THE LAWS RESOLVTIONS OF WOMEN'S RIGHTS: OR, THE LAWS PROVISION for WOMEN.

A Methodicall Collection of such Statutes and Customs, with the Cases,
Opinions, Arguments and points of Learning in the LAW, as do properly
concern WOMEN. Together with a compendious Table, whereby the chief matters
in this BOOK contained, may be the more readily found.

LONDON; Printed by the assigns of JOHN MORE Esquire and are to be sold by JOHN
GROVE, at his Shop near the Rowles in Chancery Lane, over against the
Sixe-Clerkes* Office. 1632.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
VArious are the Conceits and Judgments of Men: Nature teaches each to
prefer his Own; Hence it is, that the number of Books multiply, insomuch,
that, according to the Wiseman; Thereof, is no end.

To expect new Matter, were to give the old Proverb the Lie; Nihil jam dictum,
etc. It Is enough, if what was before, be now so changed by Method and
Application, that it shows as new, and becomes more ready for Use. Habit and
Apparel alter the Shape, sometimes the Conditions of Men. An old Theme in a
new dress ingenuously contrived makes the Composer an Author. Why then should
this Book blush to show it self? or doubt to be servant to the Printer,
whose Master nevertheless it is?

To give it as absolute, or free from faults, were to make it more then the
Work of Man, whose incident is Error: Such as it has, are rather accidental
then original, and may be fairly excused; Not to insist, That the Author's
dead, That it was long since collected, Alteration of some Cases by Modern
Statutes, Or this the first Impression. Goodness is the Parent of Confidence;
The Act is crowned by the End, which was this, A public Advantage and
peculiar Service to that Sex generally beloved, and by the Author had in
venerable estimation. To implore their Patronage, and prevail, were to guard
this Book beyond Opposition. The strong neither needs nor desires a Champion;
Meeknes protects it self: What here you find real and perfect, therefore
accept; It will subsist; Remit the rest, the rather for that nor the Tract, nor
This is peremptory, But only proposed for your favorable sense and Approbation.

I. L.

TO THE READER.
BY whom this following DISCOVRSE was Composed I certainly know not, neither by
what inducement the Authors pains therein was procured: But if for no other
consideration then to make this scattered part of Learning, in the great
Volumes of the Common-Law-Bookes, and there darkly described, to be one entyre
body, and more ready, and clearer to the view of the Reader, his love deserves
thanks, and his endeavors kind acceptance. The Work has been carefully,
and with much labor and diligence collected: The Theme, as the subject, is,
The Laws Resolutions of Women's Rights; which comprehends all our Laws
concerning Women, either Children in government or nurture of their Parents or
Gardians, Mayds, Wives, and Widows, and their goods, inheritances, and other
estates. It is profitable and useful Learning to be well known. I am sure it
will please all them whose actions are guided virtutis amore, and offend none
but those ill manners, who can have no other antidote made them, then formidine
poenae: for it sets forth Law, and Justice, things honest, and things
convenient. I had such a good conceit of the matter and frame of the whole
Work, that having a Copy there of lying by me sometimes, within the Compass
of a Lent vacation, I plucked my intentions from my own course of Studies, and
cast them upon this. And those vitia Scriptoris, and Authoris, which I found, I
amended, and have added many reasons, opinions, Cases and resolutions of Cases
to the Authors store: wherefore those oversights or neglects that thou may
impose upon the Printer or me, (which I suppose will be some (if not many) thou
shall have thanks to supply or amend, which is all I expected, and more then
the Author, as I believe, had (or now being dead can receive:) and perhaps thou
may have a better reward; for the old Adage is true, pretium non vile laboris.

Vale, T. E.

THE TABLE.
ACceptance, page 177 Accidents of Marriage, page 62. Actions by the Husband
and Wife, how brought, 196. 197. Acts done by the Wife, when good, 141. Age of
a Woman; at 7. her father shall have aid, at 9. she is Dowable, at 12. she may
consent to Marriage, at 14. out of Wardship; at 21. she may make a feoffement.
7. Appeal of the husbands death, 332. How it shall be sued 338. within what
time it shall be brought, 141. before whom it shall be sued 343. Pleas in
Appeal, 353. 355. Attainder of the Husband, loses the Wives Dower, 152.
Chattells real of the Wife, what interest the Husband has in them, 130.
Contribution of Parceners, 47. Courtesy of England, what, 79. there must be
Marriage, 80. and seisin, ibid. and issue, 81. 87. shall not be of a reversion,
ibid. nor of a right, 82. nor after the Husbands discontinuance 83. nor of an
estate suspended, ibid. nor of a bare use. 84. A second Husband shall be
tenant, 85. when the title thereof begins, 88. How the Husband shall lose it,
9. It shall be, though the child die, 89. Clergy in appeal. 364. Damages in
an appeal, 365. Declaration in an appeal, 348. Degrees, how they shall be
accounted, 76. Descent, how altered, 12. Discontinuance, 155. Divorce, what, 64.
122. Causes thererof, as Impotencie, 65. Affinity, 66. long absence, 66. Dower,
90. what it is, 91. when to be recovered 93. what seisin is requisite, 93. the
husband must have both Frank-tenement and Inheritance. 95. Of what things it is
granted, 98. of what not, 99. Of what inheritance the husband must be ^eised,
101. When given of an estate determined, and when not, 103. How much it shall
be, and how held, 106. 107. It shall be of the Husbands best possession, 108.
when the wife may elect, 109. when of Land and rent issuing out of that Land,
109. At the Church-doore, 111. Lost by elopement, 144. How the Husband may
hinder it, 148. lost by his attainder, 152. who may assign it, 243. 244, etc.
what things shall be assigned, 281. Election of Lands Dowable by the wife, 109.
of Dower or loynture made during the coverture, 184. Elopement, a woman thereby
loses Dower, 144. Executor of his own wrong, 129. Executorship, 233.
Exposition of the words, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, 188. of the Stat.
of Westminster, 1. cap. 4. 17. of the Stat. of 32. H. 8. cap. 28. 166. 170.
173. of the Stat. 27. of H. 8. cap. 10. 183. Evidences detained, 261. Felony,
206. Fines, 176. Fourcher, what; 218. Forfeiture of Estates, 313.
Frank-Marriage, what; 73. whether it may be to a man, 74. It may be given at,
before, or after Marriage, 74. That word makes inheritance, 75. Heir, what,
and how, 8. 9. Hermaphrodite, what, 5. Hotchpot, what, 40. 41. when used, 42.
Husband and Wife, are one person, 116. 119. where one, and where several
persons, 4. they cannot enfeoffe one another, 120. How Lands may be conveyed
from him to her, 123. where he shall be charged for her debt, 136. what Acts
she may do, and what not, 141. How they shall bring actions, 196. 197. 204.
Impediments of Marriage, by affinity. 59. by adoption, etc. 60. Infant, what
acts void, and what voydable. 132. Ioynture, 183. where both it and Dower shall
be had, 192. what shall be said to be a refusal or agreement to a Ioynture,
195. Law reduced to a Method, 1. of King Edmond, 375. Marriage, what, 51.
Promises thereof defined and distinguished, 52. 53. How long such Promises are
to be expected, 55. who may, and who may not contract Matrimony, 57.
Impediments thereof, 59. 60. why it is necessary, 63. when it is consummate, 63.
Not dissolved for any crime, 67. Statutes concerning it. 68. 69. Lands given to
marry one, when recoverable, when not. 78. It changes the Woman's name and
dignity, 125. Nuper Obijt, where it lies, 27. Out-larie of Baron and Feme,
221. Partners, what, 24. difference between them and Ioynt-tenants and tenants
in Common, 25. the coherence between them, 45. where they shall be heir one to
the other, and where not, 46. where they shall contribute, 47. where they
differ in service, 49. Pardon of the King, 364. Partition, of the manner
thereof, 31. where a Writ lies, 33. what plea in that writ is good, 34. who
may sue it. 35. In what case it shall abate 38. The Judgment upon that Writ,
39. what things shall not be parted, 40. Where it may not be avoided, 42. 43.
where it may, 44. Polygamie, forbidden, 61. Posthumus, where he may enter, 14.
where not, 15. Promises of Marriage, how long to be expected, 55. How they may
be dissolved, 55. and by what authority, 56. Quarentine, what, 242. Rape, 376.
of two sorts, 377. Recoveries, what, 180. Remitter, what, and when, 157. Rent
reserved upon a gift in Frank-marriage is void 73. a Woman dowable of Rent.
109. Seisin, to make Tenant by the Courtesy, 8. and the Wife dowable, 93.
Service of Parteners, where it differs, 49. Statutes concerning Marriage, 68.
69. of Gloucester, 160. of 32. H. 8. cap. 28. 163. that Stat. expounded. 166.
170. 173. of 27. H. 8. cap. 10. 183. Of 11. H. 7. cap. 20. Of 3. H. 7 cap. 1.
Of West. 2. cap. 12. Of West. 1. cap. 14. West. 2. cap. 35. Of 6. Rich. 2. cap.
6. Of 31. H. 6. cap. 9. Of 3. H. 7. cap. 2. Tail special, 85. Treason, 208.
Wast, 307. Wooing, 71. when the gifts shall be restored, if the match take not
effect, 72. Women why in subjection, 6. their several ages, 7. when
compellable to serve, 8. Writs, whereby a woman may have her Land, 23. of nuper
obijt, 27. de rationabili part, 30. of partition, 33.
The end of the TABLE.
THE WOMAN'S LAWIER.
SECT. I.
ALl Law, says Justinian in his Imperial institutions, belongs to persons,
to things, or to actions: which division I acknowledge to be good: and so in
his method of the Civil Law, does a Doctor and very learned man, Conradus
Lagus, yet the same Lagus says, it is too strait for his purpose, and
therefore not feeling himself at ease in so narrow a distribution, to drive
the forms of Civil Law to certain heads, according to their material
varieties, he confesses he i^ compelled to constitute a plurality of Law
members more then the very Law sets down as appears in the 2. Part of his
Method the 2. Chapter, yet a curious Caviler (I perceive) might find in
Justinians partition a very great red^^dance rather then any defect, for Res is
a transcendente, comprehending actions, persons, and what not. And actions in
the widest signification seem alone to be the theme and right subject matter
of Laws and all Humane Constitutions: as for persons they are so many, and so
differing, that I think there is no use, Custom, Injunction or decree, but it
appertains to some person, and that in some peculiarity of difference, either
in state, age, sex, function, profession, merit, or some other like several
regard, so that in mine opinion, Law might be dispersed into apt titles of
this personal difference, in such sort as both Students, might come to the
easier knowledge: the one of their learning general, and the other of their
particular duty. I though I be far unable to produce a perfect method of the
Laws of England, as Lagus following his own artificial project has framed an
excellent Deliniation of the Laws of Rome, and though I be unworthy to have
the Marshalling of the titles of Law to bring all matter cohering under them,
yet I will make a little assay what I am able to do if I were put to it in a
popular kind of instruction: following a frame by distinction of persons,
chasing the primary distribution of them made before the World was seven days
old, Masculum and Foeminam fecit eo^, of which division because the part that
we say has least judgment and discretion to be a Law unto it self, (Women
only* Women) they have nothing to do in constituting Laws, or consenting to
them, in interpreting of Laws, or in hearing them interpreted at lectures,
leets or charges, and yet they stand strictly tied to men's establishments;
little or nothing excused by ignorance, me thinks it were pity and impiety
any longer to hold from them such Customs, Laws, and Statutes, as are in a
manner, proper, or principally belonging unto them: Laying aside therefore these
titles which include only the masculine, as Bishop, Abbot, Prior, Monk, Deane
and Chapter, Viscount, Coroner, together with those which be common to both
kinds, as Heretic, Traitor, Homicide, Felon, Laron, Paricide, Cutpurse,
Rogue, with Feoffor, Feoffee, Donor, Donee, Vendor, Vendee, Recognisor,
Recognisee, etc. I will in this Treaty with as little tediousness as I can,
handle that part of the English Law, which contains the immunities,
advantages, interests, and duties of women, not regarding so much to satisfy
the deep learned or searchers for subtility, as woman kind, to whom I am a
thankful debtor by nature.

SECT. II. The Creation of Man and Woman.
GOd the first day when he created the World made the matter of it, separating
light from darkness: the second day he placed the Firmament which he called
Heaven, betwixt the waters above the Firmament and the waters under the
Firmament: the third day he segregated the waters under the Firmament into one
place, calling the waters Seas, and the dry land Earth, which he commanded to
bring forth ^ructifying herbs, plants and trees: the fourth day he made the
Sun, the Moon and the Stares in the Firmament, to be for Signs, Seasons,
Days and Years, and to give light upon the earth: the fifth day he made by his
Word the Fishes of the Sea, Whales and every fethered foul of the air,
commanding them to increase: the sixth day he made Cattle, creeping things, the
beasts of the Earth: and now having made all things that should be needful for
them, he created Man, Male and Female made he them, Bidding them multiply and
replenish the Earth, and take the joint soveraigntie over the Fishes of the
Sea, the Fowls of the Air, and over all Beasts moving upon the Earth, Genesis
1.

In the second Chapter Moses declares and expresses the Creation of Women,
which word in good sense, signifies not the woe of Man as some affirm, but
with Man: For so in our hasty pronouncing we turn the preposition with to
woe, or we, oftentimes: and so she was ordained to be with man as a help,
and a companion, because God saw it was not good that Man should be alone.
Then when God brought Woman to Man to be named by him, he found straight way
that she was bone of his bones, flesh of his flesh, giving her a name,
testifying she was taken out of Man, and he pronounced that for her sake man
should leave Father and Mother and adhere to his Wife which should be with him
one.

Now Man and Woman are one.
NOw because Adam has so pronounced that man and wife shall be but one flesh,
and our Law is that if a feofment be made jointly to John at Style and to
Thom. Noke* and his wife, of three acres of land, that Tho* and his wife get no
more but one acre and a half, quia una persona, and a writ of conspiracy does
not lie against one only, and that is the reason, Not. br. ^o. 116. a writ of
conspiracy does not lie against baron and feme, for they are but one person,
and by this a married Woman perhaps may either doubt whether she be either
none or no more then half a person. But let her be of good cheer, though for
the near conjunction which is between man and wife, and to tie them to a
perfect love, agreement and adherence, they be by intent and wise fiction of
Law, one person, yet in nature and in some other cases by the Law of God and
man, they remain diverse, for as Adams punishment was several from Eves, so in
criminal and other special causes our Law argues them several persons, you
shall find that persona is an Individuum spoken of any thing which has
reason, and therefore of nothing but Vel de Angelo, vel de homme, fol. 154. in
Dyer, who cites no worse authority for it then Callepinus own self, seeing
therefore I list not to doubt with Plato, whether Women be reasonable or
unreasonable creatures, I may not doubt but every woman is a temporal person,
though no woman can be a spiritual Vicar.

Of Hermaphrodites.
OF Hermaphrodites I have some kind of doubts, not whether they be persons,
but what persons they be, If a man die seized, leaving 3. children which be
all Hermaphrodites, whether the eldest shall have all his land, or that it be
partable as among coheires. Also if the eldest be a Hermaphrodite, and the
other 2. fair young Virgins which way jetteth the descent. Bracton in his
first Book, Cap. 7. says, Hermaphroditus comparatur masculo tantum, vel
feminae tantum, secundum praevalescentiam sexus i^calescentis, that is, it must
be deemed male or female, according to the predominance of the sex most
inciting.

And as I remember I have read the like division, V^. Britt. Cont. sol. 1678.
Bracton in his first book the 30. Chapter fol. 438. where he shows that a
man shall not be tenant by the courtisie Si partus declinaverit ad monstru^,
and cum clamore emitteret deberet, emisit rugitu^, says, it is not partus
monstrosus, licet natura membra m^nuerit, vel ampliaverit, ut si quis habeat
digitos, aut articulos sex vel plures. Now then if these creatures be no
Monsters, but are in conjunction to take on the^ the kind which is most ruling
in the^, this must needs be understood in matrimony, and consequently they may
have heirs, which being granted, why may they not be heirs according to the
prevalescence which Bracton speaks of: if I were to furnish my self a house,
I would place no picture or Image in any parlour, dining or bedchamber, but it
should be of good seemly and natural proportion, Satyrs and Centaures should
come no nearer then the post at my door. And at the threshold of this my
treatise, or as it were a little behind the door: I will leave these deformed
Children of Mercury, or Venus, suffering them to enter no further.

SECT. III. The punishment of Adams sin.
Return a little to Genesis, in the 3. Chap. whereof is declared our first
parents transgression in eating the forbidden fruit: for which Adam, Eve, the
serpent first, and lastly, the earth it self is cursed: and besides, the
participation of Adams punishment, which was subjection to mortality, exiled
from the garden of Eden, enjoined to labor, Eve because she had helped to
seduce her husband has inflicted on her, an especial bane. In sorrow shall
thou bring forth thy children, thy desires shall be subject to thy husband,
and he shall rule over thee.

See here the reason of that which I touched before, that Women have no voyse
in Parliament, They make no Laws, they consent to none, they abrogate none.
All of them are understood either married or to be married and their desires
or subject to their husband, I know no remedy though some women can shift it
well enough. The common Law here shakes hand with Divinity, but because I am
come too soon to the title of Baron and feme, and Adam and Eve were the first
and last that were married so young, it is best that I run back again to
consider of the things (which I might seem to have lost by the way) that are
fit to be known concerning women before they be fit for marriage.

SECT. IV. The Ages of a Woman.
THe learning is 35. Hen. 6. fol. 40. that a Woman has diverse special ages,
at the 7. year of her age, her father shall have aid of his tenants to marry
her. At 9. years age, she is able to deserve and have dowre. At 12. years to
consent to marriage. At 14. to be horse du guard: at 16. to be past the Lords
tender of a husband. At 21. to be able to make a feoffement: And per Ingelton
there in the end of the case, a woman married at 12. cannot disagree afterward,
but if she be married younger, she may dissent till she be 14.

The age of 7. years, when Bracton wrote this aid, for making the son a
Knight, or marrying the daughter, was due de gratia and non de Iure, and pro
necessitate and indigentia domini capitalis: measured by the indigence of the
Lord, and opulence of the tenants: But West. 1. Cap. 35. in the third year of
Edward 1. the Law was made certain, the Lord shall have aid of his tenants,
as soon as his daughter accomplished 7. years age-for the marriage of her.
Viz. xx. s. of a whole knights fee, and xx. s. of xx. I. ^and in soccage, and
so forth, according to the rate more or less.

The King shall have this aid according to this proportion, by a Statute made
25. Ed. 3. and for this aid every Lord may either distraine or bring his writ
de auxilio habendo at his election, but tenant by grand serjeanty, or petit,
shall not pay this aid. Mich. 21. He. 4. fol. 32. no more shall coppy-holders,
as seems by the writ, both in Fitzherbert and Bracton, for it is, Precipimus
ut habere facias rationabile auxilium de Militibus, et liberetenentibus. Now if
the Kings writ run for it before the Statute, how is it that Bracton says it
was due, but de gratis, That perhaps he meant but for the quantity, ipse
videri^, if the father dye, the daughter being unmarried, she shall recover so
much as was gathered and not paid her at the hands of the executor or heir,
but this aid is only for the marriage of the eldest daughter, and not for no
daughter, where many make but one heir: But see Bracton fol. 36. b. Where he
says, primae genitae filiae non dabitur auxilium tale, quia istud auxilium
pertinet ad Cap. dom. sicut pertineret si non esset nisi unus haeres cum omnes
sunt quasi unus h^eres.

SECT. V. A Woman compellable to serve.
THe next age of a Woman is 9. years when she is dowable, but we will stay a
while with the virgins, concerning whom, if they be in the power and governance
of parents, masters, or prochein amies, or if they be poor, the Law differs
little or not much from the common form apperteyning unto males, unless it
been in cases of rape, which I reserve to the end of my discourse, where the
poor have least need of subsidy, only this I observe here, By a Statute made
5. Eliz. ca. 4. Two Justices of peace in the Country, or the head officer and
2. Burgesses in Cities, etc. may appoint any woman of the age of twelve years,
and under 40. being unmaried, and out of service, to serve and be retained by
year, week, or day, in such sort and for such wages as they shall think
meet, and if she refuse, they may commit her to prison, till she shall be bound
to serve.

SECT. VI. Of Heirs.
But leaving this sort to the title of day laborers, come we to women wards in
the custody of their lords. And take for the foundation here the Statute it
self West. 1. Cap. 22. This Statute expressly reciting the material point of
the Statute of Merton, wills it in every of them to be observed, Merton Cap.
6. and the Statute of Merton is this, Whosoever lay person shall be convicted
be he parent or other, to have detained, abduced or married puerum aliquem,
he shall yield the value of the marriage and be imprisoned until ye have both
made amends to the party damnified, if the ward be married, and satisfaction
to the King for the transgression hoc de haerede infra 14. etc. but if any
heir of 14. years age, or upward till 21. shall marry himself without
greeing with his Lord to defraud him of the marriage, where the Lord offered
him a convenient marriage, and without disparagement, there it shall be lawful
to hold the inheritance until and after the full age of 21. years, by so long
time as shall suffice to reap and receive the double value of the marriage,
secundum est inationem legalium hominum et secundum quod p^oeodem maritagio
prius fuerit oblatum, sine fraud and malitia, et secundum quod probare poterit
in Curia Dm. Regis. Let us speak of heirs, and see a little in what cases a
woman shall inherit, It is known to all, that because women lose the name of
their ancestors, and by marriage usually they are transferred in alienam
familiam, they participate seldom in heireship with males, and therefore
Bracton is bold to say, Nunquam ad successionem vocatur femina qua^diu haeres
superfuerit ex masculis, but to this rule he subjoyneth exception and examples,
the very same which are in Littleton, To wit exception of right line, right
blood and manner of giving.

SECT. VII. Of the right Line.
A Female may be preferred in succession before a male by the time wherein she
comes: as a daughter or daughters daughter in the right line is preferred
before a brother in the transversall line, and that as well in the common
general tail, as in fee simple, for example, land is given to a man, and to
the heirs of his body, who dies having issue two sons, of which the eldest
dies, leaving issue a daughter, this daughter shall inherit by the right of
blood, also a woman shall be preferred propter jus sanguinis: Example, a man
has issue a son and a daughter by one venture, and a son by another venture,
the first son purchases in fee, and dies without issue, the sister shall
inherit. So it is where a man seized in fee has issue, ut supra, and dies,
his eldest son enters and dies without issue, etc. Bracton who has both
these cases, disputes here as if he were seeking a knot in a bulrush, and he
finds a difference where the inheritance is Discendens and Perquisita. But
Littleton is plain though the second son be heir to the father in the last
case, and therefore should have had the land, had the eldest son never
entered, yet the case being as it is: possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit
sororem de integro sanguine esse heredem. and whether the fee was descended, or
perquisit what skils it, here it must needs be, if the brother was heir of the
blood of the first purchasor, that the sister of the whole blood is so too, yet
there is a great difference between land purchased by him that died seized,
and land descended unto him, for the first may go to the heir on the fathers
side, and for default of such to the heir of the mothers side, but land
descended must always go to heirs of the blood of the first purchaser, and
the case may be such that a female shall carry away inheritance from a male,
though there be no difference of right line, or in the integrity of blood,
which Bracton calls jus sanguinis duplicatum: as where John Style purchases
in fee, and dies without issue, an ant or ants, or uncles daughter on the
father side, shall inherit before an uncle, or uncles son on the mothers
side, where they be both collateral and the integrity or neernes of blood is
alike. Put case, that the purchasor died leaving issue only John the younger,
and this John married or unmarried dies without issue, now cannot the land go
to the heirs on the part only of the mother of young John, and therefore ye
must ascend a step higher to the marriage of the father and mother of the first
purchasor, if ye will find who shall inherit, where if there be neither
brother nor sister to the purchasor, a daughter to the eldest uncle on the
fathers side may inherit before any of the mothers side, yea and before a
son of the second uncle on the part of the father, and this by the
worthiness of blood. I will not examine the crainkes of descent, but turn to
the case, where possession of the brother excludes a brother and takes in a
sister: If a man has issue a son and daughter by one venture, and a son by
another, and give land to the eldest son in tail, now if the father die and
the reversion in fee descend to the eldest son, who likewise dies without
issue of his body, the second son shall have this land: For here was no
possession, but an expectance of fee simple in the eldest. Per omnes
Iusticiarios de Communi Banco. 24* E. 3. fol. 13. For it is possessio fratris
and non reversio fratris, etc. Yet Thorpe Justice of the Kings Bench thought
the land should go to the daughter, Brook con. Brook descent. 13. Again,
afine was levied to I. and A. his wife in tail, the remainder in fee to A.
they had issue a son, and the husband died, the wife took another husband,
by whom she had issue another son and died: the eldest son entered and
died without issue, the collateral heir to him entered as into the remainder
in fee, and the youngest son of the half blood, to execute the fee, brought
a Scire facias, which was holden good, for though the eldest might have
charged, for^ited or given the fee simple by atteinder, yet it was not actually
in him, and therefore the demi sanke none impediment but the younger son
might have it, as heir to his mother, 24. E. 3. fol. 30. Which cases prove,
that the possession of a brother to convey the fee to a collateral heir, if
it be not apprehends actively, the general heir to the common ancestor may
enter, Therefore where there is a son or daughter by one venture, and a puisne
son by an other venture, if the father die seized of an advouson or a rent,
and the eldest son died before he present or receive the rent, the daughter
shall not inherit, and if the father die seized of an use in fee, possessio
fratris facit sororem esse haeredem: by taking the profits of the ground. 5. E.
4. 7. Where it is said that if the father by testament bequeath the profits for
term of years, this lets not the possession of the eldest brother:
otherwise it is, if it had been for term of life, and the like difference is
(by this book) if a lease be made for years or for life of lands not in use,
etc.

SECT. VIII. Where the manner of gift alters the descent.
BRactons first exception to his general rule, that a Woman shall not inherit,
when there is an heir male, is, Nisi contrarium faciat modus donationis. His
example is, A man gives land to one in marriage with his daughter, to them two
and to the heirs of their bodies, they have issue a daughter, and the husband
dying, the wife taking another husband, has by him a son and dies, the
daughter shall inherit per modum donationis, the case is plain.

But Littleton has a limitation, where modus donationis, does clean exclude
Women from inheriting, That is, where lands are given to a man and the heirs
male of his body: now if he die having issue a son and a daughter by one
wife, and a second son by a second wife, the daughter can never inherit, nay,
if he die having issue a daughter only, which daughter has a son, neither
daughter nor son shall inherit, for whosoever shall inherit by force of an
intaile made to heirs males, must (per modum donationis) be males and co^vey
his disce^t to it per heirs males, which because the son cannot do here, the
donor may reenter. But Littleton says also (lest women should take the matter
unkindly at his hand) that where land is given to a man, and to the heirs
females of his body, his issue female shall inherit per forma^ doni and not the
issue male: for the will of the giver must be observed. He has another case
which I may not omit: When lands are given a man, and to the heirs males of
his body, which have issue 2. sons, and the eldest dies having issue a
daughter, if he lease the land for term of years, the reversion descends
to the son: but if the lease be for term of life of the lessee, the
reversion and the fee simple descends to the daughter, the discontinuance is
the cause, and here the daughter is in not in the per, but contra modum
donationis by violating the will of the giver.

SECT. IX. Where a woman coming to lands shall retain them, etc.
NOw I will show you where a female having gotten inheritance: per modum
donationis, or otherwise, shall retain it, and where not. Mark well this
case, John died seized of fee, leaving issue Robert the eldest son, and
Richard the puisne: Robert entered, took a wife and had issue Alice, which
Alice died, he took another, and leaving her great with child he died, the
Lord seized the land and ward of Alice, and granted the custody to one which
endowed the wife of Robert, she was delivered of a son William, The Lord
seized William his ward which lived ten years, and died without issue, Henry
the son of Richard the second son of John enters, Alice enters upon
Henry, and he brings an assise: now because the possession of the Lord was
seisin and possession of William, to whom Alice was but of the half blood, it
was awarded that Henry should recover. But by the opinion of the Court, the
land which the wife held in dowre should go to Alice: for therein William had
Broke dispent. pl. 19.
no more but a reversion 8. Assisa pl. 6. Again, Henry seized of tenements
deviseable in Winchester (where the Custom is, that he which is seized by
devise may not with warranty or without warranty make alienation to bar the
reversion or remainder (devises them to his wife Alice for term of life, the
remainder to Th. his son for life, so that Th. should make no alienation: quo
minus tenementa devenirent propinquioribus haeredibus de sanguine puerorum post
mortem predicti Thom. Henry died having issue Steven an elder son, and Maud a
daughter, which had issue Eliz. Steven died without issue Alice, the wife
entered and died seized, Tho. enters and alieneth in fee with warranty: Ma^d
dies, Elizabeth makes claim by taking the haspe of the door in her hand:
Tho. dies without issue, Eliz. enters upon the alienee, he puteth her out
she, brings an assise.

It was holden that the heirs of Henry had nothing in the fee simple by the
limitation, which went not to his children, but to the next of blood to his
children, excluding ses infants demesne, And by Wilby, if B. make a lease to
Alice for life, the remainder to the nearest of blood, if he die having issue
2. sons, and the eldest dye having issue a son (though this issue be heir
to B,) the other son after the death of Alice shall have the land as nearest
of blood, and (by Green and Seaton) if there had been several issues, of
diverse sons and daughters to the devisor, when the remainder vested it should
have gone to them all. But here because the daughter of him had issue a
daughter when the tenant for life died, and there was not issue of any son,
at the instant to take from her, or with her, this Daughters Daughter shall
have all, and though there came an after borne son of any of the brethren,
she may detain all, etc. for a remainder vested is not like to fee simple
descended to a daughter, where a son Posthumus may enter. And if lands be
letten for life, the remainder to the right heirs of I. and if I. dye having
issue a son, which enters after the death of the tenant for life, and then
dies, his son shall have nothing, because he was not capax at the fall of the
remainder, likewise where there is a brother and sister, and lands are let for
life to an estranger the remainder to the right heirs of the brother, if he
and the tenant for life die, the sister may enter, and retain the possession
and fee, though the brothers wife be afterward delivered of a son: in like
sort did the remainder rest in the child of Ma^d in Eliz. viz. which recovered
by award, 30. Assi. p. 47. But where there is father and son, which son
purchases and dies without issue, and an uncle enters, if two years after
the father has a son by the mother of the purchasor, this son may enter
and put out the uncle, and the reason of Law is that he that comes in by
purchase must be capax, at the time when the purchase vest in him, but in case
of descent it is not so requisite. Perk. in his Chapter of devises says, that
if a devise be made to a college, which is not a college at the time of the
devise it is a void devise, although afterward it be made a college: and upon
the same reason, is Dier 13: Eliz. 303. of a devise to an infant in ventre sa
mere: And where a man dies seized and his daughter enters, etc. a son borne
afterward may enter, but it is not so in case of purchase, etc. for if a woman
consent to a ravishor, and her daughter and heir enter by the statute, 6. R.
2. ca. 6. the son Posthumus shall not put her out, no more shall he, where a
daughter and heir enters for condition broken, and where a daughter has a
villain by descent, which purchases and she enters into the perquisits an
after borne son her brother shall have that which descended, viz. the villien
but not the land: these cases has Brook Discents, 58. out of the Doct. and
Student, 5. Ed. 4. fo. 58. in the case of Elizabeth Venor, agrees concerning
entry made by 6. Ri. 2. And so does Hales and Mountague, in the case of Wimbish
and Talbois, yet Mountague Chief Justice takes there a learned difference if
a man devise land for life, the remainder to the right heir male of the
devisor, and the heirs of his body, etc. now if the devisee for life die, and
a woman which is heir general to the devisor enters, and has afterward a
son, the son shall never out the mother in whom is vested the inheritance
for want of other persons to take the falling remainder: per le melior opinion
9. H. 6: yet (he says) the cases of ravishment possession of a brother,
abatement of a bastard, etc, are all to be understood of fee simple: for where
the entry gains but estate tail, one may beat the bush and another take the
bird, so if a man seized by descent from his mother make a feofment with
condition, etc. and die without issue, if a woman heir on the father side
enter for condition broken, an heir male or female on the mothers side may
oust her. Plow. etc. fo. 56. a. b. and 57. a.

West. 1. ca. 22.
THen West goes on with heir females, that so soon as they come to the age
of fourteen years if the Lord for covetousnes will not marry them, yet he
shall not keep their land above two years after they have accomplished 14*
within which two years if they be not married by their Lord, they may take
action against him for their inheritance, to recover it without paying any
thing for the custody or for marriage. If so be that of their proper malice or
through the mischievous counsel of others, such women refuse convenable
marriage offered by their Lord, he may in this case retain their land until
they be of 21. years, and longer until he shall receive the value of their
marriage.

Littletons words upon this statute in his 2. book cap. 4.
BY Littleton if tennant by service of Chivalry die, his here female being 14.
years old or more* the Lord shall have custody neither of the land nor body,
for at that age a woman may have a husband able to do knights service, but if
such an heir be under 14. and unmaried at the time of her ancestors death,
the Lord shall have ward in her land until she be of 16. years age, West. 1.
cap. 22. which gets the Lord 2. years to tender marriage without
disparagement, and if during these two years the Lord tender no such marriage
she may enter and oust the Lord. If such an heir female be married under the
age of 14. in the life of her ancestor, which ancestor dies before she
accomplisheth 14. years, the Lord shall have no more but the wardship of her
land till she be 14. years old, and then her husband with her may enter into
her land and put the Lord out, for this is out of the Statute, because the Lord
may not tender marriage to her that is already married, for before the Statute
of West. such an heir female that was under the age of 14. at the death of her
ancestor, and had atteined afterward to the age of 14. years, without any
tender of marriage by her Lord made unto her, might well enter into her land,
and put out the Lord, as appears by the rehearsal and very words of the
Statute, which as it seems (so says Littleton) was made altogether for the
advantage of the Lord.

A suspicion of Littletons error.
NOw saving Mr. Littletons inspiration, I am greatly afraid that ye shall not
find by the text of the Statute, That an heir female, being under 14. at the
death of her ancestor, might by the common law before this Statute, enter and
oust her Lord, as soon as she had accomplished 14. year of age without tender
of marriage. The law perhaps was so, but this Statute proves it not: Again, I
doubt, Littleton was deceived, in taking this Statute to be all for the
advantage of Lords, yet it is likewise said by Davers 13. H. 7. 11. that this
Statute was made for advantage of the Lords.

Glanvill ibro. 7. cap. 12.
Hear what Glanvill says, women shall be in ward until they be of full age and
the Lord shall mary them being of full age, every one of the^, with their
reasonable portion, and thoughthey be of full age they shall remain
notwithstanding in their Lords custody until they be married by his advise,
for by the law of the land, no woman heir can be married, but by her Lords
disposing and assent. In so much, that whosoever having a daughter or daughters
heir or heirs, shall in his life time without gree of his Lord marry any of
them, he suffers by the right and general custom of the Realm perpetual
disinherison, without ever recovering any thing, but by the grace and mere
mercy of his Lord. If it be prooved that any woman holden in ward do forfit
with her body, she shall be deprived of her heritage, and her portion shall go
and accrue to her parceners. And if they all offend, the whole heritage shall
fall as escheate to the Lord. But after such heirs be once lawfully married,
though they become widow afterward they shall no more be holden in ward, nor
then by their incontinency can they forfit any inheritance. But yet they may
not remarry without their Lords assent. Thus far Glanvill.

Bracton his 2. Book cap. 37.
BRacton, who (as it may very well be gathered) wrote one half hundred years
after Glanvil, and but very little before the making of West. 1. In his 2.
Book and 37. Chap. finding it a question, at what time an heir female should
be out of ward, whether at 14. or 15. or at 21. acknowledges a greater
capacity of deceit, and maturity of desire, to be in women then in men.

And that therefore, a woman might be out of ward at 14, and marry, because, at
that age she is able disponere domui suae et habere cone et key, et virum
sustinere, that is to order and dispose, a to have, the key clog at her girdle,
and to be a jolly stay unto a man. But this early emancipation of women heirs
he takes to be only of such as inherit la^d of socage tenure: for drawing
toward the end of the Chapter he falls in with Glanvil, And says of heirs
coparceners in Chivalry, si ab initio omnes maiores extiterunt nihil ominus in
custodia dominorum ^rint donec per consilium et dispositionem eorum maritentur:
quia sine ipsorum co^silio et assensu, mulier haereditate^ habens maritari non
potest non etiam in vita antecessorum, etc; quod si olim fecissent, hereditatem
amitterent: sine spe recuperan^i nisi solum per gratiam. Hodie tamen aliam
paenam incurrent. And presently he shows the reason why they might not marry
without their Lords assent viz. lest the Lord might be constrained to take
homage of his capital enemy, or of a man altogether unfit or unworthy.

SECT. X. How the law came to a certainty in the point of a woman's being out of
ward.
CHoose now whether ye will learn of Glanvil and Bracton, what the law was in
their time, or of Mr. Littleton, that wrote many score years after the making
of Westminster. 1. In mine opinion, neither did this law bring any advantage to
Lords, neither does it show that heirs females, oftenants in Chivalry, might
enter at 14. years, neither is there any clear proof that the law was
clearly so taken. The letter of the Statute does not expressly give 2. years
to tender marriage, but rest raineth covetous Lords, that they shall not hold
the land above 2. years after the 14. which seemech plainly to import, as it is
reasonably taken both by Needh. and Billing 35. H. 6 that before the making of
this law, the age of male and female in this point, took no difference. I may
be asked, how it comes then to pass, that the law is so clear in that which
Littleton concludes withal, vizt. That the Lord shall not have two years to
tender his woman ward marriage, save only where she is under 14. and unmaried
at the death of her ancestor: before the Statute, it was either out of doubt,
that a daughter and heir, should not be clean out of ward. at 14. or at the
least it was doubted, whether she should or no: and the words of the Statute
whatsoever Mr. Littleton says, makes not the matter plain enough. But we
have the help of Reverend Prisot, in the Book above mentioned. 3. 5. Henrici
6. Westminster. 1. (says he) was made in the time of Edward the first, who purposing
to put all the law into certainty, and in writing, begun to makes Books
thereof, by help of the most sage men of the law in this Realm, Judges and
others. And he made a Book two years after the making of this Statute in
which all the Statute is rehearsed, which book goes on, and says by express
words: that no woman shall be said to be under age, thereby to be in ward after
she is past the age of 14. Thus says Prisot. By him therefore and by other
Justices in the Eschequer chamber it was ruled clear, that where the Kings
tenant in Chivalry died leaving his daughter and heir of the age of 15. year,
she should not be in ward. And Billing says for law, that if between the 14.
and 16. year, when an heir female is in ward another ward falls which
holds in Chivalry of the first, the Lord shall not have guard, per cause de
guard, for the first ward is out of his power to all intents excepting only
tender of marriage. And another Justice says, if a tenant hold ofone lord
bypriority, and of another by posteriority, the daughter heir under. 14. shall
be in custody of the anteriour Lord till she be 16. but she may enter upon the
land by posteriority, as soon as she comes to 14. likewise if the Lord has
once married this woman-ward, after the age of 14. she may presently, enter into
her land: for now the Lord has had all that, which to him belongs, the
marriage. And the course of the Chancery is to make livery, before: 14. cum
exitibus, but after 14. livery tantum: vid. 4. Eliz. 213. Dyer. and Dyer. 20.
Eliz. 362. 1. Hen. 720. on livery for then such an heir is to have the profits
by the law. To come to an end of this matter, I will not forget, that even in
Mr. Littletons days very near two hundred years after the making of West. 1.
by the last Statute, that ever Hen. 6. made in the year of his reign. 39. ca.
2. it was established by Parliament that women being of the age of 14: years
at the death of their ancestors, without question or difficulty shall have
delivery of their lands and tenements descended to them: for so the Law of the
land wills.

SECT. XI. A search for the true reason, why a woman is horse du guard, at the
age of 14. years.
THe principal reason that moved our law founders, so soon to set women out
of ward is none other then has been already declared, she is quickly able
domui preesse, viro subesse, and her husband for her shall do Knights service,
or some other for him, and in his stead, the cases are therefore 26: H. 8. fo.
2: If the Kings tenant in chief, having feoffees to his use, marry his
daughter, under age, to a man of full age, and dye, this daughter, being heir,
is out of ward for her body though not for her land: for that shall be in ward in
this case, an the Kings possession must be voided by suite and livery. But had
she been of full age of 14. years at her fathers death, no such thing had
needed, neither should she have bin in ward, nor the King have any primer
seisin: For that was not as yet seen into by the Statutes of H. 7. which had
given ward, relief and herriots upon the death of him, which died intestate
and seized of only a bare use: again, if the King have a woman ward which he
marries before she be 14, she shall be be to all intents out of ward at 14. and
may immediately sue her livery. 28. H. 8. for as a ward masculine, married by
his Lord under 21. shall be sui luris at 21. so shall a ward feminine being
married before 14. be out of ward at 14. altogether. In the old Natura brevium
in the writ de electione custodiae. it is said, that where the tenant marieth
his daughter being under age, to a man of full age, and dies, the daughter
shall be out of ward. But if he mary his daughter, being of full age, to a man
under age, and die, she shall be in ward. This Mr. Brook takes to be no law:
even so do I: his reason is, that no Lord can have the marriage of her that is
already married, or compel any heir to be twice married. For if a tenant
marry his son and die, and then the sons wife dies holden, the Lord shall
not have his body in ward to marry him. Which is clear: specially if the son
were infra annos nubiles at the time of his fathers death. But certainly, if
the Lord couple his ward to a wife which dies, the ward is at full liberty for
his body, and shall not be married by his Lord.

The reason why an heir female of full age married by her father to a man
under age, should not be out of ward, must be because the supposition of law
fails: her husband is not able arma portare and officiis fungi militaribus,
vel pro iisdem faciendis cum alio pacisci. But this notwithstanding, me
thinks a woman married, should be out of ward for all her husbands nonage,
thought the woman be but twelve years old a boy knight shall be out of ward
for his body: shall a woman innupta and matura viro be in keeping of any but
her husband, shall she at 14. years age be ward because she has a husband
but 19. year olds, who should not have been in ward had she had no husband at
al? non videtur. The husbands ability to do soldiers service, is neither the
only nor the principal cause in mine opinion, why a woman is by law out of
ward at 14. years age. But law going with the trace or tide of nature, that
has made women (as Bracton says) fit to carry cey and key cloge betimes,
suffers them to mary very early: And it should be a mischievous,
inconvenient, unjust, and unnatural law, that should hold a woman from her
husband, or from her inheritance, which is without offense of law married, and
fully able to bring forth children, because her husband is not fully fit for
all manor of horsemanship. Be not therefore good woman absterred from a young
husband, by old natura brevium.

SECT. XII. How a woman that has been in ward, shall come by her land.
A Woman past 14. years of age at her ancestors death shall not be in ward:
And where she is in ward till 16. she may have action at 16. against her Lord
for her inheritance, according to the Statute. By Littleton, she may enter
which stands with reason, for the Statute giving action to her affirmatively,
does not disaffirme the entry which she might have had, by the ancient
catholic Common law: if she cannot or dare not enter, she may have alone (if
she be alone) or with her fellows (if she be a coheire) a writ of
mortdancester, as well against her Lord as against any other abator. Marlbridg
ca. 16.

But if she be ward to the King, against whom a mortdancestor, writ of Aile,
Besaile or Cosinage then it melts into petition, and she must sue for livery.
And where the King has a woman in ward with some lands holden of other Lords
in socage, such a ward shall not so soon as she is 14. year old have livery
of that socage lands, but she must arry unless she be married, in the mean
while till she be 16. because livery must be at once parcel, and not by
percels. Yet if 3. copartners be in ward to the King, she which first comes
to age, shall sue her livery, and have partition upon it.

SECT. XIII. Of Parceners.
FOr, it must not be omitted there where a man dies seized of any manner of
inheritance, having issue none but daughters, to whom such inheritance
descends, when they have entered by Litt. they are parceners, one heir to
their common ancestor, and so are the heirs of females parceners and they
ought to come in by descent, for if by purchase they are jointenants: and they
are called partners (says he) because they are compellable by a writ de
partitione facienda, to divide the inheritance amongst them. Like, or the same
law is, where a man dying seized having no issue, his land goes to his
sisters, or aunts, that are partners, if one of them dye before partition made,
her part shall descend to her issue, and for want of issue to her coheires,
which shall be deemed and adjudged in, by descent and not by survivour.

SECT. XIII. Difference between partners and jointenants.
FOr although partners have a conjoined estate, yet law makes a great
diversity betwixt them and jointenants: Partners by the common law, are only
females or the heirs of females, which also must be in, by descents, for if
sisters makeajoint purchase they are jointnants, and not partners. Betwixt whom
observe here the german and apparent difference: If two coparceners be of
lands in fee simple, whereof one before partition made charge her part with a
rent and dies without issue, her coparcener taking as heir and by descent,
shall hold the land charged. But it is otherwise betwixt jointenants.

Also partners may devise and give away their part by testament, so cannot
jointenants.

SECT. XV. Difference between partners and tenants in common.
ANd as in the cases precedent, parteners are like tenants in common, so in
that which follows they are like jointenants. If two sisters enter into their
deceased fathers lands, and every of them having issue a son, dies before
partition, so that one moitie descends to one son, and one moitie to
another, which sons enter and occupy the lands in common, if they be now
disfeised they shall have but one assise and not several assizes. Because
although they come in here by diverse discents, yet still they are partners, and
that not only in regard of the seisin and possession which their mothers had,
but rather in respect of the estate which descended to their mothers from the
common ancestors, the grandfather, to whom they are but one heir, so that of a
disseisin before partition, they shall have but one assise.

SECT. XVI. Difference of partners from both jointenants and tenants in Common.
BY Bryan, 10. Ed. 4 fo. 3. one copartner may in feoffe another copartner, for
though their possession be joint, yet their right and interest is severed, so
that if one sister die, the other shall claim a moitie by descent from her,
and not the entire inheritance from the Common ancestors.

Partners in this therefore are like tenants in Common, whose title and right
are separated, and therefore they may infeoffe one another.

But it is otherwise with jointenants, whose right is entire and goes with the
possession by survivour. Again, partners may release the one unto the other,
and in this they are like jointenants only, for if one tenant in Common release
to his fellow, his moitie passes not, because that he to whom the release is
made, has in the franck teneme^t of this moitie no possession. But partners
whose right is from one root have a more co(...)ect possession then tenants in
common, and may release one unto another.

To conclude this point, partners differ from both jointenants and tenants in
common in this, that partners are and always were compellable to make
partition, so was neither of the other two before the Statute 31. H. 8. cap. 1.
which ordains that jointenants and tenants in common of inheritance, which in
England or Wales in the right of themselves or their wives, shall be compellable
by writ de participatione, to be devised in Chancery to make partition: And
that after partition, they and their heirs shall have mutual aid one of
another, for the deraigning of a warranty peramount, to recover pro rata, as is
used betwixt partners at the common law.

Afterward. 32. H. 8. cap. 32 it is ordained, that if any have equal estate
with others or in common jointly for term of life or for years, or unequal
estate, with such as have an adhering inheritance, they shall likewise be
co^pellable to make partition: Provided, that this shall not be prejudicial
to any person, other then the parties to it, their executors or assigns.

SECT. XVII. Of the Nuper obiit.
But ere we go any further in partition, let us see what actions may lie
betwixt partners for their inheritance before they have divided it.

And first, of the Nuper obiit, This is a writ and commandment of the King to
the sheriff to summon a coheir to be before the Kings justices at a day
certain, to show why she or he (for it lies betwixt parcenersin Gavell kind
also) deforceth the plaintiff coheire from her reasonable part belonging to
her, of the inheritance of I. S. their grandfather, father, uncle, brother,
grandmother, aunt, sister, or cousin (as the case requires) whose heirs they
be: and qui Nuper obiit, ut dicitur. This writ lies for lands holden in fee
simple, only betwixt coheires, where one or more of them deforceth or holds
out his or their fellow coheire or coheire, etc. It must be brought in the name
of all those which be deforced though in verity there be but one that sueth.
And this 1. may have a writ of summoneas ad sequendu^ against her negligent
copartners, who if they appear not, the sole plaintiff shall be received to
sue for her portion against the deforcer: If after the ancestors death, a
kinsman enter claiming by descent, the Nuper obiit lies not against him, but
after entry and ouster, an assise of novell disseisin or a writ of right, for
though coheires may have Amordancester against a stranger, yet can they not
have it against one of their own parenteale, privy in blood, and claiming by
the same descent, and where a writ of right sometimes is between sisters, as
where one is infeoffed by deed and another claims by descent, battle lies
not, nor the grand assise, but an inquest in licu thereof. Thus far, V. N. B.

The New. Na. Bre. not disagreeing says further. That if one sister deforce
another of the land whereof her ancestor died seized in estate of fee tail,
the remedy must be by form done, and not by Nuper obiit, a Nuper obiit may
be brought of the seisin of the aile, besaile or the tresaile, and if it be
brought of the seisin of the grandfather, Darreigne seisin in the father is no
good plea without showing that he died seized.

This writ may be brought, by the aunt against her sister and niece, or by the
aunt and niece, against another sister and niece, or by one sister against
another, that is but of the half blood. But if the father give part of his
land in francke marriage to one daughter and dye seized, etc. the donee in
francke marriage, shall not have a Nuper obiit against her sister for her part
in residue of her fathers fee simple la^d, unles she put her land in hotch pot
which was given in francke marriage. A nuper obiit must be brought by a coheire
deforced, against all the other coparceners, though some of them have nothing
to do in the demand.

A villein and his wife, shall not have a Nuper obiit against the coparceners of
his wife, for he is not infranchised by marriage with one of those
seignioresses to whom he was bound. If a coparcener be deforced by a
coparcener and by astranger, the deforced may have a Nuper obiit against her
coparcener, and iointenancie abateth not the writ, no more shall non-tenure of
parcel of the thing demanded, by rule of the register. If two coparceners
enter after the ancestors death, and deforcing a third parcener, do afterward
make partition, and then one of them alieneth her portion in fee, the deforced
partner may by a Nuper obiit against her two coheires (notwithstanding the
alination) recover a third part of that which is not aliened and a third part
of that which is aliened by a mortdancester or writ of Aile (as the case lies)
and in her own name, and in the name of her two coparceners against the
alien^^.

If one coparcener infeoffe a stranger in fee, and take back an estate in fee
or for life, it seems a Nuper obiit is maintenable still against her so long
as she disclaim not in the blood, etc. But 21. Ed. 3. and 45. Edw. 3. is
contra. But several tenancy, or non-tenure is no plea in a Nuper obiit for the
priuity of blood. But a sister may claim by purchase, and disclaim in the
blood, and this is a good plea. If one coparcener die leaving issue a son,
which son infeoffeth a woman in all the land, etc. and then marries her, now
cannot the other percener have a Nuper obiit against the baron and feme. But
she may have a mordancestor in her own name and in the name of the seizure
which the father had the day of his death, for that amounts to a dying seized
see Novel not. br. 197. etc.

SECT. XVII. Of the writ of right de rationabili part.
THere is also another Writ, called a writ de recto, de rationabili part that
never lies but betwixt priuies in bleed as betwixt brothers in gavell kind,
or betwixt sisters, nephews, nieces, etc. It is also for lands in fee simple,
as where the ancestor leaseth land for term of life, and dies having two
daughters, and after the death of tenant for life, one of the daughters enters
into the whole inheritance and deforceth her sister, the deforced may have this
Writ, it is maintenable by two or three sisters against the fourth, or by an
aunt, or niece against a sister that deforceth, and this writ lies as well
where the ancestor dyed seized, as where he died not seized. It is in nature a
writ of droit patent, and must be directed to the Lord of whom the land is
holden, from before who^ it is remoueable by a Tolt, as the Haught writ is,
where the ancestor dies seized, and one coheire deforceth another (whether it
be in gauell kind, or amongst partners at the common law) the deforced has
election of this writ or of the nuper obiit. But when he died not seized, and a
coparcener afterward deforceth, the Nuper obiit lies not: The form of this
writ is, Precipimu^ to the Lord, ut sine dilatione plenum rectum teneas A. de
december acris cum pertinentii^, quas clamat esse rationabilem parte^ de libero
tenemento quod fuit I. patris, vel etc. and tenere per liberum servititum
tertiae partis, etc. for it must be seen what rent and service the whole land
yields to the Lord, and according there to shall the plaintiff be rated in
his, or her writ. If after the death of their ancestor two coparceners enter,
and the one do then deforce the other of something appendant or appertenent to
that which is holden in coparcenery, she may have a writ de rationabili par^e
of this appendant or appertenent which shall say, quod clamat tenere ad liberum
tenementum.

If a man dying seized of lands intailed have two daughters whereof the one
enters and deforceth the other, the remedy is by formedon, and neither by
Nuper obiit or Rationabili part: If a sister, aunt, niece or cousin, claim
from her ancestor by feofment in fee, and one which should have bin coparcener
(had the feofment not bin) deforceth her, she may have a writ of Droit patent,
and join the mise by battle, or graund assise, come semble, says
Fitzherbert, because she claims not as heir. But where there is no
impediment, intaile, feoffement, or such thing, and all the partners deforced
bring a rationabili part against all the copartners, terretenants (for so it
must be) and the heir of an heir may sue for part of the seisin of the
common ancestor, there battle, or grand assise, voucher or view lie not,
neither is no^tenure any plea, for the writ lies only between privies in
blood: finally, the demand in this writ must be of a portion certain as of x.
acres, if xx. descend to two sisters, and the demandant if she recover, shall
have judgment of so many to hold in seueralty.

SECT. XVIII. Of Partition.
NOw of Partition, it may be made in diverse manners, as first for example by
agreement amongst two copartners or more which accord to divide the inheritance
into certain parts of equal value to be holden in severalty, and always the
part which the elder has is called Ini ia pars, though in this kind of
partition, there be no prerogative of primer election given to the eldest.

Another manner of partition, is where they cause certain friends to make the
parts or division; and here the eldest shall first choose, and then the next
eldest, and so succeedingly.

If by their whole agreement the eldest make the division it is said (says M.
Littleton) that she shall last make election, which is as much to say (say I)
as she shall have none election at all, Littleton has another manner of
alotment wherein after partition made of the lands every part being written in
a seroule, and lapped up in a bale of wax, is put into a bonnet, which must be
holden by some indifferent body, and then (as we use to choose Valintines
every partner pulls out a part, the first borne first, the rest after her in
degree of ancientry and every one shall hold her to her chance.

Also partition may be made in Chancery, as when one copartner of full age, and
another remains in ward to the King, etc. in such case if she which rests
in ward at full age have not her full part, she may sue a writ of partition or
Scire facias upon the record returnable in Chancery, to show why a new
partition shall not be made, and partition may be of a reversion, or of an
aduowson.

Of a reuersion thus, that A. shall have reuersion of such such lands, B. the
reuersion of such other lands, and of an aduowson, that A. shall have every 2.
3. or 4. auoidance, etc. and this is good without deed, where partition is made
of a manor without mention of the aduowson it remains in common see that
case of aduowson and partition of aduowson, 2. Hen. 7. 5. a.

Partition by agreement of parceners is good in law, as well by paroll as by
writing, and if unto two copartners there do descend two houses, whereof the
one is worth xx. s. and the other x. s. annually, the best house may be
allotted to one copartner, and she and her heirs to pay to the other and her
heirs, (for owelty or equalities sake) v. s. rent issuing out of her house,
and all this is good without writing, so that the partner that shall have this
rent, and her heirs may distraine for the same when it shall be arere, of common
right in whose hands soever the house charged shall come, and this shall be a
rent charge of Common right had and received for equality of partition,
Fitzherb. fol. 252. and Plow. 134.

Partition of lands, that one partner and her heirs shall have and hold them
from Easter to the gule of August, alone and by her self; and the other and
her heirs from August till Easter in the like manner, was awarded a good
partition in the time of Ed. 2. and by similitude of reason (says Fitzherbert)
it is a good partition, where two Manors descend to two Copartners: that the
one shall have one Manor by name, and the other the other for a year, to
change possession the next year, and so forth from year to year
commutatiuely, betwixt them and their heirs for ever, No. na. br. 62. l. and
m. Et auxi. party. que lun* auera le ter^. in ta. and laut. le ter. in fee
simple est bone partic. And partners may make partition for term of life or
for term of years, and if one Co-partner lease her part to another Co-partner
for term of years, yet she may sue a Writ of partition against her partner
the Lessee, though the term be vnexpired. 33. Hen. 8. Dyer 52. is a quaere. If
the one of two Copartners lease for term of years, that which to her
belongs, and after the other brings a Writ of partition against the Lessor,
to whom in this partition there is allotted a less portion then the due, some
think (says he) that the Lessee without remedy must hold himself contented,
as well as the partner which leased; But if the partition had been without
writ, quaere.

SECT. XIX. Of partition by Writ.
When Copartners cannot all agree to make partition amongst themselves, the
aptest mean to compel them, is a Writ of partition. And if there be four
Copartners, one may have this writ against three, or two against two, or three
against one.

The gist of it by the old Na. bre. is where the one enters keeping out the
other, and refusing to make partition, but l^^t. lays it where they be all in
possession, and so sounds the Writ it self; for it is a commandment to the
Sheriff, Si A. fec^^it te securum, etc. summoneas B. that she come and show
why she refuses or permits not partition of a Manor, or a wood, or such
like, the which with the appurtenances, the said A. and B. do hold together,
undivided of the inheritance of ^. their father, Mother, or, etc. Fitzherbert
in his Writ of partition, sets down the form as a Carpenter should set up
a frame of a Cottage, being both to show on what soil it should stand, for he
shows not the general gist of his Writ, and that his President might make
plain, which is not doubtful, that when Partners are in possession, one or
more may have a partitione faciunda, yet he touches not the question, whether
a Partner ousted, or not suffered to enter, may have it.

40. Hen. 7. fo. 9. in a Writ of partition, Keble pleads for his Clyent, that
the defendant was sole seized, sans ceo, that he held pro indiuiso, with the
Plaintiff: by Vauisour that is no good plea, for admit that she be sole
seized, yet partition lies well enough, but by Brian Chief Justice, it is and
has been adjudged a good plea, in our books, for one shall not come to divide
that with another wherein he has no part. And (says Keble) in a Writ of waste
between tenants in Common it is a good trauerse, Non tenet insimul and pro
indiuiso, likewise is it here where we have trauersed the point, and supposall
of your Writ, and the party by nuper ob^jt, may recover in seueraltie, and
partition shall be made, and it was said that the seisin of one parcener, is
the seisin of both, and so the reporter thinks, if one enter, etc. Where she
which enters claims in the name of her self, and of her partner I can well
agree, or if she enter not denying the right of her fellow: And if after the
death of the common Ancestor, A. which is one Coheyre enter silent into the
whole inheritance, B the other Coheyre may now perhaps (without other entry) in
the name of her self and her Companion maintain a possessorie action, against
a stranger, but when a Sister enters vindicating all to her self by
purchase, or obiecting against her Sister, Bastardie, or Attainder, and keeping
her out of possession, this I trow is no entry of both, but such a deforcing as
the Writs de rationabili part, and the nuper obijt, were made to redress: If
every seisin of a partner must needs be the seisin of all those that can claim
as coheyres, then there is no deforcing or need at all of the forenamed writs.

But seeing that law has appointed them for lands in see-simple, and a
formedone for land in tail against deforcers of their coparceners, I say, that
seisin of one of them is not seisin to all of them, and having a chief Justice
on my side, I dare hold, that non tenet pro indiuiso is a good plea in a Writ
of partition, which if it be brought by her that is deforced and out of
possession, it comes preposterously out of kind and season, and out of the
order that our Law-founders at the first ordained, See Brook Coparceners per
totum, ou entry de un est le entry del auter verse estrange pur lour
advantage, mes nemie pur disadvantage 43. Ed. 3. 19. and lentrie d'un nest
l'entrie de ambideux enter eux mesmes. 40. E. 3. 8.

By whom, and how the Writ of partition must be brought at this day.
COheyres in Gauell kind, may compel one another to make partition by Writ,
but then they must mention the custom in their declaration, If one Coparcener
dye having issue, etc. her husband being tenant by the courtesy is compellable
to make partition, but he cannot compel, etc. by the Common Law, for the Writ
lies naturally, for none but parceners. Fitzherbert, and the old na. bre. have
a note out of the Register, that in the 12. of King Ed. (they tell not which)
there was sealed a Writ of partition at Barwicke between strange persons, and
there it was said it might be granted between any Coheyres or fellow tenants,
without naming de heredit^^e in the Writ, where it was likewise affirmed that
such a Writ before that time was never seen, as well the other books of Law,
as the Statutes of 31. H. 8. make it out of question, that this Writ by the
Common Law was only betwixt Coheyres, as the two Writts which we have passed,
were by custom in some special places: ioynttenants, and tenants in Common
might have a Writ of partition, as Fitzherbert sets down: by the Custom
of London, Writ of partition lies against tenant by the courtesy Littleton
264. Dyer 1. M. 98. Brief de partit. at this day lie against the Feoffee of one
Coparcener, but not for a Feoffee: mes. vide Dyer 3. M. 128.

Likewise before the Statutes, if a man were both tenant in Common, and tenant
in Copartnerie, as having one third part by purchase from one Sister, and
another in the right of his Wife, he and his wife might bring a Writ of
partition, which see Not. br. fol. 61.

It has been much doubted, whether partition by agreement betwixt tenants in
Common, or ioynt-tenants were good without deed: But by the better opinion, 3.
Ed. 4. ^. 9. and 10. such a partition is good enough if it be upon the ground:
but see the books of 2. Eliz. Dyer. 179. 18. Eliz. Dyer. 350. There is also a
pretty case of a mill parted between two brethren ioynt-tenants by an award of a
third, that one should repair the mill on the one side of a certain post,
and the other on the other side imperpetuum, etc. which was awarded a good
partition without any writing. 47. Ed. 3. 24. and ^9. Assi. p. 1.

It has been also much doubted whether judgment may be given to hold in
several when in assise of novel disseisin, brought by one ioynt-tenant or
tenant in common against another, it is found for the plaintiff, as it is
clear it may be if the action were betwixt partners 7. assi.. p. 10. Herle
would not have given judgment to hold in seueraltie, had the parties been
ioynt-tenants: But 10. Assi. p. 17. such a judgment is given and no bones made
of it, yet 28. assi. p. 35. R. Thorp in like case, would give no judgment but
generally to hold a moity per my and per tont, though he were besought in the
Country at the assizes, and at West. again and again for Judgment to hold
severally, 7. H. 6. fo. 4. Weston glanceth on such a judgment, and Strange
denies that it may be, for it destroys the suruiuor: But Chine says, that
it may be, and has been often: the reason why the Law was more scrupulous in
those points between tenants in Common, and ioynt-tenants, then between
partners, was (as I guess) because coheyres have their estate by course of
law, and the other are in either by the act of some body which made the estate,
or by their own doing, so that though for necessity they may alien that which
belongs to them, or charge it yet otherwise the Contract made by consent may
not without manifest assent be undone: Bract. says, fo. 206. sufficit femel
voluisse, nec dissoluitur mutua voluntas nisi mutua voluntare contraria. It is
perceived how the law was before the Statutes, 31. and 32. H. 8. a summarie of
which is set down already, now that it may the better in part be understood,
how the law has been taken since those Statutes, observe the causes
following, out of my Lord Dyers Reports.

The puisne of three Coparceners of a reuersion upon estate for life gauel-kind
alieneth by a fine, the lessee dies, the eldest parcener enters into all his
Inheritance, the middlemost, and the Alienee bring a joint Writ of partition
upon the Statute, the eldest pleads the general issue, non tenent insimul
and pro indiviso, the case appearing by the evidence, it was holden upon a
demurrer clear, that the action was not maintainable, for the one ought to
have her Writ by the Common Law, and the other by the statute, but join they
could not, Quaere (says Dier) if the entry of the eldest give seisin to the
rest, that it should give it to the stranger were hard 2. and 3. Phi. and Ma.
fol. 12. 8.

One of three Coparceners alieneth that which to her belongs, one of the
other two brings a Writ of partition against her fellow parcener, and the
alienee, upon the statute, because in this case, she might have had a Writ by
the Common Law, this Writ upon the statute abated: But if the two Coparceners
had joined against the alienee, and the one had been at non-suite, she should
have been summoned and severed, and her part been divided as well as the
others, quaere, by the Register, when the husband unto one of three partners
purchases one part, etc. he and his wife may have a special Writ against the
third, even so it seems if one of three Coparceners purchase a fellows part,
the purchaser may have a special writ against the third parcener, 7. ct 8.
Eliz. 243. in Dyer, by Anthony Brown and Dyer ioint-tenants, cannot at this
day make partition by paroll out of the county where the land lies, for 31.
and 32. etc. change not the law in this point: But the partition must be by
Writ out of Chancery. Humfrey Brown and Weston: 2. Eliza. Dier. 179. a man
devised socage lands to his two daughters, and to the heirs of their two
bodies loyally engendered, and died, the two daughters took husbands, and at
full age, etc. partition was made by paroll, one husband had issue by his Wife,
and she dyed: By the opinion of the whole Court the other Husband, and his
wife shall have the whole Land by suruiuor, for partition by word only betwixt
ioint-tenants or tenants in Common of estate of Inheritance is void: yet of a
term peradventure (says Dier) such a partition is good enough fo. 350. in
Dier: If ye doubt now of any thing something more then you did before, ye are
the better learned and warned to work surely.

The manner of partition by Writ, etc.
THe Judgment upon a writ de partit. faciend. if: that division be made
between the parties; and that the Viscount in proper person going to the lands
and tenements by the oath of 12. loyal men of his County, make the partition,
delivering one part to the plaintiff, or to one of the plaintiffes, and
another part to another parcener, etc. making no mention in the judgment more
of the eldest then the youngest Sister, The Sheriff must give notice to the
Justices of the partition which he has made, as well under the seal of the 12.
men as under his own seal, And in this partition there is no primer election
given to any: but the second may have livery before the eldest, or the younger
before either of them even as it pleases the Sheriff.

And this difference is between partition by Writ here, and the other
partition which is by agreement: In the first the Viscount shall make to every
partner, her distinct share, but in the other they may agree, that one shall
hold in seueraltie, and the rest shall occupy that which remains in common.
Thus far Littleton.

Bractons partition.
THere is in Bracton a large discourse of partition, which I see not why, (for
the form) at this day should not be good, if not of all other the best: And
this partition is by commission to men either chosen by the parties, or
appointed by the King as Justices or extenders, with commandment to the
Sheriff to make them come before those Commissioners or extenders tam milites
quam alios legales homines nulla affinitate attingentes, per quos negotium
melius expedire poterit. He has also a precept to the Coroners where the
Sheriff is negligent: Tepidus and remissus in executione preceptorum domini
Regis, with a rule for valuation of an aduowsan, viz. that a mark annual to
the parson shall be rated a shilling to the parcener to whom the aduowsan shall
be allotted.

And when the extent and division is made, every part being written by it self
should be delivered to a Layman altogether unlettered, which should distribute
to every coheyre her part at adventure, wherewith she should stand contented:
But this might be otherwise, by their agreement amongst themselves, to elect
according to the prerogative of their age. Bracton discendeth deeper into
examination what things may be parted amongst coheyres, exempting neither
lands, tenements, homages, villinages, services, seruitudes, or anything
belonging to lands and tenements from division, unless it be seriantia (quae
diuidi non debent, ne cogatur-Rex seruitium accipere per particulas) or a
castle, or the head of some Earldome or Barrony, quod propter ius gladij
diuidinon debet sit illud castrum vel aliud edificium, and hoc ideo (says he)
ne sic caput perplures particulas diuidatur and plura iura comitatus and
Baroniarum deueniunt ad per nihilum quod deficiat regnum quod ex comitatibus
and Baronijs dicitur esse constitutum. Therefore Caput comitatus vel Baroniae
rests indivisible, and shall go to the eldest copartner, though where there
are many chief and great Mansionhouses, every one may have one perhaps, and if
there be but one, every one may have part thereof, where the frank-tenement is
holden by service military, for if a free soke-man die, whose heritage it is,
ab antiquo partibilis, the eldest son (by Bracton) shall have his house, and
the rest shall have allowance: Amongst other things, Bracton stands long upon
the bringing to a common heap (which we call Hotchpot) Lands given in marriage
to a coheyre, showing that though lands given in marriage (whether the
Inheritance be discendens, or perquisita, and whether she to whom the land is
given, be at the time of the gift a maid or a widow) must needs fall into
partition, when part of the other lands is claimed (and hoc quamuis homagium
interuenerit and post tertium haeredem:) yet for all that, she to whom there is
given in marriage already more then an even portion, may well retain it, and
is not compellable to any confusion unless she demand a share in that which
remains, so that she to whom all is given, may likewise retain all. And
where a daughter was infeoffed pro homagio and seruitio, or where a stranger
was infeoffed of part of the inheritance, which afterward married a daughter,
etc. they might be made parcel of the other lands, without any Hotch-pott: of
these things ye may read more in Bract. li. 2. c. 33 and 34 with a Writ of
habere facias seisinam, for he says, possessio non pertinet ad haeredes nisi
naturaliter fuerit apprehensa animo et corpore proprio vel alieno: sicut
procreatorio prius ad ipsos non pertinebit, and vnde cum in curia Regis facta
fuerit partitio statim habean^ breue de seisma sua habenda.

SECT. XX. of Hotch pott, according to Littleton.
FOr putting of lands in Hotch-pot, there is no where so full, and plain
learning, as in M. Littl. third book c. z. If (says he) a man seized in
fee-simple lands, having issue two daughters, of which the eldest is married,
give parcel of those lands to his daughter and her husband in frankemarriage,
and die seized of other lands, exceeding in value those which are given, etc.
the husband and wife shall have no part of this remnant unless they will put
the land given unto them in Hotch-pot: for example, If the father had 30.
acres, and gave 10. now after his decease if the donees refuse to make
commixtion, the other daughter may enter and occupy the whole 20. and hold it
to her self: But putting all in Hotch-pott, to find the entire value, (for it
is but an estimation or valuation) finding the acres to be of like goodness,
the Donees in franke-marriage shall have an n^reasement of 5. acres to hold all
15. in seueraltie, so that always, the land given in frank marriage, must
remain to the donees and their heirs, for else (says Littleton) should
follow a thing unreasonable and inconvenient, which always the Law detesteth,
there is the same Laws betwixt the heirs of Donees in frank marriage, and the
other partners, if the Donees themselves die, before their ancestor, or before
partition.

This putting of Land in hotchpot is where the other lands descend from the
Donor only, and not from any other auncestor, for if they descend from the
father or brother of the donour, from the mother of the Donee, that which is
equally so descended, shall be without Commixtion equally divided: Also (by
Littleton) if the land descended be of equal value with the land given in
frank Marriage, Hotchpot should be then in vain and to no purpose, and see
Littl. Chapter of parceners more concerning such Hotchpot.

How partition may be avoided.
PArtition made betwixt two Sisters tenants in fee simple, they both being of
full age, is not defesable, though there want oweltie, and equal value in
their parts.

But if the land were in fee-taile, the parties making the partition should be
bound and concluded only for their time, the issue of her which had the meaner
value, might enter after her mothers death, into her Aunts part, and occupy
with her in common, and she again with her niece in the part allotted to her
Sister: If two Coparceners in fee, both married, together with their husbands
make partition, it shall stand in force during the coverture, but after the
death of a husband, his wife having a meaner part, may enter and defeat the
partition, not so if at the time of the alotment, the parts were both of equal
annual value.

If two Coparceners, whereof the one is under 21. years age, make partition so
that a meaner value is allotted to the puisne partner, she may enter and defeat
the partition either in her minority, or when she is of full age: but let her
take heed when she comes once to full age, that she take not the whole
profit of that which to her self was allotted, for that is an agreement to the
partition, and makes it indefeasable, peradventure a moietie of the profits
she may take.

Three acres of land are given to one in tail, which has other three in fee,
and after his death, his two daughters make partition, so that one has the
land intailed, and another the land in fee, if she which has the fee-simple,
alien her part and die, her issue may enter into the land tailed, and hold
occupation in Common with her Aunt, whose folly was to make such a partition,
for since she is without remedy, against the alienee of her mother, and
without recompense, for the lands intailed, whereunto she is an heir, by
descent from the first Donee, it is reason she may enter, specially
considering, that the state tail is not discontinued, yet 20. Hen. 6. it is
holden, that she is put to her Formedon.

A man seized of two carues of land, one by just title, another by disseisin of
an infant, dies seized having issue two daughters, they divide so that one
has the carue gotten by disseisin, and the infant enters upon her
possession, etc. she may enter into the other carue, and hold in parcenarie
with her Sister: But if she had aliened her part in fee before the entry of
the infant, this had been a full dismission of her self out of Copartnership
which she could not have recontinued by entry, as she might perhaps, had she
made only a lease for years, generally if after partition one part be euicted
from her which has it, by loyal entry, she may enter into the other lands,
and occupy with the other Coparceners, compelling them to a new division: all
this says Littleton.

SECT. XXI. How Partition shall be avoided when it is by Judgment.
MUch of that which Littl. has taught for the avoiding of partition (as I
collect) must be understood of partition in pais, and by agreement, for when
it is made by Judgment in a Writ of rationabile part, nuper obijt, or assise
to hold in seueralty, or by livery in the Chancery, or else by Writ, de
partitione, in which cases there is commission or authority derived from the
Prince to extend and to make parts by the Oath of 12. men, etc. there is now
no reason, that a matter of this substance, circumstance and solemnity, should
be all laid on the ground, by a bare entry, yet that silly poor women
altogether ignorant of the law, might not fear that that Partition which is
made by the Law, that by law there were no means to reuerse it, but that still
it must stand impugnable, whatsoever iniquity or inequality it had, Old Breton
says in the end of his 17. Chapter, Si ascum ^ercener soit que se tient nient
pay de cel partison si ferres nous vener le process, and le record deuant
nostre justices de bank, etc. illonques soient les errors redress, etc. He
concludes somewhat like Bracton. Et apres le Assignement des purparties fuit
per sort ou per election: foit le seisin per judgment de nostre court: But to
the matter. There is occurring in many of the year books, remedies against
partitions, as if judgment be given in a nuper obijt, of purpartie, and seisin
granted to hold severally, yet the partition may be anoyded by error in the
first judgment. If partition be made in Chancerie, and a less value then is
due allotted to a puisne Sister, which remains still in ward, she may have
remedy by scire facias when she comes to full age: So whether partition be
of it self altogether unjust, or in part inequall, through malice, ignorance,
or negligence of the Sheriff or extenders, there is remedy always, so the
parties be not hurtful to themselves.

And although partners of estate in fee, being all of full age, making purpart
by agreement, bind and conclude themselves and their heirs for ever, yet when
partition is compulsatorie, and the parts are delivered by the Sheriff, who
with his extenders makes division (which may be without the presence of the
heirs) I see no great reason here, why acceptance should be a bar in the
issue perpetual, or to the parceners for term of life, yet Littletons bien
for guard is good counsel, vide Dyer 33. H. 8. 52.

SECT. XXII. Of the coherence between Partners after division.
BUt admit now that partition is so made that there remains neither cause nor
intention to undo it, yet the partners are in a kind of confederacy and
combination amongst themselves, by the very Law and custom of this Realm, Et
lou^ droit est cy connex null de eux ne doit respondre sans le autre: pur le
contribution. Etsi ascun se face ceo ne serroit in preiudi^^ des auters
partners. Britton cap. 73. so that if any of them will sue for any inheritance
that was their Common Ancestors, the suit must be in all their names still, and
if any of them be sued, for any such Land or inheritance, she may pray aid of
the other coheires, which may come with her to plead a feoffment, fine or
release, or deraigne warrantie, and if in this sort she lose some or all her
part, she shall recover that which her partners hold her equal portion. But if
a parcener put her self in defense, and will not pray aid of her fellows,
which may strengthen and assist her, she shall then recover nothing against her
coheyres, though she lose all her purpart and liuelihood: They continue
therefore still in a sort one heir tied together like bundles of rods, for
their mutual strength, and by Bracton and Britton, if one of them die without
issue after partition, her part shall go to the rest, per ius accrescendi, But
is crossed by Littleton above, which tells you that their title shall be in
this case by descent, though the dying be before partition, therefore if
partition be betwixt two Sisters of the half blood, and one of them dies
without issue, having an uncle of the whole blood to the Father, that Uncle by
Bractons partition shall have her Inheritance, etc.

SECT. XXIII. By what manner of acquisition the ouer-liuer takes the part of a
Co-heire when she dies.
FOr your better instruction in this point, mark this Case, a man has issue
three daughters, by one venture, and one daughter by another venture, and dies
soised, etc. they all enter, and two of the daughters by the first venture die,
the third daughter by the same venture shall be heir alone to their two parts,
and the fourth daughter of the half blood gets therein nothing, 10. Assi.
p. 27. yet 4. Assi. p. 10. if a man die seized having issue two daughters by
diverse venters, both under age, and a stranger abateth, and one of these
daughters in their infancy, releaseth all her right, and dies without issue,
the other may have a mortdancestor, and recover the whole Inheritance, as heir
to her Father, though she can by no means be heir to her Sister: But if she
which released, had been of full age when she released, she had given away
her moitie. And if she had entered at full age, or under age, nothing had
accrewed to her Sister: But not entering, the mortdancestor to which they were
both entitled, goes for all to the suruiuor. And this I think to be a good
case, making nothing on Bractons side, and not plain any thing on Littletons.

SECT. XXIIII. Of Contribution
THat which Britton touches above, of Contribution, I understand to be in
case, where one partner prays aid of another, the sequel whereof I have
shortly told you: There is another Contribution by Statute, Marlebridge, c. 9.
which wills, S^ haereditas al^qua de qua vnica tantum secta debeatur, ad
plures par^icipes eiusdem haeredit. devoluatur, ille qui habet eineciam partem
vnicam sacier sectam, and participes pro portione sua contribuant. The writ for
this Contribution, when the young copartners will not perform the ordinance,
has cum de communi consilio prouiso, etc. reciting the Statute.

This Statute reaches not to the King; at whose Court all the copartners shall
give their several attendance, suite; and service. And if any of the lands
partable be holden in Capite every Coheyre shall and must have a part of that
in her alotment, for the Kings profit, The statute of Ireland which is a
receipt of H^n. 3; 14 of his reign to Gerrard Fi^zmorrice Justice, shows
that by those days, the first borne partner did always homage for her self
and her fellows to every common Lord of the fee who took all his service, per
man^s primogeni^ae, which primogenita, had in recompense; (says the Statute)
no homage, ward-ship, or subjection of Copartners, nor any thing but the
Capital Message, ratione eineciae: Glanuil (which writ before the Statute)
says, that homage and all other services, were done to the chief Lord by the
hand of the eldest parcener for all the rest, without guerdon from them or
their heirs, in the first or second degree: But (by him) their heirs in the
third degree were bound to do homage, and pay relief to the heirs of the
eldest daughter, etc. Because forsooth (as Bracton makes the reason) issue
being had and continued to the third and fourth degree, the heir of the
eldest, might now take homage without fear of being excluded from inheriting
that which was altogether unlike to descend unto them: But by Bracton the
youngest Sister should presently do fealty to the eldest, and by Britton (who
wrote after Marlbridge) the matter rested merely in the Lords election, (for
thus says he) Election le Seignior aprendre tiels services per un main ou per
les mains de toutes les parceners, Car autrement per droit les gardes and
marriages des auters parceners pur les parols in le brief de guard o^ le
plaintiff dit que launcester, l'infant soit son tenant and lui fist service de
chiualer. eac. 68. fo. 175.

Now seeing that Glanuile, the Statute of Ireland, Bract. Britton, and al do
agree, that every Lord might take his services by the hands of the eldest
partner, (the reason whereof was a desire which the Law had to conserve
Seignories in their intierties, and that Lords should not take or divide them
into mynnomes, and Crotchets) what was it that caused the making of this ninth
Chapter of Marlebridge? It should seem that Lords in those days played upon
the advantage, And though they were scrupulous in taking of homage, by which
they were shut from succession, and yet willing enough to take entirely all
other emoluments incident or annexed to the tenure, from one pair of hands: yet
suite of Court, which is burdenous or inconvenient to none but to the tenants,
they would be and were content to dissipate, and it should seem also that in
puisne Sisters and Coheyres, though they were easily entreated, that the eldest
should do all suit and service, yet they could be well content to give them
nothing for their pains, and therefore a Statute was needful, for other
things I will not accuse old writers of error, they erred not perhaps if they
take it as it was taken by Lawyers then, though that taking staggered from
Laws conformity.

This I say, (to me) the statute of Ireland is sufficient to prove that the
eldest Sister shall have no guard, marriage, or subjection of the youngest, and
neither homage nor fealty (by Littl.) can be taken otherwise, then a service
incident to a tenure, for which it is lawful to distraine. As therefore when a
Manor descends to two partners, each one may have parcel of the demesne,
and parcel of the services, and so of one there may step up two Manors: And
if the division be that one shall have the demesnes, and another the services,
the suite is now in a very haut suspention, and the Manor for a time broken in
pieces: but it shall be a Manor again, if she which had the services die
without Issue, (per Thiru. 12. H. 4. fo. 34. 35) So I doubt not but when a
tenement, holden by service military, descends unto two coparceners, and
division is euenly made, each of them may pay rents and do service for her part
to the Lord, who may take fealty and homage of either of them, if he will: And
may be compellable to take homage of one of them at the least, which for the
warrantie shall be auailable to both.

SECT. XXV. What service belongs only to the eldest parcener to do.
THere is some thing besides suite of Court that shall lie only upon the part,
which by an Alcumized term we call einitia: Fitzherbert titulo partition. 18.
has this note, If the Earldom of Chester descend unto two parceners, it
shall be divided betwixt them, As other lands use to be, and the eldest shall
not have the Seigniory or Earldom whole to her self, quod nota: adjudged,
percotam curiam. 23. H. 3. But this notwithstanding if law should have the
course, which she had in her state of innocence, I think the capital
Message of a Knights fee, and the head of an Earldome or Baronie in partition
ought ever to go to the eldest. And if because there is not else perhaps
wherewith to make purparte to the youngest coheyre, or not any other thing,
holden in Capite, to be distributed for the Kings advantage and so for
necessity, (quae nullis vinculis legum contine^ur) the head of a Barony be
divided, yet the indivisible service by which it is holden, is scutage and
grand-serjeantie, I mean the very actual service, falls by right upon the
eldest parcener. Et vbi est commodum, ibi debet esse onus, and so vbi est onus
debet esse commodum: whether the case following prove mine assertion or no, I
will set it down out of my Lord Dyer, and then prepare me to speak of another
partnership: Humfrey Bohune, sometime Earl of Hereford and Essex, held the
Manors of Harefield, Newman and Whitenhurst by service of Constableship of
England (which is grandserjantie) and dyed seized, having issue only two
daughters, they entered, took husbands, and the husband of the youngest became
King, then partition was made, in which the King and his wife did choose
Whitenhurst and Harefield, and Newman fell to the other partner: By the opinion
of all the Justices of England, the reservation of the tenure at the first was
good, the two daughters before marriage erercise this office by sufficient
deputy, and after marriage the husband of the eldest might execute alone, And
per omnes iusticiarios, as when there are two daughters, and the Father dies
seized of lands holden of one of them, the whole service, if it be entire, (as
homage) is reviued after partition: so here unity of parcel of the tenansie
in the King, did not determine the office, but it continued in the other
parcener, so that the King might exact the service, or refuse it at his
pleasure, as every Lord may refuse the homage of his tenant, if it be not
ancestrell. Me^ pur ceo que le office fuit haut and dangerous, and auxi ver^^
chargeable al Roy in fees, le Roy voile declaimer de aver le service execute
Dier 11. Eliz. fo. 285.

THE WOMAN'S LAWIER. The second BOOK.
NOw that I have brought up a Woman, and made her an Inheritrix, taken her out
of Ward, helped her to make partition, etc. me thinks she should long to be
married: Foemina appetit virum, sicut materia formam, And I did not mean when
I begun, to produce any Vestall Virgin, Nim^e, or new Saint Bridge^. Following
therefore my first intention, I will begin to instruct Women grown* first such
as are, or shortly shall be Wives, and then Widows.

SECT. I. Of Marriage, according to the Civil and Common Law.
MArriage is defined to be a Conjunction of Man and Woman, containing an
inseparable connection, and union of life. But as there is nothing that is
begotten and finished at once, so this Contract of coupling man and woman
together, has an inception first, and then an orderly proceeding. The first
beginning of Marriage (as in respect of Contract, and that which Law takes
hold on) is when Wedlock by words in the future tence is promised and vow^d,
and this is but sponsio* or sponsalia. The full Contract of Matrimony, is when
it is made by words, de praesenti, in a lawful consent, and thus two be made
man and wife existing without lying together, yet Matrimony is not accounted
consummate, until there go with the consent of mind and will Conjunction of
body.

SECT. II. Of Sponsion or first promising.
THe first promising and inception of Marriage ^s in two parts, either it is
plain, simple and naked, or confirmed and borne by giving of something: the
first is, when a man and woman bind themselves simply by their word only to
Contract Matrimony hereafter: the second, when there is an oath made, or
somewhat taken as an earnest or pledge betwixt them on both parts, or on one
part, to be married hereafter. There is not here to be stood upon, the age
definitiuely set down for making of marriage irreuocable, but all that are
seven years old (betwixt whom Matrimony may consist) may make sponsion and
promise. But if any that is under the age of seven, begin this vow and
betrothing, it is esteemed as a mist, and vanishes to nothing.

SECT. III. Of public Sponsion.
THis Sponsion (in which as it stands, is no full Contract of Matrimony, nor
any more, save only an obligation, or being bound in a sort to marry
hereafter) may be public or secret: public, either by the parties
themselves, present together, or by message or Letters when they be distant one
from another: Neither is there herein any curious form of paction or
stipulation required, but only by words, howsoever expressed, a plain consent
and agreement of the parties, and by the Civil Law, (with which the ancient
Canons concorded) of their parents* if the Contractors were sub potestate
parentum: the like reason seems to be for consent of tutors, etc. But it is
now received a general opinion that the good will of parents is required, in
regard of honesty, not of necessity, according to the Canons which exact
necessarily, none other consent but only of the parties themselves, whose
Conjunction is in hand, without which the conclusion of parents is of none
effect: note further, that sponsalia may be made pure or conditional, and
whatsoever is else adjected (as earnest, pledge, or such like) is but
accidental.

SECT. IIII. Of secret Sponsion.
THose Spousals which are made when a man is without witness, Solus cum sola,
are called secret promising or desponsation, which though it be tolerated, when
by liquid and plain probation it may appear to the Judge, and there is not
any lawful impediment to hinder the Contract, yet it is so little esteemed of,
(unless it be very manifest) that another promise public made after it,
shall be preferred and prevail against it. The cause why it is mistiked, is
the difficulty of proof for avoiding of it, when for offense her just cause
of refusal, the one or other party might seek to go loose, and perhaps
cannot, but must stand haltered from any other Marriage, and the Judge in
suspense what to determine.

SECT. V. The validity of the Desponsation.
THough this Sponsalia be always made with intent that Matrimony should ensue,
yet the Contracter cannot thereunto be compelled, unless there were another
thing joined to the Contract of Spousals, neither are they compellable to
marry, though an oath accompanied the promise, unless it were made pure and
without Condition, for in conditional sponsion of Marriage, the bond of
performance is suspended in the Condition, till that be performed, unless
there follow a relinquishment of the Condition, by copulation of bodies, or a
new consent by word^ of the present.

SECT. VI. The nature of the Condition.
ANd here in the quality of Conditions it is observed, that if the Condition
annexed to the promise be repugnant against the right of Matrimony, the
disposition of the whole Spousals are void: As if a man promise a woman to
marry her, if she poison the child which she conceived, the promise is of none
effect, as toward Marriage. But a Condition, though it be otherwise dishonest
or impossible, corrupts not promise of Marriage if it be not aduersant, and
against the Law of wedlock.

SECT. VII. How long the performance of promise is to be excepted.
NOw it may be demanded what time must be tarried and expected by the Law
Civil and Common, for perimplishing of promises made of future Wedlock: It is
answered, that if the limits of time prefixed when the sponsion was first made,
be once passed and expired: if the vow were made without limitation of time,
then (where there appears not any weighty cause of stay) if both the parties
be residing in one Province, the woman quae non vult ^ua vo^a diutius delud^,
may after two years marry to whom she lists, But if her Spouse be commorant
in another Province, then she must tarry three years, Though indeed these
times of expectance, may be prolonged and lengthened, by a Judge, as he shall
find cause just and reasonable.

SECT. VIII. In what case the betrothed may refuse one another.
IF after the Sponsion or first betrothing, and before Matrimony contracted,
some evil disease (as leprosy, or some violent cause or casualty) make one of
the parties unfit for generation, the other may repudiate and abandon him or
her, which shall be so diseased or unabled. Spousals are also dissolved for
fornication, specially if it be committed by either of the parties with their
kindred: likewise Spousals which are made a pupillis may be dissolved by a bare
renuntiation, but by no means they are rightlier avoided, then by a dissension
of both the Contractors, from their first consent, for by such dissent also
society is or may be broken in sunder. There are other causes for which the
bond of desponsation may be taken away, as devulgation of kindred unknown, and
opportunity of nuptials sought by detestable means, for which cause not only
Spousals, but Marriage it self, when it is contracted, may be dissolved.

SECT. IX. By what authority Spousals are to be undone.
TO all these causes of undoing the first vows of marriage, there must be
added the authority of the Bish which has power to absolve, yet the Canons do
without the authority of any Bishops make free from the Obligation of only
promised marriage, all those which abdicate themselves to Religion. And
Hostiensis contendeth that without authority of any Judge, Spousals are undone
ipso iure, by a post-marriage, made by words of the present time, sed nemo sibi
ipsi ius dicere debet, no man may be his own Judge: And it is certain, that
espousals ought never to be undone, but by public authority, unless the cause
for which we will have them undone be so well known, that it needs neither
proof nor sentence, such as is fornication when it is notorious, and public
to all the world.

SECT. X. Of Matrimony contracted in the present time, and who may contract.
THose which the Latins call puberes, that is, they which are come once to
such state, habit and disposition of body that they may be deemed able to
procreate, may contract Matrimony by words of the time present, for in contract
of Wedlock, pubertas, is not strictly esteemed by number of years, as it is
in wardship, but rather by the maturity, ripeness, and disposition of body:
There is further required in them which contract Matrimony, a sound and whole
mind to consent, for he that is mad, without intermission of ^ury, cannot
marry: But he that is deaf and dumb, may contract Matrimony, quia non verbis
tantum sed nutu and signis sensa mentis exprimuntur, and as they which are
impuberes, cannot for infirmity of age, make any firm knot of Wedlock, so
likewise they which by coldness of nature, or by enchantment, are impotent, be
forbidden to contract.

The impediments Ecclesiastical, as vows, Compaternitie and spiritual
kindred, I will not meddle with: But come to kindred of blood, which contains
a principal let and prohibition of Marriage.

SECT. XI. Impediment of Marriage by Kindred and Consanguinitie.
IN the worlds infancy men were enforced by necessity to marry with own
kindred, propter hominum pauci^atem, But that necessity is taken away and long
since by the very voice of God, they which are in certain degrees of blood are
forbidden to marry, Leuiticus 18. And because Marriage is an abundant
seminary of charity and love, it is wisely and profitably ordained that it
should be dispersed into many families.

Therefore by Natural, Civil, and Common Law, Marriage is clean forbidden
betwixt all those, which are as Parents or Children one toward another in
infinitum; and betwixt those persons, which are of kindred in the transuerse
line, Marriage is forbidden till the fourth degree be past.

SECT. XII. The impediment of Marriage by Affinity.
THere is further a certain nigh alliance called affinity, quasi fines duarum
cognationum coniungens* this rises betwixt them which are married, and the
kindred of one of them, as betwixt the husband and the kindred of his wife: now
affinity prohibiteth Marriage only to the persons contracted, etc. for the
Cosins or Consanguinity to my wife, are of affinity only to me, and not to my
brothers or children by a former Wife; and my blood and consanguinity are
kindred of affinity only to my Wife, and not to her brothers or former
children: here is it that the Father and the Son may marry the Mother and the
Daughter, and two Brethren may marry two Sisters in another Family: for the
Consanguinity, of which one is of blood to the husband, and another to the
wife, are betwixt themselves in no bond of affinity: And observe that in what
degree a man or woman is to one of them that are married, by Consanguinity,
they are accounted in the same degree to the other in affinity: As the wives
brother, who is in primo gradu to his Sister, is in the same degree to her
husband, and their children in the second, etc. And so forth their Childrens
Children, which after the fourth degree, are again by all laws permitted to
marry, contrahi^^^ and affinitas per illicitum co^^um.

SECT. XIII. Diversity of Religion.
AMongst the hindrances of marriage, note this also, that by Constitution of
holy Church, marriage is forbidden betwixt persons of diverse Religions, as
Jews and Christians.

SECT. XIV. Of fear and constraint.
ALso Matrimony holds not when it is extorted by force, or by such a fear
as may cadere in constantem virum; quia matrimonia debent esse libera.

SECT. XV. Of Marriage detestable made.
ALso Marriage holds not, when it is sought or made with wickedness: And if a
man promise to a woman which he has adulterously polluted that he will marry
her when his wife dies, etc. Or if a man have sought to abridge the days of
his lawful wife to marry another: These villainies are such perpetual cankers
in marriage, that they do not only hinder it to be made, but also rend it in
sunder when it is made.

There are other crimes, quae distrahunt Matrimonia contracta, as Incest cum
cognata, and rauishment, yet if any man ravish a Maid, or other unmarried
Woman, the Canons do admit him to marry with her if she consent: But otherwise
she shall be rendered to her Father, upon whose suite and accusation, the
rauisher is put to Capital punishment.

There are by the Civil and Common Laws many other impediments of Marriage,
as susceptio propriae sobolis, publica poenitentia, caedes Sacerdotis,
interdictum Ecclesiasticum, etc. which I will not trouble Women withal.

SECT. XVI. Marriage forbidden by public Constitution.
BY Civil ordinance also Marriage is sometime restrained and forbidden, as
betwixt him which adopteth, and her which is adopted: for seeing that they
which are adopted are in the place and stead of Children, there rests a
League, as of kindred betwixt them and the blood of him which adopteth, by the
Civil Law and Canons both.

But this Civil kindred lasts no longer then the adopted are in potestate
adoptantis, Neither is it any obstacle to a Marriage, save only betwixt the
adopted and adoptant, and those which are in his power. And as adoption
hinders Marriage by the Civil Law: so by the same law, a man may not marry
her whom he took exposed, as a castaway or a foundling, and brought her up
as a Daughter. Marriage is also forbidden, sometime ratione publicae
honestatis, as if a Man be divorced from his wife, and afterward she has a
Daughter by another man, this is no Daughter in Law to the husband, yet he
should do impudently to marry her, Those prohibitions of Marriage that were
sometime betwixt a Tutor and Pupil, betwixt a President and a Woman in his
subjection, betwixt a Senator and a freed bondwoman, betwixt a Senators
Daughter and a freed bondsman, betwixt a woman Comedian or one whose parents
used some lascivious or light Art, and a Senator: lastly, betwixt free and
servile, are all either by long public Custom or by Common Law taken away.

SECT. XVII. Of Polygamie.
THere are examples in Scripture of Poligamy (viz.) where men had more wives
then one at once, as Abraham, Jacob, David, and Solomon had: And it seems 21.
of Deuteromie 15. that it was sufferable by Moses his law, But it was said at
the first, man and wife shall be one flesh, and the examples were rather
permitted then lawful. The Civil Law Canons, and all Christian Common wealths
do utterly condemn Polygamie, and so much did the wise Emperors of Rome
detest all petulancy of Marriage, that they made and ordained Laws, that
Women which within the year of mourning for their husbands betake them to
wedlock again, should be reputed infamous and defamed. But this also the
Canons have taken away, Contracts of Matrimony ought to be public. Nuptials de
presen^i ought always to be made public at the Church, or at the least, in
presence and Congregation, del bon g^n^s, yet is it not of necessity, that they
which marry stipulate by themselves, or be present in person at the contract
making, but it may be well enough by Proctor, so that the Contractors
themselves be willing and witting, or that they ratify it when it is done.

SECT. XVIII. What words are requisite.
THere needs no stipulation or curious form of Contract in Wedlock making,
but such words as prove a mutual consent are sufficient, and it may be made by
Letters. If question rise about words, recurrendum est ad communem intellectum,
and vsum loquendi, and indubio pro matrimonio iudicandum, for there is more
doubtfulnesse in construing of words, vt res magis valeat quam pereat, etc.

SECT. XIX. The Accidents of Marriage.
THose things which are of solemnity or benevolence, as provision of Dower,
earnest, giving pledges, nuptial benediction, etc. are not of the essence of
Matrimony which is made by consent: for though Dower cannot consist without
Marriage, yet Marriage may very well stand without dower: And so it is of all
Donations propter nuptias: In only one case written instruments are required
in making of Marriage, and that is where a man marries her whom he has holden
a long time as Concubine, here instrumenta dotalia are behouefull, that the
children had before Marriage, may be esteemed Legitimate: But this holds not
in England.

SECT. XX. Wherefore Marriage ought to be made.
THe causes of Matrimony principally are two: The first is susceptio sobolis,
increase of Children, for even by Plato every good man ought to desire that he
may leave behind him worshippers of God, and propagators of piety: The second
cause is the euiting of fornication and uncleanness 1. ad Corinth. ca. 7 Saint
Paul bids, that to avoid fornication every man have his own wife, and every
woman her own husband, and whosoever marryeth for beauty, age, order,
splendor of birth, or for riches, rather then for these two causes, does very
peruersly, though it be not expressly disallowed, but Marriage may be for the
other things also, and the Consent may be given for them.

SECT. XXI. The Consummation and indiuiduitie of Marriage.
WHen to the Consent of mind, there is added Copulation of body, Matrimony is
consummate, the principal end whereof is propagation or procreation: But where
the course after going is not observed, there rises no lawful Offspring, the
Children which are had, are not in power and commandment of them which beget
or bear them, neither are they taken by Law for any other, then vulgo que^i^i.
Otherwise it is in lawful Wedlock, the knot whereof is so straight and
indissoluble, that they which are yoked therein, cannot the one without the
consent of the other, (neither was it ever permitted) abdicate themselves, or
enter into Religion, for Saint Paul in the above titled Epistle and Chapter,
says plainly, that the husband has not power of his own body, etc. And
there cannot chance any fedity or uncleanness of body so great, as that for it
a man and wife ought perpetually to be segregated, yea so vnpartible be they,
that law says, they may not utterly leave coniugalem consuetudinem, though one
of them have the very leprosy it self.

And here is moved a question not impertinent, That is, whether a woman be
bound to follow her husband whersoeuer he goes, if he require it, whereunto it
is answered by Bartall and by some other, That if the wife before she married
knew the negotiations and occasions of her husband, would be such, that he must
of necessity ever be traveling, she is bounden, and i^ the Contract seems to
have consented to go with him at commandment, but if after the bargain made
he take up a new trick of circum^^gar^, she may let him go when he list, and
tarry at home when she will.

SECT. XXII. Of Divorce.
PActis poenarum cogi potest nemo ad Matrimonium contrahendum: And as no man
can be compelled by any conuention of pain or penalty to contract Matrimony,
so is it impossible, when it is once lawfully and evidently contracted, to
distract it by any partition, covenant, or humane traction, Quos Deus
coniunxit, homo non separet, yet there are Causes, for which diverse are
permitted: But Divorce, that only separateth a consuetudine coniugali, takes
not away the bond of Matrimony, and therefore Divorces are sometimes
perpetual, as long as the parties live, sometimes for a season limited, and
sometime, till reconcilement be had, and he that makes Divorce with his wife
being only separated a Toro, is forbidden to take another wife.

SECT. XXIII. Causes of Divorce.
THe Civil Law has many causes of Divorce, but by Divine and Common Law, the
only sufficient cause is adultery and fornication, which by the Canons is
carnal and spiritual: the spiritual is heresy and Idolatry: They dissolve
Matrimony for spiritual fornication only, where one of the parties is
converted to Christian faith, and the other for hatred of his religion will not
cohabit, etc. And this is taken also from Saint Paul 1. ad Corinth. 7. where he
says, If the unbelieving depart, let him depart, a Brother or Sister is not in
subjection.

SECT. XXIV. Impotencie or Disabilitie of Procreation.
THere is admitted also, in dissolution of Marriage, the complaint of
impotencie: And Justinian very discreetly, willed that in that exploration or
proof of the defect there should be expected three years: but the Canons
ordeine that Matrimony is dissolved by probation of impotencie, without mention
or limits of time. And this is more then a bare divorce or separation, a Toro,
for it dissolueth Marriage, avoiding it as it had never been: so that he or
she whose fellow is convicted of impotencie, may choose a new friend, and
presently marry again.

But this is to be understood of impotencie which was before the Marriage made:
for indeed where the impediment was so precedent, there could not any
Matrimony exist or have being, etc.

Otherwise it is, when this disability betideth after Marriage perfected and
consummate, for in that case, he or she which remains potent, shall not leave
and depart from the impotent, but be compelled to bear the discommodity,
as well as any other ill fortune. And that which is here taught of Conjugal
impotencie, stretches to all impediments of Marriage which are perpetual, vt
per ea Matrimonium nunquam extitisle iudicetur.

SECT. XXV. Marriages inter ascendentes and descendentes.
THose Marriages that are made between ascendentes and descendentes, are so
detestable, that by the Civil law they deserve exile and confiscation of
goods. And there is a gloss that would extend this to all unlawful Marriages:
but by Bartell and others, it is to be inflicted only upon those, which are
contra iura sanguinis.

SECT. XXVI. Captivity or long absence of one which is married.
IT falls out not seldom, the one of them which are married to be taken
captive, or otherwise so detained, that it is uncertain if he live or no.

Therefore because it is in some sort dangerous to expect long the incertaine
return of an absent yoake-fellow, here the Civil Law did ordain, that after
a husband had been gone five years, and nothing known whether he lived or
no, the wife might marry again, and so might the husband, that had expected
his wife, etc. But the Common Law commands simply to forbear Marriage till
the death of him or her that is missing be certainly known.

SECT. XXVII. That no crime dissolueth marriage.
OF old time, some Crimes were numbered amongst the Causes of Dissoluing
marriage: but Justinian changed the Law here in part, and the Canons upon the
saying of Christ, Quos Deus coniunxit, etc. will not by any means that
Matrimony rightly made and consummate, can be dissolved, quoad ad vinculum
Matrimonij. though for fornication they suffer a parting, quoad Torum. So that
nodus legitimi Matrimonij, is never dissolved but by death, and the wife as
long as she lives is subject to the law of her husband by Saint Paul.

Yet says Lagus, seeing that in Contracts of Wedlock we regard as well what is
decent and convenient, as what is lawful, I cannot tell why we be not bound in
dissoluing of it to follow the like equity: and for example, if a Wife cannot
dwell with her husband without manifest danger of death, because he is cruel
and bloody, why may not she be separated iudicis ordinarij cognitione
precedente.

SECT. XXVIII. The Authority of the ordinary Judge, etc.
FOr if Spousals of future Marriage cannot be dissolved without public
authority, it must needs follow, that without like authority, there can be
no repudiation when Matrimony is fully contracted and consummate: But in
pursuing of divorce the strict order of Judicial proceedings is not always
severely kept: for regularly production of witnesses before contestation of
suite, non adiuuat producentem, yet if Cornelia sue a Divorce against
Sempronius, causa consanguinitatis, and Sempronius being cited will not
appear, if now Cornelia bring her witnesses, the Judge may receive them.

Marry this religious observation the Canons give him ever, when he comes to
point of Judgment, That the danger is less, in leaving men contrary to the
Statutes of men, then in separating (contrary to the Statutes of God) those
which are lawfully conjoined.

Thus far have I run my self in debt to Doctor* Conradus Lagus, of whom in
the third part of his Method, ca. 22. may be further learned the difference
betwixt Scortum, pellex and Concubina, Our English comprehends them all in
one word, and I would they dwelt all in one House, beyond Seas, Concubinatus
speciem conjugij -- habet; Et ex Concubinae natis conceditur beneficium
legitimationis. If maid, wife or widow, ask what I mean to tell them so much
of Civil and Canon Law, seeing they be none of those Country women, I pray
them not to look for the Regions in mappa mundi, but for their own Regiment
in Christian duty: The spiritual Law is here an Oracle to the temporal,
which evermore sends to the Ecclesiastical Judge, viz. the Bishop, for
certification of lawfulnes or unlawfulness of Wedlocks when Accouplements come
in question.

SECT. XXIX. Statutes concerning Marriage.
FOr it is true that Newdigat^ says, 12. He. 8. fo. 6. that marriage and
Diuorcements with the circumstances of them be properly no parcel of
Common-Lawes learning.

Yet it is very needful here that I show you here what the Laws of England
have needfully concerning Marriage established, 32. H. 8. ca. 38. declares all
persons lawfully to marry, which are not prohibited by Gods Law. And it was
ordained, that all Marriages contracted and solemnized in face of the Church,
and consummate with bodily knowledge, should remain indefeasable,
notwithstanding any pre-contract, etc. Further, that neither dispensation,
prescription, law, reservation, prohibition, or any thing (Gods law excepted)
shall trouble or impeach any Marriage made without the Leuiticall degrees, nor
any man be received in spiritual Court to process, plea, or obligation,
contrary to this Act. This Statute, though it seemed to be made upon good and
great considerations, (because precontracts too too slenderly proved, and
sometime but only surmized, helped the Romish oppression, and separated those
which were at quiet in an honest conjunction) yet many did after the making of
it, very dissolutely come from their first vows, and, as it were in spite of
conscience and Ecclesiastical censure, coupled themselves bodily with such as
they newly fancied, slipperily leaving their former Contracts: it is repealed
2. and 3. Ed. 6. ca. 3. only in the points of pre-contracts: And they are left
in the validity which they were of, by the Kings Ecclesiastical laws,
immediately before the making of 32. with prouiso that all the rest of the said
Act stands whole and in strength. So is it now again by 1. Eliz. cap. 1. See
also 5. and 6. Ed. 6. ca. 12. that the Marriage of Priests and Ecclesiastical
persons is lawful, their Children legitimate, a Priest may be tenant by the
courtesy, and his Wife have Dower.

It is a sport to behold how some of the Canonists and Glossographers refreshed
themselves in their disputes about Nuptial questions, how clear they make it,
that, If Adam our first Father were now alive and a Widdower, he could not take
a Wife, quia, all Women are his Children, and that in the right line: Then what
a question it is, whether unlawful copulation cause any affinity or no.

In hoc articulo, (says one of them) non parcam in foro verecundiae, that is
to say, he will handle the quiddick without shame or honesty, and then in the
plainest that may be, he finds a difference betwixt a dogs neck in ^he
Collar, and his nose in the King, betwixt knocking at the Barrels head, and
setting it abroach: but the curious learning w. is that of spiritual kindred,
caused either by holy Baptism, or by the blessed Chrisme, and this had power
impediendi Matrimonium contrahendum, and dirimend^ matrimonium contractum: yea,
this was such a matter, that 39. Ed. 3. fo. 32. Bastardie is pleaded against
the Plaintiff in assise, and the cause was, that the father married a woman,
before which Marriage he had christened ^^^ which was his Wives cousin, and for
this cause, after and of them was dead, Divorce was sued, and Judgment thereof
given in the spiritual Court, though indeed by Justice Thorpe, and the
greatest opinion in the temporal Court, the Issue could not be bastardized,
unless the Parents had been called, and the Nuptials destroyed by sentence,
which was now impossible to do, for death had determined them.

Out of question therefore, if the parties had lived, a little or no Kindred,
had marred great good acquaintance: But howsoever, by those days secular
Marriage was forbidden in spiritual men, and secular men were straightly
prohibited by spiritual. Spiritual Kindred, the Statutes afore-going, have
now welcomm^^ Wedlock, clean out of the Popes stocks, And the 18. of
Leuiticus alone, does in a manner sufficiently demonstrate, with what persons
Women are restricted to marry.

SECT. XXX. With what persons Women may not marry.
SUch are her Grandfather, her Father, her Sons Son, etc. her Brother,
though it be but the one part, her Fathers or Mothers Brother, her Brothers or
Sisters Son, or her Sons Son. Brothers or Sisters Children (says Ramus
in his Commentaries of Christian Religion, lib. 2. ca. 9.) are forbiden to
inter-marry, ed more, non lege Diuina vel Roman^: Christians, he says further,
which have abrogated the Law, 25. of Deuteronomy, whereby a Brother might be
challenged to raise up the house of his deceased brother, have also constituted
a prohibition, within certain degrees of affinity, and therefore a man may not
marry with the widow of his Grandfather or of his Father, or with the widow
of his own Son, or of his Sons Son, or with the widow of his Brother,
or of his Brothers Son, or of his Brothers Sons Son, etc. Nor with the
Grandmother, Mother, Daughter, Niece, great Aunt, Aunt or Sister of his
deceased wife.

SECT. XXXII. Of Wooing.
I Am afraid my feminine acquaintance will say I writ as I live, I talk much
of Marriage, but I came not forward: stay a while yet I pray you, I know many
an honest woman more repenting her hasty Marriage ere she was w^oed, then all
the other sins that ever she committed. It were good reason we speak a
little of wooing, but to handle that matter, per genus and species, would take
up as much room, as the Indian fig tree, every third whereof, when it
falls to the ground, grows to a body. I will slip by it, only observing
that the giving of gloves, rings, bracelets, chains, or any thing that is ex
sponsalioru^ largitate (as a man would say, of loves liberality) or as a pledge
of future Marriage betwixt them that are promised, have a condition* (silent
for the most part) annexed unto them, that if Matrimony do not ensue, the
things may be demanded back and recovered, yet there is a distinction of like,
for I have authority in it, Si sponsus dedit aliquid, and aliquo casu
impediuntur nuptiae, donatio penitus rescinditur, nisi osculum intervenerit;
marry if he had a kiss for his money, then the one half of that which was
given, is the woman's own good: And she has yet more favor in the case, for
whatsoever she gave, were there kissing or no kissing betwixt them, she may
ask all, and have all again. Quaere of this in the Consistory.

SECT. XXXII. The Condiments of Love.
THere are with us, as well as with the Ciuilians, many kinds of Donations
propter nuptias, and some ex sponsaliorum largitate: Good meats are the better
for good sauce; venison craves wine, and Wedlock has certain Condiments,
which come best in season in the wooing time, and serve (as Breton says) pour
doner fees come melier talent d'aymer Matrimony. A husband per se, is a
desirable thing, but Donements or Feoffements, etc. better the stomach, though
of it self it be good and eager, And because the first Marriage made in
Paradise, if you mark it well, had a Iointure, I cannot but allow the
circumspection which is had.

SECT. XXXIII. Of Frank Marriage.
IT was, as I suppose, more frequent in the old time, that men gave Lands with
their Daughters in Marriage, then it was at this day: But now as then, if a man
liberally and freely, without money or other considerations, save only love
and natural affection, give Lands of Tenements to another man, with a woman
which is Daughter, Sister, or Cousin to the Donor, in Frank Marriage, whether
it be tempore Matrimonij, vel ante vel post, this word Frank Marriage makes
an estate of Inheritance, viz. to the Donees, and the heirs of their two
bodies, and they shall hold quite of all manner of services (except the pure
fealty) till the fourth degree be past. But the Issue in the fifth degree, and
his Descendant, shall hold of the Donor and his Heirs, as they hold over.

SECT. XXXIV. The Gift must be Frank.
PEr Rich. 16. assi. p. 66. if a man give land in Frank Marriage, rendering a
rent, the reservation is void, till the fourth degree be past per Martine
Justice, 4. H 6. 22. such a reservation is merely void, for it is contrary to
the nature of Frank Marriage.

By the old tenures, such a reservation is good, and the Donee shall hold in
Common estate tail; by Brook in his Abridgement, it cannot be any estate
tail, for want of the parol heirs. And where such a gift is made to a woman,
not cousin to the Donor, there passes but estate for life, for it is by a
maxim or ground, that Frank Marriage makes inheritance, and this case is out
of the principal: By Bracton fo. 28. and 29. Si terra detur in maritagium viro
cum vxore, and eorum haeredibus pro homagio and seruitio viri, licet detur in
liberum maritagium (qua* sunt sibi ad inuicem aduersantia, etc.) tunc
prefe(...)um and erit ac si donatio fieret tai^ viro quam vxori, he delivers
the like learning before, fo. 22. and this rule withal ^x tacita condition
and pacta incontinenti opposita insunt contractibus, and legem dant eis and
illos infirmant.

SECT. XXXII. The gift must be to a Woman, etc.
IT was delivered for a Law in tempore H. 8. that Lands cannot be given to a
man in Frank Marriage, though he be Cousin to the Donor.

SECT. XXXVI. It may be tempore Matrimonij, ante, vel post.
WHat if after the gift made, the man refuse to marry, the Cousin of the Donor
marry elsewhere?

If two Donees in tail after the Common form be divorced upon a pre-contract
made by the woman, they shall* remain ioyn-tenants of the Frank Tenement* and
the Inheritance is gone Tail^ 9. But per Dyer fo. 147. and 12. assi. p. 22. and
19. assi. p. 2. If Tenants in Frank Marriage be divorced, the Woman shall have
all the Land, for the Land was given for the woman's sake, and for her
advancement, and by John Bracton, her husband has no more in it but Custodiam,
as he is the wives tutor and Guardian: By the same reason therefore that the
wife shall have the land, if she be divorced, by the same, I should think, she
should have it, if her Sponsus refuse to marry her: But where I give Land to
one to marry my Daughter, or, if he marry my Daughter, there, if he marry
another woman, I may enter.

SECT. XXXVI. The word Frank Marriage makes Inheritance.
IF a man give lands with his Sister to I. S. in Frank Marriage, habendum ^is
and haeredibus suis in perpetuum. By Kniue^, Mowbray and Finchden, 45. Ed. 3.
fo. 19. this makes neither Frank Marriage nor estate tail, with an expectance
of fee, (as in Case where Lands are given expressly in tail, habendum eis and
haeredibus, but the fee-simple passes presently by the gift, for Frank
Marriage must be holden of the Donor* which here has nothing left in him, but
all is holden of the Lord Parainount, and the words do not make any other
estate tail: yet 13. Ed. 1. lands were given to one, with the Cousin of the
Donor in Frank Marriage, habendum eis and haeredibus, and it was taken for
good Frank Marriage: This, says Brook, was in the year, that estates tail
were made in. But for all that, if ye look the case in Fitzherbert, Formedone
63. whither Brook sends you, you shall perceive that at the time of the
gift, it was Frank Marriage in fee-simple, for by those days the Donee had
potestatem alienandi post prolem suscitat^m: But in a gift made after the
Statute of quia emptore^, on such a fashion, I take it the Law will be, as
before in the case 45. Ed. 3. According as it was also holden in the years of
H. 8. that if a gift be made in Frank Marriage, the remainder to I. S. in
fee: this is no good Frank Marriage, for warrantie and acquitall that are
incident, etc. be only in regard of the reuersion to the Donor, and they
cannot be had when the fee-simple is presently conveyed to a stranger.

SECT. XXXVIII. The Account of the Degrees.
LIttl. accounts the Degrees from the Donor to the Donees, the first Degree;
from the Donees to their Issue, the second; from the Donees Issue to his Issue,
the third, etc. and the Issue in the fifth Degree shall do service. And this
(says he) because the Issue of the Donor and the Issue of the Donee after the
fourth Degree past, may inter-marrie by holy Churches Law. Bracton accounts
thus, donatarius facit primum gradum; haeres suus facit secundum; haeres
haeredis facit tertium; haeres secundi haeredis facit quartum, qui tenebitur ad
seruitium, yea, he makes it an express rule, that only the Donee and two
heirs succeeding lineally, shall enjoy the immunitie of being acquitted. And
he seems to understand no other reason of the acquitall so long, but only
an abstenancie from homage, lest the taking of it should hinder a reuerting, if
it betided the Donee, or the Issue to die without Issue. Fitzherbert titulo
droit 55. and 60. cites 6 H. 3. and 15. H. 3. in warrant of Bractons
Computation, which I think he fetched not any further then out of the Author
himself, in whom fo. 21. I find it. And fo. 22. he answers a doubt of his
own asking, that is, Whether all other service shall follow and continue, if
homage be done ante ter^ium haeredem, wherein he concludes, that the service
ever follows homage, quamuis ad damnum soluentium: And I conclude, whether it
be the third heir, or the fourth, that shall do service, he may still vouch,
have a Writ of me ne, as if the fourth Degree were not past, and if he bring a
Formedone, the Writ shall be Dedit in liberum Maritagium.

SECT. XXXIX. A Woman gives Lands to one to marry her.
AS Frank Marriage makes Inheritance without the words Heirs, and is always
made to a woman, and for her sake: so there is another Donatio prop^er nuptias,
that is conditional without words of Condition made ever by a woman to a man.
That is, where a woman gives Land to a man in fee-simple, or for term of his
life, to the intent that he marry her, who if he afterward when he is
thereto within convenient time required, refuse, etc. there is now an ordinary
Writ for remedy granted in this case, to reduce the Land, which Writ may be
sued in the per cui, or post, after one or more alienations, either by the
woman sole, or by her and her husband married, against such a one as should
have married her, after the refusal, or after her death by her Heir, whether
it be Son or Daughter, or Daughters with the child of another, and there
needs no scripture or writing to prove that the feoffement was for intent of
Marriage: nay, if a woman infeoffe a stranger, to the intent to infeoffe her,
and one which she intends to marry, if now the espousals take not effect,
she may have Writ causa Matrimonij prelocuti, against the stranger, though the
deed of feoffement were simple and sans Condition, an. 34. Ed. 3. li. assi. and
40. Ed. 3. li. assi. a woman enfeoffed one which had a wife, and entered for
nonperformance of the Condition, (...)heritance of woman, and in this part
because it resembles the Donations, that are propter nuptias, the Doctrine of
it being something like that of Dower.

SECT. XLI. Marriage.
THis Courtesy is in the Inheritance of a Wife, therefore a consequent of
lawful Marriage, and exceptions of Concubinage, or such like, which are
impediments of Dower, must needs be good exceptions here.

SECT. XLII. Seisin.
THere must be in the wife a seisin and possession; for if she were but heir
in appearance, and die before her Ancestor, this avails her husband nothing.
Similie, If the Father (being seized of Lands) dye, and soon after his
Daughter and Heir dies before actual seisin had by entry either by the
husband, wife, or other person for them, so that no possession and a naked
possession in law here is all one: yea, the law is taken, that if a man dwell
in Essex with his wife, and lands descend to her in Yorkshire, if she die the
next day after, before entry, the husband shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy, for even in this case is found a default in him, that he did not
constitute one to make entry for him maintenant after the Ancestors death,
and yet if rent descend to a woman Covert, etc. which dies before day of
payment, or after the day, and no demand made of the rent by her husband, he
shall have Courtesy in the rent notwithstanding. So it is if an Advouson in
gross descend to a woman married, having Issue, etc. though she die before
auoydance, the husband shall present, and though the Bishop after the descent
present by lapse, yet the husband shall have the second presentment, for there
cannot in these things possession be taken maintenant and at all times, as they
be in Lands: And take with you here these Cases out of Dier, 1. Ma. fo. 95.
Tenant per Cheualrie in cap. dies, his Daughter and Heir being under age
office is found, and the King grants the wardship of body and Land to me which
marries the ward and has Issue by her, and after she accomplisheth the age
of sixeteene years, and the King is satisfied for the two years profit, they
tender a general liuerie, and before it be past, the Wife dies, the Baron
shall have the Courtesy come semble, says the Book.

And 6. Eliz. Dier, 229. the like descent is to a Daughter, and married, having
Issue by her husband, and she dies ten days after her Father, no Livery being
sued that is found by office, the Baron shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, and
shall sue livery.

SECT. XLIII. No Courtesy of reuersion after estate for life.
THe seisin must be to the Wife in estate of Inheritance not mangled or cut off
from the Frank Tenement, and therefore (by Parkins) where a Woman an Heir
enters after her Fathers death, and being seized in fee-simple, makes a Lease
of her Land to I. S. for term of his life, if she now marry, have Issue, and
die during the Lease, the Husband shall neither be Tenant by the Courtesy of
the Land when it reuerts, nor of the rents in the mean while* Also 8. assi. p.
6. If a Daughter and Heir enter, endol^ (...)den, and have Issue by her, and
the condition being broken, she dies* if now the Feoffor enter, the Feoffee
shall not be Tenant per le Cur^esie of the Seignorie: But if a feme sole have a
rent or common in or out of certain Lands, and the Tenant leasseth the Land to
a stranger, during the life of I. S. and the woman intermarrieth with the
Lessee, has Issue, and I. S. dies, now if the wife die, the Baron shall have
Courtesy in the rent or Common. And if the Tenant leased his ground for 20.
years, and a woman having in the ground a rent charge in fee, intermarrieth
with the Lessee* etc. dies during the term, it is a question in Parkins,
whether the husband shall have Courtesy in the rent after the term determine,
see Parkins, cap. By the Courtesy.

SECT. XLVII. No Courtesy of a bare use.
IF a Woman sole seized, etc. make a feoffement to the use of her self and her
heirs, and then she marries, has Issue, and dies before any estate in the
same lands be again by entry or otherwise executed to her, her husband shall
not be Tenant by the Courtesy, and this as well after the Statute of 27. H. 8.
as before, if the Feoffement were since the Statute.

SECT. XLVIII. What Husband may be Tenant by the Courtesy, and of what estate.
WHere the Wise is actually seized of Lands in ^eesimple, see-taile general,
or as Heir of see-taile special, the second Baron may be Tenant by the
Courtesy, as well as the first, for so is the Maxim.

And Parkins, Fitzherbert, and Brook have all of them the Case, 21. H. 3. viz.
A woman Inheritour has Issue by her Husband, and he dies, she takes another
Husband, has Issue by him, and that Issue dies, the woman dies, her second
Husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy: Bracton agrees also, who when he
has showed this Civility of England, concludes. Quod dicitur de primo, di^i
poterit de secundo, sieve de primo viro haeredes apparentes extiterunt sieve non
plenae aetatis vel minoris. But he adds, Quod iniuriosum est secundum
S^ephanum de Segraue, qui dicebat quod lex ill^ male ^uit intellecta, and male
vs^tata: Nam quod dicitur de lege Angliae, intelligi debet de primo vir^, and
communibus haeredibus, and non de secundo, maxim cum haeredes apparentes
extiterint de primo.

My mind gives me that he said truth, and that Law turning a little out of
her Channel here before Justice Segraues time, could never since be brought
to her course.

SECT. XLIX. Of special Tail.
BEfore West. 2. cap. 1. all the Estates which we now call tailed (that is
curtailed or cut off) were see-simple Conditional, If Lands had been given to
a man and a woman in Frank Marriage, or to them and to the Heirs of their two
bodies (which gifts make now a special Tail) as soon as they had Issue, the
Condition was thought to be performed. And as a woman suruiuing her first
Husband in this case might alien the Land, so might she by bearing a Child to
her second Husband, etc. this makes him Tenant by the Courtesy. (...)be
enforced to prove, that the Child sent forth some voice or cry arguing life
and natural humanity: for if it bellowed, bleated, brayed, grunted, rored, or
howled, there accrued no courtesy by getting such an uncivil vrchin.

By him therefore there must be a natural cry heard inter quatuor parietes,
for (he says) though a Child be borne mutus and surdus, tamen clamorem
emittere debet, sive masculus sit, sieve foemina, nam Dicunt E. vel A. quotquot
nascuntur ab E^a:

E. or A. all cry that from Eve come,

Though they be borne both deaf and dumb.

Non sufficit igitur tantum baptizatus and scpultura: yet 28. H. 8. Dyer fol.
25. sets down Fitzherberts opinion, that a man may be Tenant by the Courtesy
though the Child never cry, car paraduenture lissue soit nee dumb, And so
says Parkins 9. 4. 7. viz. that if the issue be borne alive, though it die
before it be heard cry, or before it be baptized, for that is a matter also
with Bracton, if there were no lachesse, contumacie or contempt in the Baron,
he may be Tenant by the Courtesy: But by negligence or by contempt he shall
prejudice himself ascuns diont.

SECT. LI. A Child borne begins the title of Courtesy.
NOw this having a Child, is such a matter (as it seems) that maine tenant
thereupon the title of Courtesy begins: for example, if a bond woman
purchase Land and marry, if the Lord enter before Issue be had, no Child
borne afterward shall make the husband tenant by the Courtesy: But if the
Baron have Issue by his wife, before the Lords entry, he shall be tenant by
the Courtesy, and the auourie from that time forward shall rest upon him
solement, And the possession in Law if the wife die, shall not light upon the
Heir, but upon the Baron, which shall be tenant to every praecipe. C^o est
clear lei, Brook out of the Doctor and Student, vide Brook villenage; 35.

And if a woman Heir have issue by her husband, commit felony and be
attainted, it has been mostly holden, that the husband shall be Tenant by the
Courtesy, notwithstanding, and that after Issue had, the Lord may auow for
homage upon the husband without the wife 21. Ed. 3. 49. By Parkins, 91. 475.
Likewise if the Wives Inheritance be recovered against Baron and feme, by false
oath, or erroneous Process, and execution is had and sued of this recovery,
if they have Issue afterward and then the wife dies, the Baron now reducing
the Land by attaint or error, shall hold per le Courtesy.

SECT. LII. What if the Child die.
IF a man have Issue by his wife, that is here in possession, the death of the
Issue is no loss of Courtesy, and by Parkins, if a Daughter and Heir
apparent take a Husband, have Issue by him, and the Issue dies, if now the
Father die, and the Baron and feme enter, he may be Tenant by the Courtesy
without having other Issue, Brook makes it questionable.

Also by Brook, if a man die, his wife being priuement enseient, a Daughter
enters as heir, takes a Husband, and has Issue, if a Son post-humus enter
upon the Baron and feme, and the Issue of the Daughter dies, and the posthumus
dies without Issue, the Baron clearly shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy,
unless he re-enter* in his wives time, and he doubts, though the Baron
enter sans other Issue. (...)bility his wife may bear him, may by possibility
be heir of that estate Si le possession le Baron ne soit loyalment anient) As
adds Parkins the Wife shall be endowed.

SECT. LVI. The Husband must be seized.
DOwer is of the possession of a Husband, the ground of it therefore is
Marriage, a Concubine then shall have no Dower, no more shall she which is but
only contracted, and it was holden by some, 10. H. 3. that she which was
married in a Parlor or Chamber should have no Dower but it is now taken
otherwise.

Also where Marriage is clearly void and unlawful, there grows no title of
Dower: But if a woman first contracted to E. I. intermarry afterward with T.
K. this Marriage is voydable, but not clearly void, and if it be not
frustrated, otherwise then by death of T. K. the Wife shall have Dower of his
Land. Here ye may perceive that which destroys an absolute true Marriage,
destroys Dower also: for though by Bracton there may be by special
Constitution a Dower appointed, that shall stand good against the tempest of
diverse assaults, yet by ground of the Common Law Matrimonium est fulcimentum
do^is. And Bracton says in his second book and 39. Chapter, Vbi nullum omnino
Matrimonium, ibi nulla do igitur, vbi Matrimonium, ibi dos, quod verum est si
Matrimonium in facie ecclesiae contrahatur.

SECT. LVII. Matrimony may be, and yet no Dower.
THough Matrimony do always precede Dower, yet does not Dower always follow
Matrimony: for first where the husband had no Land, the Wife can have no Dower
by the Common Law, Bracton and Breton which give a woman Dower in a certain
sum of money or in other Chattels, speak rather as Civil Lawyers then mere
English: Also Dower is not granted, unless the Husband is above 7. years old,
and the wife above nine, 13. Ed. 1. Fitzherbert Feme perdera Dower, si son
Baron morust deuant 9. ans d'age Dyer 14. Eliz. fo. 313. Also if a man marry
his bondwoman in gross and die, she shall not recover Dower against the
Heir, for she is his bondwoman, but against the Feoffee of her husband she
shall recover Dower, unless she be regardant to the Manor whereof the
Feoffement was made.

SECT. LVIII. What Seisin is requisite in a Husband.
WHere the Huband has neither possession in fact, nor possession in Law,
during the Couerture, nor any thing save only a right or title, the wife shall
not have Dower, as also if the Baron suffer a Disseisin, an abatement, a
Condition broken, an alienation in Mortmaine, or cesser of his rent or services
by two years space, etc. and then he take a wife, dies before reduction of
his Land, or if judgment be given for him in a plea of Lands, and he marryeth
afterward, and die before entry or suing of execution, the wife shall not have
Dower of these Lands: So is it if I. S. exchange Lands with T. K. and I. S.
enters, but T. K. takes a wife, and dies before entry, his wife shall not
have Dower in any of the Lands exchanged, but where a husband is once actually
seized, the wife shall be endowed notwithstanding any disseisin afterward done
to him, or feoffement made by him either absolute or conditional: And if
before or after Marriage celebrated and not dissolved a possession in Law be
cast upon a Husband by descent, escheate, or fall of some remainder, the wife
shall be endowed though the Baron die before entry, as if the Kings Tenant die
seized, and his Heir being married dies before office or entry, the wife of
the heir is dowable: so if rent des^end to a husband which dies before day of
payment, etc. for there is not requisite in the husband such a seis^n as
whereof an assise lies: but if a precipe quod reddat might lie against him, it
suffices 4. He. 7. fo. 1. Brook 66. in Dower.

A husband may have possession in law by descent of a villain in gros, or
possession in law of a rent charge, by excepting the deed of grant, and hereof
the wife shall be endowed, although the Baron do afterward refuse receipt and
seisin of the rent. But judgment in a Writ of annuity for the Baron takes
away Dower of a rent charge from the wife, and a woman may have Dower of an
estate that was suspended, as if the Lord married with his Tenant, now is the
Seignorie suspended, but if he die, the wife shall have Dower, a third part of
the rent per ret^igne^* for the Seigniorie, though it slept, yet there was
still a possession in Law of it in the husband: Here it must not be forgotten
that it ^eemeth doubtful whether an abatement of a stranger which is a
possession in fact destroye^h a Possession in Law, it appears by Park. ^o. 72.
sect. 371. and 372* and 4. H. 7. 1. per meux that it does not.

But 21. Ed. 4. ^o. 60. which is accorded for good Law, 4. H. 7. fo. 1. where
in a Writ of Dower the Tenant pleads ne vnques seisie in dower, etc. the
demandament shows that Lands descended to her husband, she being then his
wife, and that he dyed before entry made either by him, or by other person, and
issuit and* est donable per le l^y, and she was enforced by the Court to plead
that none entered: for if a stranger had entered, she had not been dowable: And
if she had pleaded (...) que Dow^e la Poet this had wayned the special matter,
but the other conclusion puts it to the Law and Courts consideration. Ye see
now of what possession of Law a woman is dowable per Brian 4. H. 7. ^o. 17. if
the Kings ward die under age, and the ne^t heir being married, die before
^^u^n^runt sued, his wife shall not have Dower, But by D^uers and Hussy, if
the Kings Tenants Heir have a wife, and after office found, the Heir does not
enter, but dies, the wife shall be endowed of the possession in Law before
office, for the Statute of prerogative cap. 13* is intended only where the
Heir takes a wife after office, and intrudeth.

SECT. LIX. There must be in the Husband an Inheritance not cut from the Frank
Tenant.
A Woman shalll have no Dower in Lands, whereof the Frankement and Inheritance
was never conjoined in her husband, during Couerture, therefore where the
Husband had but a reuersion after estate for life, the wife is not dowable:
under this rule comes one other, dos de dote peti non debet: And if a man
seized, etc. take a wife, and alien with warrantie, and then both the feoffor
and feoffee die, if the wife of the feoffee bring a Writ of Dower against the
heir of the feoffor, which voucheth to warrant the heir of the feoffor, and
hanging the voucher, the wife of the feoffee demands* Dower against the heir
of the feoffee, if she bring her Writ, not for a third of two pa^ts, but for
a third of all that whereof her husband dies seized, she shall not have
judgment fill the first plea be determined: Littleton. If there be father and
son both married; and the Father seized of one acre, etc. dies, and the
son enters and dies: if now the sons son enter and endow his
Grandmother which dies, his mother is not Dowable of that which the
Grandmother held in Dower, for of that his Father had no more in mere right,
but a reuersion upon or after a Frank tenement, and the Grandmother endowed
was in of her Husbands possession, yet if the father had in his life time
i^feoffed the Son, etc. the sons wife might well have Dower after the
Grandmothers death, of that very Land which the Grandmother held.

And if the sons son voluntarily or compulsarily ^^ Writ of Dower had
endowed his mother, against whom the Grandmother had then received her Dower,
and died after execution, the mother might well have entered into the land which
the ailesse recovered against her, Parkins 63. The Frank tenement and
Inheritance may be both in a sort in the Husband, and yet not sufficiently knit
and united together to give Dower: for example, the Lands be given to two, and
to the heirs of the body of one of them, if he which has the inheritance die
first, his Wife is not dowable, no not after the death of the suruiuor, for the
state tail was not executed, in her husband to all intents, though the Issue
in a Formedone against an abater might allege seisin, and esplees (as we call
them) in his father. Likewise, if by fine sur grant and render, estate be made
to a husband for term of life the remainder to I. S. his son in tail, the
reuersion to the right heyr^s of the husband, and the fine is executed, if now
the Baron die, living I. S. or any of his Issue, the wife of the Cognusee is
not dowable: But if a Lease be made for years, the remainder to I. S* for
life, the remainder to his right heirs, etc. the wife of I. S. shall have
Dower of this estate, though erecution of Dower cannot be ^asting the term;
And if a Lease be to the Husband for life, with a remainder to a stranger for
^eares, the remainder to the Husband in ^ee, the inheritance and Frank
Tenement are sufficiently connexed to give the wife Dower, b^t execution shall
cease during the term: for when an estate for years is more ancient, or as
ancient as the Inheritance, which the Husband had during Couerture, there the
execution of Dower to the Wife must needs tarry the terms expiration: And so
it is if a man grant me a rent in fee by Indenture, with Condition that the
rent shall cease during the nonage of mine heirs, my Wife shall not be
endowed during mine heirs minority.

What if a man that is seized in Fee-simple make a lease for life rendering
rent, etc. and then taking a Wife he dies, the heir shall have this rent
incident to the reuersion, and it shall be a^ets to him in a Formedone in
Descender: but the wife gets here no Dower; and says Parkins, a woman shall
not be endowed of a rent reserved by her Husband to himself and his Heirs
upon a Lease for years, 1. Ed. 6. titulo Dower in Brook accords. If the Law
be so, Dower has less favor in this case then the estate per Cour^^si^
d'Angleterre.

But Clear if a man take a wife first, lease his Lands for years or for life,
and die, now the Wife may recover Dower of the Land it self, and by Breton, if
the woman recover the third part of Lands leased for years de office, de
justice il serra a guard que el terti^ remnant, les deux parties: que demorent
de terre iesques a^^nt que il e^t receive al value de le tierr^ party que il
auera perdu^, etc. But if she recover all the Land leased from the termer, he
shall have recovery per pl^^ de garranti, either of such other Lands as the
Lessor had, or if he had no other of the Lands seized, when the widow is dead,
by s^ir^ facias out of the Court where the Judgment was enrolled. Note, That
though the Law be as is abouesaid, where Lands are given to two, and to the
Heirs of one of them, yet if the Husband purchase to himself and his wife,
and to the heirs of the Husband, the wife may relinquish the purchase, and
disagree by bringing her Writ of Dower: Like Law seems to be, where the
purchase is to the Baron and feme during the life of the Baron, the remainder
to his right heirs.

SECT. LX. Of what things Dower is granted.
LIttletons ground is of Lands or tenements, But a woman is Dowable also of all
manner of rents which are rents of Inheritance, Also of Offices, as for
example, of a Bayly-wicke in fee, a woman may have the third part of the profit
in Dower, and be contributary to the charge: Also at this day where the Baron
has but an use in fee-simple or fee-taile general, unless it be in case
where the Husband may and does disagree, the wife shall have Dower, and if a
bargain and sale be made of Lands to the Husband which dies before
inrolement, the wife notwithstanding shall have Dower, and by the inrolement
einsement, it shall be indefeisable against the Vendor and the Heir of the
Vendee: Also a woman is Dowable of Villains regardant to a Manor, and if a
villainy in gros, a woman may have Dower by taking his service every third day,
and if a mill by taking the third part of the profit, and she shall grind
tole-free, and if a House, a woman is Dowable by a Chamber or rent assigned out
of the house. Note that if such a rent be assigned out of the Land wherein
Dower is claimed, the woman may have Assise without Deed, contra, if it be
assigned out of other Land, 33. H. 6. fo. 2.

Also a woman may hold an Aduousan appendent, in Dower of the third part of an
Aduousan in gros, by presenting at every third auoydance, or the third part of
the moitie of an Aduousan, by presenting at every sixth auoydance: And of a
Common in gr^s which is certain a woman is Dowable. Likewise if any grant to
I. S. that he and his heirs shall take yearly in his Meadow three load of
Hay, etc. For Common appendant, Parkins says, If a woman accept two acres
parcel of a Manor in allowance of Dower, she shall have no Common appendant:
aliter, if a moitie be assigned her. E^ 5. lacobile Countelle of Oxfords case
cited in Harpers case, Coke 11. Rep. fo. 256. Dower shall be of prediall
Tithes, etc.

SECT. LXI. Of what things Dower is not granted.
OF naked services, as homage and fealty, there is none endowment, nor of a
bare annuity granted in fee, nor of things uncertain as of Common without
number. And if it be granted to I. S. that he and his heirs shall take so
many Estouers in Methold wood as they will burn, in etc. this will yield no
Dower, no more then a License or grant de coylor bois in auter bois: By the old
writers, if in the first establishment of Dower special mention be not made or
Aduousons or third presentiments, the wife cannot have Dower of any Aduouson pur
ceo que aduouson d^ ^sgly sevest mi departible: But when a Manor with the
appurtenances is ordained for Dower, if an Aduouson be appendant to the Manor,
and the Church become void, after the Husbands death the Wife may present.

Also by them a woman cannot challenge a Castle, chief Mease, or head of any
Baronie or County, or any thing within the close or Circuit of the chief
Mease, to be assigned her in Dower: But for her habitation she may choose
aliquod honestum Messuagium de villenagijs, that is, some bond Tenements within
the Mannor-house.

And where there is none such to choose, she shall have one clapped up for her
in aliqua platea competenti de commum bosco: as long and broad as the third
part of her husbands chief house: A cottage of clay and splints set close in a
corner of a cold Common, which is but a rewmaticke Lodge to welcome Suitors to.
But how if the Common and all things be so enclosed that there is not room to
swing a Cat in, women are not put in Rogum with their Husbands any where but in
the Indies, and I think that custom is left there also by this time: If there
be neither base tenement, nor wood, nor ground wherewith and whereon to build a
Widows habitacle, she may be endowed (for necessity) of the principal*
Message, and without necessity always if the heir be so contented: The
reasons which Breton and Bracton do expressly allege, for niceness of Law,
making dainty in their time to endow Widows in Aduousons and great Messuages,
is only the indiuiduity or impartablenes of the things. Of an Aduouson because
it is but ius quoddam, and not corporal, and great houses, etc. for the
dignity and strength which the Realm was thought to have by their
conservation: But considering that the end of Dower is chiefly the maintenance
of a Wife, Si vir premoriatur: it may further be colourably said, that Law at
first did never mean to trouble Widows with presenting of Clerks, for that
either is not, or ought not to be a matter lucratiue or of gain, though
indeed Bracton prize a Benefice of an hundred Marks at one hundred Shillings
value.

SECT. LXII. Of what estate of Inheritance the Husband must be seized.
THe Learning here is not discrepant from that which went before in title of
Courtesy: Of fee or fee-taile general a Woman shall have Dower, so shall she
of feefarme or of a base fee-simple, but not of Coppy-hold unless the Custom
serve for it: And if Tenant for life make a feoffement in fee, the wife can
have no Dower, 3. H. 4. fo. 6.

The which Littl. inserteth in this Chapter of Dower, viz. where the Husband is
seized, as heir of special tail, etc. is no interdiction of Dower in all
cases to her which is married to the Donee of special tail. Littletons own
example is, That if Lands be given to a man, and the heirs which he shall
engender of his wife Alice, if he dies, Alice shall be endowed of this estate;
for no Issue of a second wife could be heir of special tail, and that makes
the difference.

The case 41. E. 3 fo. 30. is this, A man seized in general tail by fine made
a feoffement and took back an estate in special Tail to himself and his
first Wife, and died, the King seize by Tenure in capite, and endowed the
second wife, the Issue of the first Wife came, showing the special tail, and
by scire facias against the Wife recovered for default: she took a second
Husband, who with his wife brought a quod ei deforceat against the Heir, and
he pleaded the special tail, the woman by remitting the heir to the ancient
tail, would have concluded him to say, that her husband was seized of any
other estate. Et non allocatur.

Parkins makes this case somewhat more austere against Dower, for as he puts
it fo. 60. the Issue is son to the Woman which claims Dower, yet the mother
by him not Dowable, because the son though he be Heir is in of another
estate then that which was in the Baron during Couerture, so likewise 44. Ed.
3. fo. 26. in a Writ of Dower against the Heir Tenant, he shows that the
band was given by fine to his father and mother in special tail, and that
afterward his father and mother discontinued the tail by fine to a stranger,
and taking back an estate in general tail, they had Issue this heir, then
his mother dyed, and the father taking the demandant to wife, he died, so the
son was now in per lun tail and per lauter, and being adjudged in his eigne
right by remitter, the wife was barred of dower, this Case in my conceit
fringeth the generality of Littletons rule, for the Issue which by possibility
the second wife might have had, might by possibility have inherited, though not
indefeisably in such estate as was in the Husband during Couerture.

To conclude, where Lands are given to the Baron and feme in special tail,
the remainder to the Heirs of the body of the Baron, and the Wife dies without
Issue, there a second wife may be endowed, for after the death of the first
wife the remainder in general tail vesteth maine tenant and is executed: 50.
Ed. 3. fo. 4.

Newton says, 7. He. 6. fo. 11. if a man make a lease for years with
Condition, if the Lease pay an hundred pound at the end of the term, that then
he shall have fee, etsi nemy que il auera que term: that in this Case by
paying an hundred pound at the end of the term, the termer shall have fee from
the beginning, and his wife is Dowable: quere, for it seems tunc* has
relation but ad tempus solutionis. If Tenant in Dower lease her estate to the
Heir for her life, and the Heir dies, his wife shall be endowed
notwithstanding the life of the first dowager, 45. Ed. 3. fo. 13. In action of
Dower the tenant showed that Tenant per Courtesy granted his estate to him in
the reuersion, rendering rent with clause of re-entry, for nonpayment, he in the
reuersion marry the demandant, the tenant per le Courtesy re-entreth for the
Condition, he in the reuersion died, his wife was barred Dower, for the
surrender might well be upon Condition, 14. E. 4. fo. 6.

SECT. LXIII. Where Dower is given or not given of an estate determined.
Where the Husbands estate is loyally enuicted or determined, Dower for the
most part fails, As thus, two men make exchanging of two acres executed in
fee, one of them dies, his son takes a wife and enters, and the otherpartie
being impleaded, voucheth the son which enters into warrantie, so that the
Tenant recouereth in value the acre, which he delivered in exchange, the sons
wife shall never be endowed of this acre, for the title of recovery in value,
is from time of the exchange by way of relation, and so before the Marriage.

Likewise if two Copartners in gauell kind make partition, one of them
marries, and the other being impleaded, prays aid of his partner which
joins, etc. if the demandant recover, and the Tenant have pro rata of the
partners part which afterward dies, his wife shall not have Dower of that
which is recovered, for the title of recovery pro rata is from the death of the
common Ancestor, says Parkins. As a Villeine takes a wife, purchases lands in
fee, his Lord enters, the Villeine dies, his wife shall have Dower, for the
Lords title begun by his entry, and the wives by seisen in the husband, the
Tenant alieneth in Mortmaine, or erecteth a cross (see thereof, W. 2. c. 33.)
and the Lordentreth, the tenants wife shall have Dower notwithstanding. So if
the Lord recover in a Cessauit, the tenants wife shall be endowed, yet if the
tenant had made (...)part, and brought a writ of Dower, it came to issue, ne
vnques seisie, etc.

The Jury found the special matter, and being asked what they thought of it,
they answered, because there was never any permanent seisin in the husband,
that she was not Dowable. Your thinking (said Justice Thorpe) is contrary to
your verdict, for here was a possession whereof she is Dowable, Et ceo fuit
opinion de toutes. Littleton also seems to be against me in Estate sur
condition, but it is not ipse dixit, but plusiors ont dit: Therefore if he
were alive, I might perhaps entreat him to be on my side.

SECT. LXIV. How much and how a woman shall hold in Dower.
THe Common Law allows for Dower the third part of that whereof the Husband
during Couerture, had such seisin as is before declared to have and hold (if it
be in lands) by limits and bounds. But this Indowment per metes and bonds
cannot be where the husband is Tenant in Common.

If one of two Copartners in gauell kind take a wife, and die before partition
made, the Heir may assign his mother a third part of his moity to hold in
Common, or he may first make partition and then endow her per metes and bonds.

Generally, when a woman recouers Dower the Sheriff shall put her in
possession per metes and bonds, and it has been holden, that wheresoever the
heir assigns Dower a third part, per mi and per tout, to occupy in Common,
if the widow accept it accordingly, that this should be a good endowment: The
Law seems to be otherwise, By Common right Parkins says, a woman shall have
Dower, the third auoydance of every Aduouson, and the third part of every
Manor that was her husbands, for if she take it in another form by
assignment from the Heir she may suffer prejudice.

As if a man seized of three Manors takes a wife, and grants a rent charge
issuing out of all three Manors, and dies: now if the wife by assignment of
the heir, accept one Manor in Dower for all, the two parts of this Manor
remain subject to the distress of the granter, because the woman (for the two
parts) accepted here her Dower in counter comen droit. But had she upon
recovery of Dower been assigned this Manor by the Viscount, she should have
held all discharged.

Yet if a married man seized of three Aduousons of three several Churches,
grant to I. S. that he shall present to the Church which next becomes void,
and the granter dying his wife recouers in a Writ of Dower against the heir
before auoydance, and the Viscount assigns to her the Aduouson of one Church
for all, etc. if now the Church thus assigned become void ascuns diont, says
Parkins, the grantee shall present, and not the woman, for she is endowed
encounter common droit, and I. S. the grantee which is a stranger to the
assignement cannot otherwise take advantage of his grant. But in the first Case
after assignment of one Manor by the Viscount, the grantee might distraine in
the other two Manors.

SECT. LXV. Less or more then a third part.
THough by the Common Law a woman is to have no less then a third part, yet if
a widow will be so foolish as to accept a fourth or fifth part or moity of her
husbands Inheritance assigned in allowance of all his Frank Tenement, it is a
good assignement: And by custom in some (...)seized of three acres in fee,
marry and die, and a stranger which has but two of these acres enters by
abatement into the third, and after he has married the Widow he infeoffes a
stranger of all three acres by indenture, resexuing vt supra, and dies, the
rent goes out of all the acres, but if the heir of the first husband recover
his acre and assign it to the woman in Dower, she is Dowable also of the
rent, for indeed it is entirely issuing out of the two other acres: And if a
man seized of three acres in fee make a feoffement of two reserving rent out of
those two acres, vt supra, the wife having the acre which remained in Dower,
may have Dower also of the rent reserved; qu^ere says Parkins, car il est
encounter le conscience de diverse homes, And making the acres to be of equal
value, it must needs be against law also, for one acre of three equally
vallued, or of every acre one third part is a just Dower. But if the acre
unsold were inferior in value, there is both conscience and law for the woman
to claim Dower of the two acres, or of the rent, for a woman must be endowed
of the best possession, and not according to the number of acres, but according
to the value of the Inheritance whilst it was the Husbands. Therefore if I make
a feoffement of my lands, and dye, and the feoffee builds a house upon it, or
otherwise improoues it, my wife shall be endowed no otherwise then according to
the value of my possession; yet if a disseisor or a feoffee sur condition, do
edify, the disseisie or feoffor re-entring, shall have the building. If being
married I make a feoffement, and the feoffee ruinateth a house which was upon
the Lands before the feoffement, and that was worth four or five pound
annually, my wife shall be endowed according to the value that the land was of,
at time of my death, because a woman has no right to possession of Dower
before the death of her husband: But Parkins dares not let this Case go
without a quaere.

SECT. LXIX. Of Dower at the Church door.
THe old kind of endowment at the Church Door comes now a days seldom in
use: But for all that I would have women better learned then to be ignorant of
it, it is when a man seized in fee-simple, being of full age, coming to the
Church door to be married, does there affirm affiance and endowe his spouse
of all his lands, or of part, as of half or a less quantity openly and with
certainty, the woman thus endowed may enter into her Dower, after the husbands
death without assignement, and this Dower may be at the Church door in one
County of Lands in another County and without deed, Parkins, sect. 217. Vide
Plowd. in Sharington, ca. fo. 304. b. it is good without livery of seisin, Et
per Shelly 28. H. 8 Dyer fo. it may be done within view, and the puisne son
of Land in borow English may not make such a Dower.

Also a son and heir apparent when he is espoused by consent of his father,
may endow his wife at the Church door in part of such lands and tenements as
are the Fathers in fee-simple, and the sons wife after his death (the father
living) may enter presently without further assignement into the parcels, thus
certainly appointed: But if she enter after her husbands death and agree to
any of these endowments ad ostium ecclesiae, she is concluded from claiming any
other Dower. Thus far Littleton. By Bracton none can endowe his wife in this
manner, unless he be Liber homo; for in his time if I be not much deceived,
the greatest number of bondmen held in manurance Lands of their Lords, which
they occupied to the Lords use and profit, in pure villeinage. These having
none other lands, could not endow, etc. Also by Bracton, Quis posset dotem
constituere, and sciendum quod tam minor quam mayor masculus. Cui vxori, tam
(...)Church door to be married deliver the Deed to her, showing her the lands,
saying, his will is, she have them according to the deed, if the Baron never
claim otherwise, then in right of his wife that is a good feoftement.

But he may endow her, of his own lands ad ostium Ecclesiae, without deed,
though the Land be in a foreign County, marry when the Dower is of the
fathers Land, ex assensu, there must be a deed, for assent lies not in
auerment 40. Ed. 3. 43. yet this is contrary to Bracton, and in old Books the
consent has been tried by proofs, Dowment may be good, ex consensu matris,
but as they say now, not ex consensu fratris, sororis, vel consanguinei, The
assent ought to be at the Church or Church door, yet 2. H. 3. the son
married against the will of his parents, and eight weeks after endowed his
wife, of his fathers lands, ex assensu patris per curiam, it was holden good,
Fitzherbert 199.

Of the head of a Baronie, or the Capital Message of a Knights fee, Dowmente
ad ostium, etc. is not good, but it may be of a moity of all such Lands as the
Baron shall hereafter purchase in fee, or of all such Lands as the Barons
mother holds in Dower: But if the Father lease his Lands for life, and the
Son and Heir apparent endow his wife, ex assensu, etc. of the reuersion: now
if the Lessee die, the Lessor enter, and the son die, the wife shall not have
Dower, because she was not Dowable of the reuersion at the Common Law, though
it had been in her husband during couerture; so is it if the Father were
seized for life, or jointly with another in fee: But if the father had been
Tenant in tail, the endowment by consent had been good during his life,
though no conclusion after his death to his Issue, or his wife claiming Dower,
even as by Election if tenant in tail, being himself in actual seisin, endow
his wife ad ostium Ecclesiae, and die, if his wife enter, the Issue may out
her, and so may he in the reuersion if issue fail: If the Father at time of
endowment ex assensu be seized none otherwise then in his wives right: Yet
Parkins argues, he shall be bound during his life, quaere.

I have held young Maids now indeed somewhat long in the old endowments, and I
would proceed to instruct them in the dower of the new learning iointures, I
mean, for my desire is, that they should be able to have when they are
Widows a coach or at the least an ambler, and some money in their purses. But
they are of the mind for themselves I perceive, that Themistocles was in for
his daughter, He desired a man rather without money, then money without a man,
here is a wise ado ye say, I tell you of Dower, of the Widows estate, and
God knows whether ye shall ever have the grace to be widows or no, ye would
know what belongs to wives, on then in a good way, I have brought you to the
Church door, if ye be not shortly well married, I pray God I may.

FINIS.
with her Husbands protection and supereminency: Now the Law that gives Dower
to her that is able to deserve it, and enableth at so green years, knows
well enough that women are at their Husbands commandment: If Titus being dead
have left his wife her maidenhead, immunis a culpa, a poena immunis erit, This
I might dilate as in probability or likelinesse of reason at Common Law, but
it seems the matter rests otherwise determinable.

For in action of Dower the Tenant shall not plead nunquam carnaliter cognouit,
nor the demandant be driven to auerre a knowledge, etc.

But the case may perchance be drawn to an issue of ne vnques accople in
loyal Matrimony, and that must be tried by the Bishop: Therefore for the
better direction of Brides, take the case verbatim, as it is propounded with
the solution 22. Eliz. Dyer 369. A woman of full age contracts Matrimony by
words of the present instant, with a young man of twelve years age, and this
being solemnized in face of the Church with consummation after a sort, the
young man being put to bed to her died under age, quaere if the Ordinary ought
to certify an accomplement in loyal Matrimony, Solutio doctorum quindecem.

We be all of opinion that she is to be taken for a loyal wife coupled in
loyal Matrimony, and in question of Dower, that the Bishop ought so to
certify; for albeit that in other regards these were but Sponsalia de futuro,
yet in case of Dower, and the privilege thereof, they are extended to
Matrimony consummate, Et iudicium datum pro dote; here ye say was the Law as
clear as Crystal on your side, when supper is done dance a while, leave out
the long measures till you be in bed, get you there quickly, and pay the
Minstrels tomorrow.

SECT. II. Baron and Feme one person.
NOw that Matrimony is celebrated and consummate, here is so strait a
fellowship or rather identitie of person, that if a feoffement be made to a
man and his wife jointly with I. S. the Baron and Feme take but a moity, and in
a feoffement to Baron and Feme, and I. S. and T. K. they take but a third part,
and where a feoffement is made to a man and his wife jointly, they take not
several moities, as other joint Feoffees do, but the Baron and feme take
entirely together, and in Law they are said to be seized by intierties, and
there is no halfing betwixt them: For if the Baron charge the whole land or
part of it with a rent, the wife shall hold it discharged after his death, and
if he sell all or part and die. the wife shall recover all by Writ of cui in
vita. See 40. assi. pla. 7. If a Villeine and his Wife purchase land jointly,
the Lord enter, and the Villeine die, the Feme or her Heir shall have the
whole Land, Eadem lex videtur, where the Husband ioynt-purchaser is an Alien
borne, or attaint in praemunire, or of fellonie. But the book of Assizes goes
not so far.

The videtur is Parliament 43. in Brook, where likewise ye shall see it was
holden 5. H 7. fo. 31. that if T. infeoffe W. and A. his wife, and afterward it
is by Parliament enacted that all estates, made by T. to W. shall be void,
that the feoffement shall be void as well toward the wife as toward the
Husband, because they are but one person in Law, and the Feme takes nothing
but by agreement of the husband. And upon the like reason is the case Dyer 3.
Eliz. fo. 196. Sir Rob. Catline purchase land held in capite to him and his
wife and his heirs without license, and the Queen pardons all offenses, pro
quacunque alienatione sibi facta, and does not speak of the wife in the
pardon, and yet it was allowed in the Exchequer.

But if the feoffement had been to W. and I. S. this I. S. should have held
his moity, notwithstanding the Parliaments decree, and this seems to be the
better opinion, though there were in manner equal number to maintain, That if
the feoffement were before couerture, the Parliament should void it for a
moity, but if it were after couerture, it should void for no part against the
Feme, when she was discouerte, leaving to Parliaments their omnipotency, it
is clear the husband cannot sever the Ioynture betwixt him and his wife, as an
other Ioynttenant may, if the Ioynture were made during Couerture, because
there is then no moity: Otherwise it is if the Ioynture were made before the
Marriage: And if lands be given to a man and his wife, habendum one moity to
the husband, and habendum the other moity to the wife, now they be seized of
moities as Tenants in Commom: But for this I find no other authority, then the
opinion of Knightly in Dyer, 28. H. 8. 10. b.

SECT. III. Baron and feme cannot infeoffe one another.
Moreover, this Conglutination of persons in Baron and feme, forbids all
manner of feoffing or giving by the one unto the other, for a man cannot give
any thing unto himself, therefore 27. H. 8. fo. 27. In action of debt upon an
obligation to perform covenants, where it passed for the Plaintiff, because
the Defendant had not paid annually seven pound to his wife, it is alleged in
arest of Judgment, that the Covenant was impossible in it self, etc. But
Chomeley, Shelley, and Fitzherbert moved the husband to agree with the
Plaintiff Car le exception sert de riens, for although in strict intelligence
of Law, money and Chattels, paid, delivered, or given to the wife by the
husband, are still his own, yet a man may give his wife a pair of hose (says
the book) as a man is bound by honesty, so he may be bound by red wax and
parchment to find his wife sustenance, and to be bound to give her money for
her security, is all one; from this Lantern I think he took his light,
which bound a gentleman of mine acquaintance to give his Wife the Obligee his
Daughter, yearly such and so many g^wnes, Hertles. etc.

And the meaning must be taken and observed: in the book of 4. H. 7. fo. 4.
is another memorable Cause, A man was bound to I. S. by obligation to make a
sure estate to a woman in certain tenements within three months after his
fathers death: The Obligor marries the woman in his fathers life time, and the
Matrimony continues, till the three months be expired; the obligation is
forfeited, Vauisor said, the husband might well have performed the condition by
fine levied, upon a writ of Covenant brought by a stranger, against the Baron
and feme. Fisher said he might have performed it by making a Lease unto a
stranger, the remainder to the wife, quaere of that. Vauisors performance had
been good I think, if there had been in the beginning a full purpose and
intent of intermarriage betwixt the woman and the Obligor: But that appears
not, and therefore being that he has brought himself to an impossibility of
performance either of words or meaning, the Obligee must needs be allowed the
advantage. If the obligation had been to the woman her self, the condition by
inter-marriage had been dispensed with; for where the Obligee is a cause that
the condition cannot be performed, the not performing is without penalitie to
the Obligor, as if in the old days, I had been bound to an Abbot that A.
should infeoffe him, etc. before Christmas, if A. had presently entered into
Religion, my bond had presently been forfeited: not so, If A. had been
professed, under the obedience of the Obligee.

And if I be bound to C. that A. shall marry B. before Easter: If I marry B.
and our Espousals continue till Easter, my bond is forfeited. Similiter, If C.
marry B. or if A. and B. cannot marry, because one of them dies or wareth mad
before the day.

I find none other cause in our Yeere-bookes alleged why things may not pass
by gift, between Baron and feme, save only unity of person.

But undoubtedly the restraint springs from a politic consideration, rather
to breed, cherish and maintain the unity, then in judging of an impossibility
because of the unity.

But the Civil Law, vir non potest dare vxori, ne foeminae amorem coniugalcm
in quaestu habeant, and prohibenter inter coniuges donationes, quia silicerct
coniugibus inuicem donare matrimonia fierint venalia and saepe distraherentur,
etc. And because it would amount to arguing inter coniuges, there is a
restraint by that law. Ne priuignus dare queat nouercae vel nouerca priuigno.
What if the Matrimony be inualidum and legibus non consistens, yet non valet
inter coniuges putatiuos facta donatio, ne melioris sint conditionis quam illi
qui recte faciont: But a gift to a plain Concubine is good enough: unless the
giver be a Soldier. By old John Bracton, lib. 2. ca 5. Non valent donationes
inter virum and vxorem; non enim poterit vir dare vxori, nec e conuerso
constante Matrimonio, quia huiusmodi donationes prohibitae sunt inter tales
personas, nec infraudem facere possint constitutioni, veluti si Maritus donet
extraneae personae ea mente vt redonet in vita viri vel post mortem: he makes
his reason in the 14. Chapter, Si tales donationes fieri possint ob amorem
inter virum and foeminam posset alter eorum egestare and inopia premi.

But at this day, though lands cannot pass betwixt Baron and Feme, right out
by plain livery, or bargain, yet in the obliquitie of fines, recoueries and
uses, there is an Expedite transporting of Inheritance betwixt them, to the
undoing perhaps of the party whose Lands are transferred and auferred, with
not so much as conjugal love always in recompense.

SECT. IIII. In what sort things may pass betwixt Baron and Feme.
LAnds cannot pass from the Baron by feoffement to put the state from him
immediately to the wife, though he were infeoffed to that intent and upon such
a condition: But one man may infeoffe another upon condition to infeoffe the
wife of the Feoffor, (whatsoever Bracton say) and the condition good. Also a
feoffement, fine, or recovery may be made, knowledged or suffered, to the use
of her and her heirs which is wife to the Feoffor, Conusor or sufferer, etc.
And as I may make another man the instrument to convey lands to my wife, so may
I be the means to convey Lands to my wife, from another man, for by Letters of
Atturney-ship I may deliver seisen of Lands to my Wife for another, and the
feoffement shall be good by Parkins 41. And a man may devise in his last Will
and Testament, either by the custom, or by the Statute, 32. H. 8. Lands to his
Wife in fee, fee-taile for life, or for years, because this takes none
effect, till the Couerture be dissolved.

It is said in Scolasticus case, If I devise that he shall have green acre
after the death of my wife, my wife shall have estate for life by the intent,
etc. And although a wife by the general rule has no will but her Husbands,
and all Testaments of a feme-couert to devise any Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments are ineffectuall, by express declaration of 34. Henrici 8.
capite 5. (...)soever be the courtesy among Dames of honor, a woman's name of
dignity changes with the degree of her husband, and of such women as have not
their honor by birth, but acquire that by Marriage the rule of Law takes
order, Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignoblem, desinet esse nobilis when she
takes a second husband.

But what though the scrupulositie of the Common pleas were observed throughout
the Realm, that Esquires Ladies should be no Ladies in Court and Country,
whereunto I will never give voice what inequality were in this depressing?
shall not likewise a Knights widow marrying with a Baron or Earl as be much
exalted verament, yet you see the dignity hangs merely on the male side,
carrying the scepter of Wedlock.

SECT. VI. Touching servitude.
NOw touching the state of freedom or bondage, Littleton says, that if a
freeman marry a bondwoman, the Lord cannot seize her; but there is remedy by
action, for taking her sans gree or license.

Fitzherbert in his liber^are probanda agrees 78. G. that she should be freed
perpetually: But the Law seems to be otherwise. And so you may find the
opinion of Doct. and Stud. fo 139 b. And that indeed it is no more but a
Temporary privilege and exemption from seizure of her Lord, during time of
couerture, for if the Seigniour of a Manor marry his Niefe regardant, the
best authority that I can find is, that this Niefe is no more but shrined in
the honor of her Lord, if he die she shall have no Dower, but remain still in
her niefitie regardant to the Manor. And to say truth, I perceive not how a
woman's being married can in any sort be an infranchisement, no not for a time:
it is no more but a sconsing or hiding of the servitude. Bracton says
elegantly manumission is a detection or laying open of the freedom which is a
natura. A woman's liberty is free license to do what she list unless she be
let by force or by Law, it is not restored to Niefe when she marries,
Marriage rather pulls it from her which before was free: When a Seignieur
therefore marries with his bondwoman she must not turn her bumme to him and
say, heretofore my Lord; I lay in your bed, and now I lie in mine own, as the
French Concubine said being married newly to her French Lord, but let her be
burome and mindful of her subjection, for if this loving Seignior of hers die,
she may right well be an apparent Niefe again to her own son for ought that
I know, why not as well as causes may happen that the father to son, or one
son to another may be a villeine, the case did happen 3. Ed. 3. that the
villain married his Lords mother, and so the father in Law, and the brother de
demisank were villeines: If a free woman marry a villeine, her natural
freedom is not otherwise infringed then by subjection to her husband: If the
villeine purchase Lands and die before seizure made by the Lord, the wife shall
have Dower: But if a freewoman seized in fee or fee-tails, take a husband
which is a villeine and die, the Lord may enter upon the husbands possession
per le Courtesy, or upon the Issue being Tenants in fee-simple or fee-taile:
See the Book 22. H. 6. fo. 18. and. 19.

But may the Lord enter upon the Land during Couerture, quaere. If a villeine
be possessed of certain goods, and the Lord make seizure of them by poll, this
is sufficient without seisen in fait: But if the villeine die before any
seisin, and ordain Executors, these Executors shall have his goods, 3. H, 4.
15. 16.

And a Villeine shall retain goods which he has as Executor against his
Lord, yea he may bring Action of debt against him as an Executor, all to the
v^^ of the Testator. Also if a Feme guardian in soccage marry with a villeine,
I take it the Lord shall have nothing to do in this gardianship: If a
Seignioresse of a Manor marry her bondman, he is made free, and where before
he was her footstool, he is now her head and her Seignior, here is part of
the particularitie.

SECT. VII. The Baron may beat his Wife.
THe rest follows, Justice Brook 12. H. 8. fo. 4. affirms plainly, that if
a man beat an outlaw, a traitor, a Pagan, his villein, or his wife it is
dispunishable, because by the Law Common these persons can have no action: God
send Gentle-women better sport, or better company.

But it seems to be very true, that there is some kind of castigation which
Law permits a Husband to use* for if a woman be threatened by her husband to be
beaten, mischieued or slain, Fitzherbert sets down a Writ which she may sue
out of Chancery to compel him to find surety of honest behavior toward her,
and that he shall neither do nor procure to be done to her (mark I pray you)
any bodily damage, otherwise then appertains to the office of a Husband for
lawful and reasonable correc^ion. See for this, the new Not. bre. fo. 80. f.
and fo. 238. f.

How far that extends I cannot tell, but herein the sere feminine is at no
very great disadvantage: for first for the lawfulness; If it be in none other
regard lawful to beat a man's wife, then because the poor wench can sue no
other action for it, I pray why may not the Wife beat the Husband again, what
action can he have if she do? where two tenants in Common be on a horse, and
one of them will travel and use this horse, he may keep it from his
Companion a year two or three and so be even with him; so the actionlesse
woman beaten by her Husband, has retaliation left to beat him again, if she
dare. If he come to the Chancery or Justices in the Country of the peace
against her, because her recognizance alone will hardly be taken, he were best
be bound for her, and then if he be beaten the second time, let him know the
price of it on Gods name.

SECT. VIII. That which the Husband has is his own.
BUt the prerogative of the Husband is best discerned in his dominion over all
externe things in which the wife by combination deuesteth her self of
propriety in some sort, and casts it upon her governor, for here practice
every where agrees with the Theoricke of Law, and forcing necessity submits
women to the affection thereof, whatsoever the Husband, had before Couerture
either in goods or lands, it is absolutely his own, the wife has therein no
seisin at all. If any thing when he is married be given him, he takes it by
himself distinctly to himself.

If a man have right and title to enter into Lands, and the Tenant enfeoffe the
Baron and Feme, the wife takes nothing. Dyer fol. 10. The very goods which a
man gives to his wife, are still his own, her Chain, her Bracelets, her
Apparel, are all the Good-mans goods.

If a Woman takes more Apparel when her husband dies then is necessarily for
her degree, it makes her Executrix de son tort demesne, 33. H. 6. A wife how
gallant soever she be, glistereth but in the riches of her husband, (...)
Executors; if such chattels be given to the wife and to a stranger, the
husband alone is tenant in Common of them with the stranger. Secondly, the
Court did hold clearly, that in Brackbridges Case, and such like, the
immediate inheritance in the Baron, did not drown the interest of the Feme,
for the one he had in his own right, and the other in his wives: But by an
express act, as by feoffement or grant of a new lease, he might have given
away the interest of his wife.

But leaving all to Law, the Law shall save that interest distinct, and
preserve it: And it was holden in this Case, that Baron and feme might not
join in an eiectione firmae with Anticle, but he alone might bring his action
and the Baron chased to more higher and more real Writ.

Also it was holden the Baron might distraine or have action of debt for a
moity of the rent, and as I comprehend the end of Brackbridges case, a
feoffement by Thomas Brackbridge made of the Manor whereof the Land seized was
parcel, and might well drown all interest Executory which his wife had, but
not a Lease executed except livery had been made in the very Lands seized, for
a Lease in possession of three acres makes them to be no parcel of a Manor
during the Lease, but a rent charge, or a lease executory which is but an
interest, leaves the possession entire, and no reuersion in the Baron, there
is further in the Commentaries the Case of Dame Hales, viz. Sir James Hales
Lessee for years, in his own right taking a new Lease for twelve years over
in remainder to himself and his Wife, died felo de se, the whol^ interest was
judged forfeit^, for the felonye had relation from the act done, id est, from
entrance into the water, etc. At which time the Baron had power to grant, and
consequently to forfeit it.

If the Wife have a ward by reason of her Seigniory, this likewise is a
Chattell real, and the Husbands interest in it shall be as in a term or lease
for years: But if the wife be guardian in socage, no lease of the infants land,
though it be made by Baron and feme, per Indenture shall bind the wife, but
she may enter after the husbands death, and if she die, the husband shall not
have the Gardianship.

For in this Case, the wife has nothing to her own use, but she is an officer
appointed, upon confidence in her natural love, and this office is not
grantable nor forfeitable. vide not. bre. 145. I have hitherto, but showed what
is wrought as it were ipso facto, upon marriages consummation while it is
green, not past a day or a week old, and I thought it methodicall to insert
the learning of battery, because in my poor opinion it were better to combat
for household mastry in the beginning, then to bring a Writ of right for it,
when it has gone too long, by title of rusty prescription.

SECT. XI. Of the Wives interest of affairs before Marriage.
NOw let us look back a little and see what shall become of the dealings
which Mistress Titus had whilst she was Sempronia, an agent in the world,
widow or maid sola and vncouert.

SECT. XII. Of Infancy.
TO debate matters of infancy would ask a whole volume perse: But breefly
know that all deeds, gifts, grants, etc. made by an Infant which take not
effect, by delivery of the infant be absolutely void, By matters in fait or
writing, which take effect, by hand and delivery are only voydable by the
infant, or by them which have the infants estate.

Out of his rule are excepted acts apparently of necessity or profit to the
infant, or which can be no disprofit to him, for manger boire, necessary
apparel and schooling, the obligation or covenant of an Infant is good.

Also an Infants presentation to a Church is good enough for danger of lapse,
and because it is no matter of emolument, and things done by virtue of office,
as giving of goods, or payment of debts by an infant Executrix, are good, so
are acts which concern the infants proper purchase. As if estate be made to an
Infant of two acres, to have and to hold, the one for life, the other in fee, a
feoffement of one acre made by the Infant is a good election: And it is said
fo. 104. in Dyer, that an Infant is bound by all Statute Laws, if there be not
an express exemption; Now whatsoever a Feme sole might avoid by infancy, she
and her husband may avoid it by entry or action after Marriage, if they take
the time, else not.

For example, An infant feme sole has title to enter for Mortmaine, within a
year after alienation, or title to enter into the purchase of her villeine
before his alienation, if by lachesse she let slip her advantage, as she may
do notwithstanding her infancy, no wise husband that she takes afterward can
mend it, for here was but a title to that which neither she nor her auncestor
ever had: But if an infant Feme sole have a right, as upon disseisin done to
her or her auncestor, she may always enter, whilst she is sole,
notwithstanding any descent during infancy; And so may her husband which
marries her after the descent: Littl. teaches us, fo. 95. Chap. Descents,
that lachesse of a husband which suffers descent, shall not toll the entry of a
Feme covert, or her heirs after Marriage dissolved. But there is an addition
to Littleton, that it is otherwise where a title is already given to a Feme
sole which takes a husband, and suffers descent, etc. for it shall now be
accounted the Woman's folly that she would take such a husband.

Howsoever it be Law, or howsoever it be understood, the Case before must needs
be good Law, for an infant Feme has as much favor as an infant Male: And
taking of an husband cannot toll an entry which was saved to a Feme sole by
infancy, neither do I perceive, how the husbands lachesse at the time of
descent, can toll the Wives Infancy to make any imputation of folly, where
infancy might excuse it.

By Parkins, If a man lease two acres to me for life, the remainder of one of
these acres to a Feme sole, which afterward takes a husband, and then the
Lessee dying, the Baron enters into one acre, and thereof enfeoffes a stranger
by mets and bonds, the wife shall not after his death enter (...) and if Baron
and Feme make a gift in tail or lease for life of the wives Land rendering
rent, so soon as the Baron dies the reuersion is only in the wife, who by
accepting the rent shall bind her self and her heirs: But if she will refuse
the rent because she was under age at time of the feoffement, it seems she may
be received to a dum fuit Infra etatem, whereby she affirms the feoffement to
be her own. If this be infallible Law, I doubt not then if a Feme infant
disseised do marry, and during her infancy the husband suffers a descent,
but her entry is saved, and she may enter, after Couerture dissolved if not
before: But Fitzherbert concludes with a quaere, and so must I.

SECT. XIII. Acts, etc. of a Feme sole being full Age.
Understand now by a Feme sole, a Woman of sull age. If a Feme sole become
indebted, and marry, the Baron and Feme may be sued for this debt during life
of the Feme: If the Creditor sue the recover, the Baron shall be charged with
it after the wives death, aliter non.

A Feme sole, Lessee for life, rendering rent takes a husband, the rent is
arrere, the wife dies, though here be no recovery in the wives life time, yet
because the Baron took the profit, he is still chargeable in a Writ of debt
for the rent, for quisentit commodum sentire debet and onus, If a Feme endowed
of rent take a husband and die, the husband shall have action of debt for the
rent arere, for it was a duty accrued during couerture: But if a man be bound
to a Feme sole, and she takes a husband, and the day of payment comes during
Couerture: now if she die, her husband cannot have an action of debt upon the
obligation, for this was a thing in action before marriage, Not. bre. fol. 120.
and 121. And agreeing to that is 39. H. 6. 27. Br. Testaments 10. but by that
book the Wife may make the Baron her Executor and so says the Book of 12.
Hen. 7. 22.

If a Feme sole being made Executrix, take a husband, she remain still a
disposer of the Testators goods to his use: and after payment of his debts she
may deliver Legacies, and after all that give the rest for Gods sake maugre le
test sa Baron. But upon such a giving of goods or delivering of Legacies before
payment of debts the husband may have an action of trespass, for gift before
payment is not a right administration, but a deuastation of the Testators
goods, Par. fo. 2. and 18. H. 6.

A feme sole seized of a carue of land, grants out of it a rent Charge by deed,
and delivers this deed to a stranger with Condition to deliver it to the
grantee as her deed, if he go to Rome and return before Easter, the Woman
takes a husband, the grantee performs the Condition, the deed is delivered to
him, he has a good rent Charge, yet the Baron was seized of the land before
the grant took effect, what though, if the Feme had infeoffed a stranger of
the land, he should have held it charged, for to some intent the grant has
relation from delivery of the deed as an escrow though for the rent, the
grantee cannot have that but for the days incurring after the darraine
delivery, and if the Feme at the delivery of the escrow had been married all
had been void, Par. fo. 2. and 3. and fo. 29. some has maintained, he says,
where a Feme sole delivers an obligation or other deed of grant, as an escrow
with condition, etc. vt supra; that it should have no relation at all save
only to the last delivery; for if he to whom an obligation is so made,
release all action to the Feme sole, before performance of the condition, and
before delivery of the deed by the baylee, he may notwithstanding sue upon the
obligation, when it is delivered, which proves that it takes none effect till
the last delivery; and then it must needs be void if the Woman be married at
time of this delivery, if all were not countermanded presently by taking a
husband. But Parkins will not yield to these reasons, for the Feme sole was a
person able to oblige her self in any manner of Contract, and her covenants
and agreements made upon consideration, she could not countermaund though she
would.

If a Feme sole seized of Land, infeoffe a stranger by deed indented reserving
rent to her and her heirs, to be paid annually at Easter, with a conditional
clause of entry for non-payment, and then they two inter-marry, etc. here can
be no failing in performance of payment during couerture, for all this while
the rent and condition are suspended.

If the condition had been to pay ten or an hundred pound, it had been drunk
up by the inter-marriage, for if a feme sole make a feoffement to a stranger
upon condition to pay her ten pound, and then she marries with I. S. I. S.
before the day of payment may release all manner of conditions, duties and
demands, and the condition shall be determined. But such a release coming
after the day wherein the condition should have been performed at what time
the wife has a title of entry will not bind her or her heirs, after the
husbands death. Par. fo. 148.

There follows a question, if a Feme sole infeoffeth a man of black acre by
indenture with Condition, that he shall infeoffe her of green acre before
Easter, and they two marry and continue married till after Easter, whether the
husband be maine-tenant seized of black acre in-the right of his wife, There
follows in Par. fo. 149. a case ayding toward solution of this doubt. If I
be bound by obligation to a Feme sole to marry her by monday next, if she
marry a stranger and the espousals continue till tewsday, I need not tender my
self to her.

A Feme sole makes cognizance of her right to levy a fine before Commissioners
per dedimus potestatem, having the Writ of Covenant (vt oportet) and at the
day given in bank, when the Concord should be recorded, the woman is married,
but notwithstanding the fine was recorded and engrossed, as levied by a Feme
sole: the question was whether it should bind the Husband, or not, it was
said, death of a party, etc. which as the act of God dissolues the whole
business, by abatement of the Writ, but marrying after the test of the Writ of
Covenant, and dedimus potestatem, and Cognizance made, does not so: The woman
therefore and her heirs are bound for ever; and the Husbands release of all
his right to the Conusee, makes all clear 7. and 8. Eliz Dyer 246. the Lord
Keeper of the great seal of England his case.

SECT. XIII. Of Acts done by a Feme Covert.
Every Feme Couertis quodammodo an infant, for see her power, even in that
which is most her own: A wife may be seized in her own right with her husband
in estate of Inheritance: but if she make livery and seisin to another in any
parcel of this Inheritance by her self alone without gree of her Husband it
is void, yea her Husband and she together may maintain an assise upon the
entry: but where only the Baron is seized, and the Feme makes livery, the
assise must be only by the Baron in his own name: Par. 38. Likewise fo. 2.
he tells us, where a man is seized in the right of his wife, and the wife
grants a rent charge out of her own Land, the Husband not knowing it, or the
Husband knowing, but not consenting; but the deed is only in the name of the
wife, this grant is void. Admit the Husband be vagrant out of the Country, and
the Wife (ignorant of his life or death) grants a rent Charge by deed reciting
that* she is sole; yet if the Grantee enter and distraine for the rent, the
husband may maintain an Action of Trespass for this entry.

Admit that this vna caro Baron and Feme through false love or jealousy, be
set at nine miles asunder variance, and certain Lands are assigned to the Wife
by the Baron for her maintenance, if the Wife grant a rent Charge out of this
Land, it is merely void.

If a Feme Covert grant a rent Charge out of her land by fine, as though she
were sole, this binds not the Husband; but if he die before he and his Feme
have reuersed their fine by error, the Feme shall be bound.

And if to a Feme Covert there be a feoffement made (a feoffement and livery is
of great celebritie) yet a naked disagreement of the Baron auoydeth it 1. H. 7.
fo. 16. If a Feme Covert (her Husband being beyond the Seas) be enfeoffed of
an acre of Land, and the Husband coming home refuses, and causes the Wife
likewise to relinquish all manner of seisin or taking any profits of the Land,
this in a Writ of entry, sur disseisin in le per brought against the Baron and
Feme will discharge the Husband of damages from the time of the refusal, but
not for the occupation before refusal, tamen quaere, Par. fo. 10. yet (says
he) they remain Tenants (for all the refusals) of the Frank Tenement to use
any action so long as none other person enters: but if a Tenant when his
Seignior is beyond the Seas, do infeoffe his Lords wife jointly with a
stranger of the Tenancie, and the Lord coming home distraines the cattle of
the stranger for his rent, this distress is a complete disagreement, and puts
the Wife out of seisin, so that now the possession remains entirely to the
stranger the joint feoffee; otherwise the husband should be at a shrewd
mischief viz. without remedy for his rent, for all the time incurred before
the distress, Par. 10. Note that in these Cases it is no plea, for the
grauntor to say that the Baron did not agree, but he must show the
disagreement.

A Feme Covert may be a disseiseresse without assent of the Baron, and he
shall be charged with damages, in assise against him and his wife: But if the
Baron do a disseisin to the use of his wife and she agrees to it, the Frank
Tenant for all this setleth not in her, for the entry of a husband gains
nothing to his wife, but where she has either right of entry (as upon
disseisin) or title of entry as upon a Condition, etc. A Feme Covert makes a
Testament of the goods of her husband, she dies, the Executors prove the
testament, if the Baron now will deliver the goods to the Executors, this
makes the Testament good; for howsoever it might be accounted void, being made
without the husbands consent, yet being once proved, it gathers spirit (as it
were) and the delivery of the goods, shall employ an assent before the will was
made, note that license or assent here, is sufficient per paroll, Par. 97.

A Feme Covert may take an assumption from any man for her Husband, she may
take an obligation or feoffement to her self, she may commit a disseisin, and
her husband by his assent shall be a disseisor, ab initio: She may give, sell,
or charge her husbands Chattels, by his assent, as a horse or such like, and
she is not so like a Monk that all her acts should have an impossibility of
taking any strength, but her husbands agreement coming after them, shall make
them good whether they be to his advantage or disadvantage, 27. H. 8. fo. 24.
But the acts of a Monk cannot be made good by agreement of the Sovereign.

And in the end of the case, Fitzherbert affirms, that when a Woman makes a
gift of her husbands goods, the Husbands post-assent is a new gift. One thing I
will add, That though a gift made by a wife of things which are quickly
gotten, and quickly gone, (chattels I mean which require no solemn
conueyance) and the Wife has a med^^ng with them may be made good by
agreement, yet a feoffement made by the Feme, cannot be made good by the
Husbands bare consent succeeding.

Now for Executorship of a Feme Covert note that per Brian, 2. H. 7. fo. 15. b.
she cannot be an Executor without the agreement of her Husband, and per mesme
le reason, she cannot give goods of the Testator without his consent* for upon
return of deuastauerint, the Husbands goods shall be put in execution: The
case in the book, is of an Executorship, before Couerture. And remember that
Fitzherbert says, 28. H. 8. Dyer fo. 7. If the wife have a Lease by
Executorship, the husband connot sell it, sed tota curia con^ra eum: But a Feme
Executrix to her first husband may retain goods against the Executors of her
second Husband, if he neue^ did alienate them. 21. H. 7. per Fineux.

SECT. XIV. Of Elopement.
AMongst the acts of a Feme Covert, I must not forget to admonish her that she
take heed of Elopements, A woman shall not forfeit Dower by not suing appeal
of her Husbands death, or by not visiting her husband, or not coming to
comfort him when he is wounded or exceeding sick in a foreign shire; but i^
he be in his home County where he dwells, quaere: A woman in her frenzy may
cut her husbands throat, and it is no forfeiture of Dower; but if she make an
Elopement (which is a mad trick) Dower is forfeited. Elopement by the sound
and quality of the offense might seem to be derived from alopex a fox, for it
is when a woman seeks her prey far from home, which is the foxes quality.
But the word seems to be French, there is a fair Statute against Elopement,
West. 2. ca. 34. Si vxor sponte reliquerit virum and abierit and m^retur cum
adultero suo, amittat in perpetuum actionem p^tendi dotem, quae ^i competere
posset de tenementis viri sui, si super hoc conuincatur, nisi vir suus sponte
and absque cohertione Ecclesiastica came reconciliet and secum habitare
permit^at, in quo casu restituatur ^i actio. A Woman that leaves her husband,
goes away and abides with her adulterer, if she be convicted thereof, loses
for ever her command of Dower, etc. unless the Husband of his own free accord
without ecclesiallicall compulsion suffer her to be reconciled and to cohabite
with him, in which case her action is restored for Dower.

It is commonly holden (says Parkins) that a Woman shall lose her Dower by
voluntary Elopement, though her abiding be inuoluntary, and though she make
none abode at all with her Adulterer: But if she be ravished, and demurre with
the Rauishor, against her will, she loses no Dower. If when the husband is
commorant at one manor, his wife depart to another of his manors, and there
live in adultery, this is none Elopement, for it cannot but be intended, she
cannot abide there without gree and goodwill of her Baron; ye shall have a case
for your erudition out of my Lord Dyer concerning this matter: of Dower was
demanded of a Manor, ex dotatione Domini Powes by R. H. and Anne his Wife, it
was pleaded that the said Anne in vita Domini Powes.

Frankly of her own accord,
Left her Husband and her Lord,
And from Bednall* Green she ran
With Matthew Rochlei Gentleman
To the parish of Saint Clements Danes, where she lived in adultery, all the
life long of Lord Powes, abs^* hoc that ever she was reconciled, the demandants
pleade^ a reconciliaui^ and cohabitare permisit, the reioynder is non
reconciliauit modo and forma.

To prove the reconciliation, a lying together diverse nights at diverse places
was given in evidence* with demeanure, as Baron and Feme; against this it was
objected that they never were resient or abiding in one house together, but
always in sunder, and that the woman continued in adultery with one or other
continually, as long as her husband lived. Et non allocatur, for there may be
many Elopements with many reconciliations, and the Defendant at his peril must
take issue upon one, 1. and 2. Phi. and Mariae, Dyer, fo. 107. But me thinks
here wants equality in the Law, women go down style, and many grains a^
lowance will not make the balance hang even: A poor Woman shall have but the
third foot of her Husband* lands when he is dead, for all the service she did
him during the accouplement (perhaps a long time and a tedious) an^ if she be
extrauagant with a friend vt supra, this is an Elopement and a forfeiture, etc.
But as the saying is, men are happy by the mass, they may go where they list
I warrant ye, and because they are enforced to travel in the world, they will
pay dear abroad for that which they* steeme of no value at home. Their
adulterous soi^^rning^ is not discerned, they may lope over ditch and Dale, a
thousand out-ridings and out-biddings is no forfeiture, but as soon as the
good wife is gone, the badman will have her Land, not the third, but every
foot of it.

Have patience (my Scholars) take not your opportunity of revenge, rather
move for redress by Parliament, and in the mean season be persuaded that
liberty or impunity in doing evil by immodest life and lascivious gallops, is
no freedom or happiness: no, but rather act thus far your Husbands duty of
instruction, namely, to learn him to leave his incontinencie abroad, by your
modest and chaste life at home. And if this will not produce you, the comfort of
your Husband, yet a far greater comfort the effect of Balaams desires, Let me
die the death of the righteons, and let my end be like his.

SECT. XV. The Husbands power in Lands, which the Wife holds in Dower or
otherwise for life.
THe Husbands Sovereignty over his wife, her goods, and chattels personal or
real, is no less then has been declared. The dominion likewise over* all
manner of Frank Tenements his own or his Wives, is supereminent in him during
Couerture, but so that he stands well bridled from doing any thing a per luy,
whereby either the Dower which his wife had by a former marriage, or expects
by the present or any other estate for life or in fee, can be taken from her
when he^ is gone: If a Widow tenant in Dower marry, and her new husband
surrendreth, etc. this is good during Couerture, but if the Feme survive, or if
there be a Divorce causa praecontractus, the Feme may enter and defeat the
surrender, though he to whom it was made be dead, and his Heir in by descent,
yea and the Law differs not here though the Wife had joined with the Husband
in the surrender: But if Baron and Feme will surrender Lands which the wife
holds for life by fine, this shall bind the wife, for the wife which is giver
shall be examined, etc. for no particular Tenant can surrender by fine without
being named in the writ, whereupon the fine is levied, Par. 117.

If a lease be made to Baron and Feme for life, and the Baron make ali^nation
in fee, the Lessour may enter for a forfeiture, and maintain an assise, if he
be ousted: but the Wife sur^i^ing, may have a cui in vira post mortem (...)is
by a husband disseised, release all his right to the husband, and afterward
notwithstanding the release brings a writ of entry in nature of an Assise, and
recouereth against him by default, the wife of the releassee shall be endowed.
But if the Heir of a disseisor being in by descent, the disseisee re-enter,
and take a wife, now a recovery against the Baron by default or reddition in a
writ of entry in nature of Assise takes away Dower from the wife, for the
recoueror had right according to the nature of his action, and the possession
which the Baron had during Couerture is destroyed: But it falls out otherwise
where a man is married, and then there is a disseisin, descent, entry and
recovery, vt supra.

If a Precipe be brought against the Baron which pleads misnosmer, or
iointenancy, and it is found against him, whereby the demandant recouereth,
this ousteth not Dower, unless the Demandant had right.

In a writ of entry in le post against the Baron, he voucheth himself to
save the state tail, and shows how his father gave him the land in tail,
and that the fee simple is descended unto him, and upon a trauerse of the gift
in tail, it is found for the demandant which recouereth, and the Baron dies:
Now if so be that the Baron might well have pleaded a release of all actions or
all right of the demandant, the Wife may falsify this recovery in her writ of
Dower: Tenant in tail having Issue dies, a stranger abateth, dies, his heir
enters, and takes a wife, the Issue of tenant in tail, arraignes an assise of
Mortdancestor, against the Baron which trauerseth the points of the writ, and
they are found against him, so that the demandant recouereth, and the Baron
dies. It has been holden that the wife shall not recover Dower here, until
the heir have reuersed the verdict by attaint. But it seems (says Parkins)
he may falsify the recovery in a writ of Dower maine tenant; for the husband
might have pleaded to the action of the demandants writ, and if the Feme
(which by no means might have attaint) must tarry till the Heir have defeated
the verdict, perhaps he will never sue attaint, or he will release, and so the
wife which once was entitled to dower by her husbands possession, never
defected but by his own lachesse, should lose her Dower maugre sat est, which
seems unreasonable: Yet quaere (says he) for the judgment is upon a
verdict, comprehending matter repugnant and contrary to that which should he
pleaded against the writ: But if the demandants entry had been congeable:
then out of doubt the wife had had no power of falsifying, for the entry had
wrought a remitter.

The Heir of a Disseisor enters, taking a wife, and the Disseisee in a writ
of entry, ad terminum qui preterit, recouereth against the Baron by default,
the wife may falsify this recovery in a writ of Dower: But it is seldom that
the demandant in Dower shall falsify a recovery against the husband, had by
his lachesse in not pleading a plea, which went merely in abatement of the
writ.

And therefore to say that the Baron might have pleaded misnosmer or
ioynt-tenancie will not serve to falsify a recovery: But if she can prove that
the demandant had no right nor cause of action, but jointly with a stranger,
which stranger by his deed showed forth to the Court had released before
commencement of suit all his right to her husband being in possession, this
will serve to falsify the recovery for a moity.

Thus has Parkins in his treaty of Dower at large discovered, that a title
never tried against the Baron in his life time, may be tried by his wife when
he is in his grane: And so further 36. H. 6. titulo fauxifier de recovery in
Fitzherbert, 15. That a woman may falsify a recovery had against her husband
by action tried, but it must be in another point, and not in the very same
which was tried by the recovery.

SECT. XVII. Loss of Dower by the Husbands attainder.
He that has a notable grudge against his wife, and would be sure to delude
her hope of Dower, has adirect way, though it be somewhat dangerous, and I
will not be of his Counsel: He needs do no more but imagine, compass, and
conspire some detestable renowned treason of the old stamp; and if he be once
attainted thereof, according to his desire, etc. But if he do but pingle, as
suffer himself to be outlawed, in action of trespass, this was never any
forfeiture of Frank Tenement: The Law was in the late days of Littleton and
Parkins that every attainder of murder or felony done by the Baron* was an
ouster of dower to the wife. The first Solons of the English Law be like
thought that tender regard of a wives estate, should restrain a husband from
all inormious transgression against the sacred Crown and dignity Royal,
would God it might: but the true reason why the law was so penal for such
offenses of the husband toward the wife, (in whom perhaps was no fault) that
thereby she should have no Dower: and toward the children that they should
have no descent of inheritance, but the hereditary blood should be corrupt) was
upon these reasons grounded upon the Law of nature, and given by Justice
Stamford in his book fo. 194. says he to this effect, men will now eschew
those Capital crimes when they shall see those persons who in nature and
affection are nearest and dearest unto them, and most to be beloved, shall be
punished with themselves: so that if themselves will not refrain such crimes
for themselves, yet they should the rather refrain for the love of their wife
and children upon whom they bring so perpetual loss and punishment and stain
of so infamous a note as that their stock, blood and Lineage shall be
corrupted and attainted, their children disinherited, and the wives of their
bosoms because the wives of such impious and foolish Husbands, by their
defaults deprived of all their means and liuelihood. And Breton fo. 258. makes
another reason why a wife of a man attainted, etc. shall lose her Dower est pur
ceo que est a supposer que el scauoit del felony son mary, and by him a woman
lost no Dower, in case the felony were committed before Couerture.

King Edward the sixth in the first year of his Reign abrogating some Statutes
concerning treasons or felony, for their austerity, and making some new
decrees concerning treason, preserved Dower against all perpetrations of an
evil husband: But 5. and 6. eiusdem regis ca. 11. by the last prouiso, It was
again enacted, that no Wife of any person attainted of treason should be
received to demand or have Dower, etc. Yet for felony 1. Ed. 6. is still in
force.

And treasons by Act 5. Eliz. ca. 1. for assurance of her Majesty's royal
power, or by the Act eodem anno cap. 11. against clipping, washing, rounding or
filing of Coins, or by the Act 18. Eliz. ca. 1. against diminishing or
impayring the Queens Coin or other coin current here, do none of them make
any corruption of blood, or forfeiture of Dower.

Note, if after attainder the Baron purchase his pardon, this is so far forth
a new birth unto him, that his Wife shall have Dower of the Lands which come to
him after pardon, if his Issue by her may per possibility inherit. Par. 75.

And remember this Case, 3. and 4. Phi. and Marie, Dyer 140. b. Marie the wife
of Sir John Gate, attainted of treason brought a Writ of Dower, against
Wiseman the attainder of Sir John; was certainly pleaded in bar, she replied,
that long time before the attainder and before the treason committed, after the
Espousals, the said Sir John* Gate was seized in fee of the Land whererof she
demands Dower, and thereof enfeoffed A. B. whose estate the tenant has upon a
demurrer, without argument at bar or bench the Council of the parties being
heard in Justice Brooks Chamber, the demandant was barred of Dower, by opinion
of all the Justices, because the Statute is, The Wife of a man attainted of any
manner of treason whatsoever shall in no wise be received to ask, challenge,
demand or have dower of any her Husbands Lands during the force of that
attainder: And by Stamford, 195. this extends to petty treason: But nota,
(says Dyer) the Lands here sold and gone before treason committed, were never
subject to forfeiture or escheate, vt in causa Vauisor, M. Littleton in the
Chapter of Dower: And therefore Antho* Brown Serieant was angry at the heart
for this Judgment: See Littleton fo. 11. per Vauisor. If a man commit felony,
aliene his land, and then be attainted, the Wife shall have action of Dower
against the Feoffee, but not against the King or Lord, if it be escheated.

SECT. XVIII. The Husbands power in his wives inheritance, and of
discontinuance.
A Woman's Inheritance is Lands of Inheritance which she has by descent or
purchase, and her Marriage such as was given her in Frank Marriage by learned
M. Littleton: But take here all fee-simple or feetaile, which she has sole by
her self, or jointly with some other to be her Inheritance.

Then know that at Common Law a man seized in the right of his Wife of green
acre, may make a feoffement of it to a stranger, and this is such an
interruption (called a discontinuance) of the wives estate, that not only the
Baron is bound whilst he lives, but the Wife also when he is dead is by
common Law forbidden entry into her own land, and put to her action of cui in
vita, but if a man seized in the right of his wife be disseised and release to
the disseisor (though it be with warrantie) this is no Discontinuance.

If a man seized in fee in the right of his Wife, have Issue by her a son and
die, and then a second Husband makes a Lease of the Land, for term of his
life, and the Wife dies, if now the Lessee surrender to the second Baron, it
is a question, whether the son can enter during the life of lease for life:
But clear (says Littleton) when he is dead, the son may enter for the
discontinuance which was but forth life, was determined.

If Tenant in the right of his Wife make a Lease for his own life, the
reuersion in fee is in the Baron: If he die in the life time of his Wife and
of the Lessee, and his heir grant the reuersion with atturnament, now though
the grantee enter, after the death of the Lessee, yet the wife may re-enter:
for as an estate tail cannot be discontinued, but by one which is seized by
force of the intaile, so the estate of a Wife, is not discontinuable but by him
which is seized in the wives right.

SECT. XIX. Of a Remitter.
YOu must understand somewhat also of a Remitter. And because women learn
faster by example then by precept, I will not stay to define a Remitter: Baron
and Feme seized together in special tail, have Issue a daughter, the wife
dies, the Baron catches another wife, has Issue by her another daughter,
discontinueth the tail, disseiseth the discontinuee and dies, now is the Land
descended to the two daughters, the eldest daughter is remitted (that is
remaunded and settled in the ancient estate) for a moitie, and driven to a
Formedone against her Sister for the other moity, for here the Sisters are by
several titles tenants in common not parceners.

If Tenant in tail infeoffe a Feme sole and die, and then his son being
under age, intermarrieth with the Feme Feoffee, this is a remitter to the
Son, and his wife which before had fee-simple has now nothing at all in the
land. But if the son had been of full age at the time of espousals, he had
not regained the ancient estate, but stood seized only in droit sa feme. If a
Woman seized, etc. take a husband which alieneth in fee, and then takes back
an estate to him and his wife for life, this reprisall (though it were by
Indenture or by fine) is merely the act of the Husband, and the woman sans
folly is adjudged in her Remitter, the reuersion of the Lessor running to
smoke, rightly to smoke, which is something more then nothing: for if after all
this the Lessor bring an action of waste against the Baron and Feme, the Baron
cannot bar her by showing her reprisall and remitter; but he is stopped from
speaking against his own Feoffement and receipt.

So that here may be an estoppell or conclusion by a matter not witnessed with
specialty or any manner Scripture: But if in the action of waste the Baron will
make default, at the grand distress, the wife upon her prayer received to show
her matter shall bar the Lessor of his action right well.

For in every case where a woman is received to plead in her husbands absence,
she shall have advantage as if she were a Feme sole. And the reason why
rendering back the land by the Alien to Baron and Feme works a remitter,
though it were by ^ne, is because a Feme Covert that takes any thing by fine
is never examined by the Justices.

But where somewhat is to be conveyed, from a Feme Covert, by a fine, as if
Baron and Feme make cognizance to another, etc. or a grant or render, or a
release by fine, in all or such like cases, because the right of a Wife is
passing, and she shall be eternally concluded, she must be examined before the
fine can be received: and if she confess that her husband menaced her if she
would not levy the fine, etc. it shall not be received 15. E* 4* ^0. 1. But
where nothing is moved in fines, save only a wives purchase and gaining, there
is used none examination of her, and therefore such fines do not conclude her.

If Tenant in tail discontinueth it and dies, and the discontinuee makes a
Lease to the Daughter and heir of the Tenant in tail being of full age, and
to her husband for their two lives, the daughter is remitted: If Baron and Feme
Tenants in special tail be, and the Baron alieneth in fee, and takes back an
estate to him and his wife, for their liue^, because they are but one person,
and the estate is likewise one and entire without moities, and the Feme cannot
be remitted here without the Husband be also remitted, they are adjudged both
in their remitter: But the Baron himself is stopped from claiming so much
contrary to his own alienation.

If Lands he given to a Woman in tail, remainder to another in tail,
remainder to a third in tail, with remainder over in Fee, if the woman take a
husband that discontinueth in fee, all the remainders are discontinued, and if
the Wife dies without Issue, there is no remedy but a Formedon by turn, if
the first, second or third Donee die without Issue: But if after the
discontinuance an estate be made to the Baron and Feme for their own life or
another man's life, or any other estate, the Wife is remitted and so are all
they in remainder. If the Feme die, the next in remainder may enter, and so is
it for them in the reuersion after the caile is ended.

A Lease of a house is made to a Feme sole for term of her life, and in a
^aint or false action a stranger recouereth this house against her by default,
so that she may have a quod ei deforcear by West. 2. ca. 4. now is the
reuersion of the Lessor discontinued, and he cannot have an action of waste.
But if the woman marries, and the recouerer lease this house to the Baron and
Feme for life, the wife is remitted to her first estate by the Lease, the first
Lessor to his reuersion, and he may have action of waste if there because.

Yet here if the other which recovered in the false action bring an action of
waste, the Baron has no other remedy but to make default at the grand
distress, and then the wife received, may bar him by showing the fain^nes or
falsehood of his action whereby he recovered.

If after discontinuance, etc. the Baron take back estate to himself and his
Wife, and to a third person, this is a remitter for a moity, and for the other
moity the Feme must sue her cui in vita after the death of her Husband.

If after discontinuance of the Wives estate, the Baron go beyond the Seas,
and the discontinued lease the Land to the Wife for life, and deliver seisin;
if the Baron agree thereunto at his return, this is a remitter, for the Feme
shall be adjudged as an Infant, and not as a Feme sole in this Case, Quaere
(says Littleton) if the Baron at his return disagree, etc. whether this oust
the Feme of her remitter.

If the Baron discontinue, the discontinuee be diseised, and the disseisor
lease! the tenements to the Baron and feme for life, this is a remitter to the
Wife, though the Baron were consenting to the disseisin: But if the Baron and
Feme were both of Conen and Consent to the disseisin, the wife shall be a
disseiseresse and not remitted.

If the discontinuee make back estate to Baron and Feme by indenture upon
condition, viz. rendering rent, and for fault of payment re-entry, and because
the rent is ar^eare, the discontinuee does re-enter, upon this entry the woman
may have an assise of novel disseisin after the husbands decease, for the
condition by the remitter, was clean extinct in truth, though during couerture
the Baron was estopped, etc. so that he and his Wife could not have an assise
together.

If the Baron discontinue, take back estate to himself for life, the
remainder after his decease to his wife for her life, here is no remitter till
the husband be dead: but the Wife suruiuing, Frank Tenement is cast upon her
maine Tenant will she nill she by act of Law, and she is remittted, for though
she enter not, yet she can have none action against any body for this land;
but any man that has cause may have action of it against her, because a recipe
quod reddat is maintainable against tenant in ley, and that is the widow here:
But Tenant of Frank Tenement in fair, is one which has an actual seisin, and
upon disseisin thereof may maintain an assise.

The Statute of Gloucester perceived how by common Law a man may play fast and
loose with his Wives Inheritance by feoffement to discontinue her estate, and
to continue it again by resumption* and so to make it Inheritance or not to
his wives at his pleasure. But a feoffement does only bar the Wives entry,
what if to his feoffement the Baron aims warrantie, what if to his warrantie
assets, what if he levy a fine? Gloucester, ca. 3. anno 6. Ed. 1. is,

If Tenant by the Courtesy alion, etc. his son shall not be barred in a
Writ of Mortdancester by the deed of his Father, from whom none heritage is
descended, to demand and recover the mothers land, although his Fathers Charter
be with warrantie for him and his heirs: But if land descend to him de part
son pere, he shall be fore-closed, for the value of so much as is descended.

If after the Fathers death, any heritage descend from the Father, the Tenant
shall recover against him of the mothers seisin by a writ of indgement out of
the rolls, etc. which the Justices before whom the plea was pleaded, shall
grant to re-sommon the warrantie, as has been accustomed in other cases where
the voucher pleads ^iens a luy descen^r^ from him upon whose deed he is
vouched, etc.

And in like sort, the Issue of the son shall recover by Writ of Cousinage,
aile, or besaile. In like manner the Wives heir shall not be barred after the
death of his father and mother to demand by Writ of entry, his mothers
heritage, which his father in her life time aliened don't null fine est le uie in
court le roy.

SECT. XVII. Mr. Littletons gloss upon the Statute of Gloucester.
BEfore the Statute (says M. Littleton) if Tenant by the Courtesy did alien,
etc. in fee with warrantie, only this, after his discease, should bar the
Heir: for this was a collateral warrantie before the Statute. Since the
Statute it is clear, that whether tenant by the Courtesy, or tenant in the
right of his wife, do alien the wives heritace or marriage by his deed in
pais, which warrantie leaving none assets, it is no bar to the heir: But
what if the Baron alien by fine levied in the Kings court, with warrantie,
shall this bar the heir without any thing descended in value?

Newton Chief Justice of the Common place, thought it should by implication of
words: for he took don't null fine* etc. to be a general exception, and
therefore this alienation by fine with warrant to remain a collater all
warrantie, as it was at Common Law.

But Littleton gives his voice with them of contrary opinion which thought it
an obscure exposition to permit irreuocable alienation by Tenant in droit sa
feme only by his warranting concord without assetts when the Statute has in
the beginning taken it expressly from tenant by the Courtesy alienating by
Feoffement. Null fine therefore, is as much to say, null loyal fine rightfully
levied, viz. a fine levied by Baron and Feme, for it is true that before this
Statute was made (and somewhat after it too) there was no estate tail come
into England. A fine might then well and rightfully have been levied by Baron
and Feme, the Barons heir be bound with warrantie, and the wives heir barred
for ever: But now since the Statute if Baron and Feme had made a feoffement in
fee by deed in the Country, the woman's heir after decease of them both may
have a Writ of entry, sur cui in vita, for all the husbands warranty. And this
Statute of Gloucester, had left a fine no more force then a feoffement here, if
the final exception had not been; for when it comes with insemente and in
mesme le manner giving a writ of entry to avoid the alienation made by the
father in the mothers life time, this might be extended perhaps to a fine
levied by them both, for where the Baron and feme does alien by fine, its true
that the Baron does alien: Lest therefore a fine levied by Baron and Feme
should be thought to be infeeblished, this exception of a fine was necessary,
and it is to be intended of a fine loyal: For when the Justices know once that
tenant in right of his wife, comes to levy a fine only in his own name
they will not receive it.

SECT. XXI. Dyers Exposition.
LIttleton in this discourse seems to speak, as if he took a warrant
without assets made by tenant per Courtesy, or iure vxoris, to be no
collateral warrantie now a days, whereat I marvel. A man may have a vein
cut under his ear, that shall disable him from performing a great part of
manhood; but he shall be a man notwithstanding, and a horse may be so foundred
that he shall neither well go or stand, and yet a horse still: So this kind
of warrantie gelt or foundered by Statute remains collateral nomine and
specie, Dyer is so fo. 148. at Common Law (says he) garrantie by tenant per le
courtesy was collateral and uncore est come ieo intend: But it it is no bar
in Mortdancester, aiel or cousinage, without assets in fee simple descended ie
and facto, whereas before the Statute it was brought to be intended and
supposed, and this Statute is taken strictly: for the law at this day is come
ieo intend, if the heir do not enter upon the aliene of his father in vita
patris, that he shall be bound and barred of his entry by the warrantie.

If the Father be disseised, and release with warrantie, the heir shall be
barred without assets both of entry and action also, for this is none
alienation by tenant by the Courtesy. In the last point of the Statute of
Gloucester for alienation by the husband, in vita vxoris, etc. if he alien the
purchase of his wife with warranty: this is out of the Statute, for heritage or
marriage is not intended purchase by her.

So much my Lord Dyer, note that both he and Littleton stand upon the word
Marriage, which indeed is not in the letter of the Statute.

SECT. XXII. The Statute of 32. H. 8. ca. 28.
We have passed the pillars, not of Hercules but of Littleton in the Husbands
power over his wives Inheritance, now let us look plus vltra with Columbus.

King Henry the eight and the Parliament ordained in the year above specified,
That all Leases of Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments hereafter to be
made by Indenture sealed for years or for life, by any person or persons being
of the age of one and twenty years and seized in fee-simple or feetaile, in
the right of themselves, their Churches or wives, or jointly with their wives
of any estate of Inheritance made before Couerture or after, shall be good,
etc. against the Lessors, their wives heirs and Successors, etc. according to
the estate comprised in such Indenture of lease, in like manner and form, as
if the Lessors and every of them at time of the Lease making, had been seized
in pure fee-simple to her own only uses: prouiso, that this act extend not to
Leases made of Manors, Lands, Tenaments or Hereditaments, being in the hands
of any fermor or fermors by virtue of any old Lease, unless the old Lease be
expired, surrendered, or ended within one year next after making of the new
Lease, nor shall extend to any grantee of reuersion, etc* nor to any Lease of
any Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc. which has not been commonly let to ferme
or occupied by fermors by space of 20. years next before such Lease, nor to
any Lease made without impeachment of waste, nor to any Lease to be made for
above 21. years or three lives at the most from the day of the making thereof:
And upon every such Lease there shall be reserved yearly to the Lessors, their
heirs and successors to whom the Lands should have come after the Lessers
death, if such Lease had not been made, or to whom the reuersion shall
appertain so much or more, annual ferme or rent as has been most
accustomably yielded, etc. within twenty years next before such Leases were
made. And every person to whom the reuersion shall appertain after the death of
such Lessors or their heirs, shall have such remedies a advantages to all
intents, against the Lessees, their executors or assigns, as the Lessor might
have had: So that if the Lessor were seized in in special tail, etc. the
issue or heir of that special estate, shall have the reuersion, rent and
services, etc.

Prouiso, that the wife be made party to every Lease made by her Husband of
any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, being the wives Inheritance,
and that every such Lease be by Indenture in the name of the Husband and the
Wife, and she to seal the same: And that the ferme be reserved to the Husband
and wife, and to the heirs of the Wife according to her estate of Inheritance:
And that the Husband shall not in any wise alien, discharge, grant or give any
the rent, or any part thereof, longer then during Couerture, without it be by
fine levied by the Husband and wife, but the rent shall remain, descend,
reuert, or come, etc in such sort and manner as the land should have done if no
such Lease had been made provided that this act extend not to give liberty of
taking more fermes, etc. then before was lawful, etc. nor enable Vicar, or
Parson to make or grant their Lease of Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tithes,
etc. or Hereditaments belonging to their Church or Uicarage: And it is further
enacted that all Leases made within three years before the twel^th of April
in the 31 year of H. 8. made by Indenture sealed by person or persons of full
age, of whole memory, not unlawfully coacted, nor under Covert Baron, for term
of years, of any Manors, Lands, tenements, or Hereditaments, whereof the
Lessor or Lessors were sei^ed in any estate of Inheritance, to their only use
at the time of their Lease-making, and whereof the Lessees, their executors or
assigns at time of this act Making, were in possession by virtue of the Lease,
no cause of re-entry or forfeiture being had or made, shall be good and
effectual in law against the Lessors, their heirs and successors according to
the covenants and agreements specified in the Indenture, etc. so that there be
reserved to the Lessors their heirs, successors, etc. as much yearly rent as
was at any time yielded within 20. years before making of any such lease, or
else the Leases to be of none other effect then they were of before this act.

And moreover it is ordained that no fine, feoffement, act or acts to be made,
suffered, or done by the husband only of any Manors, Lands, etc. being the
Inheritance or freehold of the wife during Couerture between them, shall in
any wise be, or make any discontinuance or be prejudicial to the said wife or
her heirs, or to such as shall claim right, title or interest by her death:
But that she or her heirs, or they to whom such right or title shall
appertain, after her decease shall and may lawfully enter into such Manors,
Lands, etc. any such fine, feoffement or other act notwithstanding, except
fines only levied by Baron and Feme, whereunto the wife is privy and a party.
Provided that this clause extend not to give any liberty to any Wife or her
heirs to avoid any Lease hereafter to be made of any her Inheritance by her
husband and her self for 21. years or under, or for three lives at the most,
whereupon yearly rent shall be reserved vt supra: Provided also that this act
extend not to any Lease heretofore made by Ecclesiastical or other person by
Co^e^t or Common-seale, which Lease is made void by act of Parliament, nor to
make good any Lease of any Ecclesiastical person made by c^uent, seal or
otherwise, or of any other person attainted of ^reason* etc.

SECT. XXIII. The Exposition.
THis Law in the first part is affirmative, or I may say leasatiue, a leasing
Law or Statute, Tenant in fee-simple, iure mero suo nothing restrained by it:
No more is Tenant iure vxoris, but he may make a Lease for years, to continue
till the last hour of Platoes great year, or till King Arthur come again
(for all this Statute) for no greater rent then three bundle of bulrushes, as
well as he might before although her land were never leased before, since Noa^s
flood, and such a Lease shall bind him during Couerture.

But if the Husband make a Lease by paroll or by poll deed, or by Indenture,
and the wife not party; or if the Land were not informer times demised, or if
the ancient rent or more be not reserved, then as the earth stays in the
worlds center upon nothing but Gods providence and permission* the Demisee
leans upon no Statute, but hangs at the wives courtesy, ponderibus librata
suis, as at Common Law.

SECT. XXIV. Law before the Statute.
HOw that was, ye shall perceive by the cases following; If before the Statute
of quia emptores* tenant in fee, iure vxoris infeoffed a stranger expressing no
tenure, the feoffes was to hold of the Baron by such services as he and the
Wife held by of the Lord Paramount. If the Baron and Feme had joined in a
Feoffement to hold of the Baron, etc. th expressed tenure had been void, and
the Feoffee must have held of them both by such services as they held over, etc.

If the Baron in this case had died, and the Wife accepted the rent in her
viduity, this acceptance here barred her for ever from avoiding the Feoffement
by Writ of cui in vita. If Tenant iure vxoris and his Wife, had made a
Feoffement to hold of the Wife, the Feoffor should have held of them both, and
if the Wife had died, the Feoffor was to hold of the Baron till the feoffement
were avoided by sur cui v^a, Par. 126.

Again, if before this Statute of 32. H. 8. Tenant in fee iuro vxoris, and his
wife had joined in exchange for other lands in fee, and the exchange being
executed, the Husband had dyed; now the Feme by entering in upon the Land given
her upon the exchange, should be barred for ever from defeating the exchange.
But if it had been made by the Baron alone, she might have defeated it
notwithstanding her entry* for that could give noseisin by force of the
exchange to her that was neither party nor privy to it, Par. fo. 8.

And if a man seized in right of his Wife, etc. make a Lease for life rendering
rent with a letter of Attorney to his Wife to make livery, the Wife delivers
seisin, the Baron dies, she accepts the rent, the may have a cui in vita by
the common Law, for the acceptance here makes not the Lease good, because the
livery which the wife made, was as servant to her Master and only the act of
the Baron, Par. 41. we have concerning acceptances some plentiful Learning,
21. H. 6. fo. 24. Ascu says there, That if Lessee for years be in arrerage
of rent and die, his Executors shall pay the arrerages if they occupy the
Ferme, contra, if they waiue possession, and so if a Lease for life be made to
Baron and Feme, the Baron commits waste and dies, the wife shall be subject to
an action for waste done by the husband if she occupy the land; contra, if she
waiue the possession, and by Paston in the end of the case, if Baron seized
^ure vxoris* make a lease for life of the land, and die, the wife can have no
action of waste, for she was not party to the lease, and ex hoc sequitur, that
a woman upon acceptance of rent of lease for years made by her husband without
being her self a party, is not bound, but she may enter: And albeit the
lease were for life, yet acceptance barreth not a cui in vita, if she were not
party, etc. 26. H. 8. ^^. 2. per curiam, if Baron and Feme sell the Wives
land, make feoffement, and the Vendee by the Indenture of sale covenants to pay
ten pounds annually to the Baron and Feme during their lives, if the Baron die
and the feme accept the ten pounds, this is no bar in cui* in vita, no more
then acceptance of rent after Marriage dissolved, where the Baron a per luy
made a feoffement or lease.

But acceptance of rent, etc. where they both made a feoffement or lease for
life is a bar of all actions. I will hunt for no far fetched learning of
acceptances: but this I find, if a man lease his land to ^. 8. to hold at will
by certain rent, none acceptance of the rent here, after the Leassors death
can bar the Heir of entry, or make any ^ffirmance of the lease, for
acceptance can neither make good a lease determined by entry, or a lease
already void without entry by the lessors death.

And he that leaseth to hold at will ends that will when he ends his life:
but a lease for years by an Abbot or Tenant in tail, is not by their death
presently void, but voydable, and the successor or Issue by acceptance of the
rent affirms the Lease; So does the Feme affirm the Lease made for years, by
her husband of her Land, by acceptance when she is become sole: and see Dyer,
5. Mar. 159. by the opinion of three Justices, Dyer, Stamford and Brown, if
Baron and Feme had made a Lease by Indenture rendering rent, and the Baron
before rent day die, and the Feme before the day take another husband, who
accepts the rent and dies, this acceptance shall bind the Wife: but note and
take with you this peculiar rule, where acceptance binds her that she be a
party to the Lease, and that by writing, for if a man makes a Lease for years
without deed, of land, which he holds in right of his wife, this was merely
void toward the wife, so soon as the Husband is dead, and acceptance of the
rent is to no purpose, Plo. 431. per Bromley.

Again 9. H. 6. If tenant in Fee iure vxoris make a Lease for years and the
wife dies, the Lessee shall pay the rent until the Wives heir enter, for so
long there is a continuance of a Fermour by force of the Lease; but none ^^owry
lies for the Husband, because he has no reuersion. And an action of trespass
vi and armis may be against him, but he cannot have action of debt for the rent.

But to come home to the very brinke of the Statute, nota (says Dyer) That the
common opinion amongst all Justices at this day is, If Baron and Feme make a
Lease for term of years, before the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. by Paroll
reserving rent to them both, if the wife when she is become sole, accept the
rent at the Fermors hands, this binds her not from anoyding the Lease, if it
were not by Indenture, for her assent was requisite at the beginning, and that
ought to have appeared by deed Dyer, 1. Mar. fo. 91. The same Learning is, 4.
Mar. fol. 146.

When a Feme Covert departs from her Land the intent, consideration and cause
ought to be expressed in scripture to prove her consent to the whole Manor;
for it is agreed for Law, That if before the Statute, Baron and Feme had made a
Lease by paroll of the Wives Land for term of years, rendering rent, though
after the Barons death she had accepted the rent, yet she might out the Termer,
because her priuitie to the Lease appears not per escript; likewise if a feme
covert suffer a recovery or fine of her Land, it shall be intended by Law to be
to her own use, if there appear none other intent expressly by Writing.

And none auerment shall be taken of intent or consideration in such Case other
then the Indenture specifieth.

SECT. XXV. Observations upon the very Statute*
I Have showed what strength a Demise or Lease for years made of the Wives
Land by Baron and Feme, or by the Baron only was of before the Statute, and is
of being made since the Statute without the appointed circumstance and
solemnity: Now a little to the very Statute* As I said before, the ordinance
is that Leases shall be good, etc. But not directly that any term shall be
boyd, though void of strength by this Statute they may be many ways, as
appears by the prouiso.

Note that the forerunning Lease, Demise or occupation by Fermors must be
derived from one that had Inheritance (for if at the end of a primitive Lease
made by the Lord of whom the Tenancie is holden, or by the Kings grantee or
committee of wardship, or by tenant in Dower, or by Tenant per le Courtesy,
some of which may by good possibility have had power to make Leases by space
of twice twenty years, a tenant in tail makes a Lease, this succeeding demise
has no virtue or ingredience of the Statute though it seem to have good
correspondence with it; And it is doubted whether a Ferme continued twenty
years by the Donors demise, be sufficient or no, to make room for a new Lease.

This for ought I perceive is by a prudent interpretation of the Constitution
rather upon equity and intent, then upon the Text, tenants in fee simple or
tailed which transmit their possession to their dear offspring, will not make
Leases to any great disadvantage of any of their own babes or blood, and
therefore their Leases may well be ^mitated.

But like enough it is that Tenant per le courtesy, or in Dower, or in right
of his own or in another man's Seignory, may Lease away their estate, for a
proud fine and a little rent: Nay ye may be sure, that if they might set the
example, they should be gotten to make Leases for esperuiers annual, and small
yearly income in hope that my young Master at his full age, should be content
with the old rent, and a kennell of (...)ds: King Henry's and the Parliaments
meaning was not therefore, that their Leases should be any patterns for
reservation of rent by Tenant in Tail, or as I suppose in the right of his
Wife. If Baron and Feme make a Lease by Indenture for twenty years to commence
at Michaelmas it might seem doubtful by the book 7. and 8. Eliz. Dyer, 246.
whether it be a good Lease, by this Statute.

If Baron and Feme by their Indenture make a Lease to commence after the Wives
death* I think this no good Lease, according to the Statute, for twenty one
years ought to be from the making of the Lease, etc. If the Baron and Feme die,
the Heir is not bound to accept the rent or allow the Lease. And though he do
accept it, if the Land were tailed, he may enter notwithstanding: vide 10.
Eliz. Dyer, 279.

If Baron and Feme make a Lease by Indenture, etc. for 31. years, quaere, the
Baron dying, whether this be a good Lease, for 21. years or no, I think it is
not, but stands merely at Common Law. For the first Prouiso of this act is
that it shall not have respect or extend to Leases made for above 21. years.

When King Henry the eight in 31. of his Reign by Parliament had made void all
Leases to be made of Lands, which should afterward come to him, if any Leases
former were in esse, or being, with prouiso viz if he which had an old
vnexpired lease, took a new that he should hold for 21. years, from making of
the new Lease, so that it exceeded not twenty one years, it was admitted in
Falmestones Case, that such a Lease made for fifty years, was good for 21.
Plo. 110.

And when Thomas Vmpton after ( 32. Henry the 8.) ca. 1. which gave power to
Tenant per Chivalry to devise two parts of his land, had devised a whole
manor in fee, before 34. Ed. 3. 5. Hen. 8. of explanation, which will by the
said Statute of explanation, was referred to the Law, the device was adjudged
good for two parts, contra Kelwais opinion, as you may see 4. and 5. Phil. and
Mar. Dyer, 150. But these cases differ far from the former as ye may find
by the comparing the Statutes: If after a Demise by Baron and Feme for twenty
shillings of usual rent* the husband release all his right, except twelve
pence, etc. or grant that the Lessee shall hold dispunishable for waste, the
Wife accepting twelue-pence post mortem viri, may distraine for the rest
notwithstanding, and have an action of waste, Dyer 304.

Note, before this Statute was made the Count Bridge water being tenant in
tail, the remainder to Basset in tail, he bound himself in recognizance to
the said Basset to make no alienation, grant, sale, conueyance or exchange,
otherwise then for his own life, it was a question after the statute,
whereunto Basset and all men were parties, whether the Earl might now make a
lease for xxi. years without forfeiture of his Recognizance, resolved by
Bromely, Portman and Harris sergeants that he could not, but if he did make
such a lease, they thought that neither he in remainder or the donour should
ever avoid it by any dying sans issue, 33 H. 8. f. 49. in Dyer, who, concludes
and so shall the statute be expounded, for so was the intent, a meaning of the
makers, yet the text has no word of donours, or of them in remainder, I hear
that law is taken now to be clean contrary in the last point viz, that
remainders and reuersions are freed from this act, and I believe it the rather
because 34. H 8. ca. 20. that frustrateth fained recoueries against tenant in
tail, where the King is in reuersion or remainder, in the provision for
strength of leases, made according to the Statute, is only against the Heir or
heirs of tenant in tail, etc.

The last part of the Statute. SECT. XXVI.
THe Last part of the Statute is negative against (...) continuance, which how
far it prevailed before or after the act, the former instructions, with the
act it self, do put in some cleerenesse. But a case or two will make it more
plain, Amy Townsend seized of a Manor in tail, take a husband, the husband
made a feoffement, 29. of H. 8. to diverse persons in fee, to the use of
himself and his wife for life of them two, with remainders of use over. After
this Statute made, Amy and her husband made a Lease for 21. years of part of
this Manuor, according to this act of 32. H 8 Amy died first, then her husband
died* the question is, whether Amy were remitted to her former estate tail by
virtue of 27. H. 8. ca. 10. and so the Lease good, (...) was argued on the one
part, that reduction of the possession by the statute 27. etc. was of effect
alone with their feoffement, and because this possession was regained without
either tort or folly in the wife, whose agreement whether she would or no, was
included in her husbands agreement during Couerture, she must needs when
Couerture was dissolved, till disclaimer, or some act done to the contrary be
^diudged in possession, there was then no tenant against whom to bring her cui
in vita, if she should not bring her cui in vita to purge the first wrong, she
must needs be remitted, if she were remitted, this cause must needs be good.
And although the Statute of 27. settle possessions according to quality and
quantity of the use, yet it seems not that so it shall continue, but they
may change by a former ancient right, for the Act being affirmative takes not
the Common Laws operation in remitters: besides that, it has an express
saving of eygne right: further, if that the wife should not be remitted, this
inconvenience follows, the Baron might charge the Wives inheritance with a
rent, to the whole yearly value, or be bound in a Statute merchant, etc. and
then making a feoffement to his wives use, she should hold the land charged
after his death. To this it was answered on the other part, that the feoffement
at the time thereof made a discontinuance, which puts Amy to her cui in vita,
which because she has not used, but is come to possession only by force of
27. etc. she must take it only by the manner, order, and limitation of the
same Statute, Couerture, or infancy, being no whit material, because the
Statute has none exception. The words are in manner, form, quality and
condition of the use, etc. and because this was a new Constitution of that
which was not at the Common Law, it has not the force of a negative implying
in null auter manner then is therein described: Amy is therefore a joint
purchaser with her husband in estate for life, and not in or by descent of
estate ta^^e: Now to say that her right and estate should change by silent
operation of the Law after she was repossessed, that cannot be, for the whole
entry is tolled, and if she be not remitted by her first* possession and
reprisall, she is never remitted.

If a Disseisour make feoffement to the use of the Disfeisee, and after the
Disseisor enter, he shall be remitted, but before his entry he shall not be
remitted, for he shall be adjudged in possession by virtue of the Statute, but
so soon as he enters he is remitted, for his entry was never tolled: But Amy
Townesends entry was clean taken away, by the discontinuance, etc. further if
she should be remitted by the Statute of 27. the remainders should be all
destroyed contrary to the text of the same Statute. And to the inconue^iencie
alleged, if she shall not be remitted she shall hold incombred with the
charges of her Husband, that is none at all, for Amy after her husbands death
might have disagreed and relinquished the use with possession annexed to it, by
bringing a cui in vita, against him next in remainder; for in him by such
disagreement or vser of action had the remainder vested, as though the woman
had been a Monk or dead person in Law, or never named in the limitation: If
the use had been to Amy Townsend in fee, she might have brought her cui in
vita against the Feoffor or his heir, by which they shall be Tenants to her
action, and so might the in^umbrance have been avoided* for when a feoffement
is to the use of one which refuses the use, it shall be in effect as if the
use had been limited to Paul's steeple or to Charing-Crosse, all falling or
reflecting because the Feoffor has no recompense or consideration to his use,
and he shall be Tenant to every Precipe: It was further agreed, that as the
Cause fell out, Amy Townesend could not be remitted, though her possession had
returned by refeoffeme^t at the Common Law, because Sir Roger Townesend her
Husband outliued her, for 21. Ed. 3. the Case is, Baron made a Feoffement, the
Feoffee ^einfeoffe the Baron and Feme and heirs of the wife, she woman dyed,
the Heir entered, the Baron brought an Assise, which was judged maintainable:
for whilst the Baron lived he was tenant to the heirs action; And the the
Judgment was, that Amy Townsend was never remitted; the reason was indeed
because there is nothing in the Statute of 27. to make a remitter: for the
clause of saving of Dr^its, Titles and Actions, is of such right, etc. as was
before the Statute, and not of any right, title, or action, risen since or
after it: Now note that as a Lease made for twenty years by Baron and feme
Tenants for life binds not any remainder by the Statute, which speaks only
that Leases made by Tenants of Inheritance, shall bind heirs and Successors,
so I would infer that if the Leassors inheritance be determined, whether it
were iure vxoris in tail or otherwise in tail, the remainder must be free
from the Statute: But note that the point which made me choose this case for
illustration of the Statute, is this, Amy Townesend was judged not remitted,
because she had no title of entry, but only by the 27, etc. of uses, and
therefore she must needs claim her possession, according to the use.

But put Case the Feoffement had been since the Statute of 32* the Law would
then have judged a remitter; for by Littleton, where any persons entry is
congeable, which takes estate for life or in fee, it is a remitter, if the
reprisall be not by Indenture, or record, or some matter of estoppell, for
always where there is a double right or title, the Law must judge for the
best, as well in the entry as in the possession, and an Indenture made by Baron
and Feme is none estoppell to the Wife by the Common Law.

Concerning the Case 21. Ed. 3. Wilby which gave judgment, thought the Barons
advantage a hinderance to the Remitter, yet if he died the wife should be
remitted: But if you look, Brook remitter 21. and 41. ye shall find that the
Feme was maintenant remitted though to save the husbands advantage of warranty,
they would not so judge it, quod mirum says Brook, and quaere quia contrarium
a ceo iour.

SECT. XXVII. Whether acceptance or taciturnity may not take away an entry at
this day.
NO fine, feoffement or other act done by the husband only shall make any
discontinuance or be prejudicial to the wife, but that she may enter, etc.
what if Baron and Feme make a feoffement or Lease for life, by solemn
Indentures with Livery and seisin clear, this takes not away at this day the
wives entry after Couerture ended. But admit when she is a widow, she
refuses to enter and accept payment of rent or performance of covenants: is
not now both her entry, and her action gone also, even as in case of an Infant,
which makes such a feoffement or Lease, and accepts the rent when he is of full
age: The question must be answered out of the Statute, and in mine opinion
there is nothing in it to aid a woman after such ratification by acceptance
volenti non fit iniuria, nec inuitis confirmantur beneficia. A Lease by Baron
and Feme per Indenture is not void presently by the Barons death. But whereas
before she was driven to suit and action, she may now enter by the Statute,
yet it compels her not to enter, neither ca^teth any freehold upon her. In
like manner if the Baron alone alien his Wives Land by fine with proclamation,
the Wife may enter by force of this Statute, but per opinionem totius curiae
Ed. 6. Dyer fo. 72. If she suffer five years to pass and expire without entry
or vser of action she and her heirs shall be barred for ever, for this Statute
of 32. though it limit no time for the woman's entry, yet it speaks nothing of
fines with proclamation, and therefore it takes not the general Law made 4.
Hen. 7. cap. 24. of fines, with proclamation. And see Sir Ed. Cokes 8. Rep. fo.
72. in Grenlies case.

SECT. XXVIII. Of Fines.
SEe further the case 18. Eliz. Dyer 351. Land holden in socage was given to a
man and his wife in tail, the remainder in see to the Barons right heirs, the
Baron alone levied a fine with proclamation to his own use, and afterward by
his last will and Testament in writing, devised the Land to his wife for life,
the remainder over to a Stranger upon condition to pay certain rent annually
out of the land with Clause of distress, etc. the Baron died, the wife
entering and claiming estate only for life paid rent according to the will and
died. Now the question is, wh^ the Issue in tail or Deuisee of the remainder
should have this Land, Et per iudicium curiae. Partly because his mother had
waued the estate tail, and although she had not done so, yet because he could
not convey his title and descent, but as well as heir to his father as to his
mother, the fine with proclamations levied only by his father bars him: So
far goes the Book. And you may observe, that it bars the wife if she will.

See also 5. Eliz. 224 in Dyer, the husband levied a fine with proclamations of
his own land, and after five years died, his widow continuing sole, of full
age, whole memory, out of prison, within compass of the four Seas, and does
not make any demand or claim of dower, within 5. years after her husbands
death ( quaere if he which pleads in bar of Dower, ought expressly to auerre
this:) The question was, if she were barred of Dower, Dyer tells us termino
Hillarij 4. H. 8. rotulo 344. such a bar pleaded was admitted good, for the
ground of Dower was the Husbands seisin, and the action given by his death. So
that it is within the second saving of 4. H 7. which preserves to all which
are not parties pursuit of right grown after the fine, by or upon cause before
the fine, so that they take it within five years.

In Plowden fo. 373. Justice Dyer arguing Stowell and the Lord Zouches case,
affirms the learning which I have recited out of his own book: But Plowden
inserts his note, that he takes the Law to be otherwise, and that a woman is
bound to no time of her Dower, after such a fine, for (says he) the aim of 4.
H. 7. as against future droicts is wholly against such rights, as either
suffered wrong before the fine, or by the fine, and in this case of Dower, the
title is all after the fine, and stands well in accord with it, not touched
by the Statute, the woman therefore may demand when she lists.

So if there be a cessor begun, a year before a fine with proclamations
continued a year after, the Lord is not restreyned at the end of 5. or 15.
years to bring a cessauir. so he says likewise, if a morgage be disseised, a
fine lenied by the Disseisor with Proclamations passed, yet the morgager paying
his money to the Morgagee may at any time, within 5. years or more, after the
payment re-enter. When Giants fight, Pigmees may not part them: but howsoever
some incertainty arise in every corner of the Law, this is here certain, that
a fine levied by the husband only, of his own land, tolleth not the wives
action of Dower, if she come in time: And a fine so levied, by him, of the
wives Land, takes not away her seasonable entry; but the gulf that swalled up
entry, action right, and all possibility of reducement by Law is a fine
lawfully levied by baron and feme, where (forsooth) because a woman is examined
by a Justice or one that has a Dedimus potestatem, etc. and acknowledges her
free consent and agreement, what cannot men get wives to do if they list, she
shall be barred and for ever excluded of a great many acres of ground, for a
few kisses and a gay gown. That is a fine finem litibus imponens, for till it
be done and dispatched, the poor woman can have no quiet her husband keeps
such a iawling.

SECT. XXIX. Of common recoueries.
AS for tricks of Common recoueries I perceive not how that can be greatly
prejudicial to women: for first if a man will suffer a feigned recovery of his
own Land to defeat his wives Dower, she may falsi^^e it, etc. see the
Eiectione firmae per Ear against Snow, Plowd. fo. 515. the baron there being
tenant in tail, his wife having nothing in the Land, he and his wife suffered
a common recovery with voucher to his own use, etc. the opinion of all the
Justices was, that though the woman suruiued, yet the estate tail shall be
barred, for it was found precisely by verdict that the wife had no interest in
the Inheritance: The baron therefore, which alone lost estato tail by the
recovery, might recover alone estate tail in value. But as for the wife, no
man can say what estate she had; nor whether she should have a quod ei
deforceat, or a Writ of right, if she had lost the land by default. So
likewise having lost by the recovery, nothing or no man can tell what her
recompense in value must be: She was named (said the Justices) upon intent to
bar her of Dower, and such is the meaning of husbands which will have their
wives named in such recoueries: but clear the estate tail is barred, if in
this case the wife might sue execution in value against the vouchee by
estoppell, yet the issue in tail should not be concluded by the act of his
Father, but he might oust her of that which she had so recovered in value, etc.
see Sir E. Cokes 10. Rep. 43. a. in Mary Portingtons ca. that the usage has
been always upon common recoueries against Baron and Feme to examine the wife,
and to grant a dedimus potestatem, to take upon her examination her Conusance
as in case of a Fine.

But let the case be, Tenant iure vxoris is agreed with John a Style to suffer
a recovery of his wives Lands to certain uses comprised in Indentures betwixt
them two, a Writ of entry in the post is brought against the Baron and Feme,
which appear in person or by Attorney, calling to warranty the common vouchee,
a man well worth a couple of new roasted eggs, which reenters into warrantie,
Then after declaration and imparlance, at the day of the appearance shall the
demandant recover against Baron and Feme, and they in right of the Wife shall
recover against the Vouchee of such lands as he has, or is like to have when
time has a hairy crown: shall this recovery or possibility of unlikely
recovery in value bind the wife when the Baron is dead whether she will or no:
by Brooks novel cases, 23. H. 8. pl. 37. it seems that such a recovery did
then bind the wife to: but without examination me thinks it should not bind
the wife: The Statute of 32. is that none Act of the Barons shall make
discontinuance, etc. except only a Fine by Baron and Feme, Ergo such a
recovery notwithstanding though it be executed the wife may enter. See 23.
Eliz. cap. 3. and there is a saving to every Feme covert or her heirs her
Writ of error to be sued within 7. years after she become sole, for reuersing
of Fines and recoueries past, if they must be reuersed by error, it seems
without error, they were very dangerous. For a rule to conclude withal, take
this, That wheresoever the Baron does any thing out of Court, which thing he
and his Wife were compellable to do, it shall be deemed and construed to be
the act of both of them, as if the Baron seized in right of his Wife, or
jointly with his wife, assign Dower to another woman, it binds, and so
granting of a rent for equality of partition and atturnement by the Baron
alone, binds the Wife.

SECT. XXX. of Iointures.
I Will enter no further into the stream of Fines and recovery, they require
a cunning swimmer: And a short Discourse cannot possibly make any plain
discovery of them; otherwise this place would have borne the Doctrine fitly
about making of ioyntures, for all husbands are not so unkind or untrusty as
to endamage their Wives by alienation of their Lands: but contrariwise the
greatest part of honest, wise and sober men, are of themselves careful to
purchase somewhat for their Wives, if they be not, yet they stand sometimes
bound by the woman's parents to make their Wives some Ioynture.

If husband, Father, Mother and all would be unmindful of provision in this
point, yet very many of our English women have with their singular virtue, so
much wisdom of their own, as to foresee for themselves, and discern the
difference between that which we call Dower and Ioynture: Ioyntures says
Dyer 4. M. fo. 148* are made for the most part to Baron and Feme jointly, or to
the Feme only, this also is comprehended under the term Ioynture before
Marriage or after, for sustentation of the charge and necessities of
Espousalls; and they are made causa matrimon^^ and gratis* without the
consideration of money, bargain or any thing saving for love and affection of
the Baron or his ancessors, and these Iointures are a present possession: But
Dower must be tarried for till the Husband be dead: It must be demanded,
sometime sued, for sometime neither with suit or demand obtained. Again, Dower
was subject to forfeiture in times past, by felony done and proved in the Baron
by the Barons treason, by the Wives elopement, and every question in the
validity of Marriage makes a scruple of Dower, all which inconveniences being
wisely foreseen, women did learn to become joint purchasors with their
husbands of such estates, as would avoid all weathers, and a good while they
did enjoy Ioyntures and Dowers after their Husbands were dead; against which
the Statute of 27. H. 8. of uses, ordeineth as follows.

SECT. XXXI. A part of 27. H. 8. ca. 10.
IT is provided, etc. that where any persons have purchased or have estate of
lands, etc. made to them and their Wives, and to the heirs of the Husband, or
to the Husband and wife, and the heirs of their two bodies, or to the heirs
of one of their bodies, or to the husband and wife for term of their lives, or
for the life of the wife, or where any such estate has been or shall be made,
to any husband and his wife or to other persons their heirs and assigns to
the use and behoof of the said husband and wife, or to the use of the wife for
the ioynture of the wife, that in every such case the woman having such a
Ioynture, etc. shall not claim any Dower of the residue of any Hereditaments
that were her Husbands, by whom she had such a Ioynture, or make any demand
thereof against the Tenants of the said lands, etc. provided that if any woman
be lawfully expulsed or euicted from her said Ioynture or from any part thereof
without fraud or Couen, by lawful entry, action or discontinuance of her
Husband, that every such woman shall be endowed of as much of the residue of
her Husbands hereditaments as the Lands or Tene^ents so euicted shall amount or
extend unto: Provided that nothing in this act extend to hurt or prejudice any
woman heretofore married, concerning her right, title, use, interest or
possession which she may claim or pretend to have for her Ioynture or Dower in
any Lands, etc. of her late Husband being now disseised: Provided also, that if
any Wife have or hereafter shall have any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
unto her given or assured after Marriage for term of her life, or otherwise in
Ioynture (except the assurance be made to her by act of Parliament, and the
Wife after that fortune to out-liue her husband, in whose time the Ioynture was
made, that the Wife so ouer-liuing, shall and may at her pleasure refuse the
Lands appointed or assured in Ioynture, and thereupon have, demand and take her
Dower by Writ or otherwise, according to the Common Law.

SECT. XXXII. The Exposition.
THe first observance is that no estate gained by matter of conclusion, shall
be deemed a purchasement within this Statute, or be auerred to be made pro
iunctura: But the Statute must be intended of true and substantial estates.
Therefore if an owner or tenant of certain land make answer to Baron and Feme
in an action of waste, or if he pray aid of them, as if they were seized of
the reuersion, or if he bring a quod ei deforceat, against them as if he had
none other then a particular estate; though these things were purposed for
Ioynture, yet they seclude not a Woman from right or demand of Dower: Releases
such as inure to make estates, as where a ioynt-tenant releaseth to his
Companion, or such as go to enlarge an estate, as where he in reuersion
releaseth to his particular Tenant, may well make and accomplish a Ioynture:
but such Releases as work no more but un mitter le droit, as where he that is
disseised by Baron and Feme, releaseth to the woman the disseiseresse, etc. are
no purchase intended within this Statute, for it is meant only of such
purchases as the wife has by gift either of her husband or of some other body,
and not of such estates, as she has gained by her own wrong: likewise is it
of releases that go by way of extinguishment, as where a Disseisor infeoffeth
Baron and Feme, and the Disseisee releaseth to one of them, this is alike
available to both, but this release can make no Ioynture, for there is no
estate conveyed by it.

Per iusticiarios, 6. Ed. 6. Brook titles Dower, a devise of Land by the
Husband to his Wife in his last will and testament, is no bar of Dower, for
it is but a benevolence and no Ioynture: Yet in M. Brograues reading it was
holden contrary, 5. Eliz. Dyer, 220. the case is, that a man seized of Lands in
tail, and of some other in fee-simple, holden in socage, deuiseth the third
part of all his Lands to his wife for her life, in full recompense of all such
Ioynture and Dower as she shall have or may claim, etc. the Wife without any
assignement or vser of Action of Dower enters after his death, into that which
was holden in Feesimple to a value of a third part of all, and the opinion was,
she had determined her election and barred her self of Dower.

But this Case makes nothing to the variance or question, because the Legacy
was with an express exclusion of Dower, etc. But see Sir Ed. Cokes 4. Rep. fo.
4. a. in Vernons case, resolved that unless it be expressed in the will to be
for her Ioynture it shall be no satisfaction for her Dower: See 38. H. 8. Dyer
61. William Whorewhod seized of Land, to the value of 360. pound, of which 60.
pound was by joint purchase to him and his Wife during Couerture, devised, that
his wife should have the third part of all his land during her life, with those
Lands, which she had in Ioynture, the assignement to be made by his executors,
if it were not contrary to Law, this Widow refused her Iointure of 60. pound,
and demand a third part of the whole inheritance; viz. 120. pound as her
Legacy, with a third part of that which remained for her D^wer, viz. 80.
pound: at last by agreement it was ordered and decreed in the Court of Wards,
that she should have the Legacy, vt supra, and forty pound over for Dower:
This Case decideth the question, for it is against the latter opinion express,
ideo quaere. Brook notes also Dower 69. that per Iusticiarios, if a man make
his Wife ioynt-purchaser with him after Couerture, of any estate of Frank
Tenement, unless it be to him and his Wife and their Heirs in feesimple, it
is a bar of Dower if she agree to the Ioynture post mortem viri, otherwise it
is of fee-simple, for thereof the Statute says nothing. But M. Brograue in his
reading did maintain for all the foresaid opinion, that where fee-simple is
conveyed to a Feme for Ioynture expressly, it is a good Iointure within compass
of this Statute: for if estate in tail or for life be a good Iointure, and
exclude Dower by acceptance, etc. a fortiore, fee-simple shall bar. And see
in Vernons case reported by Sir Ed. Coke 4. Rep. fo. 3. b. that the case in
Brook is mis-reported and the Lord Dyer is against it, and confuteth Brooks
reasons of this opinion.

He relied also upon dame Dennis case, 8. Eliz* Dyer 248. An Indenture was
made 36. H^n. 8. Betwixt Sir Maurice Dennis and Elizabeth Statham, that in
consideration of expected Marriage, and other things reasonable the said Sir
Maurice and his heirs, should from thenceforth stand seized of certain Lands,
etc. to the use of himself and his heirs until Marriage were had and
solemnized, and then to the use and behoof of the said Maurice and Elizabeth,
and their heirs after Marriage, Sir Maurice dyed, entered into the Lands, and
demanded Dower of his other Lands, it was a question whether this conueyance
and matter, vt supra, with auerrement that it was for a Ioynture, should bar
her of Dower, Catline, Saunders, and Dyer were against the Dower by equity of
the Statute, which in the third prouiso is of Ioyntures for term of life or
otherwise: Against them were Justice Brown and Whiddon, and they resembled
this Statute to another of the 11. H. 7. ca. 20. which cannot be extended to
fee-simple, but is meant and expressed only of estate for Life, or in tail
severally or jointly with the Baron.

But Justice Dyer as it seems by M. Brograue upon diligent conference with
sage men of Law, did strongly adhere to his former opinion, that this
conueyance with auerment made a good Ioynture: Ye shall find again, 14. and
15. El^z* he affirms for Law, that where Fee-simple is limited over to a
Wife, or estate made to Baron and Feme in fee, it is auerrable pro iunctura, if
the conueyance he not expressly contrary: See a question for auerment, Dyer 226.

One that had an use in Fee of certain Lands, to the value annual of 100.
pound, took a wife, 22. H. 8. and after espousals at request of his wives
friends and Parents, caused the Feoffees to execute estate to him and his wife,
and to the heirs of himself of parcel of this Land to twenty pound value,
etc. He then purchased other Lands, and after 27. dyed seized of all: The wife
by taking rents and profits of the twenty pound land agreed to her estate
therein, and afterward brought a Writ of Dower, detertia par^e residui omnium
terrarum, etc. because the Statute is expressed of Iointure, and the deed
whereby estate was made to the baron and feme has no mention of Ioynture or
Dower, quaere, whether this matter generally alleged without auerment, that it
was pro junctura* vel pro do^e, shall bar or no: See the Institutions of Sir
Ed. Coke, ^o. 36. much matter concerning Ioynture.

In all conueyance or purchase for Ioynture, unless it be by fine, or common
recovery, he which makes the estate must be a person able to convey etc. at
the time of Ioynture making, or else it is not good.

He must not therefore be non compos mentis, attaint of treason, an alien
borne, or under age* but the nonage of the Wife, is not material whether the
Ioynture be made, before Couerture or after, if she accept it, agreed at M.
Fi^ches reading.

SECT. XXXII. The Words, Land, Tenement or Hereditament.
LAnd is intended as well of pasture, meadow, woods, heath, etc. as of arable,
and lands covered with water or surrounded is within the Statute: So is a Town
an Isle, etc. but vestura terrae, or an upper Chamber cannot make a Ioynture as
Land.

Tenements assured in Ioynture, may be Aduousans, Rectories, Windmils, an
upper Chamber, a Seigniory in Chivalry, and a reuersion sur estate pur vi^,
all coming within the mea^ing of the Statute.

As for a reuersion upon or after estate for years, it is rather in account of
law, land, then a tenement: for the Frank Tenement, which is the principal,
is as the present substance of the Land it self: And the reuersion of either
of these particular estates, if rent be reserved, may well be assigned for a
Ioynture.

Yea and whether rent be reserved or no upon a Lease for years, it might be
somewhat doubted whether the reuersion be assignable for a Ioynture, etc.
because the Frank Tenement passes presently, and a woman may have an assise
thereof.

But clear a nude reuersion, sur estate pur vie sans rent, because it is no
present commodity, cannot make a Ioynture, yet if such a reuersion be
assigned, and it turn to a possession in the Husbands life time, it may be a
good Ioynture by matter of subsequent Hereditament, within the Statute may be a
rent charge granted to a woman for life, though it were never in esse before;
or a rent reserved upon a Lease for life: But the Hereditament assigned must
be a profit and commodity, or else it is not assignable, etc, for homage or
fealty, shall not make any Ioynture.

Rent payable every five year may be assigned for Ioynture, for is a profit
though it be not annual. And an ancient keepership of a Park with a fee
belonging to it, may be appointed or assigned in Dower.

But so is not a keepership newly granted and sans fee, which is a charge,
without gain or vtility.

SECT. XXXIII. Estates Tail.
ALl estates tail, are within the equity or compass of this branch of 27.
and the forms or species within the ^etter are but as patterns or examples of
Ioyntures. And therefore where an estate is limited to Baron and feme, and to
the Heirs Males of their bodies, or to them and the heirs Males or Females of
the body of one of them, although this be an abridgement or amputation of one
sex, from the examples within the very Statute; yet it is a good Ioynture.

There is a Case in proof thereof, Dyer, 97. 1* Marie the Duchess of Somerset
was ioynt-purchaser with her husband of estate to them two, and to the heirs
Males of her Husbands body, between them begotten, which is none of the five
estates expressed in the Statute, but the Justices held clear unless it were
refused it excluded Dower.

So is it if estate be made to Baron and Feme, to them and the heirs Males
which the Baron shall have of the body of his wife, vel e conuerso. Or if the
gift be to Baron and Feme, and three heirs of their two Bodies, which is an
estate determinable upon death of the third Issue, or if it be to them and to
the heirs de corpore, the son of both of them or of one of them all these
estates limited for Ioynture are good enough.

SECT. XXXV. Estate for Life, etc.
THese words, Or for life of the Wife, are intendable as well for an estate
made to the Wife only during her life, as of an estate made jointly to Baron
and Feme during the life of the Wife: Therefore an estate made only to the
Wife for her life, or to the Baron for his life, with a remainder to the Wife
for her life, is a good Ioynture within meaning of the Statute; yet it seems
not to agree with the nature of a Ioynture by the etimology of the word, and
the Statute speaks not of any remainder, Dyer 14. and 15. Eliz. fol. 387.
agrees and says that Ioyntures may be conditional, which if the Wife accept
after the husbands death, she shall be barred of Dower, as where the condition
is, that she shall keep her self unmarried, and, says he, a Conueyance to a
wife during her life in remainder, after the immediate death of her Husband,
upon condition reasonable may well be intended pro iunctura, yet he himself
afterward, fo. 340. thinks that such a remainder to the wife for her life,
after the death of her Husband, cannot be termed a Ioynture, because the
Etimologie serves not, and 11. H. 7. ca. 20. and 27. H. 8. demonstrateth no
such Ioynture for women in possession or in use of any estate in remainder
after the Husbands death, etc. quaere.

If an estate be conveyed to a man's Wife, and to a stranger for their two
lives for the Wives Ioynture, it is good enough, yet the Statute mentions
only estates betwixt Baron and Feme: And although the estate be not conveyed
to the Feme by precise terms for her life; yet words that amount to as much,
shall be of as great effect: As if Lands be given to a wife, until I. S. has
levied an hundred pound, or till he be promoted to a Benefice: This makes an
estate for life, within the branch of 27. etc.

SECT. XXXVI. Estate to the use of Baron and Feme.
IF estate be conveyed to Baron and Feme to the use of a Stranger, this is no
Ioynture; but if it be to Baron and Feme, or to one of them, or to a Stranger
to the use of the Feme, it is a good Ioynture, and in every limitation of use
to the Baron and Feme it is requisite that he or they that shall take the
possession may be seized to an use, for if Lands be given to the King, or a
Corporation, or to an alien borne to the use of Baron and Feme, this is no good
Ioynture, for these persons cannot stand seized to another bodies use, no more
can a Rector or Parson of a Church, or a Bishop, unless it be in respect of
their natural capacity; but a man attainted may take for another bodies use,
and therefore a Feoffement to him, to the use of Baron and Feme may be a
Ioynture.

SECT. XXXVII. How a Woman may have a Ioynture and Dower, and how neither
Ioynture nor Dower.
A Woman may have Dower notwithstanding her Iointure, by the kind oversight of
her Husband, or of his heir: As if a Ioynture assigned, the Baron himself
will endow his Wife, ad ostium Ecclesiae, or ex assensu patris; Or if after the
husbands death, his heir or Feoffee will assign other Lands in Dower to her
which has a Ioynture already: Or if the heir plead to her in a Writ of
Dower, ne vnque seisique Dower, etc. or nient accouple in loyal matrimony; or
any other plea save Ioynture, etc. in bar of Dower, for in such Case if it be
found against him, the woman shall recover Dower, and retain her Iointure
nevertheless, quia volenti non fuit iniuria. On the other side a Woman shall
have neither Ioynture nor Dower, if by her own folly or wrong done, she have
forfeited her Ioynture: As by breach of a condition annexed to her estate, or
doing of wast, or making a Feoffement: And if her Ioynture by lawful title,
and without any folly in her, be euicted from her yet where the heir is
remitted to another estate then that which her husband was seized of during
Couerture, she gets no Dower. So is it if the estate whereof Dower is
demanded, were conveyed to the Baron and his heirs during the life of I. S.
But if it were to the Baron and his heirs, for so long time as I. S. had
heirs of his body lawfully begotten, this estate may yield Dower.

SECT. XXXVII. The first Prouiso for Dower upon euiction of Ioynture.
THis Prouiso is to be construed favorably for women, as the premises be in
favor of the Heir: And therefore as well tayled Lands as Fee-simple are bound
to render value and recompense; if therefore the Ioynture euicted were to the
value of twenty pound per annum, and the heir have twenty pound per annum of
Land tayled to his Father, the woman shall recover every whit of it in
recompense of her lost Ioynture, for this latter and new Statute controlleth
the ancient Statute, de donis conditionalibus.

SECT. XXXVIII. In what case a Woman may refuse her Ioynture to demand Dower.
THe Statute is plain, that a woman may refuse a Ioynture made during
Couerture, and take her Dower, or waiue Dower, and rest on her Ioynture,
unless the Ioynture were by act of Parliament, etc. And M. Brograues opinion
was, that if the Ioynture were made by other assurance, and afterward confirmed
by Parliament, that such ratification took away a woman's election as well as
if the original assurance had been by Parliament: But if the Ioynture were
made before Marriage, the woman must needs hold her to her Ioynture, sans
election. And this is by implication upon the third prouiso, as appears by
the report of Anderson, etc* See Commentaries Plowden, 390. The Case 6. Eliz.
Dyer, 228. is, That Richard Ashton Esquire in accomplishment of certain
Indentures dentures betwixt him and Sir William Barenport, concerning Marriage
to be had betwixt Richard Ashton the son and Elizabeth the daughter of Sir
William, which gave seven hundred Marks with her in marriage, infeoffed
certain persons before Marriage of Land to the annual rent of twenty pound to
the use of the said Elizabeth for term of her life: The Marriage being
consummate, first Richard the Father, and then Richard the Son died, then it
was found by office that Richard the son died seized in Fee if these Lands,
whereof the Feoffement was made, and of other Lands holden by Chiualry, as of
the Duchy of La^caster his heir being under age, the first question was
whether she might retain the twenty pound Lands, ^^d have Dower of the rest,
because she was not Richard A^^^ons wife at the time of the Feoffement first
made, neither was it made of the barons lands, or by the baron resolved by
Council of the Court, that she was barred of Dower: And it was so likewise
resolved in Vernons Case, Sir Ed. Cokes 4. Report, wherein is much learning
touching Ioynture.

The second question in Eliz. Astons ca. was whether she were Dowable from the
Queen, because the feoffement was not found by the Office.

The third question, whether it might be a^^r^ed for the Queen in stay of
petition of Dower, that the Feoffement was made pro iunctura, no such matter
being expressed neither in the deed of Feoffement or Indenture of Co^^^ants.

The fourth question, whether the Widow Elizabeth might be received to auerre,
and prove by Commissi(...) the Court of Wards, that the Feoffement was not
meant for a Ioynture. Here is enough to make Women be w^^e how they take
Ioyntures before Marriage: Take (...)there to admonish you, beware of fines
after Marri^^^, Ioynture was made to a Feme Covert by her Baron* she and her
baron aliened the land by fine sur connusance de droit, by the opinion of
Justices, Wray* Bell, Manhood* and Dyer, she shall not demand Dower of the
residue of her husbands Land after his death; for she aliened her Ioynture
before time of election was given her, by the Statute, quaere. But if the fine
had been sur connusance de droit, come ceo que le connuseead de done le Baron
tantum, this had been a better form for the wife and less dangerous, 19.
Eliz. Dyer, 358.

SECT. XXXIX. What is a sufficient refusal or agreement of or to a Iointure
made after Couerture.
See Sir Edw. Cokes 3. Rep. in Butlers and Bakers Case.

THe refusing or agreement, etc. because they are peremptory, must not be
clouded, dark, doubtful or implicatiue, but plain and express, a bare word
or saying, by a woman, that she will refuse her Ioynture or accept it, is not
material, as diverse Justices do hold it: But if she come upon the Land
whereof she is Dowable, and there refusing her Ioynture pray the heir to
assign her Dower, this is such a refusal that the heir by this shall be
charged in damages from this time forth in a writ of Dower, and this refusal
must be to the heir himself, and not to a Stranger. If a Widow waiue the
possession of a house or tenement assigned in Ioynture by her husband, and get
her to another place, this is no refusal: But if she have any meddling with the
land assigned in Ioynture, or do any other act amounting to assent or
dissenting, as for example, If she bring a writ of Dower and declare upon it,
this is peremptory although she be under age, Covert or not Covert of a second
Husband; for the Law says, that they which have discretion to acquire and get
things, have sufficient discretion to give and preserve those things gotten.
Therefore if an Infant cdme to any thing by purchase, he shall not in that
have any advantage* or be in better plight then a parson of full age.

As where estate is made to an Infant of two acres, to have and hold the one
for life, the other in fee, etc. a* Feoffement made of one whilst he is yet
under age is a sufficient election. And if a rent charge be granted to an
Infant, whereupon he brings a Writ of annuity, he shall never auow for it,
as a vent, when he comes to full age: So if an Infant recover debt, and sue
execution by elegit, etc. he shall never have a scire facias: And an Infant is
subject to an action of waste or entry for condition broken as well as any
other person, These collections gathered, as I think, by some well learned and
industrious Student out of M. Brograues reading, though they want of the
fullness and perfection which the own pen of so great a Lawyer might have
given them* yet are they pertinent and important. And I not a little beholding
to him, from whose hands I obtain them.

SECT. XL. Of Actions brought by Baron and Feme, or by one of them.
NOw because the common sayings are found by common experience true, Qui capit
vxor^m, capit lites, and qui habet terras habet guerras, A Wife brings iarres,
and wealth brings wars, quarrels, suits and controversies at Law, sans c^o,
that it has any other intendment, it will not be amiss a little to declare
how and in what manner actions at law must be commenced and pursued by ba^on
and Feme, or against them, or by or against one of them according to
prescription of Law, and their several and joint Interests, etc.

SECT. XLI. Where the Baron shall sue only in his own name.
A Man shall sue for his Wives Marriage money only in his own name, but how
or where, that is a matter of some obscurity: by Bracton, lib. 5. ca. 10. 407.
money that is promised causa Matrimonij, is as a sequel of Marriage, and so
being annexed to a thing spiritual, requires a spiritual suite; yet he
confesses that it is otherwise for Land promised or couenanted, etc.
Fitzherbert in his Writ of Debt cites 31. Ed. 3. that if a man promise one
twenty pound to marry his Daughter, which marries her accordingly, he may have
a Writ of debt upon his promise, but he forgets not the ^eere difference in the
Book of assizes; for in the Writ of prohibition, he tells us, if a man promise
one twenty pounds if he marry his Daughter, after marriage if the promiser will
not pay the money, the husband may not sue in Court Christian, if he do a
prohibition lies* marry if I promise one twenty pounds with my Daughter in
Marriage, etc. now* upon nonpayment, he may sue in Court Christian, for this
concerns Matrimony. The same learning he insisteth upon his Writ of
Consultation, adding that if he die which made the promise, the other may sue
in Court Christian against the Executor, or Executors of Executors, 22. ass.
pla. 70. is thus, upon Contract had betwixt two men, that if one of them will
marry the others Daughter, he shall have ten pound, etc. the ten pound after
Marriage must be demanded in the Kings Court, because the promise was not with
his Daughter in Marriage, but by Covenant, that he should, etc. But if he had
promised the money with his Daughter in Marriage, it must have been demanded
in Court Christian: And if a man promise upon his faith to pay ten pound, the
Ordinary cannot compel him to pay it, but he may enjoin corporal penance,
unless the promiser will voluntarily redeem it: Thus teaches Justice Thorpe
in declaration of the Statute of circumspecte agatis 45. Ed. 3. fo. 24. The
Demandant declares upon a covenant betwixt him and the Defendant, that if he
married the Daughter of the defendant, he should have an hundred pound, etc.
It was moved that this demand of debt upon a Covenant concerning Matrimony was
not good, but the matter concerned the Court Christian per articulos cleri,
Notwithstanding because the demand was upon a deed, and a written deed makes a
lay covenant, the defendant was compelled to answer: But 14. of Ed. 4. fo. 6.
in an action of debt the Plaintiff declares that he had married the Defendants
daughter, upon agreement of twenty pound to be paid, etc. and all the Judges of
the common pleas (without tarrying the Defendants answer) awarded que le plaint
prist rieu person brief, for the demand is, say they, of the same nature with
the espousals, viz. ius spirituale, and determinable no where but in Court
Christian, and yet the Book of assizes was there remembered 15. Ed. 4. fo. 32.
the plaintiff in a Writ of debt demanding five marks declares upon a
covenant quod not^, for five pound where he had married, etc. and 33. pound
five shillings four pence was paid, but the residue being 5. Marks, the
defendant denied to pay, yet I care not says Catesoy though he be discharged:
for I know well enough that upon such a matter, the action lies not at common
Law, quod fui^ concessum per curiam* And the cause alleged was that there was
not quid for quo 17. Ed. 4. fo. 5. The master of the Rowles asks the Justices
of the Common pleas, if a man promise money to another to marry his daughter or
servant, which marries her accordingly, whether an action of debt will lie at
the common Law or no: No says Townsend, for it is but a nude promise of no
more effect then if I promise you 20. pound to build you a new Chamber, and ex
nudo pacto non oritur actio. But if I promise you six shillings every week
for the bording of I. S. here is quid for quo, for law intends here, that I
have advantage and profit by the service of I. S. But further in your case, the
thing that is to be done is spiritual which cannot be sold, neither can the
party be compelled to do it: Rogers and Siliard were contrary to him in
opinion, That a promise upon Marriage is no ^^dum pactum* because the daughter
cousin or friend is by intendment advanced. And if I promise a Schoolmasters
money to teach my child, he shall have action of Debt. Likewise if I promise a
Surgeon money to heal a poor man's wound, or a Labourer money to mend a
highway. But in the end Choke and Little^on agreed with the Master of the
Rowles, that in the case by him propounded none action lies at common Law*
because Matrimony whereupon the promise is founded is a thing spiritual, and
by no manner of means vendable. 19. Ed. 4. fo. 10. in an action of debt,
brought upon such a bargain: Collow says, it is true, a man must demand a
woman contracted to him in the spiritual Court, but money is a temporal
thing: And when a Parson of a Church is to recover tithes, he must sue in Court
Christian* but if he sell his tithes, when they be severed, he shall sue for
the money in the Kings Court, but then and afterward in the same or like case
20. of Ed. 4. fo. 3. Bryan asks him then, to what end serves the Statute,
that things touching Matrimony and Testaments must be tried in Courts
Christian, cui des vous quam vous purres achate les Sacraments. Sir, says
Neale, dismes are a thing spiritual, but if a Parson of a Church lease his
Tithes, he must sue for the rent in a temporal Court, and Collow stands to
it, that per emptionem and venditionem res spirituales efficiuntur temporales,
he never spoke a truer word in his life.

Out of these opinions consorting together like harp and harrow, may be
gathered this sure learning. That he which will wed shall do well, (and
according to the Statute of circumspecte agatis) to take as much as he can of
his wives marriage money before hand, with fair Indentures or good obligation
for the residue. And by the aboue-said Books, as also by M. Plowden in that
case he may have action of debt, for every deed sealed and delivered carries
sufficient consideration, to wit, the will of him that made it.

Concerning the old scruple, though money be a visible sign of invisible grace
Sacramental and Spiritual, specially if it be in Angels; yet I trust it is
not more spiritual then the woman her self with whom it is promised. And as
there is no question made but a man may sue in Court Christian for his lawful
wife unlawfully taken and witholden, upon which suite if a prohibition be
granted, a consultation may be had for proceedings, quatenus p^r restitutione
vxoris duntaxat prosequitur, etc. So by Fitzherbert in his Writ of
Consultation an Action may be brought at Common Law, de vxore abducta cum bonis
viri, or an action of trespass for taking only of the Wife. But for a clear
proof that in these promissions of money upon Marriage, neither the money is
any Ghost, nor the promise any nudum pactum. See the case 10. Eliz. Dyer, 272.

An Action of the Case was brought upon promise of twenty pound made to the
Plaintiff in consideration, that at special Instance and request of the
Defendant he had married his Cousin: this was a good cause of action in the
Queens Court, although the Marriage were celebrated and perfected before the
assumption, because the Nuptials did ensue the Defendants request.

And as Lands may be given in Frank marriage after the Espousals, and yet the
Espousals be cause and consideration of the gift: so may money be promised
after Espousals, and yet the Espousals be cause of the promise.

But Reader be not confident of the Law in that Case of Dyer, for I have seen
a report of a Case between Sandill Plaintiff, and Ienny Defendant, entered in
Banco Regis* Hillar. 2. Iacobi Rot* 571, where the Plaintiff declared that the
Defendant in consideration that the Plaintiff had formerly married his
Daughter at his special request, the Defendant promised the Plaintiff to pay
him every year during the life of the Defendant ten pound, etc. and as my
report says, the Plaintiff upon non assumpsit pleaded, had verdict and
judgment in the Kings Bench, but upon a writ of error in Exchequer Chamber,
the Judgment was reuersed, for that the Marriage was executed before the
promise made, and yet the declaration supposed that the Defendant requested the
Plaintiff to Marriage, etc.

But let me not run so far from my Tert as never to find the way back
again: A man may sue for Marriage money in his own name only, and so is it
generally where that which is in demand, or to be recovered, comes merely
and only to the Baron. Example, 43. Ed. 3. fo. 8. The Earl of Arundell
brought a Writ of Trespass against one, for chasing in a free Chase that he
held in right of his Wife, and the Writ awarded good, though the Wife were not
named in it, because nothing was to be recovered by damages.

Likewise is it if the Baron bring a Writ of Trespass for strayes taken in
Lands holden in right of his Wife. And eod. anno fo. 26. for breaking of a
house and carrying away of timber, the Husband alone shall have the action
because he may when he list pull down a house or sell timber standing upon
his Wives Inheritance, or make a release to any body upon such manner of
trespass, and the Wives action is gone for ever.

There is also the same year fo. 16. another Case, wherein because a decies
tantum was brought by Baron and Feme, the Writ abated; for though the first
action concerned the Wives Interest, yet nothing is to be recoueredin a decies
tantum but damages, etc. See the Book of 20. H. 6. fo. 1. a Writ of
maintenance wherein nothing is recouerable, but damages, was brought by Baron
and Feme upon maintenance in a bill of fresh force against them, by the better
opinion they might join, etc. And the Defendant passes Ouster, but not by
award, 41. Ed. 3. f. 9. a Writ of Champertie brought by the Baron only upon an
assise which had passed against him and his wife, was allowed good
notwithstanding exceptions taken of the wives Interest, etc. upon the reasons
before expressed. And by Finch, if a man have a Ward in right of his Wife,
Dower shall be demanded against him only, because the guard is a Chattell
vested: But if a Writ of Wardship be to be brought, it shall be against the
Baron and feme, etc. because of voucher.

And in trespass, if the Plaintiff recover against Baron and Feme by false
verdict, they both must wine in the attaint* for that must be according to the
record 46. Ed. 3. fo. 20. a man brought a Writ of rauishment de guard,
declaring upon a possession, iure vxoris, and the Writ held good: yet in this
case there is more then damages to be recovered, for the Plaintiff shall have
the Infant restored by the very words of his Writ. But there again it was
agreed, that an action to recover a Ward must be against them both, because of
voucher, though in a writ of Dower it be vt supra, because therein there is no
voucher, etc. If Baron and Feme sell the Wives Inheritance by fine for twenty
pound, an action of debt for the money shall be brought by the Baron only,
for the grant was only the Barons grant, and if he die, the Executors shall
have the action and not the Feme. 48. Ed. 3. fo. 18.

And a reple^^n must be brought by the Baron only, because a Feme Covert
cannot have a property in any goods or Chattels: But for such goods as the
Wife has as Executrix, it seems the Baron and Feme may join in ar pleuen:
so shall they for goods of the Wife taken dum sola fuit, Fitz. in the title
reception. In trespass at Common Law, or upon the Statute, Anno 5. Rich. 2.
the Baron alone shall have action of trespass, and so likewise for taking away
Charters, concerning the Wives inheritance. So is it if he alone deliver such
Charters, he alone may have action against the Bayliffe, etc.

But a Writ of Detinue of Charters of the Wives inheritance must be sued by
both, etc. because the Charters themselves are to be recovered. And therefore
upon recovery of them the Baron and Feme must join for recovery. A quare
impedit was brought 50. of Ed. 3. fo. 13. and the Baron declared of an
agreement betwixt three Sisters to present by turn to a Church, whereof they
had the Aduousan, and this was the turn of his Wife, etc. The Defendant
demands Judgment of the Writ, because the Wife being still alive was not
named, but this Writ also was awarded good, because nothing was to be
recovered here but only the Presentment and not the Aduousan. And if a Writ
should be awarded to the Bishop against the Baron, the Wife thereby should not
be out of possession, because she is not party to the Judgment* besides that,
she is aided by West. 2. cap. 3. And for a general rule where the Husbands
release is good, the action may be brought in his name only, as upon cutting
of trees, grass, Corn, etc. And such actions may be brought in the name both
of the Husband and the Wife. An assise of ^arraigne presentment is a mixed
action, and the Aduousan it self, shall be recovered in it, therefore of
necessity it must be brought both by Baron and Feme 15. Ed. 4. fo. 9. The Baron
Seignior in right of his wife, joined in a writ of rescous, and it was argued
that he alone ought to have brought the writ: But it was awarded well brought
by them both. Though per Littleton it were good enough in nosme le Baron
tantum. And per Pigot, when an obligation is made to Baron and Feme, the Baron
alone may have the action, or they may join ^adem lex in trespass, etc.
maintenance, etc. for always* where the action may survive to the wife, the
wife may join in the writ: They which shall read these two last Cases argued
50. Ed. 3. and 15. Ed. 4* in the years at large, shall not need to repent it.

SECT. XLII. When a Wife may sue or be sued alone.
IT is seldom, almost never that a married woman can have any action to use
her writ only in her own name: her husband is her stern, her primus motor,
without whom the cannot do much at home, and less abroad: But if her Huusband
commit felony, take the Church and abjure the Realm, she is now in case as a
Widow enabled to make alienation of her own land as a Feme sole, or to bring
a cui in vita for her Lands aliened by her husband, quod vide cui in vita*
Fitz. 3. Likewise 1. H. 4. fo. 1. The Kings writ of Ward against Sybill
Belknap, is awarded good, though it were brought by the King; but judgment was
asked of it, because Sybill was a Feme Covert, iour del brief purchase, and
the husband not named; whereunto was answered, that for offense against the
King and his Peers, Belknap was banished to Gascoigne, there to remain till
he obtained the Kings Grace, etc. Justice Gascoigne by the assent of his
fellows, commands the Defendants to answer, and she pleads in bar. Again 2.
H. 4. fo. 7. all the Justices testify, that the wife of Sir Robert Belknap who
was banished, sued a writ alone without naming her husband, and by their
common award it was holden good, for that as some said, the said Sibyl was the
Kings Fer^er.

But howsoever it were, Markham exclaimes Ecce modo mirum quod foemina fert
breue regis, Non nominando virum coniunctum robore legis. Some say it should be
conuictum, etc. It is like a miracle that a wife should commence any suit
without her husband, 18. Ed. 4. fo. 4. If a feme Covert be impleaded without
her husband and outlawed, the baron and feme may join in a writ of error to
reuerse the outlary, for the wife cannot sue without the Husband. If a fine be
levied to a feme Covert, yet she and her husband must join in the quid juris
clamat, as the book of 11. H. 4. 7. testifies: If Baron and Feme be beaten,
etc. they must Join in action for battery of the Feme, but for his own
stripes the Baron shall bring his own action by himself, or else his writ
abates for that part, 9. Ed. 4. fo. 52. Because a feme Covert has nothing to
do to participate in the suites of her husband, nor in the privileges of her
husband: Therefore a suite against the Wife of an attorney shall not be in the
Court where he serves by bill, but by original writ, and none essoine de
seruitio Regis* or other essoine cast for the Husband, shall serve for the
wife, for if in a praecipe quod reddat against baron and feme at the grand Cape
the Baron be essoyned de seruitio regis, and the wife make default, she shall
lose her Land. So likewise if the Baron be a servant of the Chancellor, etc. no
writ of privilege shall serve for him and his wife, but actions against them
both must be sued at the Common Law; But a protection cast by the Baron,
dismisseth the plea sans iour for both, because the Feme cannot answer without
her husband, 35. H. 6. f. 3 and 4. a feme covert shall not be received to
disauow the attorney of her husband, but he shall make an attorney for them both
33. H. 6. f. 31. And cod. ^n. fo. 43. If the wife will come into the Court and
offer to plead any other plea then that which her husband has pleaded, or to
confess the action* she shall not be received to it, but the husband may not
forcher per essoin. And if baron and feme wage the law, etc. If the wife
appear not at the day given, the baron shall be condemned: But a wife shall
never be received to disauow the suite of her husband and her self, quod vide
39. Assisarum pla. 1. a good Case.

SECT. XLIII. Of Felonies.
IN matters criminal and capital causes, a Feme covert shall answer without
her husband, 15. Ed. 4. fo* 1. And note, if a Feme Covert steal any thing by
cohersion of her Husband, this is not felony in her 27. lib. Assisarum 40. It
was found that a woman had stolen bread to the worth of two shillings by
compulsion of her husband, and awarded that she should go quite. It seems to
be all one if a woman steal by commandment of her husband, quaere.

If a man and his wife commit felony jointly, it seems the wife is no felon,
but it shall be wholly judged the Husbands fact, says Stamford: Seven men and
a woman were arraigned of felony, found guilty, and because the woman cried
out she was wife to one of the seven, the Judges sent to the Bishop to be
certified of the Marriage. But a woman by her self without the priuitie of her
husband may commit felony to become either principal or accessory: As if she
steal goods, or receive thieves to her house, etc. and if the husband so soon
as he perceive it waiue and forsake their company, and his own house, in this
case the Woman's offense makes not felony in the baron. But if the baron commit
felony, his wife not ignorant of it may keep his company still
notwithstanding, and not be deemed accessory; for a woman cannot be accessory
to her husband, insomuch as she is forbidden by the Law of God to bewray him:
note also that a woman cannot be thief of her husbands goods, if she take and
give them away, the receiver is no felon, Stanford. lib. 1. cap. 19. Briton
allows that the wife shall keep her husbands counsel, but yet so that if she
acquit her self per pais del fait and consent, for felons wives he says have
often held men whiles the husband killed them, and in that case it is reason
and Law that they hang together, fo. 47. By Bracton* non debet virum accusare
vxor, nec de^egere ^ur^um suum neque feloniam, con^en^ire tamen non debet, nec
co^diutrix esse, sed feloniam and nequi^iam viri quantum potest impedire. And
by him if goods stolen be found sub cla^ibus vxoris, she shall be culpable with
her husband of his felony. Item, si vxor cum viro coniuncta fuerit, vel
confessa fuerit quod viro consilium vel auxilium praestiterit, ^^n^bun^^^ ambo,
nam licet obedire debeat vxor viro in a^^ocioribu^ tamen, and la^^o^inijs, nec
est ei obediendum. Poterit vir ligare and tenere, atque vxor sponte and non
coacta occidere, and ita ^ene^ur de maleficio vterque: libro 3. ca. 32. In the
end he shows how execution of judgment shall be deferred when the woman
condemned is with child, sieve ante delictum conceperi^, sieve post. He coteth
civil Law for it. But Stanford has it perfecter.

If a woman be arraigned of felony, it is no plea to say she is with child,
but she must plead to the felony, and if she be found guilty, she may then
claim the benefit of her womb, whereupon the Marshall or Vicount shall be
commanded to put her in a chamber, and cause some women to examine and try her,
whether she be ensoint de un infant, which if she be not, she shall be hanged
maintenant: And though she be quick with child, yet Judgment shall not be
delayed, but only execution deferred. If after such respite when she is once
delivered, she become great again, and object to prolong her life, the Judge
ought to command execution presently, for this benefit shall be claimed but
once, If the Judge inquire further of it, it must be but to set a fine on the
Marshall or Sheriff for looking no better to her. Stanford, lib. 3. ca.
vl^imo. And by the books which he cites the objection must be not priuiment
ensoint, but en^^int de viue enfant.

SECT. XLIV. Of Treasons.
ANd this objection of enseintment is as well to delay execution for treason as
for felony. A woman for committing either grand or petty treason shall be
burned. The latter part of the Statute 25. of Ed. 3. ca. 2 is, That if any
servant kill his Master, any woman kill her husband, or any man secular or
religious person kill his Prelate to whom he owes obedience, this is treason,
and every Lord shall have the Escheates for such treasons of his own proper
fee, the Statute is but declaration of the common law titulo Coronae, in Fitzh.
A woman compasses with her Adulterer the death of her husband, they assailed
him riding on the high way, beating, wounding, leaving him for dead, and then
they fled: The husband got up, levied hue and cry, came before the Justices,
they sent after the offenders, which were gotten, arraigned, and the matter
found by verdict, the adulterer was hanged, the woman burned to death, the
husband living, voluntas reputabitur per facto, 15. E. 2. A woman servant
conspired to rob her Mistress, and brought a stranger to the bedside where the
Mistress lay asleep, the stranger killed her, the servant silent nothing doing
but holding the Candle, the two chief Justices and H^re thought the servant a
Traytresse, and a principal, 2. and 3. Eliz. Dyer, 128. yet Mistress is not
verbatim in the Statute, Stanford was one of them against the chief Justices
opinion in this case; yet in his own book he teaches that abettors and
procurers, are within the meaning and intent of the Law: The servant and the
wife conspire the husbands death, he is killed by the servant, in absence of
the wife, this is petty treason in them both, by opinion of diverse Justices,
otherwise it is if the murderer be no servant, Dyer 16. Eliz 332. for Saunders
wife which procured Brown to kill her husband, but barely hanged as
accessarie, because the principal was but a murderer. 8. Eliz. Dyer 254.

SECT. XLV. Actions by Baron and Feme together.
THe baron and feme may join in a writ of trespass, quare vi and armis
clausu^ fregit, etc. for trespass done in the wives land, either before
couerture, or during couerture. See 21. H. 6. fol. 30. such a Writ brought of
trespass in the Close of Baron and Feme, and feeding up blada sua. Judgment
is asked of the Writ, because a Feme covert has no property in goods and
chattels during the couerture. The Declaration, says Markham, is blada sua dum
sola fuit depastus fuit. That, says Newton, is not possible, but it ought to
be blada ipsius Katherinae, etc. Yeluerton says, that both the Writ and
Declaration ought to have been Dum sola fuit, which Newton denies, and says,
that the Count ought only to be so, and affirms, that as the matter is
brought forth, there is an intendment of depasturing before couerture, and of
breaking the Close after couerture, of which the Baron and Feme may have a Writ
Clausum suum fregit, etc. So the Action seems to be by two several titles:
But in the end the record was viewed, which was Quod clausum ipsius Katherinae
fregit and blada eiusdem Katherinae depastus fuit; and the Declaration Dum sola
fuit, which made the Writ to be awarded good. And there it is said, that by the
Register the Writ is not Dum sola fuit but general, and the Declaration
special. Yet 7. H. 7. fol. 2. upon the like Writ of Quare clausum fregit and
bon^ and catella sua cepit, which Declaration of trespass to the Feme Dum sola
fuit, judgment being given, was afterward found erroneous, for fault in the
Writ which should have been not bona sua, but bona ipsius le Feme, and
therefore a Repleader awarded. The baron and feme may have a Writ of trespass
of assault made to the Feme, and imprisonment of her, until the Baron
compounded and paid a fine, and the brief and count shall be ad damna ipsorum
quod nota. 46. Ed. ^. 3. Nota per Cu^iam, says Brook, Baron and Feme may
join in appeal De ^^pe le feme, for the husband alone cannot have it without
his wife, 8. H. 4. fol. 21 The case there is, A woman prisoner in the
Marshalsey, makes a suggestion to the Court, that the Marshals man had ravished
her in prison: G^scoigne commanded the Marshall to take his man to his custody,
and his staff from him, and the Court told the woman, that she alone could not
bring appeal, sans son Baron, but if her husband would come, and they two
together would prove the rape, the rauisher should be hanged. By this case it
is plain, that the wife alone cannot have the appeal, but the Baron and Feme
may have it. But neither by this case, or any other statute, can I find that
the baron may not have it alone, Whether ne vnque a couple in loyal matrimony
be a sufficient plea in this appeal, and whether he which is but Baron in
possession only, that is, that husband which is at the time of the rape may
have it, quaere, and see 11. H. 4. 13. Baron and Feme may join in a Writ of
Debt, and 16. Edw 4. fol. 8. such a Writ brought for arrerages of account, with
Declaration that the defendant was the wives receiver, Dum sola fuit puraccount
render, and that the Baron and Feme after espousals, assigned Auditors, which
found the defendant in arrerages, etc. Insomuch as the ground of the Action
begun by the wise, and the assignment of the Auditors was pursuing. And
likewise by the wife they might join. So if an Obligation be made to Baron and
Feme, they may join in a Writ of Debt, and if the Baron die, his wife and not
the Executors shall have the Action, 3. H. 6. fol. 37. Per curiam Baron and
Feme may join in a Writ of Debt upon an Obligation made to them during
couerture. And Babington affirms that the Baron may have the Action alone if
he will, 43. Ed. 3. fol. 10. such a Writ was brought, and exception taken that
it ought to have been by the husband alone, sed non allocatur, Though for
chattels vested, as goods that are given to a man and his wife, the Baron alone
must pursue his Action for taking them out of his possession: Otherwise it is
of matters consisting only in Action, etc. for they survive to the Feme, like
to a Lease granted to Baron and Feme for years. So is it of rauishment, or
eiectment of Guard, for these are Chattles real: But if a man and his wife be
bound by Obligation, a Writ against them both upon that Obligation shall abate
car fait del Feme covert est void. See 15 Ed. 4 fol. 10. that if an Obligation
be made to Baron and Feme, and the husband dies, the wife or husbands
Executor, which of them shall hap to have the Obligation shall sue, etc. as it
is said by Bryan. And Detinue of Charters shall be brought by Baron and Feme
for Charters concerning her joint possession, 38. H. 6. fol. 25.

If Baron and Feme make a Lease for years of the wives lands, they must join
in an action of waste, or else the Writ shall abate, 7. H. 4. 15. yet 3. H. 6.
fol. 53. a Writ of waste so brought was doubted of, because forsooth a Feme
covert cannot make any Lease: But at the last the Writ was holden good, for the
wife might accept the rent, or distraine for it, and make auowrie after the
husbands death, at what time, and not before, she has power to agree, or
disagree; but during the Couerture, the lease was the Act of them both, baron
and feme tenants for years, may join in an Action of covenant, against the
Lessor that outeth them, for the wife suruiuing shall have the term, if the
husband do not aliene, 47. of Ed. 3. fol. 12. And where a remainder is to be
executed to a Feme covert by force and conueyance of a fine, etc. the Baron and
Feme may have a Scire facias, to show why the land should not remain to I. S.
and to N. his wife, for the land cannot remain to one of them, but it must
remain to them both: But a Formidon in Discender, or Reuerter. or a Writ of
Escheat differs, 11. H. 4. fol. 15. 44. Ed. ^. fol. 10. a Writ of Dower was
brought by Baron and feme, and the tenant pleaded, that the former baron had
never any thing in the land during the espousals, which the Demandants did not
deny, therefore the Tenant prayed they might be barred, and their confession
recorded, but it would not be granted, because it should be prejudicial to
the wife, yet at the request of the Tenant they were received to acknowledge
their right by fine, and the woman was examined. Quod nota, for she shall not
be examined upon confession of an Action.

SECT. XLVI. Actions against Baron and Feme.
AS Actions are rightly pu^sued by Baron and Feme when right is withholden from
her, or wrong done to her self, her interest or possession, so when the wife
is, or is supposed a wrong doer, or her husband does wrong under pretext of her
interest, writs must be sued against them both; for as it has been showed
already, if a Feme covert be condemned in any civil Action without her
husband, she and her husband may have a Writ of error. Therefore if a woman
which is indebted take a husband, an Action of Debt shall be against her and
her husband in the Debent, 9. E. 4. fol. 24. 7. H. 7. fol. 2. agrees, and if
any thing were owing to the Feme before marriage, the Writ of such a debt shall
be Quas^is debet. If a man bail goods to a Feme sole which marries
afterward, an Action of Detinue shall be against her and her husband for these
goods per curiam, 39. Ed. 3. 17. And 1. H. 4. fol. 31. a Writ of trespass sur
le case, was brought for not repairing certain banks, upon lands which the
defendant had in Dale, by reason whereof the plaintiffes ground was surrounded,
and because the Defendants whole interest in Dale was only jure vxoris, which
wife was not named in the Writ, it abated, for they ought to have been joined.
3. H. 4. fol. 1. Upon a Lease made to Baron and Feme for years, rendering rent,
the Lessor brings a Writ of Debt, etc. against Baron and Feme, and Judgment
was asked of the Writ, because it was not brought against the Baron only:
Thi^^ing holds the Writ good, as well as an Action of waste shall be against
both Baron and Feme upon such a Leaf, and so does one other Justice, but some
pleaders argued contra. And in Actions against Baron and Feme, the woman must
be named wife, 42. Edw. 3. fol. 23. A writ of trespass is brought against John
and Alice with others, Alice says she was and is the wife of John, iour del
brief purchase judgment del brief, and this is a good plea in abatement of
the writ. So if a writ be against John and Alice his wife, Alice if she be
single may plead, not the wife, Judgment del brief. But John shall not have
that plea per totam curiam, for none as Brook makes the reason; shall plead
Misnosmer, but the party, 7. H. 6. fol. 9. In Assise against Baron and Feme
the Uicount returned, that he had attached the Baron per centum ones matrices,
but the wife had nothing to be attached of, within his B^^liwicke, he^ e^^ in
eadem inuenta, the best opinion is, that the return is not good, for he was
commanded to attach the wife, which the Law would never command if the thing
were impossible, but it is possible enough for the wife to be attached, by her
husbands goods, and by him she must be brought into the Court. Babington
says, an Attachment must be by a mere chattle, which shall be forfeited by
Default, but not by any Chattell real, as a Lease for years, or a ward, or by
appartell, etc.

Now note, it has been said, that in an Action of debt or trespass, or other
personal Actions, if the Baron appear, and the wife make default, or if the
wife appear, and the baron make default, they shall not answer the one without
the other, 44. Ed. 3. fol. 1. A writ of debt was brought against Baron and
Feme, the wife outlawed, the Baron rendered himself at the Exigent, at return
whereof he appeared in ward, and the Plaintiff prayed because the Process
was determined against the wife, that the husband might answer sed non
alocatur. But see in the next lease a writ of trespass pursued against Baron
and Feme to the Exigent, the Uicount returned that he had taken them at the
day, the Baron came inward without the wife, etc. The Plaintiff declared
against him, he was compelled to answer, and pleaded not culpable le Vicont
fuit charge de le corpse le Feme. and amerc^e, and a writ went out to have the
wife at Westminster at a certain day, with a Venire facias betwixt the
Plaintiff and the husband, returnable the same day, see 34. H. 6. fol. 29. A
writ of trespass against Baron and Feme, and the Baron as servant to the
Chancellor brought a Super^edeas for himself and his wife. Littleton said it
was to be allowed for neither of them, no more than where trespass is brought
against one of the Chancery; and another man, etc. Nay not so much, says
Prisot, for in that case the Plaintiff may take his bill in Chancery against
him which is of the Chancery, and leave out the other, hut he cannot do so
here, specially the trespass being supposed to be done by the wife. The
privilege being dissolved, Littleton prays that the Defendant may answer:
Nay, says Billing the wife never yet appeared, therefore take your Process
against her, and we will pray an Idem dies for the husband. In an Action of
Debt, says Littleton, against Baron and Feme, it is true that one shall not
answer without the other, and in trespass also the wife shall not answer
without her husband, but the husband may answer without the wife, if she make
Default. Truth, says Prisot, all is one, in every writ of trespass, whether
it be of ^attery, or otherwise, and in every other personal Action one of
them shall not plead without the other. But in a Praecipe quod reddat the
default of a wife is the default of the husband and wife, aliter in trespass
or debt against baron and feme, for there if the baron appear by cepi corpus
or exigent, and the wife makes default, the baron shall have an idem dies per
maineprise, and if the wife waiu^ be, the husband shall go sine die, for in
every case where the wife is party to the writ it must be intended prima facie,
that the cause of action begins from the wife. Bryan a Protonotaries Clarke
said it had been holden by the Court before this time, that if the baron came
in gratis, he should answer sans sa feme, but if he come by cohersion, etc.
then vt supra. But says Prisor all is one, and there is no diversity, to whom
all the Justices, and many Serieants agreed, q^ il ne respondra vnques sans sa
feme en null case: yet afterward 36. H. 6. fo. 1. in an action against baron and
feme upon the Statute ^. Hen. 6. of forcible entries, the Sheriff returned the
plur' capias mandaui balliuis, etc. which answered they had taken their bodies,
etc. the Bailiffes were demanded to bring in their prisoners, the Baron
appeared, and she wife made default. It is a doubt whether the husband should
answer maintenant, and a writ go out to the Sheriff ad habendum corpus
vxoris, or whether the baron should have an idem dies with the wife, and go in
the mean season sans maineprise, for by Wangford he might not answer without
his wife, because of the imprisonment, etc. Prisor here asked, what was the
supposall of the writ? and when he understood it was of an entry by baron and
feme jointly, he affirmed the baron should answer presently without the wife.
And so said he in trespass and battery, when it is supposed by the writ that
baron and feme together did beat the Plaintiff, the baron appearing, fans le
feme, shall answer, otherwise should it be here if the writ had supposed the
forcible entry dum sola fuit, for it were unreasonable when the action rises
and is caused from the wife, that then her default should be her husbands
default. And likewise is it in action of debt if the wife be waiue, the baron
appearing at the exigent, shall go sans maineprise, for it cannot be intended,
but that the action rises only from the wife. But if an action of trespass
done by baron and feme jointly, the baron appear at the exigent, and the wife
be waiue, the husband shall answer, and if the issue be found against him, and
afterward* the wife* sue her Charter of pardon, it shall not be allowed,
unless she bring her husband with her. By Prisot also in this (...)se, a man
cannot have a writ in the Chancery against baron and feme, supposing a forcible
entry du(...) sola fuit, but the entry must be supposed jointly as in an
action of trespass* And Laycon declares against the baron in the end of the
case. And note 40. E. 3* that in trespass if the baron be outlawed, and the
wife appear at the exigent ^l al(...)sans iour, if the baron purchase a
pardon, and sue scire facias against the party, he must bring his wife with
him, or his pardon shall not be allowed: But it is other wise* i^ the baron
appear* and the wife be waiue, etc. for the baron alone may answer. There is
much of this matter in the year books, 43. Ed. 3. so. 18. in action of
detinue against baron and feme, the wife was waiue, the husband appeared at
exegent, praying that the Plaintiff might declare against him, which he did
upon a delivery to the feme dum sola fuit: Because the process was determined
against the wife, whose acts the baron alone could (...) answer unto. It was
awarded que il* (...) quit, for though to loss of issues returned to baron and
feme, the wives default is the barons default, yet it is otherwise upon a
capias* or exigent* for the corporal punishment. But in a praecipe quod redda^
a grand Cape shall go out upon the wifes default, And see* 41. Ed. 3. so. 24.
in a writ of dower against baron and feme upon the default agr^^d Cape went
out, and at the day the baron only appeared, (...) pleaded that he alone was
tenant, etc. sans c^o, that his wife had any thing in the land, here the wives
default was so (...)r, a default of baron and feme both, that the (...) seasin,
41. Ed. 3. 24. in libro veter.

But the Barons default is never any default of the wife, therefore 16. Assis.
p. ^. In a pr^cipe quod redda^ against Baron and Feme, the Baron made default,
any the wife (...) here (...) and (...) issue, which being sound against her,
she and her husband brought an attain. Though in(...) were challenged, first,
(...) the Baron (they said) by default had (...), and then because he was (...)
to the (...), 3. (...). In a writ of debt at the (...)ned Cepi corpus for she
(...), and the (...) non est ^^uentus, the exigent here went out only against
the Baron, and an idem dies was given to the wife. But it was said if the (...)
had returned, the husband taken, and the wife non (...)* exigent should have
gone against them both; for the wife is to be brought by the husband.

For by Cho^* and Danble 9. Ed. 4. f. 23. if (...)an action of debt the Baron
appear, and the wife make default, capias shall go against them both, quod
m^rum, faith Brook* where corporal punishment shall be, indeed it seems to
be no law, for 9. H. 6. f. 8. in an action of debt, at the exigent the Baron
and Feme sued a super^edeas, but notwithstanding they were returned outlawed,
and at the same day the Baron appeared alone, and a new exigent went out
against the wife only, and an idem dies given to the husband, car il ^auer^
corporal pain, etc. and if he make default at the return of the exigent, a
di^^ringas shall go against him. Again, 11. H. 4. a (...) ^api^s went
against* Baron and Feme, the Baron appeared, and the wife made default, the
Plaintiff could not obtain exigent against them both, but he had it against
the Feme, and an idem dies given to the Baron? For though in a praecipe quod
redd^^ in (...) of the grand (...) and such like, and for loss of (...)
returned upon Baron and Feme, the wives default be the husbands default, yet
the wives default only shall ^ot ^ee so (...) to him as to drive him to a
corporal punishment* as to the capias or exigent. Likewise 39. Ed* ^. 3. fol.
18. (...) against Baron and Feme, at the exigent the Baron appeared, the wife
made default, and because she was misnamed in the writ, a new exigent went
out, and a^ idem dies to the husband, yet he was compelled here to answer
maintenants, 8. H. 4. fol. 6. in appeal of Mayhem against Baron and Feme after
exigent awarded, the Baron alone came and found suerty, and had a supersedeas,
though the wife never appeared, 12* H. 4. fo* 1. in a writ of debt against
Baron and Feme, process continued till capias was awarded, then the Baron
appeared of his ow^^ accord, and the wife made default, an idem dies was given
to the husband, and a capias sicut alias went against the wife, which came and
finding suerties* had a supersedeas to the Sheriff, then at the day of
appearing the wife come, and the Baron made default, therein was awarded that
the wife should have another day of maineprise, and process went out against
the husband. But this, he said, should be no example in temps a vener.

SECT. XLVII. Of Fourching.
THis interchange or shifting of appearance and default by Baron and Feme is
called sourching or fourcher: The term being of no greater lineage than from a
hay forke or pitchforke, which in french is fourth: The Logicians call their
dilemma a forke: And our Ancients have given a like name to a subtle kind of
delay which parceners, ioyntenants, and married couples had at the common Law
when suits were commenced against them called forcher* for even as a cunning
fighting bull when he is bayted, offering to the dog first one horn, and then
another, might be said to forth, so these conjoined adversaries were wont to
play with both tynes, when first one should appear, and his fellow be
^ssoyned, and at the next day of appearance he should make default, which
formerly appeared and be essoyned by him which first made default. Against this
West. 1. ca. 42. complaining that demandants were greatly delayed by (...),
which might not answer but together and by ioyntenants which knew not their
own several, that used to four^h by ^ssoine, till every one were once
essoined* Ordeineth that such tenants henceforth shall be allowed no essoine
more than at one day, and as one person. The Statute of Gloucester made 6.
eius^em. Regis (...) the first recites the former Statute thus: Whereas it is
established, that parceners and tenants in common shall not fourth by essoine,
after they have once appeared in Court; It is ordained that the same Law shall
be observed when a man and his wife are impleaded, etc. In the book 12. H* 4.
fo. 1. Culpeppe^ affirms, that fourcher which was at the common Law in a writ
of debt is not to be re(...)died by this Statute of (...). And Thy(...)
confesses, that the Statute i(...) l^^d* (...) yet says he, at the common Law
(...) and (...) might never fourth by distresses, infinet in a writ of debt,
for that they are in a manner one person in law Thus much of sourching.

SECT. XLVIII. The Baron and Feme appear.
But admitting that there is no delay used, how shall Baron and Feme plead? I
suppose it is hardly comprehended within rules. Brook sets down that in a
quid ^uris clamat against Baron and Feme they may deny the deed, by which the
Feme should be bound, and a quid iuris clamat was brought against a Feme
covert, 18. H. 6. fo. 1. Titulo Baron and Feme 83. And where the Baron is
estopped from pleading non tenure, the wife is so t^^* Titulo lou^nes accounts
Br. 17.

^6. assisar. p. 44. An Assise was brought against Baron and Feme, the Baron
canus in proper person, and pleaded the Plaintiff(...), the wines Attorney was
asked if he would ass^^t to the plea, who answered he would be advised,
therefore these d^^^ was delivered ba^^ again to the husband, to the intent
that it should not be allowed, unless the wines Attorney consented, who
alterward agreed. Thus does Fitzh. titulo Assise abridge the case 243. very
near the original, for Brook mist^ke it, or I mistake him; in the title of
Baron and Feme, 72. In an action of debt against Baron and Feme executrix, It
in a good pleading to say that the wife has fully administered, and a good
replication to say that the wise has asserts sins pa^ler del Baron, ^^. Hen.
6. fo. 4. And there it is said, that a wife (...), may administer and
distribute gods without the assent of her husband: And if that she sell the
Testator goods and redeem them, yet still they remain assets. If a Fame tenant
for life take a husband, and they sine, being (...), of a stranger, if the
Baron die, he in (...) cannot enter, for that is the act of the husband.

If a Feme tenant for life take a husband which alieneth in Fee, and he in
reuerston enters, if now the Baron dye, the wife shall have the land again,
29. assisar. p. 43. Brook 86. Titulo Baron and Feme. The case is of an estate
made to baron and Feme in the book of assizes, in a writ of entry in nature of
assise against Baron and Feme, the Baron pleaded non tenure for his wife, and
for himself Ioyntenantie with a stranger* This was Bolden a good plea per
Curian^ and not double, for he must answer for both, 16. H. 6. fo. 22.

12. Rich. 2. Baron and Feme were acquit in appeal, and it was found by
verdict that they had been imprisoned to damnages C. l. By Thin and H^ll
Justices, the damages ought to be severed, the Baron to have one judgment for
himself, and he and his wife another judgment for his wife, for if the
husband should dye before execution, the wife ought to have execution of her
da^u^ages, and not the husbands executors, which could not be if the recovery
were in common, Fitzh. Titulo Judgment 108.

SECT. XLIX. Outlarie of Baron and Feme or of one of them.
44. Ed. ^. fo. 3. The Baron and Feme being outlawed in an action of debt, got
each of them a several Charter of pardon, sued scire facias against the
Plaintiff, and found maineprise jointly, the Viscount returned that the scire
facias came tardy, at which return the Baron appeared without his wife, and
praying to have scire facias sicut alias upon the first maineprise, or a new
scire facias by new maineprise, neither of them might be allowed without his
wife, yet it was agreed that if two men were outlawed, one might sue pardon and
scire facies without the other, for in that case, the one may plead alone upon
the first original without his fellow, against whom the process is
determined: but the Baron cannot plead here without his wife, see the book 11.
H. 4. fo. 89. Baron and Feme being outlawed, the wife appeared and brought a
Charter of pardon, she was suffered to go at large, but the pardon might not
be allowed because the baron appeared not, and the wife could not plead
without him.

14. ^. 6. fo. 14. June said that one kind of divorce betwixt baron and feme
is, when an action of trespass is brought against them, and the baron only
appearing, process goes out against the wife till she be waiue, etc. She can
never purchase her pardon, unless her husband appear, so that if he will he
is divorced. The like subtilty has M. Littleton 13. Ed. 4. fo. 4. where he
affirms, that if a woman be outlawed by erroneous process, if the husband
will not bring a writ of error, he may so be rid of a shrew; for that
counteruailes a divorce.

11. H. 4. Shows that a woman may be suffered to go at large, though her
pardon be not allowed till her husband appear with her, etc. And see Dyer 10.
Eliz. 271. In debt against baron and feme, process was continued till the
baron was outlawed, and the wife waiue, afterward the wife came in ward by
process, brought the queens pardon for her waiuery: Though the pardon could
not be allowed, because the wife without the husband could not sue scire
facias against the platntiffe, to make him declare upon the first original,
for the pardon had a condition in law, ita quod ipsa staret recta in curia,
which she could not do alone, yet by the opinion of the Court she was to be
discharged of the imprisonment, I think the shrew went home. But that a woman
outlawed by her self alone for an offense touching her in an action brought
against her husband and her, and the husband appeared before outlagary was
discharged of her imprisonment upon sight of her pardon, I find not here nor no
where else, and therefore it may be M. Iunes way will serve sometime to be rid
of a shrew, and that by a like manner a woman may be voided of a slouin, or
vncumbred of a Churl. An action of trespass is brought against baron and
feme, and the baron outlawed, the wife appearing at the exigent, goes
san^iour: if a capias vtlagatum lay hold of the husband, I perceive not well
how he can get loose without his dames favor.

SECT. L. Of Divorce.
But it is time to make an end of marriage since we are come to matter of
diuorcement, of which I reckon this of outlary for none. 47. Ed. 3. in the very
end of the year sets down flue ways, Causa professionis, Causa
pcontractus, Causa consanguinitatis, causa affinitatis, and Causa frigiditatis,
with an observation, that when divorce is Causa profession^^, the wife shall be
endowed, and the heir inherit, contra, in all the residue, ^mmaturi^i^ also, or
mi^oritie of age at the time of espo^sals, may be one cause of divorce, As ^9.
Ed. 3. fo. 32. John and Alice his wife brought an assise, the Tenant said that
Alice had sued divorce in the Archbishopric of Barwicke, because she was under
age of consent, tempore sponsaliu^, never consenting afterward, and divorce was
had judgment del brief. And Broke titulo guard 124. remembers that 5. Ph.
and Mar. the Doctors of Law declared for divorces upon this case, That if an
heir, or other body be married infra annos nubiles, and do disassent at the
age of discretion, or after (before assent) to marriage it is sufficient, and
the party may be wedded to some other body, without either divorce or testimony
of the disagreement, before the ordinary, who though he may punish per
arbitrium Iudicis here, yet the second espousals are good, by Law of both
Realm and Church: But when divorce is had, for kindred, praecontract,
frigiditie, or such like case, the Law is clean contrary, for trial of
divorce when it is pleaded in a temporal Court, must be by certificate of the
Bishop, and not per pais. 5. Hen. 4. fol. 2 and sentence of divorce belongs
to the Bishop in his spiritual Court.

Of which there is authority, 2. Eliz. 179. in Dyer, This year he says,
sentence of divorce was given Causa frigiditatis naturalis, in the Archbishops
Court of Audience, and the woman was actrix and querulans de impotentia
pro^r^andi^^ vi^o, who was adjudged impotent by the Physicians: The same year,
or next year, another case and judgment happened like, and the woman which
complained married to a second husband of better stuff, by whom she had
children, and gave him all her land by fine, etc. her. first husband also was
married to another woman, and had children by his second wife, ( vt
asserebatur) in which case the Doctors held that the parties divorced were
compellable to live again together, vt vir and vxor, quia sancta Ecclesia
decepta fuit in Iudicio priori, Therefore much ado was made to stay the
engrossing of the fine, yet the Justices made it be engrossed, contra manda^
dom^ Custodis, etc. But see Sir Edw. Cokes 5. Report. fo. 98. in Buryes case,
that the Doctors were deceived, for the parties divorced causa frigiditatis
cannot live together again, and the issue by the second wife is legitimate,
for a man may be habilis and inhabilis diuersis temporibus. Again, 13. and
14. of Eliz. Dyer fol. 305. teaches that right and lawfulness of marriage is
ever to be judged, not by the temporal, but by the spiritual Judge: And
therefore in an issue of ne vnques accouple in loyal matrimony, if the Bishop
certify not the lawfulness of wedlock, but the circumstances. he shall be
amerced, and a melius certiorando awarded. Seeing therefore right of marriage
is to be discussed by the spiritual Judge, they which are married ought in no
case to sever themselves, and remarry without the spiritual Judge: if they
do, the second marriage is no marriage, the children had in it are
illegitimate, and the woman not dowable, except in the case first specified.
And generally where espousals are not merely void but defiesable, if they be
not avoided by diuorcement, the issue which is had without defeiting that shall
inherit: as if a man marry his cousin or his sister, says the book, and have
issue by her, and die before divorce had, now nothing can bastardize the issue,
for though the Commissary was wont in his visitation to make a kind of divorce
in such cases after death of one of the parties, it was never any more than an
Inquisition of office, Ad inquirendum de peccatis, for the heir could not be
bastardized, when the parents both or one of them were dead, and therefore not
citable to appear, etc. And it is holden strongly by Thorpe 39. Edw. 3. and in
the Parliament 24. H. 8. see Brook titulo Bastardie 23. 37. 44. 47. And a
divorce cannot be had but of a marriage consisting, and not yet by death
dissolved, for there cannot well be a reuersing of any divorce when the parties
divorced be dead, as Brook understands Connings by 12. H. 7. 22. for says
he, it was adjudged in Co^bers case, where the baron and feme had issue, and
afterward were divorced, the baron taking another wife, by whom he had issue
and died, that when the first issue sued in spiritual Court to reuerse the
divorce and bastardize, the second issue, after his fathers death a prohibition
lay: But it was said that the title and descent were comprised in the libell,
or else the prohibition could not have been granted. Thus says Brook titulo
Deraignment. But titulo Bastardy 47. he sets down the same case, that a
man may be bastardized after the espousals, wherein he was begotten and borne,
or by death determined. See Sir Edw Cokes 7. report Kennes case, that some
divorces dissolve the matrimony, scilicet a vinculo matrimonei, and bastardize
the issue, and ^ar^^ the woman of her Dower, and some a mensa and Thoro, which
dissolueth not the marriage, nor bar the wife of her Dower, nor bastardize
the issue: And therefore if any action be brought and divorce pleaded, the
cause of divorce ought to be showed: And there it is said that a divorce may
be repealed in the spiritual Court after the death of the parties, but a suit
after the death of the parties to divorce them, and to bastardize their issue
may not be, for that the trial of bastardy, or not belongs to the temporal
Court, originally if sentence do not hinder. And see Sir Edw. Cokes Institut.
ca. Dower f. 33. and ca. Estates upon condition fol. 181. the deriuation of the
word divorce a diuertendo or dino^^^ndo, quia vir diuertitur ab vxore, and see
there the several causes of divorces, and how for any of them respectively do
extend in power and effect, and in Littletons tune many divorces were of force,
which the Statute of 32. H. 8* cap. 8. take away* and there see that a man may
marry the sister of his first wife, since that Statute.

By Na. br. ^^l. 44. in the writ of prohibition, and Na. br. 1^9. and Dyer 28.
H. ^. 1^. agree, if the woman shall have the goods not spent, and that detinue
lies for them, If goods be given in marriage with a woman, she shall recover
them in the spiritual Court after divorce, and there lies no prohibition, ^6.
Hen. 8. fol. 7. is that if the husband before divorce had, have given or sold
without collusion, such goods as were the wives before marriage, she is without
remedy for them being divorced.

But if he aliened them by collusion, and bring a writ of detinue, for so much
of them as the property may be decerned of, and for the residue, money and
such like, she shall sue in spiritual Court. If a man which is bound to a
woman by obligation marry her, and they be divorced, she has her action
again, which was suspended ibid by Fitzh and Norwich. But see the book of 11.
Hen. 7. 4. p Cur. contrary where the divorce is causa praecontract', and it is
so cited, Dyer 4. Mar. fol. 140.

If the woman divorced were an Inheritrix, etc. and the husband before
diuorcement has done waste, felled her woods, received her rents, granted her
wards, presented to her Churches, given away her goods, none of these things
past in possession executed can be reuersed or recalled: But if the Inheritance
it self were discontinued or charged, or a release made of it, or her
villains manu^^itted, she shall have remedy for these things by common Law.

If baron and feme Iointpurchasers de disseised, and the baron release, etc.
the wife shall have a moiety if they be divorced, although before there were
no moieties betwixt them, for the divorce convert that into moieties, which see
Brook title Deraignement and divorce 32. H. 8. In Sir Edward Cokes 5. Rep. in
Olands case it was holden, that if a Lease be made to baron and feme during
the Couerture, and the baron sows the land, and after there is a divorce
causa praecontract, the baron shall have the Corn, and not the lessor, for
although the baron prefecuted the suit, yet the sentence which dissolues the
marriage is the iudgment-in Law, and Iudicium redditur in ^^ultum.

And as by divorce, that which was entire may be converted or divided into
moeties, so by it, inheritance may be made francktenement. And if baron and
feme donees in tail, have issue and be divorced, now they have but
francktenement, and the issue shall not inherit, for it is not like here as
where lands are given to two men, or ^o a man and his mother, or to a man and
his daughter, and to the heirs of their bodies, where several heirs shall
severally inherit, for it was never lawful for them to marry, 7. Hen. 4. 16.
Broo^* 9. in titulo Tail, see also, 13. Edw. 3. titulo Deraignment, If land be
given to baron and feme in tail which be divorced causa praecontract, etc.
they shall hold jointly for term of their lives, and the land go to the
Suruiuor. But by the Reporter, if the gift were in franckmarriage, the party
which did not cause the divorce shall have all: and agreeing to that difference
is Perk. Chap. feoffement, Sect. 238. and also agreeing is Sir Edw. Cokes 9.
Rep. in Beamonts case.

12. Assisar p. 22. Dorees in franckmarriage were divorced at the woman's suit,
the baron continued possession till he died, and afterward the womandied, the
possession was adjudged to have remained always to the woman, because she
never made any debate for it, so that the man never had it by disseisin, and
agreeing to that is Plowden Wymbysses case fol. 58. and Diet 3. M. fol. 126.
19. Assisar. plac. 2. The Do^^e in franckmarriage wedded infra annus nubi^es,
sued divorce by the barons motive and the wives agreement, at their full age,
and the woman recovered all the land against her quondam husband by assise. And
Titulo Assise in Fitzh. pla. 413. 44^. is this case, A man of certain
tenements, infeoffed his feoffor, and his wife in tail, the remainder to the
right heirs of the baron, they were divorced, at the suit of her husband,
which kept the woman out of the lands, and she brought an Assise, whereby she
recovered a moyty of the tenemen's by judgment presently. And propter
difficultatem it was adi^rned for the other m^ity to the Commonpleas, where
she had judgment of that also, because divorce was at the husbands s^^t. As a
woman may have an Assise against her companion divorced, for lands wherein she
claims inheritance, or estate for life, so if he have aliened in see, ^ee
tail, ^r for life, the lands which he had in fee simple, ^ee ^a le, or for
term of life, to a stranger, she may as soon as she i^ divorced, bring a Writ
called a ^^i ante diuor^^^m against the Al^enee: And this Writ may be in the
per, cu^, and post. If she dye before action commenced, or before recovery,
her heir may have a Writ called a sur^uran^e diuortium, and the Aunt and Niece
may join in i^. But for her estate tail her heir shall be put to a formidone.
But note Reader, that it seems both the woman and her heir may enter after
the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. and never bring Cui in vita, nor sur cuim vi^a, etc.
for the opinion in Grenlies Case, Sir Edw. Cokes 8. Rep. fol. 73. is, that if
the baron alien, and after the wife is divorced causa praecontract. which
dissolve the marriage a vinculoma rimonii, the wife during the life of the
husband, or after his death, may enter, for the words of the A^tare n^ fine
fe^ffeinent, etc. during the Couerture between them, and although the Statut^
says, But that the same wife, etc. that is to be intended of her which was his
wife at the time of the alienation, etc.

Note that whereas West 2. cap. ^. gives a cui in vita upon recovery by
default against the husband, etc. she shall have a cu^ ^h^e diuortium upon the
like ^e^ouery by equity and extension of the Statute* and the process is
summons, grand cape, and pe^i^ cape. I will here set the bounds and limits of my
third book, not because this sequel and consequence ^iuorte, I mean, whereby
the issue had, is bas^^^^^zed, and the w^^an restored to her goods and lands,
conforteth with the marriage so perfectly begun as I meant it, for this is not
the untying of true wedlock, but rather a dissipation of marriage tainted at
the beginning, and in Christian Court adjudged to a ^^llity, as if it had never
been, the Baron and F^me that I h^^^ spoken of all this while, if they were
not married in their infant love and very first flowing age, yet were they not
^rostbitten or so blasted either of them when they were young, but they might
well have fr^^tified, neither was either of them a common Law breaker,
entangled with promise or praecontract, and as for consanguinity, or affinity,
there was no more betwixt them, than is between Jack Flecher and his bolt. You
may imagine some matter by only imagination, perhaps more visible than it
could have been, being true, whereupon a public sentence of separation being
published a Thoro and mensa, but then there was a monition of chaste living, and
prohibition to both the parties, that neither of them should fl^^ to other
marriage so long as both of them were living. And the Author of separation,
that is the party suing divorce, did put in sufficient caution to do nothing
contrary to this prohibition. So that the holy lives of matrimony were not
clean broken, and pulled asunder, but within a year or two they were
reconciled, voluntarily of their ^wne accord. And soon after (so I will make
it) having the Distaffe, Spindle and Sheeres all in mine own hand, the
husbands life was suddenly cut off, or else the wi^e had been sole executrix.

THE WOMAN'S LAWYER. The fourth BOOK.
PAle death equo pulsans pede pauperum tabernas regnumque ^urres: Death, I say,
to whom the Poet did attribute so much power in this his verse, Omnia sub leges
mors vocat a^^a suas, has called the husband hence, left the house full of
mourning, and specially the wife cannot choose but sorrow and lament. If my
^oure legged beast should fall into halues, the one half stark dead without
motion or spirit, and the other half standing still upright, senting, seeing,
feeling, gazing; must it not, think you, be wonderfully astonished. If an
Elephant, in whom (as some d^e write) is understanding of his countries speech,
a wonderful memory and recenting of things past, a great delight in love and
glory, besides prudence, equity, and religion, should have his head cut off,
his body remaining still for and all that vegetable and sensitive, would he not
(trow ye) be exceeding sorrowful for the forgoing such an ornament, I dare be
bold to give a woman as much as Pliny gave the Elephant: She has
understanding, and speech, firm memory, love natural, and kindness, desire
of glory and reputation, with the accomplishment of many meritorions virtues:
But alas, when she has lost her husband; her head is cut off, her
intellectual part (...)gone, the very faculties of her soul are; I will not
s(...) clean taken away, but they are all be(...)ned, di(...)ed and dazzled, so
that she cannot think or remember when to take rest or ref^ction for her weak
body. And though her spirits and natural moisture being* inwardly exhausted,
with sorrow and extreme grief, she be called and enforced to seek
restoration, by such aliments as life is prolonged by, yet is she nothing
desirous of life, having lost a moytie of herself, yea the principal maytie
now best prised and esteemed, but never best loved: Time must play the
Physician, and I will help him a little: Why mourn you so, you that be
widows? Consider how long you have been in subjection under the predeminance
of parents, of your husbands, now you be free in liberty, and free
proprii^uris at your own Law, you may see number. cap. ^0* That maidens and wives
vows made upon their souls to the Lord himself of heaven and earth, were all
disauowable and infringible, by their parents or husbands, unless they
ratified and allowed them, either express or by silence, at the day when such
vows came first to their notice and knowledge: But the vow of a widow, or of a
woman divorced, no man had power to disallow of, for her estate was free from
controlment. Must a woman needs weep thus for the loss of her Buckler,
Shield, and defense, in the person of him with whom she held daily commutation
of all offices proceeding from love and superlatiue kindness. Let her learn
to cast her whole love and devotion on him, that is better able to love and
defend her than all the men in the world, Him I mean that has forbidd^n to
afflict widows* or orphans, with promise to hear their cries, and vindicate
their wrongs, by killing them by the sword, and making the wives widows, and
their children fatherless, of them which break this Commandment, Exodus cap.
22. Then because a sober carfulness and moderate sedulitie, in business of
profit or disprofit, does mitigate greatly the sorrowing for such actions, as
opinion or fancy makes thus grievous, let her look to her affairs as cause
and need requires.

SECT. I. Of Executorship and Administration.
SHe is not made an Executor, because the office is troublesome, let her take
heed she make not he^rselfe an Execut' de son ^o^t deem she, by her own wrong*
(...). H. 6. fol. 31. Action of debt was had against ^ woman as Executrix to
her lafe husband. S^e^pl^aded that her husband made B. and C. his Executors,
which taking Administration from the Archbishop, did de^i(...) to this
De^c^dant three robes, which her husband gave her by will, (...); that ever she
administered in a^* other manner. As^^on Justice held this for no good plea*
because here was no color of any Administration, for that is no Administration
to use her own goods. But if one administer (quoth he) about funeral ^^pen^es
and nothing else, he may in a Writ brought against him, plead the
Administration for this only cause* sa(...)ceo that he administ^ed in any
other manner, for here was a kind of Administration which shall charge the
party no further than the goods administered will reach. But for a woman to
take her own goods is none Administration at all, (...) ^^riam. And there it
is said, that the Law allows a woman convenient apparel, but not excessive*
etc.

Anno primo Eliz. In an Action of debt as against an Executor, upon a plea of
ne vnques execut' ne vnques Administrater ^o^e executor. A special verdict was
found, how the Defendant had recovered 10. l. that was due to the Defunct, and
made an acquitance for it, taking also into his hands all the goods and
chattels, that were the said Wyrials, so was his name, using them as his own,
this was holden a sufficient Administration. And says Justice Dyer fol. 166. I
take for a rule, that occupation and possession of a dead man's goods, gives
sufficient notice of the person which shall be charged to administer, be it
either ordinary or Executor. 17. Edw. 3. Action of debt was mainteynable
against a Deane only, gardiam^ spiritualium sede vacant ad cuius manus bona
deuenerunt, without naming the Chapter, and issue was taken upon the
deuenerunt, viz. the possession. And such an action may be against an Executor
alone, which has possession of the goods, 8. Edw. 3. In a Writ of Dower
against one Executor alone that held the ward in his only custody, he was
named Cu^tos and not Executor.

And for this reason it is, that though an Executor bringing action must show
how he is Executor for the most part, yet the like is not needful in an
action against an Executor, for he may be an Executor sundry ways, by
Testament, by letter of the Ordinary, or by his voluntary Administration, and
taking unto him possession, use, and occupation of the goods long, 50. Ed. 4.
fo. 72.

And if an Administrator brings an action, he shall say in his Count qui
obiit intestatus, and not vt dicitur, but where one declares against an
Administrator, it is the usual form to say qui obiit intestatus vt dicitur
for the Plaintiff, there is not intended to know certainly whether the
Defendant be Administrator or not. And see Greysbrooke (...). Plowd. fo. 276.
b. etc. that where letters of Administration are pleaded in Law, they need not
be showed to the Court otherwise in the Count, etc.

And a woman taking more apparel than is convenient for her degree, without
legacy or license is an Executor de son tor^ demesne, 33. Hen. 6. yet there is
some possession or meddling, that the Law tolerateth, and is cullorable, and yet
it draws no burden with it, as expenses about funerals, or if one be made
Coadintor, or Supervisor* or if he have l^tters ad collegendum, or if he were
Executor, by a former will disproued by a latter will.

Likewise if a Feme Covert be made Executrix, not meddling with any goods, etc.
refuse to administer when she is sole. In all these cases there is a C^llor of
authority, and the party shall plead the especial matter, sans ceo, that he
administered in any other manner.

But he which claims by gift, shall plead absque hoc quod vt Ex^cutoris. In
the principal Case Dyer concludes, that the Plaintiff should be without
remedy, if he might not have the action. And if (says he) a lawful Executor
by his evil administration, viz. Conuertion of goods to his own use shall be
charged, it must needs be thought reasonable, that he should be in better case
vndischarged, that executes but by wrong of his own carriage: Thus far
Dyer. Sometime the husband dies in so good time, that it were madness in his
widow to refuse administration^. Know therefore that by the Statute 21. H^n. 8.
ca. 5. When the husband dies intestate, or the Executors named in the
Testament do refuse to prove it the ordinary or persons, which have authority
to take probat of Testaments, shall grant administration to the widow of him
which is deceased, or to the next of his ^in, or to both, as by his discretion
shall be thought good, taking suerty of him, or them, to whom such commission
shall be made, for true administration of the goods, debts, (...)*

And where diverse persons claim Administration as next of kin, which are all
in equal degree, or where one claims where indeed diverse be in equality of
kindred with h(...), the ordinary shall have liberty to grant it to one or more
of them which require it. ^^d whereone or more, but not all of them with are in
equa^it^ of degree, d^e make request, the Ordinary may admit the widow, and him
or them^^ely making request, or any one of them at his pleasure, taking
nothing, etc. unless the goods d^^ amount (...) the ^^l^^ ^^ (...) pounds, the
penalty is forfeiture of so much money as was received contrary to this Act to
the party grieved, and ten pound to the King and party grie^ed besides.

But by the anci^^t custom of the Realm: If any man dyed (...)* the Ordinary
might dispose of his goods in ^^^us* uses, he might feife, prese^^e, give or
grant them, yet was he not chargeable in any action prosecute, by creditors of
the intestate* because forsooth he was a Judge spiritual, and not subject to
temporal fuit, for things committed to him upon confidence.

But West. 2. ^^. 20. ^a e A^. t^. F. ^ is Cum post moste^ alienus deceden^is
intestat^ and obligati aliquibus in debito, and the goods come to the
Ordinaries hands, it is ordained that he answer to action as an Execu^tor
shall do, quatenus bona defunct ^^^fici^^t. Then again, because still the
Ordinary might neither meddle nor be meddled with, for things in action as
debts, etc. 31. Edw. 3. cap. 11. ordeineth, that in Case of intestate the
Ordinary shall depute the most trusty and nearest friends of the dead to
Administer, and that they shall have action of debt, or answer in action of
debt, and be accomptable to Ordinaries, etc. as Executors. I will wade no
further here in the office of Executor or Administrator, except it be only to
show unto you, how next of kin in the Statute of 21. H. 8. has been taken.

A son of Charles Duke of Suffolk, by a second venture, having certain goods
by his fathers Will, dyed intestate, and without wife or issue, his mother who
was daughter to the Lord Willough by took Administration, which was afterward
revoked after great argument in the spiritual Court, as well by common
Lawyers, as Ciuilians, in the behalfes of the said mother Duchess of
Suffolk, and Lady* Francis wife to the Marquis Dorset, sister of the half
^loud to Henry the Intestate, which sued to reuerse the Administration, and
obtained it her self, though she were but sister de demi sanke, for the
mother is not next of kin to her aw^e* son in thi^ ^a^ter, but must descend
and not ascend, either by one Law or the other, and children be ^^ sanguine
patris and matris, ^^^ pater and matter non sunt de sa^g^ine puerorum. Contrary
it is of brethren and sisters, 5. Edw. 6. 47 in Brook titulo Administraton
There is also this Case, William Rawli^s Clericus died inte^^ate,
administration was committed to Sir Humphrey Brown, who had married Rawlins
his sister, William Shelton, and John Shelton, sons to the Lady Brown by her
first husband, reuersed the administration and obtained ^ for themselves.

But see in Sir Edward Cokes 3. Rep. in Ratcliffs ca. fol. 40. it is said that
the book of 5. Edw. 6. have been often times resolved to be no Law, and that
the goods of the son or daughter ought to be granted to the father or mother
as the next of blood, and there is Littleton ^ited who says, that although the
sons lands go to the uncle, yet the father is next of blood.

SECT. II. Are^son^ble part of the goods.
IF there be a will proved, the widow must take such goods as were bequeathed
her by delivery from the Executors, but whether here were a will or none in
some places, she shall have a third part of all her late husbands goods. For
this there is an ordinary writ to the Sheriff, where she cannot have a third
part of that which remains after funerals discharged, and legacies paid and
performed, to summo^ the Executors to appear and make answer why she should
not have, as the custom of the Court is, that women ought to have rationabilem
partem de bonis and ca^al^^s vir^rum. The like writ is for children, whether
they be sons, or daughter^, or both. And this writ speaks of a custom in
the County, that children which are not heirs nor promoted in the fathers life
time, shall have their reasonable part, 3. Edw. 3. A Writ of debt was brought
by a man and Alice his wife against the Executors of his wives father, and
declaration was upon custom of the Shire, that children not advanced should
have their reasonable part of their fathers goods, the Executors said, that
Alice was married by her father in his life time, judgment si action, etc. It
is no answer said one, to say that she was married by her father, except you
say also by, or with her fathers goods, and to her conueniable advancement, and
here the husband at time of the marriage, or after had never any land. The
Executors said still she was conveniently married by her fathers procurement,
etc. And in the end the Baron and Feme offered to auerre, not married by the
father, on which point the issue was joined, Fi^zh. Dett. 156.

40. Edw. 3. In a rationabili part bonorum, brought by a daughter counting on
the custom of the Town, that every son and daughter should have a reasonable
part, the defendant pleaded a reuersion descended to her, which she might sell
for her advancement in marriage, judgment si action, etc. Mowbray said, the
Lords in Parliament would not agree that this action is maintenable by any
common custom or Law of the Realm. Doctor and St. fol. 132. a. by the custom
of some Country, the children (the d^bts and legacies paid) shall have a
reasonable part of the goods of the dead. 39. Edw. 3. fol. 9. 10. One brought a
Writ of Detinue for certain goods, showing the custom of Sussex: That where
the father dyed intestate, his heir should have a reasonable part of his
Chattels, and upon this custom he demanded goods come to the Defendants
hands; It was argued whether the custom were good or no. Morris, such a
custom has been allowed in Air 21. Hen. 6. fol. 1. and 2. In fine ^asus a
woman brought a Writ of detinew against her husbands Executors for a ^^ity of
his goods, as for her reasonable part by custom, and the Defendant was
compelled to answer.

7. Edw. 4. fol. 20. and 21. I^ a ra^io^abili part bo^^rum, judgment was
asked of the declaration, because the custom was, that where the Baron dyed
sans issue, the wife should have a moity of his goods, after debts and ^u^erals
discharged, but if there were issue, she should have but a third part, and
here the Plaintiff had a demanded moity without alleging that the baron died
sans issue, etc.

The Plea was amended by permittance of the Justices, for Da^by said, the widow
had as good title to the goods as to lands at the common Law. But Cat. by spied
another fault in the Count, viz. Continuance of the custom not alleged.

18. Hen. 6. fo. ^. in a rationabili part bonorum one Executor appearing,
confessed the action, and the others made default, whereupon the Plaintiff
recovered presently by equity of the Statute 9 Edw. 3. cap. 3. by which the
Executor coming first must answer. Like, or the same learning is in the former
Book 7. Ed. 4. where Choke said, that always if ne vnques executor, ne vnques
administrat come executor be a good plea (vt hic) the Executor first appearing
must answer.

I see that many tunes in stead of this writ de rationabili part bonorum, a
writ of debt sometimes, and many times of detinue has served, and you may
find further 52. and 56. titulo Detinue in Fitz^. And the great variance is in
this, that the action is founded on a custom sometime of the Town, sometime
of the County, and sometime of the Realm, for indeed many have holden that it
is general like an action of the Case against an Hostler, or an action de^igne
custodiendo. So teaches Glanuil, and so Fitzh. who relieth upon magna Charta*
cap. 18. which prescribi^g how the Kings debts shall be, levied of his goods
that is dead, wills the surplussage to remain for the Executors ad
testamentum defuncti pimplend. saluis vxori and pueris eius partibus
rationabilibu^, which being of a reasonable part may be restrained to places
where custom yields it, for ought that I perceive Bracton in this passage,
is like a piece of Roman ancient coin that time has rusted and defaced.

If a man (says he) make a Testament, he ought to remember his Lord of whom
he holds his land with the best thing he has, and the Church with the next:
If the wife dye before the goodman, the Church must have likewise the second
best beast of all the ^^ocke heard or drove, but he says, this is of g^a^e
and permission of the husband, and though a man be not bound to give any thing
to the Church nomine sep^lturae, yet if he do it is a laudable gift, and
Dominus papa will not be against it. A woman that is at her own commandment
may make a Will, and dispose the fruits and corn growing on her Dower lands,
whether they be severed from the soil, or not severed, quod (...) non po^u^t
sed n^^c de gratia potest. She that is sub po^estate viri, can make no Will
without her husbands ratification, though by custom sometimes women ^o^ make
Wills of that which might have fallen to their reasonable part, etc. or of
things given them, ^^ or^atum ^^cut de robis and ^ocalibus.

A man may make a Will of all his things moveable, excepting so much as he
owes, for debts are before legacies, and the King before all Creditors. It is
lawful for the Viscount or Kings Bayli^^^, showing his letters Patents out of
the Exchequor, to attach all the goods and chattels of him which is dead found
within his lay fee to the value of the debt, etc. and to i^bre^iat them, by
view of lawful men, so that nothing be amoued till the debt be paid, and the
remainder of all such chatte^s shall be to the Executors debitum, vero
defuncti quod debetur. I^d^is non vsurabit qu^mdiu haere^^^^ra aetatem
extiterit, neither shall the King when a Jews d^^^ comes to him take any
more than the principal, neither shall a woman's Dower ^e char^^able with her
husbands debt. D^^ debe^ esse libera, and when a man dies (...) state, the
execution of his goods belongs to the Church and his friends dedu^^ng first
o^^ of them his clear de^^s, amongst which must be reckoned his ser^^^ts
wages, certain and incertaine, if incertaine they shall be taxed by the (...)
friends, and the charges of his burial, and funeral expen^es taken out of the
stock, that which remains must be divided into three parts, whereof one
shall go to the wife, the second to the children, and the Testator has
absolute power to dispose of the third. If there be no children, vna medietas
defuncto, alia vxori reseruatur: If there be no wife, vna medietas defuncto,
alia liberis tribuitur: And where there is neither wife nor children, tuncid
totum remanebit defuncto: The heir is bound to pay his Predecessors debts, so
far forth as the inheritance fallen to him will extend and further as his
own grace and good liking leads him. Ea quae dicta sunt locum habent and
tenent, all this is Law, says John Bracton, except custom sway otherwise as
in Cities, Boroughes and Towns. London he says has a custom, that when
certain Dowry is appointed to a woman, either in money or other chattels or
houses, she shall demand no overplus of her husbands goods, except it be the
increment which he gives by his voluntary bequest. And the reason why she
shall have not plus quam dotem constitutam, is because ipsa prededucet dotem
suam ante omnes debitores. His conclusion is that Citizens wives and children
shall have no more than is bequeathed to them, but be exempted from the
general custom: vix enim inueniretur aliquis Ciuis qui in vita magnum questum
facerit, si in morte sua cogeretur inuitus bona sua relinquere pueris indoctis
and luxuriosis and vxoribus malemeritis, etc. I am sorry that Bracton seems
to conceive no better hope of Citizens wifes, but it may be he was deceived not
only in his opinion of Borrough women, but of Law also, for he makes his
division of a man's goods into thirds or seconds, shutting it clean out of
Cities and Towns Corporate, to be general which Mowbray ere while told you,
the Lords would not confess to be Law, 40. Edw. 3. And many arguments may be
made to the contrary; for indeed it might most properly fit and be convenient
for Citizens, whose estate consists very often rather in moveable goods than
in lands, and seeing the custom serves not for heirs that have their fathers
inheritance, widows may most reasonably be barred from it that have ioyntures,
or reasonable part of Inheritance, which are no^ the widows of Citizens, for
the most part. But let ^s end this matter with Sir Thomas Smith De republica
A^glor. lib. ^. cap. 6. Though our Law may seem somewhat rigorous toward
wives, yet for the most part, they can handle their husbands so well, and
doucely, specially when they be sick, that where the Law gives them nothing,
their husbands at their death of their good will give them all, and few there
be that be not either made sole, or chief Executors of the husbands last Will
and Testament, having for the most part the government of the children and
their portions, except it be in London, where a peculiar order is taken by the
City, much after the fashion of the Law civil.

SECT. III. Of Quarentine.
ALL this while the widow remains still in the ho^^^ where her husband dwelt,
for as Britton says, ^n bone Christien, though perhaps not in excellent
French, ne a^^iert mye que ^ee^es solent botes horse ouesque le con de lour
barons. Therefore M^gna Ch^^^^ cap. 7. giue^^ ^ widow qu^^^ntine or forty days
a^o^e in the capital message of her husband after his decease, except the
house be a Castle. If she must leave it because it is a Castle, there must
presently a competent habitation be pro^ided for her, in which she may
honestly dwell till Dower be assigned her, and in the mean season she shall
be allowed reasonable e^^ouers in the common, etc. The Writ that goes out to
the Sheriff, or Kings Ba^li^^^, upon ^^^^^ment is a commission commanding
speedy Justice, and therefore process is to be awarded upon it against the party
offending to appear within a day or two, not tarrying for the County day, and
the proceeding is as in a commission Oy^^ and T^^^i^er.

See 6. Edw. (...). 76. in Dyer, A Writ of Dower was brought, and the Tenant
pleaded in abatement of the Writ, that since the darren continuance the
Demandant had entered into part, etc. Showing incertaine which and this was
holden a good Plea, and the demand being of francktenement, the demandan^s
entry has abated the whole Writ, yet 45. Edw. 3. in a ^^i^e facias to have
execution of Dower, such an entry pleaded was not good; The Demandant to
maintain her Writ said, that her husband dyed seized in fee, and that he and
she the same Demandant, cohabitabunt super eodem manerio vt vir and vxor vsque
ad diem obitus sui, with protestation, that it descended to the Defendant which
entered, and that she continued possession cohabiting with him, and she held
the same at the pleasure and will of the heir, and non aliter: This, says
Dyer, is holden no good pleading for the quarenti^^, but she should have
showed the death of her husband certain, and the time of the forty days
continuing, therefore the opinion of the Court made her w^i^^ her plea, and
trauers the entry, n^ta prolege: If a woman marry within the forty days, she
loses her quarentine Dower. Brook ^y. Dower 101. 1. M. But if otherwise she
be ou^^ed by the heir within the forty days, she shall have a Writ de
quarentena habenda no ^^ br. 161. b.

SECT. IV. Assignement of Dower.
NOw to assignement of Dower, it is true that when it appears certain what it
is that a woman shall have in Dower, she may enter presently when her husband
is dead, and tarry for none Assignement, per Littleton, yet Perkins says* if a
man dye seized of iij. s. rent charge in fee, though here the third part be
certain enough, his widow shall not distrai^^^ for xij. d. before
Assignement. Nay further, if she rec^^^^ this Dower by action, yet she shall
not distraine for it before execution: But if the Lord of a Manor do marry
with a woman tenant by iij. s. rent and dye, here she shall have xij. d. Dower
by way of reteiner without any Assignement. And in case where rent is recovered
in Dower, the Viscount may deliver seisen by grass, by a bough, by a clod of
land, or by the distress of beasts, taken upon the land, though the day of
payment be not yet come. But the party cannot charge any those beasts, 40. Ed.
3. fo. 22.

SECT. V. who may assign Dower.
SOmetime Dower is assignable by the husbands heir, as if a man seized of two
acres of land in one County, make a feoffement of one acre with warranty and
dye, the heir may indow the widow with parcel of the acre remaining in
allowance and full satisfaction of the whole Dower, and been, for if in a writ
of Dower brought by her against the feoffee of her husband, he vouch the
heir, etc. she shall recover conditionally against the voucher. And if the
heir make a Lease for life of part of such lands as are to him descended, and
indow his mother of the parcel remaining in allowance of all, etc. it is good,
yet in this case in a Writ of Dower against the Lessee, if he vouch his
Lessor, the recovery shall not be against the vouchee, because he is not bound
to warranty as the heir of his father. But if he had been generally vouched,
the heir, and had generally entered into warranty, judgment perhaps should be
conditionally against him. Sometimes the husbands one feofee, or vendee shall
assign Dower for the rest. And if a woman accept Dower from one of her
husbands feofees, in parcel of his land, in allowance of her Dower of the
rest, it seems this shall bind her against the other (...)fees, yet some
have doubted thereof, because the other feoffees, say they, cannot plead this
in an action of Dower against them, neither is there means to bring into Court
him which made assignement, being a stranger. If diverse Ioyntenants be of
certain lands assignement of Dower, by one of them shall be good against them
all. But if one Ioyntenant of land assign rent in allowance of Dower, his
follows shall not be distrained for this rent, for there could be none
inforcement to assign Dower after this manner. Likewise if the Desseisor
assign a rent charge out of the land, this shall not bind the desseis^e, causa
qua supra,

Assignement of Dower may be by one which is a Disseisor Abator, or Intr^dor,
etc. if this assignement be without fraud in the woman endowed, and sans ^or^
to any other person, it is good, though the Assignor be a tortious Possessor,
but if there be any such couine, or tort, the assignement is voidable, for the
most part by entry. 44. Ed. 3. fol. 46. A woman that had title of Dower, with
intent of defeating the Tenants warranty made a stranger to enter, and against
him she recovered Dower, it was holden in an Assize, which she brought
afterward, that he recovery would not serve her, but her estate was gained by
des^isin, because of the couine.

Assignement of Dower by him which has Francktenement is good, and if the wife
has not right of Dower of that which is so assigned by the Tenant of the
Francktenement, yet that shall stand until it be defeated. And if tenant per
elegit, statute staple, or statute merchant assign Dower, it is not good. And
Assignement of Dower by guardian in soccage seems not to be good, says
Perkins, for a Writ of Dower lies not against such a guardian, see 29. Assis.
p. 68. But Assignement by guardian in Chiualry is good till it be defeated* and
it shall never be defeated, if the woman's title of Dower be just.

SECT. VI. Assignement to her self, or de la pluis beale.
IF a man seized of forty acres of land, 20. by Chiualry, and 20. by soccage
die, etc. and his wife being guardian in soccage, bring her Writ of Dower in the
Kings or some others Court, against the Lord which is guardian in Chiualry, he
may plead this matter, and pray to have it adjudged, that the woman indow her
self of the fa^^est in her own possession, and if she cannot deny the case,
it shall be judged for the Lord, to retain quietly the lands which he has
during the nonage of the Infant. And after this judgment the woman may indow
her self in presence of her neighbors, by limits and bounds de la pluis beale
part of the soccage lands, to have and to hold to her self for term of her
life. This manner of indowment is never before judgment be given for it,
either in the Kings or some other Court, and it is to save the state of guardian
in Chiualry, Perkins gives this matter, which Litlton leaves thus raw, a
turn or two more. And so does Keble 14. Hen. 7. 26. If, say they, the land
which the woman has by her gardianship, be not the whole value of her just
Dower for the smalnesse of it, or because it is charged with some rent, she may
show the matter in her replication: And if the Lord cannot deny it, or do
trauers it, and it is found against him, then shall the woman have so much of
the lands holden in Chiualry, as together with that she has in possession
already, may make up just a third part of her husbands inheritance. If the
inheritance were all of soccage tenure, the widow being guardian cannot indow
her self de la pluis beale, but she shall be allowed a third part in her
account for so long time, as she is Guardian, for if she bring her Writ of
Dower in this case against the heir he cannot plead her gardinship, and that
she may indow her self, See 45. Edw. ^. fol. 6. If such a Feme guardian bring a
Writ of Dower against one whom her husband infeofed with warranty, he shall
not pray that she (...)ow her self, for he may vouch the heir which
Gardin(...) Chiualry cannot do. It is no good plea for Gardine in Chiualry to
say the Demandant was guardian in soccage, etc. but he must show that she is
guardian in soccage ^our del brief purchase, and this is good till she have
showed by replication the land deuested from her possession.

If a widow guardian in facto, of some lands that were her husbands, and holden
in Chiualry, purchase her Writ of Dower against another Guardian in Chiualry,
he shall not plead the special matter, and plead vt supra, for the wardship
is here to the widows own use and profit.

SECT. VII. Assignement of Dower by the King. Statutum prerogative ca 4 fact.
17. Ed. 2.
THe Statute is that after the deaths of husbands which held of the King in
Cap(...), the King shall assign Dower, yea although the heir be of full age,
Vidue si volu^runt. And such widows before assignation of Dower, whether the
heir be of full age or under, shall swear not to marry without the Kings
license: If they do marry ^a^^ license, the King shall take into his hands as
a (...)esse all the L^^^s and Tenements holden of him in Dower so that the
woman shall take no profit of it, till she or her husband have satisfied the
Kings will by fine, which was wont to be tempore regis Henrici patris regis.
Ed. ^. ^aith the Statute, at full yearly value of the whole Dower, nisi
vberiorem g^^^iam habu^^^nt ^ulieres. And women which be themselves Tenants in
Capite of inheritance, what age soever they be of, shall swear likewise not to
marry without the Kings license. Si fecerint, terrae cap^^^tur eodem modo in
manus Regis, etc. This Statute is proved to be but confirmation of the common
Law, ^4. H. 3. Pr^rogatiue 27. i^ Fitzhe^^^rt, and by ^^. Char c. 7. ul a vidua
distringatur ad se ^^^^tandum dummodo voluerit viuere ^^^e marito: Ita tamen
quod secu^itatem faciat, quod se non maritabit ^ine assensu nostro, si de nobis
tenuerit vel sine assensu domini sui si de alio ^^nnerit. Fitzb. in natu. br
263. shows the manner of indowment by the King: The widow must come into
Chancery, and make oath not to marry sans license, whereupon the King may make
the Assignement in the Chancery, and direct his Writ to the Escheator,
certifying him that he has assigned a third part of such lands, with a third
part of the liberty of Court view of franckpledge, etc. commanding him to make
livery of the same to have in Dower, or the woman may after she has sworn,
have a writ reciting her oath, and commanding the Escheator to make
assignement. But the most usual course is vt antea.

And the King though he has committed custody of lands to another person, may
assign Dower to the widow in Chancery notwithstanding, and she shall have a
Writ to the Escheator, y^^ and the King may grant a Writ to the Escheator,
commanding him to take surety of the widow not to marry sans license, and then
to assign her Dower, as praecipi^us tibi ^^ cap^o sacramento, etc. assignari
and lib^^i ^^cia^, etc.

If the Tenant which is dead held by Chi^^^ry of some Bishopric or such like
which is in the Kings hands by vacancie, the widow must demand her Dower in
Chancery, and she shall have a Writ for her Assignement to the Escheator, but
in this case she swears not to marry sans license. So is it also when Dower
is demanded of la^^^, holden of a common person in Chi^^^ry, where the heir is
in the Kings ward p^r ^^nage.

And the King may assign Dower in Chancery rendering rent to him, because the
lands assigned do exceed a just third part of the Tenements, whereof Dower is
assignable. If the widow be so weak ^^ impotent that she cannot travel to
the Chancery to take her oath, and demand Dower, she may sue a special Writ to
some person, both to take her oath, and to receive Att^rney* whom she will
constitute to sue in her stead. If livery be made to the heir being of full
age with a reservation of Dower, to be assigned to the King, and then the
widow comes into the Chancery for Dower as she must do, there shall go a
special Writ to the Escheator, to warn the heir that he be in Chancery at a
certain day, and the widow shall be appointed the same day to receive her
Assignement. But if the Writ of Livery directed to the Escheator be general,
without clause of salua do^a per nos assig^anda, the widow must now ^^^ for
her Dower by Writ of Dower against the heir. If the King when he makes livery
reserues Assignement of Dower to himself in his Writ to the Escheator, now
whether the widow come and demand dower in Chancery, or demand no dower, yet
the reuersion is in the heir after assignement, for after the death of Tenant
in Dower the heir shall not (...) any ne^ livery. Because the first writ
command^ all the land^ to be delivered, and so the Escheator does deliver all,
nothing being reserved to the King, but only Assignement of Dower. If after
this Assignement i^ ^e ^^r^is^^ by the heir, or other body, that the land
which the woman has, is of far greater value than it was made by the extent,
etc. if the excess ^e (...) and returned, ^ s^i^e facias shall go* forth ^^
cause the woman to come and show cause why she should not take a n^w Indowment.

If she appear and cannot gaine^ay the matter, or if she were warned and make
default, it seems in both cases, she shall be endowed a new. So that parcel
of the lands which she has, shall be taken from her, ^^ the King may, if he
will, make assignment altogether new, by a new Writ to the Viscount. If the
widow after she is sworn and endowed, do marry sans license, the King sends
to the Escheator to seize those lands, which she holds in Dower, by a Writ
reciting the oath, the indowment and marriage with this in it, Nos contemptum
hu^^^modi nolentes transi^^ impunitu^, necnon inde^^^^tati nostrae volentes
prospleere, tibi praecipimus (si ita est) ^nc omnia terr^^ and ^^^^ment quae
ten^t in Dote, etc. capias in man nos^^, Ita quod de (...) prouenientibus nobis
respond^^^ ad scaccar^^^ (...) quousque nobis d^ Forisfac^u^^ ad nos inde
pertinen^ satisfactur ^u^rit. Thus far (...).

Stamford argues, whether Fitzherbert deliver the Law rightly or no, in this
that he says, the King may assign Dower in Chancerie, though he have
committed o^^^ the wardship of land to some other body: for many writs are in
the year books brought against the Committee in such a case. And in some
books the woman recouers Dower, the King never being made privy: As titulo
^^^ del roy 23. (...). is the case 4. H. 7. fol. ^ Action of Dower was against
the Kings Committee during the heirs ^onage, the Defendant showed how it was
fo^^d by office, that the husbands father tenant to the King, died seized
having issue, the husband which entered sans office, and died* leaving his heir
under age, all which matter was (...) by office: whereupon the King seized,
committed the lan^ to the Defendant, etc. Judgment ^^ action.

And the widow was adjudged dowable. Bry^^, who at the first was in mind to
proceed no further without ^^d of the King, when he had considered the Statute
de Bigamis* cap. 3. awarded presently that the woman should recover Dower. The
Statute is, Vbi custodes hereditatis mari^orum suo^ cui^^dias habent ex dono
vel concess^^ne regis, ^^ue custodes ^^^um petitarum ^enea^^, ^iue heredes
dictorum ^^^^men^orum vocentur ad warrantiam si excipiant quod sine reg^
respondere non possu^^, non ideo ^^persed^^tur, qu^^ in lo^^el^^dicta pro^^
iustus fuerit procedatur^ Stamford notes some books wherein is ^ound, that
he^re^ in costodie of Committ^^s vouched to Warrantie, have come in and had aid
of the King, directly contrary to this third Chapter de Biga^is. But whether
the Kings grant in those cases were Durante (...), or Durante been placito* it
appears not in the ^ookes, and that makes a great difference.

Likewise if the Writ of Dower ^e (...) Committee of a Committee: And if
Wardship ^^ committed to the widow without exception or foreprize of Dower,
she is concluded to claim any Dower during the Wardship. In Stamfords opinion
the new (...) and the case supra 4. H. 7. do not agree. Howbeit for ^hy part ^
find not the repugnan^ie; for as the King may assign Dower to his widows,
though the heir^ be of full ^ge, Vid^a si voluerit, so Fitzhorbe^^ says he
may assign Dower if he will, though he have committed the la^^ ^^* And this
does not deny, but rather affirm that ^^ some case the Committee may assign
Dower* If the Committee (as Stamford himself confesses) assign. Dower to one
that is not dowable, or if his assignation exceed just measure, the King may
reform it. And if a wom^n ^^dowed by the Kings Committee will marry (...)
because she stands vn^wor^e, for in the C^mm^^ pla^e is no ^wearing in this
point, her ^^nds are never ^ whitlesse subject to ^eizure for the contempt,
therefore in the end he concl^deth, that where ^ ^ard is omitted over, the
woman has election, whether (...)* (...) ^^^ to ^he King in Chan^erie, or at
Common Law against the Committee, unless it be where the grant of a Ward is
but Du^an^e been placito* for in that case of necessity the suit must be to
the King. S^^ Sir (...) (...), fol. ^8* the reason why a Writ of Dower is
maintenable against the Committee of the King.

Stamford th^^^teth Fitzherbert also in that that he says, a widow must
demand Dower against the heir, which has Liue^^^ without clau^^ ^^ (...) dote
p^^ ^^^ assig^and^; for when Liue^^^ is before Assignement of Dower, there is
commonly a saving in the Writs of Liuerie, if so be the woman were found to be
wise, etc. by the office. And if she be not found by the Inquisition, then
there is a leaving out of Sal^a Dote, etc. in suing of general Liuerie. Indeed
if she were not found to be the Kings Tenants wise in the office, the heir may
safely s^e* Liuerie within (...) such saying: But (...) agrees with O^slow
P(...) 32. in the case of Mines, that for Assignation of Dower, if the King
have not expressly relinqu^shed it, though the Liuerie be s^m^ ^l^^se of salua
Dote* etc. yet this makes no such wai^ing of the prerogative, but that the King
may assign Dower to a widow, that by an office is found to have been wife to
the Kings Tenant at the time of his death, for without so much it seems she
can neither demand it in Chancerie of the King, nor of the Committee, nor of
the heir in the Common place, quere vide fol. 109. Prerogative of not
assigning. The King has a prerogative as well of not assigning, as of assigning
Dower. As if the husbands Feoffee in a writ of Dower against him call to
Warrantie the heir in the wardship of the King, etc. the woman shall recover
against the Tenant, and no recovery shall be as yet against the heir: But
neither any common person, nor yet the Kings Committee of wardship, shall have
this prerogative: But for the King himself, if in the case Judgment to
recover is value be given for the Tenant, he must stay for execution till the
Kings hands be amoued, etc.

If a woman be endowed by her husbands Feoffee, of such lands as the husband
did not die seized of, whereof also for this reason the King can have no
wardship. Stamfords opinion is, that she cannot marry s^ns license.

For by ^6. Assisarum Pl. 57. it appears that where a woman was endowed, by
Guardian in Chivalry, who was afterward attainted of treason, and his
Seigniorie forfeited to the King, she must hold now of the King, and not of the
heir which was in reuersion of the land: He accords with Fitzherbert, that
the Statute of Prerogative is understood only of lands holden in capite, and
therefore she must demand Dower of lands holden of a Bishopric, or of Tenant
in capite, when the temporalities, or the heir are in Custodia regis, she must
be endowed in Chancery, but she may marry when she list, and shall take no
oath to the contrary: Also if a widow will relinquish her Dower of lands
holden in capite, she may marry ^ans license. And see Dyer 3. M. 123. b.
affirms, that the wife of Tenant parauaile shall not be sworn as widow of
the King in the Chancery, when her Dower is assigned to her. The reason per
Stamford is the copulative connection of Et si se maritauerit, to the former
words of the Statute of demanding Dower, and swearing not to marry: The words
si viduae voluerint, he takes to imply no more but election of refusal, or
taking of Dower, and that is manifest by the last clause of the Statute.

But by Fitzherberts writ, which he sets down for form of seizure, when a
widow is married sans license, it appears that the King may grant to another
the marriage of his widow or widows, and for marriage before agreement with
such a Grantee the King may seize, and composition with such a Grantee by Baron
or Feme before or after marriage, is as good as if it were with the King
himself. But now by the Statute 32. H. 8. cap. 46. This composition is given
to the Master of the Wards and Liueries, with three of the Council of that
Court, who have also authority to tax according to the Statute of Prerogative,
a reasonable fine for marriage sans license.

How much it ought to be is plain by the Statute, as also what lands are
subject to the Statute, as also what lands are subject to seizure as well of the
husbands lands as of the wives. If that were reason, says Fitzherbert, a
woman's inheritance might be seized too, Et semble a moy, the King cannot grant
marriage of his widows as he may of his wards; for a widow may remain sole
without penalite, or paying for it, by Mag. Chart. cap. 7.

But Stamford includes, that a widow endowed o^ lands holden in capite by the
Kings Committee, or husbands heir, though unsworn is not freed from marriage
sans license, for she is presently as soon as she is endowed, tenant to the
King, and not to the heir which is in reuersion, yet only the heir is he,
which shall have action of waste against her; but if trespass be done upon
the ground, she may have a writ out of Chancerie, supposing entry upon the
Kings possession. And Auowrie to be made by the King rests only upon her,
as holds Wood, 1. H. 7. fol. 17. and 4. H. 7. 1.

Now note that Endowment in Chancerie is of such strength, that be it by wrong
or by right, it cannot be avoided by plea without suit in Chancerie: And if it
be too little, the woman must stand in her own harms, that has once
attempted it in Chancerie, be she within a^e, or of full age, as appears,
18. Ed. 3. fol. 29.

If any office be trauersed, because the land is holden not of the King, but
of some other Lord, who therefore has an Ouster le maine vna cum exitibus, yet
Dower which is already assigned remains vndefeated, till another suit be made
in Chancerie to avoid it.

Yet in this case, because Admeasurement, is no prejudice to the King of whom
the land is not holden, the Lord that tendreth trauerse, may have a Writ of
Admeasurement at y^ Common Law. And the heir may have Admeasurement of Dower
assigned by his Ancestor: But an Abator cannot have Admeasurement, neither can
Guardian in fait have Admeasurement upon assignment by Guardian in droit, nor if
the heir were at full age at his Ancestors death, and died, his heir being
within age can the Guardian have Admeasurement, but where a woman is endowed in
Chancerie, and afterward the heir, or some other for the King surmiseth
e^cesse of value, it may be admeasured beginning with Scire facias, as
Fitzherbert has taught supra, and fol. 249. ^. If the husband had l(...) in
diverse Counties, by reason whereof diverse writs of diem clausit extremum were
awarded after his death into every of those Counties, the widow cannot be
endowed till such time as all the writs be returned into Chancery. If after she
is once endowed in Chancerie, her Dower be recovered from her by any title, she
has no remedy but to remove the record of this recovery into Chancerie, and
then upon the first record which shows that she was endowed, and upon this
other of recovery she shall have Scire facias, reciting both the records
against him which is tenant of the two parts, to reseise them into the Kings
hands, and so to be newly endowed, but not to recover any damages, though
damages were recovered against her, Lib. 43. Assisar. Pl. 32. for by the
latter part of the Statute Prerogative, cap. 4. It seems the King has lost
his prerogative, and that he is bound by, West 1. cap. 22. Note that woman
Joint purchaser with her husband is not within this Law to fine for her
marriage, when she becomes a widow (say I) therefore well fare a Ioynture.

SECT. VIII. Suit for Dower at the Common Law.
THus we have seen how, and when a widow mu^^ f^^ for Dower in the Ch^^^er^^,
viz. when either her husband died the (...) tenant in cap^te, or by ^nights
service, his heir under age, or otherwise tenant to some other, ^hole lands
are in the Kings hands by vacancie, or nonage of the heir. But if the husband,
which held in Socage, or by ^nights service, not of the King, did give or alien
any man^^r of way his lands, or were disseised of them, or died s^is^^ of them.
The widow, if by simple demand she cannot obtain her Dower to be assigned
her, may have a w^^t of Dower Vnde nihil habet at the Common Law against him
which is tenant of the Franktenement, by the old Not. breuium this writ is
maintainable against him which has possession of the land, by what manner
soever, or against the Guardian in Chivalry; in this or like form, Rex
V^cecomiti, etc. command A. to render to B. which was the wise of C. ^er
reasonable Dower, quae ad came contingit de libero ^enemento, quo^ fuit praedict
C. sometime her late husband in D. vnde ni^i^^abet, and vnde queritur quod A.
ei defortiat, etc. and nisi fecerit and B. fecerit t^ securum de clamore
prosequendo, etc. summoneas A. vt sit apud Westminster ostensurus. If the Dower were
ad ostium Ecclesiae, or ex assensu patris, or otherwise there is mention made
of it in the writ. In London there may be a writ from the King to the Mayor and
Sheriffs in these words, Quod Iusticietis A. quod just and ^^ne delatione,
and secundum consuetudinem ciuitatis nostrae London redd' B. quae fuit vxor C.
rationabilem dotem, etc. Et Iusticietis D. quod just, etc. whereby appears
that a widow in London may have a writ of Dower against several tenants by
several Iusticies, as well as at the Common Law several Precipes against
several tenants all in one writ, the Process in the Common Place, is summons,
Grand cape and petty cape, in the Common Place this writ of Dower, vnde nihil
habet, must be returned into the Kings Court, Et per grand reason, says
Britton cap. 10. 4. For if two or more women should strive, every of them
affirming her self to be the lawful wife of him which is dead, not minding to
be buried with him, as is the corse in India, but to get a third of his lands:
This must be tried by Certificate from the Bishop, unto whom if any but the
King should write for the deciding of debate, it might fall out to be all in
vain, because none has power but the King to compel the Bishop to make
Certificate. In the next Chapter Britton shows, that if the Tenant vouch to
warranty one which appears according to summons, the Plea shall proceed
betwixt the Plaintiff, and the Warrantor, or Vouchee, the Tenant keeping
seisen till the Warrantie be determined* Then if the Garrantie cannot be
denied, nor the woman's right disproued, if that which she demands were
certainly assigned to her for Dower from her husband, she shall recover
against the Tenant, Et le renant le value.

But if the demand be of no other than reasonable Dower* the woman shall
recover in value against the Warrantor, and the Tenant shall hold his land in
peace: If so be this Warrantor be under age, yet the Law favors widows so
much, that the plaint shall not attend his full age. Therefore if the Tenant
show forth any Charter, Deed, or special cause, whereby the Court may perceive
that the Infant is bound to Warrantie by the Ancestors act, he shall answer
presently, what age soever he be of. And though the Infant in ward be aliened
by his Guardian or Gardians from hand to hand, this shall not prejudice the
Voucher, for always he shall vouch to warrantie the Heir and not the Guardian,
who is bound to present his ward so vouched in Court without difference,
whether it be one or many parceners. Thus says Britton, and 48. Ed. 3. fol. 5.
agrees, that he which voucheth an heir under age, must vouch him in ward de
vntiel. If he be a ward, it is said there also, that he which voucheth an
heir at full age, must show a Deed, quaere. But when the lands are in the
Gardians own possession to his own profit and use, the writ of Dower must ^ee
brought against the Guardian, and not against the Infant. 46. Ed. 3. fol. 19.
Where Mowbray says, where an Infant is vouched in ward of the King, the woman
shall recover Dower maintenant. 3. H. 6. fol. 17. It was agreed per curiam,
that in Action of Dower, if the tenant vouch the heir in the Kings ward within
the same County where the writ is brought, the Demandant shall not recover
before the warrantie be determined: but the Law is contra, if the Voucher had
prayed summons in another County, for then the Demandant should recover
maintenant, yet by the Register fol. 7. if in a writ of Dower the tenant vouch
in Durham, the Demandant shall abide trial of the warrantie, and not recover
presently. But by Fitzherbert for a rule in titulo* Voucher, if the tenant
vouch in a foreign County, she shall recover maintenant, and never attend
trial of the warrantie, but when Voucher is in mesme l^ county. If the heir
vouched to warrantie, aft^r ^hee has appeared and count^^ pleaded the
warrantie, or before appearance, being lawfully summoned do (...)ke default,
the Defendant shall have execution against him maintenant, if he have lan^s
within the County, Brook Dower 5. And also Dower the 6^. when the heir is
vouched in the same County, the woman shall recover against the heir. Dyer 3.
Eliz. ^^^. In Dower the tenant vouch the heir in the same County, who co(...)
as one that has nothing by descent in ^ee, and renders Dower, the tenant
auers, that he has ass^^^ by descent, qu(...) if he should not say in fee, for
by Weston and Brown, if the lands be in tail, it does not (...) the tenants
lan^s And the opinion of the Court was, that the Demandant shall have Judgment
presently aga(...) the heir if he has lands, etc. and if not against the
tenant, and that before the issue of the ass^^s tried.

1 Ed. ^. fol. 24* In a writ of Dower against Tenant for life, if he vouch his
Lessor, which is heir to the husband, the woman shall recover against the
Tenant, and he over against the Vouchee. But when the heir i^ vouched by
Charter of his Ancestor, the Demandant shall (...)cover against the Vouchee,
and the Tenant shall hold (...) peace: Yet in a Writ of Dower against Lessee
for (...)e of the Barons demise, if the heir be vouched to Warrantie (though
here the reuersion which is the cause of the Warrantie were made by the Baron)
the Demand(...) shall recover against the Tenant, and he against the heir. If
the tenant vouch in a writ of Dower, and the Vouch(...) counter plead the
Warrantie, the woman shall recover maintenant, though in other actions it be
otherwise. 46. Ed. 3. fol. 25. and 49. Ed. 3. fol. 23. In a Writ of Dower the
Tenant vouched himself, to s^^e the (...) tail. 2. H. 4. fol. 18. in Dower
the Tenant vouched the heir, Process went on to sequatur sub suo periculo
sicut alias, the Vouchee came not, it was awarded the Demandant should recover
against the Vouchee, if he had lands in the same County. If not, that she
shall recover against the Tenant, and he over in value. But first it was
examined if the Vouchee were heir to the Baron.

21. Ed. 3. fol. 30. In Dower the tenant voucheth the Barons heir in ward of
the demandant per cause de nurture, showing the Ancestors Deed, he was
compelled to plead in bar, because now the woman might be endowed De la plus
beale, for Gardeine pur nurture, has always intendment to Soccage tenure.
Vide Brook Dower 42.

5. Ed. 3. The fathers wife was endowed, the Grandmother brought a writ of
Dower against her, ^he vouched the heir in reuerston, the Demandant recovered
against the tenant, and she against the heir a third part of two parts
remaining, but not in value. See Brook Dower 79. If the Grandmother die, the
mother may enter into the first dower, and the heir into the second.

SECT. IX. Plees in a writ of Dower.
ADmitting there were no Voucher, let us run over other matters usually
pleaded. 14. H. 4. 33. in Dower was demanded a third part of two mils and of
other lands, y^ tenant asked Judgment of the plaintiff: for they were during
the whole time of couerture, but the ^^te of two mills, viz. to^ts. 38. Ed. 3.
fol. 13. In a writ of dower against one as Guardian of land, and heir of K. de
R. the defendant answered that the Infants father was ^. de R. Judgment del
brief, and if the writ were good, he was ready to render dower: You cannot,
said Knyuet, plead to the writ and render dower both at one day, so the
demandant praying Judgment, seisen was awarded her. And because she auerred
that the defendant was not touts temps prist, to render dower, an Inquest of
damages was awarded, and that execution should cease till the Inquest were
past.

13. Ed. 4. fol. 7. In action of dower the tenant pleaded touts temps prist de
render Dower, and uncore est. The demandant said that I. S. her husband died
seized, and that such a day and year she required the tenant to indow her at
Dale, which refused, etc. he replied that at the same day he offered to go
with her to the lands, and to assign her dower, but she refused, sans ceo,
that he refused: The Court held the Issue well taken by this special pleading.
But if he had said generally and barely he refused not, some thought it had
not been sufficient, insomuch as it denies not the request.

Bryan said the demandant here might not have several Judgments of one thing,
for note, she was to recover dower upon the first plea, but all the other
Justices were of opinion clear, that she should have Judgment, of Dower
maintenant, and 18. Ed. 3. In action of Dower Judgment was to recover dower
with an inquest for damages. As in a Quare impedit the Plaintiff may have one
writ to the Bishop, and another to the Sheriff to enquire of damages.

Likewise 14. H. 8. fol. 25. in a plea of dower upon confession the demandant
recovered Judgment, and after Judgment auerring that her husband died seized,
she prayed a writ to enquire of damages, and habuit: for if the demandant in
dower will recover damages, she must ever surmize that her husband died
seized, though the Tenant confess the Action, or plead but only to the Writ,
and in the end of her Demise she may maintain the Writ, for sur plee and
brief, the dying seized appears not, without surmise, etc. 22. H. 6. fol. 44.

SECT. X. Deteiner of Evidence.
BY Perkins, none may deteine Dower for deteining of evidence but only the
heir to whom the evidence belongs, and the heir, when he pleads, must show
what the evidence is, etc. And they must concern the lands descended, unto him
whereof Dower is demanded; for he may not deteine Dower of land which the
Charters concern not, or for Charters concerning his purchased lands, or those
whereof he has no seisin. Aliter, if they concern some reuersion descended;
But if the heir come in vouched to warranty by the Barons feofee, he cannot
plead this Deteiner of Evidence, because in verity the land is another man's to
whom most rightly the Charters belong. But one copercener may have this plea
after partition against her mother or other Demandant in Dower, though the
evidence concern the other parceners and her all alike; see 41. Titulo Dower
in Brook, If a widow that is with child deteine evidence against her husbands
daughter and heir, or other heir collateral, it shall be no sufficient plea
to delay Dower. 1. Perkins 70. and 71.

18. Hen. 8. fol. 1. The heir said, the Demandant detained a bag ensealed
with the evidence, concerning the land, which if he would deliver he was
ready to render Dower, bone plee per Curiam.

33. Hen. 6. fol. 51. The Tenant pleaded for part of the land, whereof Dower
was demanded non tenure, for another part detinue of Charters, for another part
Ioyntenancie which his father, for a fourth part demanded view: but it might
not be granted, because he took notice to himself of that part by pleading to
the rest. And the Plaintiff to his plea of suruiuor pleaded his release made
to the father her husband in his life time, Issi^^ seisi que Dowre, etc. The
plea of Evidence detained as Littleton said, went to the whole action, quod
fuit, negatum, v^de Brook ^y. Dower 4 but he was forced to show what evidence
he deteineth, viz. a special Charter.

4^. Ed. 3. The Tenant pleaded a withholding of Evidence certain, conce^ning
his inheritance, and shows what: Et q^e il a^ estre toures temps prist si,
etc. the woman made title to two deeds, by gift to her husband and her self:
and for the other Evidence, she said whereas the Defendant claimed as brother
and heir to her husband, she kept it to the use of her child: si ou^sq^ soit
inseint q^ serra ^eure si dien luy done nostre, and issue was taken, whether
she were ins^int die obitus mariti, not whether she were inseint per son baron
die obit^s. And that book of 41. Edw. ^. is cited for law, in Sir Edw. Cokes
7. Rep. fol. 9 that a woman may deteine Charters for the heir in ventre ^a
mere. And 22. Hen. 6. fol. 16. It was agreed that deteiner of Evidence is no
plea in an Action of Dower, unless it concern Inheritance descended. Et si^
videtur ibidem, says Brook, that if it concern inheritance, though it be not
the very land, whereof Dower is demanded, the plea is good, 9. Edw. 4. to plea
of Charters detained, the Demandant answered veies cy^le fait and pr^^ dower:
the Court reading and perceiving it to be the deed, etc. gave judgment for
Dower.

14. Hen. 6. fol. 4 The Tenant pleaded detinue of a chest with two fines and
other Charters: per Martin Justice, if the Chest were open he ought to declare
every deed, specially by it self, and so it is likewise in action of detinue,
for a Chest open with evidence, quod curia concessit.

2. Hen. 7. fol. 6. Is set down, the reason why the certainty of evidence
detained must be shown, viz. That the Jury may be more able to make their
verdict, and the Court to iugde to whom they appertain: for if they belong to
the Defendants purchase, he is put to a Writ of detinue.

And 6. Eliz. Dyer 230. see, a man seized of four acres soccage land, and of
one deed or Charter concerning those lands, by his last will in writing devised
three of his acres to his youngest son in fee, the fourth acre to his wife
for life, the remainder to a stranger in fee, h^ died, his wife got the deed,
entered into her acre, and the son into the three acres devised to him, the
woman brings a Writ of Dower, for a third of these three acres. The son
pleads detinue of the Charter, which if she would de^^uer, he is and always
had been ready to render Dower: she showed the whole cause by way of
replication, and upon that the other side demurred. It seems (says Dyer)
that this plea serves for none, save only the Barons heir, and for no land,
but that which is descended: And not for the heir himself if he come in by
voucher, or ^s Tenant by receipt in default of Tenant for life: Where he is no
more but tenant per admittance, for such a one cannot say, that he has been
toutes temps prist a render Dower si etc. Neither can guardian in chiualry have
this plea, for he cannot have a writ of detinue of the heirs evidence: And
this plea is a bar for no lands but those which the Charters detained do
concern. 22. H. 6. Where Newton says, the reason of this bar is, because
the evidence being seen and looked into, may yield matter to bar the
Demandant of her Dower, for such lands therefore as the Charters do not touch,
Dower shall be granted of them, this plea notwithstanding. Also certainty must
ever be alleged in this case, if the evidence be not in some bag, bo^, or
chest, sealed or locked up. And note, the Defendant supra was not named heir
by the demandant, neither had he enabled himself to this plea as heir,
therefore the Court might take it indifferently: As in a quare impedit* if the
incumbent be named Clericus, the Court takes him for a Disturber if he enable
not himself as incumbent, or person impersonee. Another fault was found in
this Tenants conclusion of his plea, because he said vnco^e prist a render
Dower, but in very deed he relied not again on the condition if the Demandant
would deliver the Charter according to the ancient book of entries. And at the
last judgment was given pro dote.

See Sir Edw. Cokes 9. Rep. in Anna Beddingfelds case 1. That the Charters
ought to concern the land whereof Dower is demanded, and not other lands
descended to the heir. 2. He that pleads that plea ought to show the certainty
whereof a certain issue may be joined, or that they are in a chest or box
sealed, which import sufficient certainty, whereof certain issue may be taken,
and in both cases action of detinue may be brought by the heir. 3. No stranger
although that he be Tenant of the land, and has the evidences conveyed unto
him, may plead in a Writ of Dower deteiner of Charters, but that plea is only
in prinity for the heir of the husband. Also the heir shall be in the degree
of a stranger in five cases. First, if the heir has the land by purchase.
Secondly, if the heir has deli^e^ed the Charters to the wife. Thirdly, so the
heir be not immediate vouchee, namely, by the Tenant in the Writ of Dower, but
by his vouchee. Fourthly, if the heir comes in as vouchee, having no lands in
the County where the land is demanded. Fifthly, if he comes in as Tenant by
receipt. And Guardian in Chiualry may not plead deteinement of Charters, for he
may not conclude his plea if the Demandant will deliver to him the Charters,
etc. for the Charters which concern the heritage of the heir shall not be
delivered to the Guardian as it is adjudged in 10. Edw. 3. 49.

SECT. XI. Deteining of the heir.
AS the heir only may deteine Dower for deteining of evidence, so the Guardian
in Chiualry only may dete^^^ Dower for deteining the heir, and that he may
plead and conclude q^ il ad en touts temps prist, for the ward belongs to him.

If a widow eloigne the infant or heir of her husband, though some other body
have him by her delivery, yet the Guardian in Chiualry may detain Dower, except
she can redeliuer him to the Guardian in as good plight, as he was at the time
of the eloig^ment, that is, unmarried if he were eloigned unmarried. But a
woman nourishing her own Infant, the son or heir which her husband left
her, if a stranger clauning as Guardian fake him from her, the right Lord shall
not detain dower for this cause. But if a woman take and remove the heir from
the place where he was nourished at time of the Barons death; Now if a
stranger wrongfully take him from her, the true and right Guardian may detain
dower. And this matter is pleadable by Guardian in Chivalry, though he come
into Court, by reason that the heir is vouched to be in his ward; for by right
the custody of the Infant can appertain to none but to him, unless it be by
his grant or agreement. Certainty is required in pleading of this detainer,
as well as in the other, viz. that she which demands dower has eloigned or
detained I. S by name, son, or daughter W. etc. 22. H. 6. fol. 16. 2. H. 7.
fol. 6.

SECT. XII. Possession in the Demandant.
39. Ed. 3. 17. DOwer was demanded, a third part of a carue of land; the tenant
said the demandant her self was seized of a third part of it already:
Judgment de brief per Knyuet it was no good plea, without showing who
assigned it, or that she recovered it. For if she were in by disseisen, she
must have dower of the other two parts remaining: nevertheless by which the
tenant was chased to answer for the two parts. 7. o^ H. 6. 33. and 34. In
action of dower against t^^, one said he had assigned rent, out of the land six
shillings and eight pence annual to the demandant for term of her life, which
she accepted, etc. The other pleaded tou^s t^mps prist, etc. The assignment was
holden a good plea, etc. the demandant said she never agreed. Now, per Strange,
she was to recover a moytie maintenant, though the other plea were not yet
tried: for this was a confession of one, and pleader in bar of the other.

2. H. 4. fol. 7. A Lady sued in Chancerie to be endowed of diverse Manors
which were her husbands, where the heir was in guard of the King, as was found
by the Diem clausit extremum there returned, and because it appeared that King
Richard had committed wardship of the lands and body of the heir till full age
of the said heir to her by patent without foreprise, or mention of dower, she
was ousted of dower per agard de toutes les Justices, till full age of the
heir, simile, 11. of H. 4. in case of the Lady Arrundell. Fitzherbert says
likewise, If a woman take a lease for years of land, whereof she is dowable,
she shall not sue for Dower during these years, Not. br. 149. c. Bracton
propounds to be considered what shall be done when the widow brings her Writ
of Dower, vnde nihil habet, and yet it is so that she has part of her Dower
already: If (says he) it be proved, or she cannot deny it, cadit breue, and
she shall not recover the residue, but by Writ de recto de dote: Therefore let
her accept no part of her Dower, before she purchase her Writ, and let it
contain all the Deforcers, be they in one County, or in many.

When they are so put together, if now she accept any thing of her Dower
without Judgment, the acceptance of part shall be no exception against her,
for she may confess satisfaction for that part: If peradventure she have
already taken part of her Dower from some one person before the obtaining or
purchase of her Writ, let his name and the summons for him be in the Writ
notwithstanding, and then if it be objected she has accepted part, she may
acknowledge that he has satisfied her for his part, and whether before or
after suit is not greatly to be stood upon. But if he of whom she received part
be not named in the Writ, she cannot against the objection of acceptance reply,
that the land which she accepted is not in the same Town, but in another. For
vnde nihil habet in the Writ non debet referri ad villas sed ad dotem. It is
nothing worth therefore, to say she has nothing in tali villa, if she has any
thing nomine dotis, wheresoever it be it is not then material. And when a
woman replyeth nihil habet, her defense shall not be per legem that is wager of
Law, but per patriam. Likewise, if a woman plead that she has nothing nomine
dotis but by some other title, as ratione custodiae and huiusmodi, Inquisition
may be in the County where it is supposed she received Dower, to find
whether she have any thing in Dower of the tenements which were her husbands,
and if she had, and now has not, to enquire what is become of it, this was a
Nor^^. case of Holda the late wife of W. in Trinity Term, 4. H. 4. as Bracton
in his fourth Book 13. Chapter and fol. 312. relates unto me.

SECT. XIII. Ne vnques seisi que Dower, etc.
THere are other pleas that go to the action and very right of Dower, as Ne
vnques seisi que Dower, etc. id est, The husband had never any seisin or state
of Inheritance, where of the wife can claim Dower, see 45. E. 3. fol. 13. The
tenant in Dower leased her whole estate to the heir, rendering rent for term
of her life, the heir died, and this was adjudged a seisin, whereof the heirs
wife might demand Dower, though the first tenant in Dower were still alive; for
the lease was a Surrender, and if a stranger had entered immediately after the
heirs death, his heir must have had a Mordancester: Ergo, said one, the wi^e
dowable. Yet mark this case ^bid. a man seized, etc. in fee simple dies, his
son enters and he dies, the sons son enters and endowes his Ayl^s^e: she
dies, a stranger abateth. In this case it is clear, the sons wi^e shall have
no Dower of the portion assigned to the Aylesse: though the sons son may
have a Mordancester per Kirton, Finch* and Mowbray: But betwi^t this cas^ and
the other, they say, is great odds; for here the Grandmother endowed, was in
from her hus^^^^, and she sons possession and estate howsoever, to his ^^ire
in whom the fee rested it were not destroyed, but he might bring a
Mordancester, yet to his wi^e it was clean adnihilate, whereas in the first
case, the Fee and Franckten^ment not a whit impeached by the life of her which
surrendered, were perfectly con^^^ned in the Baron to whom the Surrender was
made. And if a r^uersion be granted to I. S. of certain lands per fai^ in
pais, in which lands I. T. and his wi^e have ^state for life, which do atturne
and afterward surrender, there is no doubt but I S. his wife, if he die, shall
hau^ Dower, though it be indeed defeasible after death of T. K. if his wi^e
survive and will vnd^^ the Surrend^r: whereas in our first case the Surrender
is no way auoydable, but the heirs wife shall pay rent according to her
portion per Finch, ^b^^. 14. Ed. 4. fol. 6. Tenant by the courtes^e granted his
estate to him in reuersion, rendering rent with clause of re-entrie for non
payment, the Grantee married, the rent was arreere, tenant per le curte^^e
re-entred, he in the reuersion died, his wife wa^ ^arred of Dower, for the
Surr^nder might well be upon candition.

2. H. 4. fol. 22. In action of Dower it was pleaded, that the Demandants
husband had nothing in the land* ^ut by (...) done to the tenant, Judgment si
action* etc. The woman showed how her husbands father, having two sons,
leased his land to the eldest son, and to hi^ wife for (...) of the^r lives,
and that she her self married with the youngest son, the eldest died, and
his wife married with the tenant: the father died, the reuersion descended to
the second son, being her husband, the tonants wife died, and he kept
possession, the Demandants husband did put him out, he re-entred, she prayed
seifin, etc. Brook thinks she ought to have trauersed the Disseisin. And if
the Baron had not entered after the death of the eldest sons wife, she should
not have been endowed: yet says he, (...) if without entry there had not
been a seizing in Law, and whether* the Francktenement which the tenant had
once in right of his wife ^e determined in puncto by her death.

11. H. 4. 73. In action of Dower the Tenant says, That N. gave the land to
the Baron and his first wife for term of their lives, the remainder in tail
to the tenant, remainder in Fee to the right heirs of the Baron, his first
wife di^d, he married this demandant and then he died, and the tenant entered,
etc. he demands Judgment if of this estate she shall have Dower.

This amounted plain to ne vnques seisi que Dower la puit, but per Hanke and
Thirn, that plea might not serve, by reason of the Fee simple in remainder*
which might engender doubt^ulnesse a lays gentes. But where a lease was made
to Baron for life, the reuers^on to the Lessor, or remainder to a stranger,
there in action of Dower ne vnques ^ei^^, ^ec. i^ good, for no manner of
Inheritance was in the husband.

11. H. 4. 83. Dower was demanded of twenty pounds rent, respondetur, the
Baron had nothing, but ^oyntly with ^. N. who is yet alive, judgment si Dower,
etc. (and he was not compelled to show whether he pleaded as ^ertenant, or as
Pernor of the rent) the* Demandant replied, that I. N. had released all his
right in the rent ^^ her husband. But becauss* she showed not the Deed of
^^^ease, she pleaded by aduisement of the C^urt seisie que Dower la puit:
Quaere of the general ^ssue, against the ^^eciall matter.

11. H. 4. 88. A woman shall have Dower of rent (...)chased by her husband in
fee, though he die before d^^ of payment: And if it be pleaded against her Ne
vnques f^^^^ que Dower, etc. she shall not show the special matter, but say
seisi que Dower la puit, and show the matter i^ ^^^dence.

22. H. 6. 4^. per Newton. In action of Dower the ^^nant plead Joint estate to
the Baron, and I. N. in plein vy, whose estate he has, the demandant shall not
say ^^^^^ que dower, etc. unless she show how, or trauerse that I. N. took
nothing by she Feo^ment.

^9. H. 6. fol. 9. Against Dower the Tenant pleade^ that I. S. seized in Fee,
infeoffed him, and he leased to the Baron, to hold at will, which estate he
continued all his life time, s^ns c^o, that he was seized of any such estate
que Dower la puit, the Judges orderad that for the long continuance of the
possession, and dought deslais g^^^* all should be entered.

10. H. 6. 17. It is not a good plea against Dower ^o say the Baron had
nothing, but for term of his life: for this amounts to the general (...) Ne
vnques seisi que Dower la puit: But to say the Baron had nothing, but (...)meant
with A. in fee, and that A. suruiued, etc. This by ^^^ Fee simple confessed
makes a good plea.

14. H. 6. 5, and 6. In action of Dower the tenant said ^e was seized, till by
the Baron disseised, upon whom he reentred, Judgment, etc. the Demandant said,
that before this tenant had any thing in the land, W. being seized in Fee,
infeoffed her husband iss^^t seisi, etc. and she pr^^^^ to be endowed, per
Marti^, the replication is not good, ^^^ this might ^e before the Disseisin,
and before couerture too, and if so, then the Baron Ne vnques seisi que Dower
la pu^^. That ye may yet perceive further how (...) a point it is to take or
relinquish this plea rightly, mar^^ well the case, 30. H. 8. Dyer, fol. 41. In
a Writ of Dower the issue was Ne vnques seisi que Dower la puit: It was given
in e^idence to the Inquest on the Demandants ^ehal^e, that a feosment was made
to the ^aron in fee, and y^ deed of feofment was showed to the Court, it was
answered that long time before the feofment, the Earon was seized to him and
his first wife in special tail, and how afterward he discontin^ed that, and
takes back an estate in fee simple to himself by ^he (...) aforesaid, of
which estate he died seized so that the heir in special tail was remitted,
and the second wife being now Demandant, not dowable.

Mountague would have demurred and dis^^ssed the ^ury, but the Justices were
clear in opinion that the ^ury ought to (...) for the Demandant, because their
charge was only upon the issue, viz. whether the Baron had ever ^ei^in of such
^state, that the wife* might have dower. And they were not to ^^g^^d the
Remitter, but only to look to the general issue given them in charge. But if
the spe^i^ll matter had (...) pleaded, the Demandant must n^^d^ have ^eene
^arred; for if he which makes a feoffement, with condition to r^^nter for the
condition broken, and then in a Writ of d^^er brought by th^fe^^^^^s wi^^, he
will plead ne vnques ^^i^^^ qu^ dower, it shall be found against him,
*Knigh^ly* therefore would have the sp^^iall matter found by the Jury, and a
verdict at large, but the Iust^ces would not consent.

Yet ^empore* Edw. 1. There was a case, that the Baron discontinued his wi^es
(...), and died, his wife recovered against the discontinue, and he died, the
discontinues wife brought a Writ of Dower against the woman Recou^rer, and she
pleaded the general issue ne vnques ^eisi que dower la puit. All this matter
was found ^y ^pe^iall ver^^^^, and judgment gi^^n upon the issue, (...)
foolishly ^^yn^d, that the Demandant should reco^er Dower, which she should
never have done, had the (...) ^eene good: S^^ and mark well this case: and
21. Edw. ^. fol. 60. and the ^^se 28* A^s. pl. 4.

SECT. XIV. Recovery against the husband.
14. H. 4. 33. IN action of Dower the Tenant pleaded a recovery in Assise
against the husband, judgment si action, etc. the Demandant said her husband
was seized, etc. and married her, and infeofed the Tenant, and afterward
disseised him, against whom the Tenant recovered in Assise, the Baron died, she
prayed to be endowed. The Tenant said he was seized, till by the Baron
disseised, against whom he recovered by Assise sans c^o, that the Baron was
seized before the disseisin, que dower la puit, the Demandant said, seized
before the disseisen, que dower la puit.

Likewise 47. Edw. 3. 13. the Baron makes a feofment, and ousteth the feofee,
the feofee recouers in assize, the baron dies now in a writ of Dower, if the
feoffee plead recovery in assize, the widow cannot ^al^^^^^ the recovery, but
she may plead that long time before it, etc. her husband was seized que dower
la puit, and the Defendant contra.

12. H. 4. 20. 21. The Tenant said he brought a Formedone against the husband,
which Writ hanging, he showed to the husband a d^ed of intailment, whereupon
presently he rendered the land in p^is to the Tenant, which entered and* now
au^rreth the entail^; Judgment si action, Thi^^ said the Statute was si vir
reddat aduersario suo de plen^ Iusticiarii adiudicent mulieri dotem, but he and
the whole Court agreed, that rendering in pais does not defeat me^^^ estates of
them which were neither parties nor privy to the rendering, and therefore they
awarded the wo^^^ should recover Dower. Hanke said, fee simple might not be
rendered without livery and seisin, and where there is Lord and Tenant, the
Tenant may not surrender to his Lord: Of falsifying of recoueries I have spoken
already.

Note, If land be recovered in value against the husband, because of warranty
made by his Ancestors, the widow shall have Dower of those lands
notwithstanding: for if the Baron had ali^ned the land before voucher, it
should not have been rendered in value: Consequently* therefore the woman's
title is more ancient than the vouchers, which begins but the day of
vouching. By F^^zh in his Abridgem^nt Dower 129. And his ^at^. ^re. 150. d.

SECT. XV. Ne vnques accouple, etc.
SOmetime the unlawfulness of marriage is pleaded in bar of Dower. As 39.
Edw. 3. 15. the Tenant pleaded the Demandant was first married to A, and he
living she married B. of who^e dow^ent she claims, A. being still alive, this
was hold^n no good pleading, and therefore he added and ^ss^^t nient accouple
in loyal matrimony. The entry was only ne vnques accouple, etc. and a Writ
awarded to the Bishop to certify, but for all such pleas deduced at length by
old Writers, as stand upon the inualidity of marriage, I will ref^rre widows
to that which is gone before of marriage and divorce. The pleas also of under
9. years of age of attainder, of non tenure, ioyntenure, or several tenure, I
will not tarry on them. 39. Ed. 1. fol. 4. A woman brought Dower against tw^ by
several precipes, and one of them prayed ^yd of the other as parceners, so
that it appears that several tena^cie is a good plea in action of Dower*
Contra in Assise, Brook 99.

SECT. XVI. Plea that the Baron is ye^ alive.
THe Writ de dote vnde nihil habet affords another e^ception against Dower,
because it says quond^^ viri sui, for though the fundamental cause of dower
be matrimony quoad le title, yet as to the possession a woman cannot claim it
till matrimony be dissolved, therefore by Fitzherbert, if the Baron take habit
of religion, the wife shall not be endowed, till the husband be dead re vera,
yet by Britton it is issuable, whether the Baron be entered into religion or no,
and that issue shall be tried by the Ordinary, and judged according to his
certificat. ^ut when the deforcer will bar Dower by ^l^a that the husband is
yet alive, if the widow reply he is dead, the proof regularly belongs to the
Plaintiff. But if the Defendant say the husband is in plein vy and ceo and est
prist auerrer, he must prove his a^er^ent, and sometime ^oth parties shall be
heard to make their pr^^e, which if it ^e a^^^e strong on either ^^^e, the
De^andant may have i^dg^ment o^^eisi^, finding surety, such as the Court, shall
^ward, to res^ort, if her husband hereafter ^ee brought into Court, the ^a^d
with the issues and pro^^^s ther^^^, i^ the interim reco^^^d. But if the matter
be doubtful, and the woman ^a^^ot ^^^^e, such surety, the seisen shall r^^^^^e
where i^ is, and t^^ plea in suspense to be renewed p^^summons as occasion
shall serve, Britton fo. 25.

SECT. XVII. Judgment.
IVdgement in a Writ of Dower is framed according to the substance of the
title, and circumstance of the pleading. It is touched above when or how a
woman shall recover damages by s^r^ise, that the husband dyed seized.

20. H^^. ^.* The Statute o^ Mo^^on cap. 1. ordeineth concern^ng widows, q^^
post mo^tem v^^o^^^ expe^luntur de dotibus suis and doors s^os vel qua^^^^enam
habere non poss^n^ ^i^e placito. That whosoever shall d^force them of Dower ^r
^^ar^ntino in any tenem^nts, whereof their husbands dyed seized, if they be
conui^ted de ini^^^o d^forci^me^to, they shall r^nder damages to the widows,
so much as the Dower should have b^^ne worth to them from the time of the
husbands death, till the day where the widows recover seisen of Dower p^r
^udicium Cur^e. And the De^orcers shall ^e^ in ^ise^icordia Reg^s never aw^it
the less.

It is plain now that the Baron dying s^ised, if the wife be deforced s^e
shall recover damages, which are sometime comprised in the judgment o^seisin,
and sometime awarded (...) iudgem^nt ^^^^^uer^^nt or s^r^^^se vt s^p^^* But for
all this Statute of M^^to^ de inius^^ deforciamento, a widow shall not in all
cases, recover damages by this dying sei^^d; for if the Tenant plead touts
temps prist, etc. and it be confessed or found to have been so, there i^ now
no fault in him ^^^ C^^y^ and Hill* ^^. H^^* 4. fol. 40. 41^. foreuery h^^re
has right to all the parts of hi^ since stor^ i^herita^^e, ^till the widow
will ^^ endowed.

The case they say objected, viz. that in a Writ of Co^s^^^^^ touts ^emps
prist, will not excuse the Tenant of d^^^ages, is no* thing ^like: for the
O^cu^iour there has not just ^itl^, etc. Doctor and Student tells us fol. 82.
and 8^. that though the husband dies seized, if hi^ widow ^oth not de^^^d
Dower, s^^ shall recover no da^^ages, for it is a g^^^ plea in a Writ of Dower
^^^^ the Tenants appear the first day, to say touts temp^ p^ist a yeeld^^
Dower, if it be de^^^ded, and that plea ^^all ^xcuse him of d^mmages, but i^ he
had made refus^^^, he shall be chargeable as well for damages before the
request as after. But in Sir Edward Cokes 4. Rep. 30. b. in Shawes Case, a
woman recovered Dower by plaint in a Court Baron, and she recovered damages
from the death of her husband because he died seized, and it does not appear
that there was any request and refusal. I dare not say that it is Idemius,
whether the heir or his feoffee plead his plea; though I cannot find^ any
pres^^ent of damages given upon it being true, but often sur plea de tou^s
temps pr^st, the judgment ended thus, ni^ilde materia qui^ venit primo edis,
vide ^^. Ed. 4. fol. 7. I do refer the Reader for his better instruction
touching this matter, where he shall find variety of store, Sir Edward Cokes
Comment. upon Litleton fol. ^2. b. The second Chapter of Merton gives power to
all widows to make wills, as well of Corn growing upon their dowry lands, as
upon their inheritance, saluis s^ru^^s dominorum de ^eodis, quae de do^ib^ and
aliis tenementis suis debentur. Britton seems to be taken with a Chanc^^y
spirit, upon ^ight of this Statute cap. 10^. fol. ^^0. where he says, that in
every judgment of seis^^ awarded of reasonable Dower, there ought to be a
^orepris^ or exception de ble^^. c^^ssaun^s and femes ^auches, I will subioyne
Bracton as an Adiutor, perhaps more orth^do^, Dower, says he, lib. 2* cap. 40*
shall ^^ assigned by the heir, if he ^e of full age, or by the Lord in the
heirs name, if he be vnderage; And this within forty days after the husbands
death, for otherwise occur^i^ tempus and sequantur damna, nisi ration^bilis
causa excuset. This assignation must be made of the land, as it was by the
husband, tilled or untilled, with the fruits growing upon it, allowing nothing
to the heir or Executor for manuring, husbanding, or culture of it, for of old
time it was observed, that in what ^^s^ or plight a woman had received her
Dower, whether it ^^^^ tilled or untilled, she must restore in like plight to
the heir, etc. she might not make her Will of any corn gro^ing, or fruit not
s^parated, from the francktenement. Sed nou^ superueniente gratia sicut p^^et
de prouisionibus apud Merton: A woman may now ordeine her Testament of corn or
fruit growing on her dowry, or, severed growing, all is one. If the husband
alien all his lands, and the Tenants need not yield dower to the widow as
soon as she demands it, if there be just cause of calling to warranty, one
or more, successively till the heir be vouched; And all that time the Tenants
are not charged with damages or cos^s. But when the heir enters into
warranty, if he do not presently yield Dower, but stand out ^bstinately, he
shall pay damages, as much as dower might have been worth to the woman from
the time of the husbands death, to the day wherein she has judgment, and the
heir shall be amercered. In like manner is it, if a widow without any
assignation enter into her Dower that was certainly nominated to her ad ostium
Ecclesiae, and which she finds empty at her husbands death, if she be
eiected, or put to suit and delays, she shall recover damages: So shall she
if she be eiected the tenement assigned for quarentine during the forty days,
or before dower assigned after the forty days. So likewise is it if she have
no place at all assigned to dwell in, vbi recli^et caput suum, etc. Thus
Bracton: and thus long we have been in the Writ de dote nihil vnde habet,
which though it be aptliest brought in the common place for the reason above
declared, yet it may be sued in the County before the Sheriff per Iusticies,
as says Fitzherbert in his na. bre. 148. But then it seems it must be
removed by recordari facias, if the Tenant plead ne vnque accouple, etc. so the
book of Entries 223, 224. for in the base Court that issue cannot be tried.

SECT. XVIII. The Writ de recto de dote.
THere is another Writ called the Writ of right of Dower, not because the
former Writ has any ^orciousnesse in it, or claims upon wrong title, but
because this second Writ has fewest ambages in pleading, and the form of it
is upon pure right* Britton says, there are cases wherein a woman is driven to
a Writ of right of dower pleadable in Court.

One is where a woman has lost seism of her dower, as if she were disseised,
and after long peacable seism of the desseisor she reentred with force, if the
desseisor recover against her by assise, she has no remedy, but only by Writ
de recto de do^e, counting of her own seism: Another is where a woman demands
lands or tenements which were her husbands, as part of her dower, when she is
seized of a surplus or greater part already: And the third is when she demands
something as appertenant ^^ her dower. Fitzherbe^^ seems not to allow Bracton^
relation of vnde nihil habet in the other Writ, for he ^aith, where a woman
that has recovered part of her dower of one Tenant already, demands the
re^nant against the same Tenant in the same Town, because the words vnde nihil
habet will not se^ue, this Writ de recto de do^^ is used of necessity, and is
directed to the heirs Guardian, if he be in ward, or to the heir himself, or
to a deforcour: And some say, that a woman losing her dower by default in a
praecipe quod reddat, she shall recover by this Writ de recto de dote, by the
opinion of some. But it seems she may have a quod ei deforceat by equity, the
Statute W. 2. cap. 4. Whereas before she had no ^^^edy but by this Writ, or by
action of deceit, if she were not summoned. Fitzherbert holds also, if a
woman lose her dower by assise or other action tried, she^ may have an
attainte, but not this Writ de recto, for the land was assigned her once to
hold in dower, and by that title she had possession, so that that title est
execute, and so she ought to sue an action of her own possession if she be
deforced, and not demand dower again. quaere.

The form is: Praecipimus tibi vt plenum rectum ^^neas B. quae fuit vxor: C.
de tertia part december acr^rum cum pertinentiis in D. quam cla^at tenere de te
in dote per liberum seruitium tertiae partis vnius denarii per annum, etc. And
this Writ may be of the moity of land, according to the custom, etc. or of
the profit^ of an office. Fitzherbert sets down one for example; Rex Andreae
salutem, we command you that you yield unto B. which was wife of ^. her full
right and third part of the profits issuing of the Custody of Westminster. Abbay
goal, with a third part of three Acres a^rable, of one rood of meadow, of
bread, meat, and bottles of ale weekly, etc. which she claims as belonging
to the francktenement, which she holds of you in dower, etc. by free service,
and bearing a third part of cost and charge toward the keeping the goal and
gate of the Abbey aforesaid, etc. whereof you your self deforce her: hereby
appears plain that a woman deforced from any thing appendant, or appertenant
to dower assigned her, may have remedy by Writ de recto de dote. The old na.
bre. notes that of a Bailiwicke, or any such office in fee, which a woman may
execute her self, or make substistute or deputy of it, she shall have dower,
but not of Stewardship or Marshalship of England.

And of a common of beasts without number a woman is not dowable, 9. H. 7. 4.
and Park. Sect. 341. And of an use before the Statute of 27. Hen. 8. of uses
she was not dowable, as it is said in Vernons ca. Sir Edward Cokes 4. Rep.
fol. 1. And of an annuity shall be no dower, but of prediall tithes dower
shall be, as appears by the Countess of Oxfords Case, cited in Harpurs Case in
Sir Edw. Cokes 11. Rep. fo. 256.

The paroll or plea is sometimes removed in this Action; As if the Writ be to
the husbands heir, which heir being himself Tenant of the Land will not do^
right: the Demandant may have out a pone* to remove the matter straightway from
the heirs Court into the Common place, but a tolt to remove it first into the
County, for the original is, nisi fece^^s vicecomes faciet, and from thence it
may be removed by the Plaintiff to the Common place by a pone without any
cause mentioned in the Writ. But the Tenant in a droit patent cannot remove the
Plea out of the County without showing case in the pone; yet as well in a Writ
de recto de dote as in a Writ of droit patent the tenant may remove the plea,
showing cause, and that immediately out of the Lords Court, into the Common
place by recordare: and so cut of the heirs Court, quaere.

If a man se^l all his land and dye, so that the ^eire has nothing by descent,
now this Writ must be directed to the feo^ee, of whom the widow when she is
endowed mus^ hold, as of her Lord by ^ealty. But if before the Statute of quia
Emptores terrarum, and^. if the husband ^^^ infeofed a stranger of part of his
Lands to hold of the husband, etc. a Writ of right of Dower must have been ^o
the heir, in whose Court the matter was to be pur^ue^, by reason of the
remaining Seignory.

So ^^ it if at thi^ day the Baron giu^ part of his Manor to hold in tail: But
if a man give away all his ^and to be holden of him in tail, and dye, now the
Writ de recto de dot^ must be against the donee directed to the Sheriff
retournable in the Common place, for the heir having only a S^gniory in gross
can keep no Court. An^ in the Writ shall be inserted quia B. capitalis
dominus feodi remisit nobis curiam suam.

If the Baron having leased all his land^ for term of life d^^, etc. And
though there be not in Chancerie, or any where els^, any matter whereby to prove
the Lords remission of the Court: yet if the Lord have not any demes^^^
whereupon to hold a Court, he can have none action against the Demandant for
the ^alse supp^sall, or ^urmise: nor let nor hinder the proceedings in Common
place.

But if he had a Court to hold pl^a in, and did not remit his Court to the
King, he may ha^^ prohibition to the Justices, commanding the^ not to pro^eed
any further. But says Not. Breu. quaere of that matter. And s^e Plowd. fol.
74. ^. where the Lord has a Court, and he will remit his Court, his
Certificate must be to the King in his Chanceri^, and thereupon a Writ of
right shall be returnable in the Court of Common P^ea^.

In the Common Place, when the plea is removed thither, your process is Grand
c^pe, and Petit cape: In the Lords, or heirs Court is used fir^^ a precept in
nature of s^mm^^^, and of a Grand cape, and Petit cape. And note that in this
writ if ^^^ (...) appear, they never proceed to grand (...), or tr^^ll by
battle (from which the (...) is ex^^p^ed) and so ^^^^^quently here is never
per Br^cton any E^soine de mal^ lecti. But the tenant may ^^^^h his (...), if
^^ have any. And after the woman has ma^^ h^^ (...) or dem^^^ pursuing her
writ, the tenant may in (...), say that ^^ee rendered she land to hi^ of her
own accord: Or if she said he disseised her of her Dower: he may plea^ ^^^
Relege, says Bracton, Et po^^ri^ ^^ritas per patriam d^clarari*

SECT. XIX. What things shall be assigned in Do^^^, etc.
WHen Judgment is given in curia regis against the tenant, either upon his
default at the Grand cape returned, or upon confession, or issue tried, the
chief substance of the entry is no more but con^ider^tum est vt re^up^^^^
(...) de (...) p^rte, and then either presently, or after ward, ^^ the (...) of
the demandant, there is awarded a writ, (...) de tertia part, to the Sheriff,
who must make return, how he has executed the Kings commandment. But I find
by Dyer, 11. Eliz. fol. 278. that an Alias habere fac* shall not be awarded
after the Sheriff has executed the Formedon; the case was that the Sheriff
upon the Habere fac', etc. profer seism by means of a third part, and the
Demandant refuse, yet by Harpur and Dyer her entry was afterward lawful, for
the certainty appeared, and they that an Alias habere fac' by no president
shall be granted, and as images of this course must be the proceedings in all
bas^ Courts which hold of Dower.

So that it is now more than sufficiently perceived, that the third part of
every man's inheritance is assignable for Dower, by the husbands heir, or the
heirs Guardian, or by the Feoffee or Feoffees of the husband, or heir, or by
some other tenant, or tenants, or by the Chancellor, Escheator, or Viscount.
But it ought to appear yet m^re fully, how these three parts shall be
assigned, and wherein* See Dyer, 2. Eliz. 187. In Dower against eight, two
confess the action, and the rest plead in ^arre, sir had judgment for a third
part of two in eight divided, and afterward upon verdict against the sir,
judgment was of sir part^ in eight divided.

Parcel of any thing, whereof a woman may rightly claim Dower, is assignable,
etc. But other lands than those whereof she is by title dowable, or not
assignable.

Acceptance of a greater or less part than the third, in name of Dower of all
the franktenement, which the Baron had, binds a woman. But assignment of all
the land which the Baron had is not good. But I refer you to Sir Edw. Cokes
Commentary upon Little^on, fol. 346. how Assignment is to be made, and what
Assignment is good, where it is said eight things are obseruable to a perfect
Assignment of Dower.

The heir is not bound to assign any widow Dower in his capital Message,
or in any part thereof. But Assignment of such house in allowance of all other
lands, or of other lands whereof she is dowable, for the house is good when it
is accepted, And Assignment of a chamber in the husbands dwelling house, when
other lands are not, whereof to make assignation is good, being accepted. But a
woman is not bound to accept this kind of Dower, except she list: Arent may be
assigned her out of the house, and this shall be good sans fait. Like wise it
is of Common, of Estouers, of Pasture assigned in allowance of lands, or other
things whereof a woman is dowable. And lands in Wales may be assigned for a
whole Dower: and thereby ^ woman may be excluded from her Dower in England. If
upon Judgment of Dower, and before execution, the tenant assign a rent per
paroll, issuing out of the land, whereof the Judgment was given, and the woman
accepts it in stead of Dower, th^^ i^ a good bar in a Scire facias, and it is
distrainable of common right* but if the Assignment had been by p^roll of
other lan^s, than of such as wherein the woman might have claimed Dower, it
would not have barred execution, because it was not pursuant to the first
Judgment, Dyer, 1. Mar. fol. 91. It is said in Sir Edw. Cok^^ 4. Rep. fol. 1.
in V^rnons case, that at the Common Law no collateral satisfaction or
recompense made to a woman in satisfaction of her Dower, was any bar of her
Dower, for no title of Fran^kte^^ment or inheritance may be barred by any
collateral satisfaction.

When the Writ of (...) comes to the Sheriff, he shall deli^^r (...) ^^ ^^^^
and bounds, but this rule cannot stretch to things not boundable. Therefore if
Dower be demanded or recovered of three shillings rent, assignation of one
shilling is sufficient: And when dower of a (...) or will is demanded, a third
part of the pro^^t, etc, shall ^^ assigned, and it ^^ ^ good Indowment without
certainti^. Et ^l (...) free* and serra contrib^^^^i^. And so dower of a
villein^, either the third* days work, or every third week^* or month. And
so of the profit of the thir^ part of Stallage, of the third* part of the
profits of a Fair, and so of the third part of the pro^^t of a Park, and of a
Dove house, and so of the third part of a Piscarie, viz. Pertertium pisc^m,
veliactum ^er^iu^ ^e^is, etc.

SECT. XX. New Indowment.
IF that which a wom^^ holds i^ dower (...) lawfully against her will, and
without her fault (...) and e^icted, etc. she shall be new endowed of the other
lands, whereof the ^^ate which her husband had remains still ^ndefeated, for
example: The Baron seized of thr^^ Acres dies, the wi^dow is endowed of one
Acre, which he gained by (...), if she be ^^sted she shall be ^^dowed of the
other two Acres. Tenant in tail of thr^^ Acre^, discontinueth in fee, the
Discontinuee marries, and dies, his wife recouereth dower against his heir;
the issue in tail brings a Formedon against the widow, sh^^ voucheth the
heir, he enters into Warrantie, loses, and the demandant has execution,
though the ^state which the heir has in the other two Acres remaining be
defeas^ble, yet the woman shall be newly endowed of them, till they be
defeated: yea, though the Discontinu^^ his heir have aliened, the widow shall
be newly endowed notwithstanding. Again, a man seized of two Acres in fee,
within one County, takes a wife, enfeoffeth a stranger of one Acre with
Warrantie, and dying having issue a sonn^ which enters into the other Acre,
the wife brings a writ of Dower against the Feoff^^, which ^oucheth the heir,
and the heir lo^^^h ^^ default, so that the Demandant has Judgment
conditional, and execution against him, to recover of the land which he has
by descent within the same County where the Writ was broug^t. If now the
Vouch^^ ^^ restored by a Writ of deceit to the lan^ which the woman recovered,
she shall have Sci^^ facias against the Feoff^^ that was tenant in her first
Writ, to be newly endowed of the other Acre. And if he have thereof in^eoff^d a
stranger, yet this stranger shall be bound by the first Judgment in dower that
was conditional.

If a woman that is dowable take a second husband, and be endowed by his assent
per metes and bounds, if now the Baron discontinue in fee, and die, the wife
may have a C^^ in vit^: and Perkins leaves it not clean out of doubt, whether
she may not be new endowed of such other possessi^ns, as were her husbands
during couerture, because the endowment was not by Writ.

This new endowment is when the euiction is loyal, and m^^g^^ ^^ t^st del
feme; for when it i^ otherwise, she must recover the land again by such means
as she may, from him which recovered it.

50. Ed. 3. fol. 7. loan. late wife of L. W. brought her Writ of dower against
T. H. demanding the third part of a Manor. It was pleaded, Q^^ ^l ne po^^n^^s
demander* for ^^no 12. huius ^^gis, a sine was levied of the said Manor
betwixt I. and E. and the tenant sued Sc^^^ facias out of the fine against the
now demandant, which came and pleaded to parcel that she held it in Dower, of
indowment from her husband, b^ assignment of W. C. and ^^^^ ^^d^ d^ l^^* etc.
for another part, she claimed for term of ^er life, by lease from W. C* of
whom likewise she prayed aid, and had it granted. C* came in by proc^sse, and
joining in aid, pleaded a Feoffment made to himself in fee, by L. the baron,
son and heir to I. W. whereunto the tenant pleaded R^^ns pass^ per l^ fait,
and the process c^ntinued against the Jury till a day certain, at which day
C. made default, and this demandant maintained the iss^^ which was found
against the now demandant, viz. that Rie^s passa per le fait, and execution
awarded for the plaintiff in the Scire fac. Judgment si ^^count^r ce^^
recoue^^e a quel el fuit party, el po^t nens demander, and the demandant
demurred.

Her pretense was, that by the reco^erie she was remitted to her action
paramont, because the recovery affirms her husbands possession. But the
better opinion was, that when her Dower once lawfully ass^gned was recovered
against her, she had here no remedy, but by exrour or attaint, for a writ of
right she might not have: But if in the Scir^ faci^s she had alleged to that
part which she claimed in Dower, that she h^ld it in Dower of the Assignment of
W. C. Prist da^tender^ a q^e le co^rt vo^^^ ^ g^rder, she had saved her estate
by protestation, and the reuersion might have heene judged to him which had
right, whereas pleading as she did, some thought sh^^ had forfeited h^^ Dower,
but that was denied by Tresili^n. Belk^ap, who said, that when one is ^^ per
tort, as i^ the Disse^see or his heirs ^nter upon him which is in by discen^,
or if a widow enter upon a discontin^^^ of her husband, and then upon issue
taken sur seisin, or disseisi^, it is found for the plaintiff, the tenant is
remitted to his Action paramo^^, Brief ^*^^tri^ in the one case, and in the
other a Cu^ in v^^a. But if a recovery be against a Tenant that has
rightful possession, the rem^die must be by errors, attaint, or writ of
right. And therefore in the last cases, if the tenants had pleaded^ release, or
other matter, which might e^tinct the right: if it had passed against them*
their re^edy must have been by writ of right, p^^ Clop^on, qu^^^e.

Which. said, if a recovery be had against the Baron upon a delatory plea, as
no^t^nure mis^osm^^ of the town, or such like, a woman may falsify such a
recovery in a writ of Dower: It seems to be otherwise, says Brook, if a
recovery be had in that mann^r aga^^^^ the woman her self who is endowed.

SECT. XXI. Admeasurement of Dower.
ADmeasurement is in a kind a recovery against a woman, not of her whole
Dower, but of part of it; for if the heir whilst he is under age, or the
Guardian whilst the heir is in ward, do indow a widow of more land than ^he
ought to hold in Dower, the heir when he comes to full age, may have a writ
D^ ^^m^nsur^tione do^is against her, and the Surplu^ or excess shall be
restored to the heir: but there is in this case only an amputation without
any novel assignment* If the heir being under age assign Dower too largely,
before his Lord and Guardian enter into the land, or seize his Ward, the Guardian
may have a writ of Admeasurement by West 2. cap. 7. And if the Guardian pursue
the writ faintly against the w^man endowed, the heir may have a writ of
Admeasurement b^ the same Statute, Custodi de cae^^^o conced^t^^ breue de
admensuratione dotis, nec per sect^^ custodis si fictae and per collusionem
sequ^tur v^^sus mul^^^em tenentem in dot^m, pr^^ludat^^ hae^^^ cum ad ae^^^^m
p^^u^neri^ ^d (...) admensu^^^dom, etc.

If the plea be in the Co^^tie, the Plaintiff may remove it without cause, and
the Defendant may remove it with ^^^^e ^hewed in the writ* as in a Repleuin.
And when the writ is r^^^^ed by Po^^ into the Common place, the pro^^^^e i^
summons, attachment and distr^sse, etc. according to the Statute. Then the
Sheriff cannot make admeasurement, but he shall extend the land particularly,
and returning the Extent ^^^o the Common place, the Justices shall admeasure
Dower. Note if the Guardian assign Dower excessive, and then grant over his
estate, his assign shall never have a writ of admeasurement. Likewise if the
heir under age assign Dower, which his Guardian may admeasure when he has
entered, etc. but the Action is not grantable, for the Guardian assigned or
grantee shall not admeasure: But an heir may have the admeasuring of Dower
assigned in his Ancestors tune. And if a woman be endowed in Chancery per le
Roy, etc. the heir may have a Writ of Admeasurement, if a woman after she is
ind^wed make any improuement of the ^and, so that it becomes of far g^eater
value than it was of at the time of the Assignement, there lies no admeasuring
upon this improuement. And Bracton says, No^ erit estim^nda meliora^^o
mu^^^ris qua^ fecit in door suapost assignationem, tempus e^im assignationis
dotis erit spectandum. But if this improuement be by casualty i^ some mine of
c^ale or lead, which had been formerly found and occupied in the husbands
time, the matter is somewhat doubtful. But see Sir Edward Cokes 5. Rep. fol.
12. a. in Saunders cap. q^ sc. That if the mine appeared at the time of the ad
ass^gnem^nt admeasurement lies.

As for new mines, a widow may not make or dig any that is waste, thus far
Fitzherbert. Briton cap. 113. and Bracton lib. 4. cap. 17. show with what
circumstance admeasurement shall be made by the vicount surserement de probes
homes praesentes and per bo^e and legale extent. They say, that the amputation
is not only of excess and super^^uity by this Writ of admeasurement, but also
of that which ^ught not to be assigned, admensuratio debet esse, ^am de
indebito, quam de superfl^o.

And therefore if a Castle or head of a Barrony were assigned in Dower by the
Gard^an without any necessity: the heir may have this Writ: for enter he
cannot, say they. They show also what plea a woman may have against
admeasurement, viz. that the Plaintiff himself made the assignation, or
confirmed or allowed it being of ^ull age, etc.

SECT. XXII. The charge of Dower.
ADmitting the Dower assigned to be both for quality and quantity just, there
is yet to be declared with what immunity a woman shall hold her Dower. First
Bracton says, Si peculia ma^iti sufficiant ad solutionem tenentur, sed vxori
dos sua deonerabitur. Et here is defendere dotem and warrantizare eam mulieri
debet and pro ea sequi comitatus hundreda and curia dominorum, vt viduatae
domui suae intendat and nutritioni suorum (si qui fuerint) puerorum. If the
husbands goods be not sufficient for payment of his debts, the heir must
discharge Dower of the burden, etc. for he is the widd^wes warrant of her
Dower, and ought to* follow for her, County Court, Court leet, and hundred,
etc. That she may see to her house, and nurture of her children.

Fitzherbert in his Writ of Admeasurement, first affirms, that a woman shall
not be distreined in her Dower, in her Inheritance, or in the joint purchased
lands to her or her husband, for her husbands debts. The Writ which he sets
down for remedy, says almost as much, R^x Vicicounti, etc. cum secundum legem
and consuetudinem regni angliae, mulieres in terris and tenementis quae ten^nt
in dotem de dono virorum, vel quae sunt de ipsarum haereditate, vel quae sibi
quesiuerint, pro debitis virorum distringi non debent, etc.

And in some Writs is this Clause, Dum tamen haeredes vel Executores testamenti
ipsius, etc. ad debi^a illa reddenda nobis sufficiant. But it seems
reasonable, says Fitzherbert, that a woman shall not he distreined in her
Inheritance for the Kings debts, neither in her Dower or Joint purchased lands
which her husband, if her title commenced before her husband became debtor, and
there is a Writ in the register importing no less, yea he affoord^ it to be
good reason that lands purchased by Baron and Feme, after the Baron is entered
in debt to the King should be discharged in the widows hands. But let
widows agree with the King as well as they can, the heir is liable to the
debts of his Ancestor before the widow: The heir likewise discharges her of
suit and service, and is so far forth her warrant, that by Britton, if she
be impleaded and vouch any other to warranty, she forfeiteth her Dower pur sa
malice, and though her husbands feofee be not called her warrant: yet if she be
endowed by him she must hold of him. And regularly Tenant in Dower must be
Attendant to her husbands heir, or to the heirs Guardian, or to the Gardenis
Executor, or to him in the reuercion, according to the rate of rent whereby
they hold over: if Tenent by fealty and xij. d. rent be disseised and dye, his
wife being endowed by the disseisor, shall be an attendant to the same
dissessor of iiij. d. annual. And now if the heir will bring a Writ of entry
in to quibus against the woman thus endowed, she may show her special matter,
and that she is ready to attend to whom the Court will award: which shall
award, that she retain her Dower still, and be attendant to the heir,
quaere, says Parkins if the heir have any other remedy, for he cannot enter
upon the Tenant in Dower. D.st. 82. a. says, That a Feme tenant in Dower
leaves the reuersion in him against whom she demands her Dower, although he
be a disseisor, and does not reduce the reuersion by her recovery to him which
has right, as other Tenants for life do. And as it is said in Sir Edward
Cokes 8. Rep. 35. in Pains ca. if she recover against Tenant for life, she
leaves the reuersion in him. But by not. br. fol. 265. a. if the King assign
Dower in Chancery as Guardian, the reuersion reposeth in the heir, for which he
shall sue livery. If after judgment the heir grant his reuersion, and the
woman atturne, she shall be Attendant to the grantee. If Lord Mean and Tenant
be, the Tenant holding by iij. d. rent, and the Mean by 20. d. If the Tenant
marry, and the Mean release to him all his right in the tenancy, the Tenant
dies, the wife must be endowed, according to her husbands best possessions,
and therefore shall be Attendant to the heir by a penny, and not the third
part of twenty pence. If he which holds by fealty and xij. d. having a wife,
sell the tenancie to his Lord, and the estate is executed, the Tenants wife
shall be endowed sans attendancie, for the Seignory extinct is not reuiuable:
If Lord Measne and Tenant be, the Tenant holds by xij. d. which dies, and
his wife is endowed, she shall be attendant to the heir by iiij. d. now if
the Lord release all his right in the tenancy to the heir, the meanalty is
extinct, and the attendance gone, for it was but in respect of the charge which
the heir was at to his next Lord.

But where there is Lord and Tenant by fealty and xij. d. rent, if the Tenant
make a gift in tail of the land to hold of him and his heirs by xx. s. rent
etc. if the donee dye without issue, his wife endowed, shall be attendant to
the donor by v. s. and viij. d. although the Lord release to the donor, for his
attendance is not in respect of the charge over, but by a special reservation.

If there be Seignor Mean and Tenant by fealty and iij. s. rent, the Means
wife after he be foreiudged in a Writ of mean, and dead, shall be endowed
without attendance. If Tenant by fealty and xij. d. make a gift in tail of the
land, re^^^^ing ^ij. d. rent, etc. and the do^ce having a wife and issue by
her, ^iscontinueth in fee, and dies, now though the wife recover Dower, and
have execution of it against the discontinues, yet she shall not be attendant
to him, for h^s is not chargeable as the Baron was, because the Dowers ^uowry
rests of ^ere^^^^^ upon the issue, to whom for all that the widow shall not
be attend^^t, till he have recontinued the (...) resayle, quaere tamen, says
Perkins. If the Tenant whilst he It^^^ held of his Lord by fealty, and a (...)
of forty shillings price, the Tenants widow when she is endowed shall be
attendant by xii^. ^. iiij. ^c. (...) she tenure were by fealty, and a nag
without express value, she shall be Attendant by a nag euery*third year.
Perkins fo. 84. ^^.

SECT. XXIII. Of the cui in vita.
I Have been long in Dower, and I fear me some women had rather never be
endowed that is, they had rather die with their husbands, or soon after them,
than be bound to learn this Catechism, yet I must come to it once again.

But first let vssee how lands whereunto a woman may have right by ancient
indowment, or by descent, or gift in franckmarriage, or by* some other
acquisition, before or during Couerture in fee, fee tail, for life, or for
years, may be reduced, if the husband have aliened them, for it the
possession continued always in the husband till his death, then by his death
the widow is made sole Tenant of them, so little needing either assignation,
or other circumstance, that without new entry, claim or challenge, she may
have action of her own possession against any other that shall enter.

If the husband aliened entirely any lease for years of his wives, it is gone
irreuocable, and if he make no sale, and the wife dies, he shall have the
leaf, except she be jointly possessed with another, and the serving ioyntenant
shall have. Commentar. upon Fitzherbert. 185. If he aliened part of the estate,
as for ten years next ensuing, where the term was for twenty, the widow may
enter when ten years expired. But see in that Case, that if the husband rested
a rent, and dies, the Executors of the husband shall have the rent, for it was
not incident to the reuersion, yet the wife shall have the resioue of the
term, Sir Edw. Cokes Commentar. upon Fitzherbert fol. 57. b. if he aliened for
the ten last years she may continue possession, till those ten years be
commenced. If the husband devise away by his last Testament, a term for
years, which he has by right of his wife, I suppose the devise is ^^id as
well as if it were made of some higher estate, as it appears by Perkins chap.
D^^^ses* and Plowd. 419 in Bra(...)g^^ case. And the Law is all one in all
respects, where the Baron and Feme are possessed of lease for years by
int^e^ties that if the estate be made to them during their couerture, or by
moyties that is to them jointly before marriage) or where the Baron is
possessed of a lease iure vxoris. See Dame Ha^^* case, Plowd. 260. And if the
Baron possessed of a lease for years in the right of his wife, charge the land
with a rent, and die, the rent is gone, Plowd. 4^8 in Bracebridges case, for
she is remitted. And if Feine Guardian in Socrage be, and her Baron alienateth
it and die, the wife may enter. And see Dyer, 8. Eliz. 25* the same is of Copy
holds per(...)der, to the use of a Feme for years, and the wife die, the
estate rests in the husband without a custom be to the contrary. If an husband
be possessed of a term for years in the right of his wife, and Judgment is had
against him, and the term is extended, and the husband dies, it shall be good
against the wife, as appears by Sir Edw. Cokes 8 Rep. 96. in Ma^^ing case. And
see the 9. case of 50 E. 3. lib. Ass. note Sir Edw. Cokes Rep. in ^ulwoods
case, and Plowd. 26^* in Dame Hales cas^, where a lease made to Baron and Feme
is extended for the debt of the King after the wives drath.

If a man possessed of a te me, deuiseth it to one for his life, the remainder to
a woman for her life, who takes an husband, the husband may release that to the
particular tenant, although it be but a possibility, Sir Edw. Cokes 10. Rep.
47. Lampe^^s case. And if a woman has a lease for years as Execut^i^, and
takes an husband, he may sell it per ^o^ curi(...) pr(...)r Fitzherbert, Dyer
^8. H. 8. 7. A woman has* a term (...)trir, the husband s(...) wits to
(...)v^^n which a moytie is awarded to the pretendor of the title, the wife is
bound thereby, but because the defendant in detinue brought by the wife for the
Indenture of lease, plead non d^tinet, and not the special matter, Judgment
was against him, Dyer, 2. E(...). 183. and 21. H. 7. 6. agrees.

If the husband discontinue the Franck tenement of his wife, the apt instrument
whereby to recover it, when she is a widow is a Cu(...) vita: Which, though it
be not so necessary and needful, perhaps, since the Statute of 32. which
disableth husbands to discontinue as it was before, yet I. perceive not by what
reason the use of it is forbidden, even in those cases where the entry is
^ongeable, for the virtue of the Writ is not decayed by lawfulness of the
entry, neither does free liberty to take possession, prohibit the resort to
Justice and action at Law, when perhaps a woman cannot, or dares not enter.

By Common Law therefore if the Baron alien in fee, the heritage of his wife or
her Francktenement, by Feoffment or by Demise, for term of life, or in tail,
she may have remedy after his decease by this Writ. Of which the general form
is, Praecipe A. quod ^^d ^^^ B^quae fuit vxor C^^^um messuagium (...), quod
clamat, esse ius, and hereditat* suam. Et in* quod A. no^ habet ingressum, nisi
per C. quondam virum, etc* qui illud ^^ de(...)isit, and cui in vita
contradicere non pot(...). Th(...) may be in the per ^ui and post, and some
variety. it has according to title of the Demandant, as Qu^ ^^ clamat(...)
ius haereditatem, or Vt ius and maritagium, or Vt ius ex^on^ I. qui ipsa^ B.
andC. virum suum feofavit, and in quo, etc. or Quam clamat tenere sibi, and
haeredibusde corpore suo, and de (...) C. quondam* viri sui ex^untibus ^^
d(...) ne I. or Quam clamat ess^ dotem suam ex dono E. pri(...) vel secundi,
etc.

If Baron and Feme lose the wives land^ by de(...), she may have this Writ
when she is a widow. But if the wives lands be recovered in a Cessauit,
per^de(...) ^^ Baron* and Feme, upon a C(...) during esp(...) shall never have
a Cu^^^ vita, 4. Ed. 2.

If Baron and Feme, and a third person, being Ioyntenants in Fee, the Baron
alien the intiertie, and die, his widow shall have a Cui in vita of a inoytie,
during the life of the third person* for it seemed the alienation was a
seuerance of Ioynture, says Fitzherbert. But he sends us to 36. Ed. 3. in his
Abridgement, titulo Cui in vita. By which book the wife in this case cannot
have a Cui in vita for any part* so long as the third person suruiueth, because
they two may join in a Writ of right, and if he die, she may have a Cui in
vita of all: Vide Librum.

Of lands which a man and woman purchase jointly before couerture, the Cui in
vita. shall be but of a inoytie: but of lands purchased jointly during
co^e^^ure, the Cui in vita is of the in(...)e, and being brought of a inoytie,
the Writ is not good, 39. H. 6. 45. for in the one case they are seized by
inoyties, in the other by intireties.

A woman by excepting lands, which she and her late husband took in exchange,
or by excepting rent reserved out of it, shall be b^^^ed in a Cui in vita, or
any other action, Fitzherbert, and ^6. Ed. 4. 8. Idem ius, if she accept
parcel ^^ her own land in Dower: but 17. Assisarum pl. 3. Brook 24. Cui in
vita. If the assignment of this Dower be sans fait, it is no bar or
con^clusiou, but a Remitter; otherwise if it be by Deed or Record. If a man
give lands to a woman to marry with him, and after espousals he alieneth the
same land and dies, she may have a Cui in vita. And note, that the gift or
demise alleged in a Cui in vita is trauersable. Thus much Fitzherbert.

48. Ed. 3. 8. In a Cui in vita, claiming to hold sibi and (...) de corpore,
without showing of whose donation* the (...) pleaded to the Writ, and it was
abated. But in a Quod ^^ de(...), the Demandant needs not show by who^e gift
she claims.

49. Ed. 3. fol. ^9* The Writ was, Qua(...) sib(...) W. N., The tenant said,
she never had any ^^ing of the gift of W. N. per Belknap, the answer was not
good, for were the gift from one or other, if the husband aliened, she might
have the action, and the Writ may be Qu^m elama^ vt ius and haere^^a^em: though
she purchased the lands, and adior^at^r. The latter point is affirmed, 7. H. 4.
fol 5 and per Littleton accorded: but for the first, vide 50. Ed. ^. fol. 6. in
a Cui in vi^a quam cl^mat ^ener^ ^x dimissione per termino vi^ae ^. N. it was
admitted upon argument: a good answer per ^ u^iam, for where one makes title
it ^ught to be true.

And there find sur release made to Baron and F^me, and to the herres of the
baron by I. N. was holden no demise, for it must be supposed the baron and feme
were in possession tempore finis: And Persy said it had been adjudged, if a
woman claimed in her Writ ad termi^um vitae, if it were found she had estate
tail, the Writ should abate.

So likewise if a woman claim by lease for term of life per A. and it was
sound that A. made no lease: she had now no estate, and consequently has none
action. Likewise (said Kirton) if in Ass^ze of novel disseism, the plaintiff
make his title by f^off^^nt of A. and is found that A. inf^offed him not, but
B. did* he shall be barred in the Assize, for where a man makes his title
upon a point which is bo^nd against him, it cannot be inten^^^ that he has a
better title, and there he shall not have advantage of any other.

39. H. 6. fol. 38. In a Cui in vita quod clamat esse ius su^^^ ex d^no I.
which infeoffed t^ ^ Demandant and her fate husband, with declaration, that
they were seized as of Franktenement, and l^e les explees, as te^ants for life,
etc. Pri^o^ said, That in cases special this* Writ ought to make mention of
whose gift, lease, or demise, the Demandant claims, as, Ad ^erminum vitae ex
dono I. S. or, Sibi and haeredibus ex dono I. S. But in demand of Fee ^^^nple
it is enough to say, Q^^m ^l^m^t vt ^us and hae^^ditatem, without showing by
whose gift or fe^ffment.

7. H. 7. fol. 2. If this Writ ^e against ^aron and feme for lands holden in
the wives right, it must be in quod vxor ingressa est per I. N. and non quod
vir and v^or ingressi sunt per I. N.

S^CT. XXIV. west 2. Case 3.
2. E^. 4. for. 13. IF a man be seisod in right of his wife, and recovery is
had against them by default, the woman after his death, may have a Cui in vita,
but not a Quod ei deforceat, per Moyle Justice: It seems that at Common Law,
this writ of Cui in vita was only granted upon actual discontinuance by the
baron: for West 2. cas^ ^^ i^, Q^ando vir amiserit per defalcum tenementum quod
^uit in vxoris suae, duru^^ fuit quod vxor post mortem viri non habu^rit, aliud
recup^rare, quam per breue de recto propter quod D^minus Rex ^^atuit, vt mulier
post mor^^in ^iri ha^eat r^^^p^ra^^ p^n bre^ede ingressu cui ^^^a in vita* etc.
But in this case, if the ten^^^ can prove that he had right on his side when
he recovered: Mu^er ^i^il capit per ^reue^. N^t^ also by the way, that this
heat w^^s. Si vir se absentaveri^, and ^^luerit ^^^ vxoris (...) defend^re v^d
si in vlta vxoris redd^ ^^ (...)* ^^ v^^^ an^^ (...) para^a (...) de^^ ^dete*
(...) to further for recoueries If Judgment of ^or eiudger be given against
Baron and F^uie, this is not void as soon as the Ba^on is dead, but v^ydable
by error, for the woman cannot have a Cui in vita, (...) fol. 2^^

A (...) ^y (...) ^^ (...) alienation ^ and therefore upon su^^ a ^^coverie, as
soon ^^ the husband is dead, the woman may have a C^^^ ^^^^ by the Common*
Law, 4* Ed. 2. ^rook^* (...) vit^* 18.

If a r^co^eri^ be ^^^ by (...) W^^^ of wa^^e, the w^^e cannot ^^u^ ^^ (...)
either because the recovery is not merely by default* or else because the
(...) of waste has no demand of land, quaere if she shall have a Quod e^
de^o^ceat, 9. Ed. 4. 16. If Baron and Feme be impleaded, by one which has good
title, and the Baron confess the action, the woman has no remedy. Yet the
Statute is that upon rendering by the Baron, the wife may be received, ^^. But
if Baron and Feme be received upon default of tenant for life, where the
reuersi^n is in the wife, the Baron cannot confess the action, for he must be
(...)* Ad ius (...) def^^^endum, 7. Ed. 4. 17.

SECT. XXV. The Sur ^ui in vita.
IF she which has cause to bring a Cui in vita, of Fee simple lands, die
before she has sued, etc. her heir shall have ^ Sur ^^^ in vita. But if the
wives lands, which the husband aliened, were in state of Fee tail, and the
wife ne^^^ (...) her heir must sue a (...) in dis^onder, and not a (...) ^^
^^^^, for though both these (...) he the children of the ancient Common Law,
and were before West 2. Yea, and this latter Writ was maintainable for lands
given to the mother in francke marriage, or to the heirs of her body (which at
the first was Fe^ ^^^pte) yet when (...) made (...) ^ tail, it did also
expressly set down ^ Writ, whereby the heir should recover such estates. The
Sur c^^^n vita, for it is no ^ore but Praecipe quod (...) etc. quod (...) esse
i^^ and hae^^ ditate^ su^^, in quod non habuit ingressum nisi per E^ and so in
the Cui, o^ in the (...) And the A^^t and Nee^^ (...) in it upon alienatio^
made by the husband of their common Ancestor, or upon recovery had against ^^^
and her. If a second husband alienhis wives Fee si^ple land^* and she dies,
the issue by her first husband (...) ^u^ ^ Sur cui in (...) (...) these ^^nd
husband still living, if he were never entitled to be T^nant by the Curt^sie.
But if he were entitled by the Courtesy, the A^tion is stayed, so leng as he
lives: And this Writ lies of a V^ Mi. 21. Edw. 3.

44. Edw. 3. 4 and 5. A man ^eised in right of his wife discontinued, and after
diverse alienations, he repurchased the lands to himself, his wife died, the
heir brought a ^ur cui in vita against him: praecipe W. ^. quod reddar, etc.
cui contradicere non potuit: exception against the writ, because it was not by
another name, but it was disalowed, and the writ awarded good. If the Baron
alien his wives see simple with warranty* and lea^ing asse^^^ to descend in
fee, he and his wife dye, and the h^ire alieneth the asse^^s and dies, his
heir shall be barred in a sur cui in vi^a* But if an heir intail^* alien the
asse^^s and dye, his issue shall not be barred.

SECT. XXIV. The (...) d^f^rciat.
THe quod ej deforciat, though it be not merely a woman's Writ, yet perhaps it
comes not more ^ptly into consideration any where than in this place, after the
cui in vita.

If Tenant in ^aile, or Te^^^^ in Dower, or T^nant per Courcesie* or Tenant for
t^^me of life, ^^^e their la^^ by default in any (...)* quod redda^ brought
against them, they have no remedy, if they were summoned according to Law, but
by this Writ which is given in express for me by West (...) And (...) the
(...) upon (...) the Writ lies against the (...) and his heirs, in which case
(...) particular Tenant was without remedy at the Common law for a writ of
right he could not have. The Statute having first appointed (...) woman shall
recover Dower, where the husband (...) his (...) by de^ault. viz. by writ of
Dower (in which the T^nant must not plead the judgment alone, but he m^st also
pr^^e her right) shows also how actions run together. When a woman already
endowed, or Tenant by the courtesy, or in franck marriage, or by other in
tail* or for life, demand the estate which they the^^^^ues lost by default, in
which cases when it is come to that, that the Tenant m^st pro^e h^s right, the
Demandants, which cannot an^wer witho^t them in the reuersion, may vouch them
^^ ^i^ flent ^ene^tes in priori br^^^. And so the Tenant ^^it loco actoris, and
if the Action were ^ Writ of right, they may proceed to the grand a^^ise or
battle; And furt^er, C^m mulier ius non habens impete^^^ bre^e de dote super
custodem, and custos per fa^orem mulieris dotem reddiderit vel defaltam
fecerit, vel placitum i(...)ct pe^ coll^sionem defenderit, vt dos fuerit
mulieri adiudicata: prouisum est quod cum ad aetatem ve^e^t haeres habeat
actionem petendi seis^^am ^ntecessoris sui, etc. it a tamen vt salua sit
mulie^i exceptio quod ius h^be^t in dote quod si ostenderit recedat qui^^a and
sit haeres in misericordia and grauiter amerci^tur secundu^ discretionem
Iustie^* Then to the quod ^i deforciat. Si haeres vel alius, de door sua
implacitaverit muli^r^m, and si dotem suam per defaultam amisserit, fi^^ ei
tale breue: praecipe A. quod just redda^ B. qui fuit vxor C. vnum messuagium
cum pertinent^s in N. quod clamat ^ss^ rationabilem dotem, vel de rationabil^
dote sua and quod idem A. in^uste ei defo^cia^* So is ^^^zherber^* but by the
old ^^. b^^. it must not be called an i^^u^^ for^ing. Ps. car le poll. ini^ste
non habetur in Stat^to, which is true, ad istud breue habeat tenens exceptionem
ad osten de^ du^ quod mulie^ i^^ non habeat in do^^ quod si ^^ and at, reced a^
quietus* etc. Last of all because until this time the Law (...) no remedy upon
lo^^e by default, ^^^* only a writ of right, which served not for them, that
^^^ld not speak de mero iure, viz. Tenants for life, in (...)* marriage, or in
tail; ^he (...) to a^oid that proiudi^e, g^^es them likewi^e their (...) writ^
of quo^ ^^ defo^^^^^, (...) according to their title, either, quam clamat ad
termium vitae, vel vt ius and maritagium, vel sibi and haeredibus de corpore.
Tenant by the courtesy, likewise though it be not expressed by the Statute, may
have a quod e^ deforciat, quam clamat tenere per l^gem Angliae, which is by
equity, says Fitzherbert, If any Tenant of those particular estates, lost by
default, by reason of non summons, he may have a quod ei deforceat, or a writ
of deceit, at his pleasure. If a man lose by default in a writ of waste sued
against him: he shall not have a quod ei deforciat, because the waste must be
found by verdict: novel na* bre.

Yet 2. Hen. 4. fol. 2. Hanc. said, if a writ, to enquire of waste, were
awarded, the Defendant which lost the land might have a quod e^ deforciat,
videtur lex esse contra, says Brook, for it was there agreed by all the
Court, that attaint lies in an Action of waste: and the party may challenge
the Jury: yea, the book at large is that the Viscount may quash the pannell,
though it be of his own making so, that this kind of recovery is by verdict,
and not by default. Note, that 21. Hen. 6. Challenge is denied, but by Newton
and Vaston Justices, Markham and Portington, Serieants, attaint lies. But see
Sir Edw. Cokes Comment. upon Fitzherbert fol. 355. that is resolved, that if
the Tenant in a Writ of waste in the tenet lose by default, a quod ei deforcea^
lies, as well as in assise, and it is no reason to say that attaint lies
against the Jury, for so it does in assise, yet it is there said, that attaint
does not lie after a Writ of, inquiry of waste, for it is but an inquest of
office. But there it is said, that if the judgment be a nihil dicit, there a
quod ci deforceat lies not, for that is after appearance, and is not a
judgment per defaultam.

And note there, that if Tenant for life make default after default, and he in
the reuersion is received and plead to issue, and it is found by verdict for
the Demandant, the default and the verdict are causes of the indgement, and yet
the Tenant shall have a quod ^i defor^e^t, and vide Dod. fol. 556. more est
quod ei deforceat. 33. Hen. 6. 46. Littleton says, that Tenant for life, or in
tail, may have a quod ei deforciat, as well upon disseisen done to them, as
upon recovery against them by default, for before West. 2. there was a quod ei
deforceat at Common. And all is one, whether it be brought upon a disseisen, or
a recovery, for neither Writ, nor Declaration make any mention of any recovery,
and the Tenant may choose whether he will plead the recovery or other matter
in bar, which if he do, the Demandant cannot vouch, acsi esset tenens:
Neither is null tiel recovery a good plea prima facie, save only for the
Demandant, when the Tenant pleads a recovery by default.

2. Edw. 4. fol. 11. Littleton stands to his old opinion, that there was a quod
ei deforciat at the Common law, and he would have it maintainable still by one
that has cause to bring a formedone, or an assize, or writ of entry, sur
disseism; But the Court seems to wonder at his sayings, and also at the first,
when Billing comes, and demands oier del record: for the Tenant in a quod ei
deforceat, the Court asks him quae intendes per ceo: so that with question^ of
ad^iration they seem plainly to reject both opinions, that there is any quod
ei deforciat at the Common law, given otherwise than upon recovery by default,
and then the Tenant may plead ^ul tiel record; for neither the writ nor the
d^claration makes any mention of the recovery* But Li^^leton comes once more,
10. Edw. 4. fol. 2. and (...), that once he brought a quod ei deforciat for his
mother, of lands which she claimed to hold in* Dower, the Tenant said, there
was no record to (...), that the (...) were lost by default. And Littleton
challenged the plea, because it might be the (...) was in a (...) Baron by
default in a Writ of right, in which ^^^ ^ quod ^^ deforc^at lies: and therein
i^ no record, (...) is a record by default: ^he Tenant said, there wa^ neither
record nor recovery where any (...) by default appeared, and this was holden a
good plea, per le^ (...) And Littleton relinquished his suit.

44. Edw. 3. fol. 42. A quod ei deforciat was brought against the heir of one
which recovered in an assize, he prayed the plea might stay for his non age,
and vouched to warranty W. N. etc. the voucher was allowed but not his age:
because he might not have had it in his first Action: So that it appears, this
writ lies upon recovery in assize, and the Tenant may vouch: But by Thorpe, if
it had been the party himself which recovered, he could not have vouched; Et
mirum says Brook, that upon a recovery in assize, which is by jury and not by
default, this writ should be. And if ye look this book at large, ye shall
find again, that this writ and the proceeding in it, is merely by the Statute
upon a recovery by default, therefore a quod ei deforciat lies, and that upon
a recovery by default in a quod ei deforciat. As 13. Edw. 1. a woman recovered
in a Writ of Dower, by default against Tenant for life of rent, and afterward
the Tenant, which lost by default, brought a quod ei deforciat against the
woman, and she lost by default, and then sued a quod ei deforciat, etc. This is
the highest Writ which these particular tenants can have of their own
possession, as it were their writ of right, and it lies against him which is
Tenant, though he be not party to the recovery, as against the feofee of him
which recovered. But it lies seldom or never for a stranger to the recovery.
Yet 41. Edw. 3. fol. 30. the Baron and Feme joined in a quod ei deforciat of
lands lost by the Feme before marriage, and been. And by Belknap it lies upon
a recovery in a sciri facias, and it lies without showing the record.

The Tenant in this Writ, whether it be he which recovered, or his alienee,
shall not have view. 41. Ed. 3. 8.

If a man lose by default in a writ of right brought in a Court Baron, he may
remove the record, and have a quod ei deforciat, in the Common place, and
quaere says Fitzherbert, if he never remove the record, if he then may not sue
his quod ei deforciat in which Court he will, either the common place, or the
Court Baron. He agrees if a woman lose by default, and then marry, she and
her husband may have this Writ: but if Tenant in tail^ lose by default and dye,
his heir must sue a Formedon: for that is his Writ of right.

If lands be given to Baron and Feme in especial tail, the remainder to the
Baron in general tail, and the wife die sans issue, now if the Baron lose by
default, in a Praecipe quod reddat, his writ of Quod ei deforceat must be Quod
clamat tenere sibi and haeredibus de corpore suo, for so soon as the wife
died, the state apres possibility drowned in the remainder, 50. Ed. 3. fol. 4.
If in a Scire facias brought in Chancerie by an heir of full age, to avoid
indowment assigned in Chancerie, whilst he was ward, he recover by default,
the woman may have a Quod ei deforceat in Commune Banco. So likewise if a man
recover land by default in Scire facias, out of some record in the Kings Bench,
the Tenant which lost by default may sue a Quod ei deforceat in the Common
Place. If two coparceners tenants in tail, lose by default, they may join in
a Quod ei deforceat, yet the default of one is not the default of the other.
46. Ed. 3. in Fitzherbert, Not. Breu. Brook has it also. A Quod ei deforceat
brought by two men, heirs in tail, of Gauill kind, Quam clama^ sibi tenere
and haeredibus de corporibus exeuntibus was awarded good, though they could
have none issue of their two bodies. 46. Ed. 3. 21. If tenant for life, or in
tail appear in a Praecipe quod reddat, and afterward depart in despite of the
Court, he shall lose the land, but yet he may recover by Quod ei deforceat, for
the recovery is by default, for that he does not appear when he is demanded.
But if tenant for life, or in tail, after the mise joined in writ of right,
depart in despite of the Court, they shall lose the land, and not have a Quod
ei deforceat, for the Judgment is final. If Baron and Feme seized in droit le
feme for her life lose by default, in a Praecipe quod reddat, they may have a
Quod ei deforceat, by Fitzherbert, which is denied in the old Not. Breu. 155.

If tenant for life lose by a default in a C^ssauit, he shall have a Quod ei
deforceat* by this Statute of West. 2. If ^e in reuersion upon default of
tenant for life pray to be received, plead, and lose by action tried: yet the
tenant for life may have a Quod ei deforceat, for the Judgment must be against
him by his default. If in a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant vouch, and the
^ouchee will not appear, so that the Tenant loses by default of the Vouchee.
Fitzherbert makes it a question, whether he may have a Quod ei deforceat, or
no, because the Judgment is not given upon the tenants own default. But
clear it is, if the Vouchee appear, enter into Warrantie, and lose by
default, that now the Tenant shall not have a Quod ei deforceat, but Judgment
to recover in value against the Vouchee. If Baron and Feme, t^nants for life in
the wives right, lose by default, and the Baron dye, a Quod ei deforceat lies
not, but a Cui in vita, as upon a Demise made by the baron: In a Quod ei
deforceat the Demandant must count, that he was seized, etc. in his Demesne as
of Francktenement, or in his Demesne as of Fee tail^, laying the Esplees in
himself, but he needs not show of whose gift, lease, or demise, though he
claim for life, or she claims in Dower, or sibi and haeredibus de corpore.
And the Defendant must deny the Demandants right, etc. and show how he
recovered in a Formedon, or in some other Action: concluding that he is ready
to maintain his right and title aforesaid, etc. vnde petit iudici^m. Then the
Demandant must either trauerse it, or show matter in bar: but he shall not
make defense, and then plead inbarre, as he shall do in a Formedon. Fi^zh.

10. Ed. 4. fol. 2. Dictum f^^t, and the tenant may plead a release of all the
Demandants right in a Quod ei deforceat. But the old Not. Breu. observes, that
if the Demandant vouch^one that enters into Warrantie, he which recovered
shall not plead the Vouchees release made after recovery. In a Quod ei
deforceat the Tenant may vouch, and so may the Demandant. 50. Ed. 3. 25. But if
the Demandant vouch, his Vouchee cannot vouch over. 10. H. 7. 39. The old Not.
B^eu. acknowledges, that in a Scire f^cias there lies no oucher: yet if a man
recover by default in a ^c^re facias, out of a sine, against Tenant in tail,
which brings a Q^od ei de^orceat: if the Recouerer maintain the title of his
first Writ, the Tenant in tail may vouch. The Law seems to be otherwise: see
Plow. 11^. and 206. and 14. H. 7. 18.

The questions arose upon the Demandants vouching, 10. H. 7. fol. 10. The
first, whether he must show cause of the Warrantie, or no. The second, whether
he may vouch one that has nothing in the reuersion. The third, whether he
shall recover in value. Frowicke answered* The Voucher is by Statute, and he
needs not show any cause, for the Statute of W. 2. cap. 3. says, Concedatur ei
quod vocet ad warrant* ac si esset tenens in priori breue: in which case he
should show no Deed: Second, he shall not vouch any stranger; for the Statute
is, Ideo concedatur eis quod vocen^ur ad warrantum quia non possunt sine his ad
quos spectat reuersio respondere. Third, the Statute giving voucher, means
that he shall have the effect of his vouching, id est, to recover in value. And
if a Statute give action for a thing, whereof the action did not lie at Common
Law, the party shall have judgment; process and execution incident or
belonging to that action, and a reuersion is a cause of voucher, and of
recovery in value. Frowicke said fu^ther: That though he which leased cannot
disclaim, yet his Grantee may, and award his charge, and if voucher here
should be no more, but an aid prayer, the Grantee might not disclaim; for if
Tenant for life pray in aid of him in reuersion, he shall not disclaim. And
Tenant by the courtesy cannot vouch, for he shall never recover in value.

SECT. XXVII. Admonition for women to take heed of him in the reuersion.
THe rest of this fourth book shall consist most in warnings to widows and
women tenants in ^articular estates, that they do nothing prejudicial to
their warrant. It is true for the most part, Ex quibus rebus maxima vtilitas,
ex ii^dem summa pernicies: Water washes and drowneth, fire reasteth and it
burns, the Sun ripeneth, and it scortcheth and seareth* They that can help
can hurt. The reuersioner of a widows estate, of whom she shall have aid to
defend her, shall take her estate from her in many cases, if she offend him in
his reuersion.

SECT. XXVIII. Of Waste.
EVen by the antique Law of England, if Bracton say truth, fol. 316. The
Guardian in Chivalry, committing waste, did lose the wardship, was auerred, Et
damna restaurabat. But if Tenant in Dower committed waste, there was no
forfeiture of her land, or parcel of it, but he in reuersion might stop and
let her, from doing waste, and such hinderance was no Disseisen. Also he might
have, if need required, a Non permittas to the Sheriff, commanding him not to
suffer waste, vendiction or exile in lands, tenements, houses, woods, garden,
etc. and he might have attachment against the widows, or a Pone per vadios
and saluos plegios, to make her come, etc. show why she committed waste. If
the waste in a wood were found by Inquisition, the pain was no more, but that
from thenceforth she should take no manner of Estouers, either to build,
burn, or enclose, but it must be per visum forestarior^m haeredis. And Bracton
sets forth the W^^^ for placing and appointing of the F^r^e^cor, or by the
heir ad praedict' (...) custodiendum. But now by the Stat. of Gloc. cap. 5. A
writ of waste lies against Tenant in the courtesy, or for life, or for
years, or in Dower, and the party attainted in waste shall lose the thing
wasted, and make gree to trebble value of so much as the value shall be taxed
at. This Statute made 6. Ed. 1. ordains also that the Guardian which loses
his wardship for committing waste shall render damages, if loss of wardship
be not equivalent to the harm. Peradventure Bracton wrote after the Statute
for in one part of his Book Ed. 1. is named ^. 3. But it is said Sir Edw.
C^kes 3. Rep. fol. 40. a. that Glanuile wrote temps H. a. Bracton, temps H. 3.
Britton, temps Ed. 1. and in Sir Edw. Cokes 8. Rep. in John Webs case, fol. 46.
b. he says, that Bracton wrote in fine del Roy H. 3. and Fleta wrote in temps
E. 1. But note a woman shall not answer for waste done before her time: yea, if
land be leased to Baron and Feme, for term of their lives, and they commit
waste: if the Baron die, now the widow is not punishable for this waste: For
that which the Baron did during couerture, was only his act and offense, dead
and determined with his person. Concessum per curiam, 2. H. 4. and Br. 59. in
his Writ of waste. Yet if the lease had been made to a Feme sole, who takes a
husband which commits waste, otherwise it is by 9. H. 6. 52. women need no
further warning to take heed of waste, they are of themselves so having.

SECT. XXIX. The Writ of Entry in casu prouiso.
BVtlet e^^^rie good woman take heed, how she makes any gift or alienation of
such lands as she holds in Dower. For Glocest. cap. 3. is, if a woman sell,
or give away in fee, or for life, the tenement which she holds in Dower; the
heir, or he which is in reuersion, may maintenant have his recovery by Writ
of Entry, and this is termed a writ of Entry in Casu prouiso. There is no
doubt but Fee in this Statute signifies both Fee simple and Fee tail. And he
which has Fee simple, Fee tail or Estate for life in the reuersion, may have
this Writ against the Alienee, or against him which is tenant of the
Francktenement. And this during the life of the tenant in Dower which aliened,
for when she is dead, it lies not per^el Not. Breu. The Statute expresses not
the writ, but the form is, Praecipe A. quod reddat B. vnum tonemen um quod
clamat, in quod non habet ingressum nisi per C. quae suit vxo D. qui illud ei
demis^^ and illud tenuit in dotem de dono praedicti D. quondum viri sunt cuius
haeres, etc. and quod post eemisionem per istud C. praefat' A. contra formam
Statuti Glocest. etc. ad praefatum ^ reuerti debet performameiusdem Statuti.
And it may be in the Per, Cui, or Post. If a woman recover Dower against the
heir, and then alien in Fee, the recovery must be mentioned by the heir in
his writ of Entry in Casu prouiso. In like manner as it must be in a writ of
Entrie^d Communem Legem upon an alienation by tenant in Dower, and though this
alienation be but in tail, or for life, yet the form of the writ varieth not:
If he which has the reuersion in Fee grant it to another, and the Tenant in
Dower after Atturnment, alieneth in Fee, the Grantee of the reuersion shall
have Writ specifying the grant. Likewise if the heir grant his reuersion with
Atturnment, and the Grantee grants it over with Atturnment, the third Grantee
may have a writ specifying that the woman held of the first, second, and third,
ex assignatione, etc. The Aunt and Niece having the reuersion by descent, may
join in this writ, and the process is summons, grand and petit cape.

SECT. XXX. The Writ if Enirie in Casa coasimili.
THis Writ is in nature like the other, and it lies when Tenant by the
courtesy, or Tenant for his own life, or another man's, alieneth in fee, or in
tail, or for term of life, he in the reuersion which has it for life, or in
tail, or in fee, may have this Writ of Entry in Casu consimili, during the
life of him which aliened, and this is formed and granted upon West. 2. cap.
24. which wills, That as often as there is a Writ found in Chancerie for one
case, and another case falling sub eodem^^^e, and requiring like remedy, there
is none in the registrie of the Chancerie, for that the Clerks of the Chancerie
shall concord in framing a writ Vel atterminent quaer^ntes in proximo
Parliamento, and scribantur vsus in quibus concordare non possunt, etc. and
referant eos ad proximum Parliamentum, and fiat breue de consensu
Iurisperitor^m: ne conting^td^ caetero quod curia Domini Regis deficiat
conquerentibus in Iustitia perquirenda.

The Writ is, Reuerti debet performam statuti in consimili casu prouisi. And it
supposes always altenation in feodo, although the Tenant leased or them sed
it, but for term of another man's life, or in tail: And so the writ of in Casu
prouiso: And that of Entry ad Communem Legem: This writ may be in the per,
cui, and post: And without title made in the writ, if if so be that the
Demandant himself made the particular estate of him which aliened: But if the
father or other Ancestor make a lease for term of life and die, and then the
Tenant for life alieneth in fee, now the heir in reuersion shall have a writ
comprising his title in it self. And if this writ be brought upon alienation
made by Baron and Feme, the writ supposes that the wife aliened with her
husband, but yet she may have a Cui in vita after her husbands death, the
alienation not letting it: If Tenant for life grant his estate to another, and
the grantee alieneth in fee, the Writ shall be in quod non habet ingressum nisi
per C. cu^ D. qui illud tenuit ad vitam ex demissione B. de^^sit ad eusdem
te^m^num etc. If a man make a lease for life, and dye, and his heir grant the
reuersion to B. and the Tenant att^^nes, If now the lessee grant his estate to
another, which alieneth in fee to A. B. shall have a Writ comprehending the
assignation and grant of all the estates.

If lands be given to two men, and to the heirs of one of them, and he which
has the fee simple dies, and then the Tenant for life alieneth in fee, now the
heir of him in remainder may have this Writ, for it lies as well for him as
for Tenant in reuersion.

If any Abbot or Prior make a lease for life, the lessee alien, the Prior dye,
etc the successor may have this Writ; Also tenant in tail may have it, if he
make a lease for life, and his lessee alien in fee. And it seems if Tenant in
tail make a lease for life of the lessee, and dye, the issue in tail may
choose to bring a Formdon, or Writ of Entry in Consimili casu against the
alienee, whilst the lessee for life is yet living, for the alienee, which is
Tenant in the Action, cannot plead in Abatement of the Writ, that the Demandant
has title to a Formedone: But if Tenant in tail make a lease for term of his
own life, which is no discontinuance, if now the lessee alien in fee, and the
lessor dye, his heir cannot have a Writ de consimili casu; but he is driven to
his Formedone, for in this case, he has no title to other Actions by color of
any demise. But in the former case he had title, by reason of the
discontinuance made for life, to claim by right of the new reuersion
descended; so that he had a double title, the reuersion reserved sur le seas
and the title in tail, consequently election of Action: Quaere.

P. 17. Ed. 3. A lease made for life, the remainder to another in fee, the
lesses aliened in fee, and a writ de consimili casu brought by him in the
remainder, and it abated, for the Court said, that he in remainder, was not
possessed in fait, till the remainder did fall after the death of the ^essee.

Says Fi^zherbert, the Law is not so taken at this day, but that he in
remainder has the remainder vested in him, as well as has he in the
reuersion, for he may have an action of waste, and enter for alienation of his
tenement as well as he in the reuersion may: Ergo he has his remainder in
fa^t, and me seems, this Judgment was not well given, says Fitzherbert.
And Hill 18 E. 2. it was held by Herle Justice, that the Writ lies well enough
for him in remainder. And Tri. 31. E 1. the heir in tail maintained a writ of
entry in Consimili casu upon alienation made by tenant le courtesy.

SECT. XXXI. The Writ of Entry ad communem legem.
THe Writ of Entry at Common law, is given in Case where Tenant in Dower, or
per courtesy, or for life does alien in fee, or in tail, or for life, etc. now
if the Tenant which aliened do dye, hec in the reuersion must take this Writ
of Entry ad communem legem, which is very like the former Writs, and may be in
the per, cui, and post; If a woman recover Dower, alien, and dye, the Writ of
Entry ad communem legem, must make mention of the recovery; And if Tenant by
the courtesy ali^^ in fee, and dye, he in the reuersion if he be heir in fee
simple, may sue this Writ, or his Assise of Mo^^ dancester, given by the
Statute of Gloucester. ca. 3. If Tenant for life alien in fee, and dye, the
Writs for him in reuersion are in diverse forms, for if he have the reuersion
by descent, the Writ is in quod idem A. non habet ingressum nisi per C. c^i D.
pator vel antecessor, of the Demandant cuius haeres, etc. demised, etc. But
when the Demandant himself made the lease to him which aliened, then the Writ
is or may be P^aecipe quod recidat, etc. omitting these words, quod clomat vt
ius and haereditatem; and note, if Tenant for life alien in fee, and dye, he
in reuersion may choose whether he will have this writ, or an ad terminum qui
praeteriit. If Tenant for life grant his estate, and he in reuersion grant his
reuersion with Atturnement, if now the Tenant which atturned alien in fee, the
grantee of the reuersion shall have a Writ, mentioning the grant and
assignation, etc.

SECT. XXXII. More of forfeitures, and how a particular Tenant may forfeit his
estate without alienation.
NOte. If Tenant for life, lease the land to. I. S. for term of life of. I. S.
which dies, the first leas^e still living, he shall not have the land again,
because he leased more than was in him, and therefore, he in the reuersion
shall have it: But if two be seized for life, the inheritance in fee to one of
them, and join in a lease for life, and the leasee dies, they shall be joint
tenants again. per Littleton 13. E. 4. fol. 4. Because he which had the fee
was privy to the lease, and so the other gained no new reuersion.

It is yet further to be understood, both that he in reuersion may enter upon
alienations made by particular Tenants, vt supia, to his disinheritance,
without suing the above mentioned Writs: And also that there are sundry other
forfeitures to the Reuersioner besides express alienations, which I would have
widows to take heed of.

6. Edw. 3. fol. 17. In Action of waste by an Infant against Tenant by his
fathers demise, he pleades, that the father confirmed his estate to have and to
hold to him and his heirs in fee, by his deed showed to the Court, Judgment
si, etc. It was said for verity, that if the claim were found false, the heir
might enter. Page 64. in Fitzh.

And if a reuersion be granted by fine, and the conuse brings a quid iuris
clamat against the Tenant for life, which pleads that she has estate in
tail, by devise in Testament from the Commissors, if it be found by verdict
that she has but estate for life, that estate is forfeited, Quod vide Plowd.
fol. 212. in Saunders in Fremans Case, where the entry for the conusee is
consideratum est, pro seisina and redd^t praed* cum partium versus etc.
occasionae and clam' and placit praedict' forisfact' habend' (si voluerit)
persequatur ac etiam quod finis praed* si voluerit ingrossetur. Plesingtons
Case 6. R. 2. was this. A man made a lease for years, and granted further by
Indenture, if he aliened the reuersion, or dyed within the te^me, that the
leassee should have francketenement, and livery was made, the fee simple was
granted by fine etc. and in a quid iuris clamat, the leassee claimed
francket^nement, judgment was given that the cognisee might enter for a
forfeiture, and that the fine should be engrossed, ( si voluerit) See 3. and 4.
Eliz. Dier. 209. in a like case the judgment was, not quod quaerens recuperet
seisinam, but quod prosequatur pro seisina si voluerit, and finis ingrossetur
etc.

SECT. XXXIII. The Statute of 11. H. 7. cap 20.
THe Common Law restrictiue of it self, and helped something by the Statute of
Gloucester, was sufficient, a great while, to bridle women from making
alienations for any land that they held in Dower or Ioynture, as arguments of
their own good deserts and testimonies of their husbands love; But time, which
made the art of fencing more fine than it was at the first, when Combattants
fought all at head and shoulders, and it was greater shame to strike under the
girdle than it is now, made law also more subtle than in the beginning it was,
when lands went altogether, or for the most part by livery of seisin.

And women witty of themselves, instructed by crafty men, grew cunning at the
last, that they could alien lands, holden for life, or in tail, to whom they
listed in fee. And he which suffers disinheritance should not easily help
himself by Writ of Entry, either ad communem legem or in casu prouiso: for
remedy whereof was made this severe statute in effect as follows. 11. H. 7.

If any woman, which has had or hereafter shall have any estate in Dower, or
for life, or in tail, jointly with her husband, or only to her self, or to
her use in any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments of the
inheritance, or purchase of her husband, or given to the husband and wife in
tail, or for term of life by any Ancestors of the husband, or by any other
person seized to the use of the husband, or of his Ancestors, and have, or
shall hereafter being sole, or with any other after taken to husband,
discontinued, or discontinue, aliened, released or confirmed, alien, release,
or confirm, with warranty, or by couin, suffered, or suffer any recovery of
the same, against them, or any of them, or any other seized to their use, or to
the use of either of them, after the form aforesaid, that all such recoueries,
discontinuances, alienations, releases, confirmations, and warranties, so had,
and made, and from henceforth to be had, and made, be utterly void, etc. And
that it shall be lawful to every person and persons, to whom the interest,
title, or inheritance, after the decease of the said woman, of the said manors,
lands, or tenements, or other hereditaments being discontinued, aliened, or
suffored to be recovered, after the first day of December next coming in the
form aforesaid should appertain, to enter into all and every of the
Premises, and peaceably to possess and enjoy the same, in such manner and
form, as he or they should have done, if no such discontinuance, warranty, or
recovery had been had or made: And if any of the said husbands and women, or
any other seized, or that shall be seized to the use o^ them of the estate
before specified, after the said first of December, do make or cause to be
made, or suffer any such discontinuance, alienations, warranties, or
recoueries, in form aforesaid, that then it shall be lawful to the person or
persons, to whom the said manors, lands, and tenements should or ought to
belong, after the decease of the woman, to enter into the same, and to
possess, and enjoy them, according to such title, and interest, as they should
have had in the same, if the woman had been dead, no discontinuance, warranty,
nor recoueries, had as against the said husband, during his life, if the
discontinuance, alienation, warranties, and recoueries, he hereafter had by or
against the same husband and woman* during Couerture and espousals betwixt
them* ^^^uided, that the said women, after the decease of their said husbands,
may reenter and enjoy, etc. according to their first estate; And over this it
is enacted, that if the woman, at the tune of such discontinuance, alienation,
recovery, warranty, etc. besole, that then she shall be barred and excluded
of her title and interest in the same from thenceforth, and the person or
persons, to whom the title, interest and possession of the same should belong,
after the woman's decease, shall immediately after the discontinuance,
alienation, warranty, and recovery, enter, possess, and enjoy, the same
Manors, Lands, etc. according to his or their title; Provided that this Act
extend not to avoid* any recovery, discontinuance, or warranty, after the form
aforesaid, heretofore had, made, or suffered, but only where the husband and
wife, or either of them, now being alive, or any other to their use, now have
title and Interest to the said Manors, etc. or take the issues and profits to
their vse^ Provided also, that this Act extend not to any recovery or
discontinuance, where* the heir next inheritable to the woman, or ^e* or they,
that next after ^er death* should have estate of inheritance, etc. (...) or
agreeing to the re^^uerie^* where ^he same ass^ent and agreement is of record
or inrowled. Provided also, that it shall be lawful to every woman being
^ol^, or married after the death of her first husband, to give, s^ll,
discontinue, etc. for term of her life only, after the course of the common
Law.

SECT. XXXIV. The Exp^sition.
BEfore this Statute, if Tenant in Dower had aliened in fee with warranty, and
dyed, the warranty discending upon him in reuersion, had barred him, for
against collateral warranty of Tenant in Dower, or for life, the Statute of
Gloucester cap. 3. determined nothing. L^^^^eton fol. 164. He adds, that if
the heir were under age, both at time of alienation, and also when the
warranty descended, he should he at no prejudice by this collateral
warranty: But if he wore under age at time of the alienation, and came
afterward to full age, during the woman's life, and never entered, then
perchance he should be barred; This was Law when Littleton wrote, and had
continued so above two hundred years, and during the reign of nine Kings
after the making of Gloucester cap. 3. which Statute Dyer comparing with the
later, he reputes the last cruel against women; for by this A^t of 11. Hen. 7.
all alienations, recoueries, releases, and warranties of Tenant in Dower, or
^oynture of the husbands lands are of no strength. And where Gloucester allows
Tenant by the courtesy to alien with warranty and assets: this from women is
clean taken away this, he says, is un case fort dure. That if a woman
^oyntresse in tail, whose warranty is lincall to her heirs, do ali^n, and
leave assets, yet the heir may enter; Therefore he is of the mind that this
Statute being rigoro^s of it self, ought to receive a stre^t and litterall
interpretation, fol. 148. But Stamford, Brown, and Brook, e^po^^ded these
words, (given by the Ancestors) to be intendible of all manner of assurances,
for money or otherwise: There are two Cases in Plowden that in^ued great
Argraments upon this Statute; The first is betwixt Winibishe and Falbo^es a man
enf^offed diverse persons to the use of himself and his wise in special tail,
before the Statute of 27. He^. 8. of uses* and after the Statute the husband
died, a stranger recovered in a formedone, per meant deduc, the first day, by
couin, and upon false ti^le, he to whom the title appertained, after the woman's
death entered, and the entry wa^ adjudged lawful, though he could not have
Judgment for a default in the pleading, and that was want of certainty in his
replication, and not showing how he was heir, or the party to whom the entry
was given by the Statute.

The greatest matter upon the Statute objected to enforce a proof, that the
widow, which suffered the recovery, was not bound by this Act, was, that she
held not jointly with her husband, any lands or tenements, but only she was
seized of an use in tail. (for they took it clear on all pa^ts, that the
case came into consideration, as if the Act of 27. had not been made) and that
seems to be directly within the letter of the Laws; But Montague chief
Justice, showing how greatly the marriage of women, and their advancement by
it, is respected in Law, as appears by the Writ of ^a^^a matr^mo^i^
prolo^^^i, and the ^^i ante diu^rtium taken by equity of West. 2. cap. ^. and
also by that, that where donees in frankemarriage are divorced; the woman shall
have all the lands: a^^irmeth it to be reason against such women thus favored,
and who abuse such favors as the Law bestows upon them, and will be of Couin
and Fa^^ity, to impair their deceased husbands inheritance, and disinhe: it
their heirs, to construe this* Law for their co^^^^tion, for the Lawmakers of
the statute were bent extremely against them, though it be penal in some sort
o^it self. And so it was agreed, that if the widow were not within the words,
yet she was within the intent and meaning of this Statute.

The other case was this betwixt Eiston and Stud. Baron and Feme le^ied a fine
of l^nds of the wives* inheritance, taking back an estate in ta^le the
remainder to the right heirs of the wife, the question was whether the woman
after her husbands death, might alien without danger of this Statute, adjudged
that she might, because she was clear without the intent and meaning of the
Act: For whatsoever the words import, the matter that this Statute aimed was,
and is, to restrain women which have Ioyntures, proceeding originally from
their husbands, or the husbands Ancestors, that they should do nothing
prejudicial to the heirs. But in this case there came no Ioynture from the
husband, but contrariwise, the wife had made a Ioynture to her husband, and
after his decease, to bridle the woman to do what she listed with her own
inheritance, were against all reason, and as far from any affinity with 11.
H. 7. as it should be, when a woman seized in Fee simple gives lands to the
father of him whom she intends to marry, to the intent that he regrant this
land to his son and her after marriage, with a remainder in tail, etc. to
restrain her, when after marriage regranting, and death of the husband, she
should levy a fine to other uses, or suffer a recovery, which case though it
be clean out of the Statute, yet it is within the words, for the ^oynture was
made by the Barons Ancestor, though not originally, etc. And so note those two
cases of Plowd. one is taken to be within the intent, though out of the letter,
and the other though within the letter, yet out of the intent, and yet both
constructions most reasonable and just.

And see Sir George Brownes case, Sir Edw. Cokes ^. R^p. that a lease made by a
woina^ t^nant in ta^le of the gift of her husband, etc. make a lease for three
li^s^ that is not warranted by the Statute of 32. H. 8 and although the lease
be without clause of Warrantie, yet it is within the Statute of 11. H. 7. for
those words in the act (with warrantie) refer to releases and confirmations
which makes no discontinuance without warrantie, for the intent of the Act is,
to pro^ibit not only every bar, but ^ueri^ manner of discontinuance, which
puts the heir to his real action. And in that case it was resolved, that if
the issue in tail had before the woman's for feiture granted his remainder
only in that case, he by the ex^resse letter of the Act shall enter upon the
discontinuance of the woman, for his act does not bi^de his estate. But when
the issue in tail levy a fine with praclamation, in the life of the woman
tenant in tail, etc. that shall bind the tail, and therefore there the
Conusee shall enter, for he which has the immediate title, interest, or
inheritance, at the time of the for feiture, shall enter by that Statute. And
it was said by Anderson, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, that where it was
in^ented for to mak^ eua^^^ne out of the Statute, that if such a woman tenant
in tail accepts a fine sur conusans de droit come c^o, etc. and by grant and
renders the land for a th^usand years, that is an alien^tion within the
intention of the Act, although the words of the Act are discontinuance,
ali^nation, etc. and of that opinion was W^ay Chief Justice, and Dyer, and all
the Court of Common Pleas was of the same opinion, 18. Eliz.

And in Sir Edw. ^okes 3. Rep. Lincoln College case. It was resolved, that if
the heir in tail convey the lands to others, and the woman tenant in tail
release, or maks con^^r^nation with wa^rantie which is not but to perfect and
corroborate the estate which the heir in tail has made, such a warrantie is
not restrained by the said Act, for that which the woman has done, is for the
benefit of the heir, and not for his prejudice, and by his a^^ent. And she and
the heir^ ^^ight have i^yned a fine, and so bar the estate tail, not with
standing the Statute of 11. H. 7. therefore such Acts by the woman shall not be
void, to grant the h^ire, or any else, any advantage by the Statute of 11. H.
7. And note the opinion of Sir Edw. Coke in the said case of Lincoln College,
that the son borne after, shall by this Statute out the daughter, who entered
for forfeiture, and ^^ew^^ other opinions concurring, y^^ in Dyer 21. Eliz.
362. the heir in such a case is said to be in by purchass.

And note, Reader, that it has ^^^ne adjudged, that although the Deed of
conueyance, and assurance of the woman's Ioynture or estate, d^therpresse her
marriage portion, as well as her marriage, to ^e the cause and consideration of
such Ioyn^ur^ or ^stat^* yet if the estate pr^^eds from the husband or his
Ancestors, she is within the said ^tatute of 11. H. 7. and s^e Villers and
Beau^^^rit^ case, 4. Mar. 146. But ^^^u^r^ if the portion money appear to be
the full price of the land, if that differ not the case.

See Sir Edw. Cokes Comment upon Littleton* 365. These ^ases put a man seized
in Fee, levy a fine to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of
his wife, and of the heirs males of her body by him begotten, and had issue
male, and after he and his wife levied a fine, and suffered a common recovery;
the husband and the wife died, and the issue male entered by the Statute of 11.
H. 7. and the entry was ^olden lawful, and yet this ca^e is out of the letter
of the Statute, for she neither levied the fine, etc. being sale, or with any
other save her husband, who made the Io^^ture, Sed qui ^aeret i^ littera,
^aeret in cortice; and therefore this case being within the (...) of the
Statute is within the remedy* But (...), (...)* that this case was de^yed for
Law by the R^^^rder o^ London, in his argument in the case hereunder (...)*
between Copland and Pyat. Another case in Sir (...) Cokes Commentaries upon
Littleton, which agree with Eiston and Studs case in Plowd. is; A man seized of
land ^ure v^oris and they two levy a fine, and the (...) grant and render the
land to the h^sband and wife in special tail, the remainder to the right
heirs of the wi^^, they have issue, the husband dies, the wife takes another
husband, and they two levy a ^^ne in Fee; the issue enters, this is within
the letter of the Statute, and yet is out of the meaning, because the state of
the land (...) from the wife, so as it was the purchase of the husband in
letter, and not in meaning. But where the woman in ^^nant for life by the gift,
or conueyance of any other, ^^^ alienation with Warrantie shall bind the heir
at this day.

The case of Copland and Pya^ adjudged Hillar. 7. Car. in Ban^^ Regis, in
effect was thus* I. S. his son was to marry to the daughter ^^ I. N. And the
Deed (...) that I. N. for the consideration of four hundred (...) paid by I.
S. and of a marriage, etc* and for the (...) of the blo^^ of I. N. co^enants to
stand seized to the use of the son ^^ I. S. and his daughter whom the (...)
of I. S. should marry, ^^taile the remainder to another (...) of I. N. the
remainder to the h^ires of I. N. (...) dies having issue, and the wife
alieneth by (...). (...) was resolved, that it was not within the Statute of
(...) 7. notwithstanding the four hundred pounds paid by ^^^ husbands father,
for the ^^nd ^rst moved from (...) father, and the presermen^ of the blo^^ ^^
I. N. (...) intent that the husbands heirs should not (...) but the wives. And
the Bishop of Ex^^tors case (...) that case cited, which was that in
considera^ion (...) to the woman, and service done by the man, (...) gave the
land to them (...), ^^^ (...) to (...) of the Bishop, it was ^^^^ to be (...),
that the (...) after her husband^ ^^^th, had no (...) within (...) said Statute
of ^^. H. 7. but that she might self it (...) ^^nger of the Statut^.

SECT. XXXV. What Actions concerning chattells do surui^e a widow.
I H^ld it good wisdom for a widow, and for all persons, to have greatest
care of matters of greatest moment, and not to contemn the lesser: Now that
^^^ have do^e with matters of Francktenement, we will see a little, in what
Actions concerning Chattels rea^^, or personal duties a widow may be
Plaintiff, or Defendant, to make an end of reckonings begin before, or whilst
she was a wife. I^ Feme covert deliver Deed to I. S. she may have Action of
Detinue for the Deed after her husbands decease, for though the delivery were
void betwixt I. S. and the Baron, yet it is good betwixt I. S. and the wife, if
the Baron dye, 3. H. 6. 50.

If a lease be made to Baron and Feme for years, and the Baron die, the wife
shall have the term, and if the Lessor out her, she may have Action of
c^uenant, 47. Ed. 3. 12.

If a man be bound to Baron and Feme in Statute Merchant, the Baron alone may
make de^e, and by some opinion the Au^^^^ quert la must be against ^^^ alone:
but if he do not release, etc. the Statute* suru^^^th to the wife, and she may
sue execution, and executor ^^ my. And, per Finch, the Law is all one of an
Obligation and a Statute. Likewise in a plea of land, if Baron and Feme recover
the land with damages, and the Baron ^^^, his wife shall s^e for damages, and
not his Executors.

So likewise by B^lknap, If an Obligation be made to Alice the wife of Robert,
this is a good Obligation, and Alice and Robert may join in an action upon it,
and if Robert die before he have released, for ^e may (...) release it, Alice
alone shall have the Action, 48. Ed. ^. 12. simile 7. H. 6. fo. 2. See the
Commentaries of Sir Coke upon Littleton, fol. 350. It is said that Chattels
reals of a mixed nature, namely, part y in possession, and partly in action,
happening during couerture, if the wife have her husband, she shall have them
by the Common Law, as if the husband be seized of a rent charge, rent service,
or Secke, iure vxoris, the rent incurreth during couerture, if the husband* dye
the wife shall have the arrerages, and ^^ of an Aduowson of the Church during
couerture, and sic de (...). And in those cases the husbands shall gain^ them
by suruiuership: but for arrerages, or auoydance of the Church before marriage,
the husband could have ^^ help by suruiuership, and so of releases. But now by
the Stat^te of 32. H. 8. cap. 37. By suruiuership the husband shall have the
arrerages as well incurred before the marriage as after.

If an Estray happen within the Manor of the wife, if the husband dye before
seizure, the wife shall have it, f^r that the property was not in the wife
before seizure.

But as to personal goods there is a diversity (...) a property and a bare
possession, for if personal goods be delivered to a woman, or if she find
goods, or if goods come to her hands, as Executrix to a Bayl^ffe, and takes a^
husband, this bare possession is not given to the husband, but the Action of
D^t^^ue must be brought against the husband and the wife.

If Baron and Feme make a lease for years, and the Baron die, the wife may
bring an Action of waste, 22. H. 6. 24.

If an Obligation be made to Baron and Feme, and the Baron die, the widow may
have the Obligation* 4. H. 6. 5. Quaere, for the book is not so clear, as
Brook makes it, the woman was Obligee with her husband, (...) sued as
Executrix.

Generally where title, or cause of Action, is given (...) woman before
marriage, or during marriage, and the husband releaseth not, etc. the Action
suruiueth when ^^^ dye. But there may be a release in land as well as in fact
i^plied, as well as expressed. And therefore the case is 8* Ed. ^. Br. D^^^.
156. and cite Plow^. 184. in Woodward and Darcy his Case, If a man be bound to
a woman, and to another, and the Obligor marry the woman, all the obligation is
extinct although the wife ouer*liue her husband, or although she dies, ^wing
the other obligee, for either of the obligees has power to release, and that
inter* marriage is a release. And gifts in Law of the chattels of the wife as
well real as personal are outlawry or attainder of the husband. If a man
marry with a woman executrix, and then release to Creditors, all manner of
Actions generaly, this extends to his proper accords, and to those which his
wife has, either in her own right, or as executrix. Baron and fe^e ^0. in
Brook. See Brook coue^on^ 6. Action of covenant was brought against Baron and
Feme, lessees of a Manor for term of life, rendering 20. ^i. per annum, and
they were bound to the Plaintiff, that he should have such surety for his
rent as his Council devised; the Counselors devised the Assurance, and the
Defendants refused to make it, it was ruled for Law, that if the Baron died,
nothing should bind his widow, save only the lease and reservation, if she
agreed to the lease post mortem viri: And she shall be charged with payment
of the rent, or double it, or pay fine ^^ (...) paenae, or hold it subie^t to
reentry, according as the lease was made: But a collateral covenant, as that
the lessor shall distraine in other lands for his rent, or a covenant, to
charge the lessees*persons in twenty pound for non payment, etc* such like
agreements bind not the widow, when the Baron is dead, and the Writ abilted.

Note, that widow is a good Addition, to be put to the Defendants name many
original Writ of Action personal, appeal or indictment, wherein exigent
^eth, etc. According to the Statute, ^. Hen. 5. cap. 5. And 14. Edw. 4. fol. ^.
B^arkey demanded of the Justices in the (...) chamber, if an Action were
brought against a (...) was neither maid, wife, nor widow, what addition
should be given her, some say she should be called single woman: and there it
is doubted, whether servant ^ee a good addition, or not; for it was no addition
by the Common Law, as some said.

We are past the greatest, and most difficult part of Law, peculiarly
belonging to a widow, and come now to consider, whether she shall marry
again, or no. If John Boccace de C^rtaldo, in his Book De duris mulieribus,
may be believed, When the sister of covetous King Pigma ^^^ and widow of
Sycheus, Hercules his Priest, had built the Walls, Temple, Market, Town house,
and private dwellings of Carthage, giving laws and rules of life to the
inhabitants, amongst the rest that were filled with love of her great virtues
and singular beauty, the King of Malaca was one, he grew so vehement in his
desires, that he threatened the Citizens of Carthage with wars, and utter
subversion of their new City, unless he might have the Foundresse of it to be
his wife: They knowing how highly their Queen would remain displeased by any
dire^^ solicitation to a second marriage, and not knowing how otherwise to
save themselves* determined to win her assent without asking. The chief of
them went therefore to Dido, and told her how the King of Malaca required
Masters and Instructers of huma^^tis to be sent him out of Carthage, from whom
he and his people might learn to do off their natural ^^^^atousnesse and
inciuilitie, and further* how he had menaced fire, sword, and extreme
dissolution, unless his request were accomplished: But they knew not (they
said) whom to send, or who would be willing to go, and leave his own
habitation, to dwell with a King of such savage nature, and wild behavior, as
was this King of Malaca. Dido, when she heard them, answered, that she was
ashamed there should be found in any Carthaginian, such (...) and cowardly
fear, affirming plainly, that men were not borne only for themselves, and
whosoever he were that would not adventure loss, peril, yea, and death,
though it were certain, for safeguard of his Country, he was (she said)
unworthy to dwell in Carthage, or that either he or his posterity should ever
be received to any honor or reputation amongst them. The Carthaginians thought
they had obtained their desire, and uncovered their counsel to the Queen,
telling her plainly the Kings demand. Dido not knowing how to reply against her
own r^dar^utions, replenished with sorrow and a^xieti^, was enforced to yield
her assent to wedlock, and craved a day, before which she said she would go
unto her husband* but before the term was expired, she caused a great fire to
be made in the most eminent place of the City, and there in view and concourse
of all other people, after many ceremonies and offering of sacrifice, as it
were to appease the ghost of ^c^^us, she suddenly with a knife struck her self
t^ the heart, and told her subjects that now she went to her husband, her
Sicheus, her dear Sich^us. on whose name still inuocating, she sunk to the
ground, haning chosen rather to shed her dearest life's blood (as she said) than
to violate the vows of chaste widdowhood. Boccace mine Author here may have
some color of reason, to extol the resolution of Dido* but not to condemn so
bitterly (as he does) all women that marry a second husband. Some of them are
destitute of friends, their parents, brethren, and kindred dwell far off,
suitors come every day, who can obsist them* Another widow has lands rents,
store of goods, some suits at Law, and no body that she can trust, in help to
govern that which she has, or to inherit it when she is gone. Another is
tolled to marry by mighty persuasions of her dearest friends and kindred.
Another has (...) youth on her side* (...) Indians leap into the dead man's
fire, if they will, she has learned that it is better to marry than to burn.

SECT. XXXVI. A (...) to marri^ so, (...) it be not uncertain who shall (...)
her to the^^ ^^ (...)*
I For my part, that am like neu^r to be feared, unless some widow be moved
with compassion toward me, will not speak villainy of Bigamie, or Octogamie,
let every woman marry when she sees her time, but (...) a slow speed perhaps
will be best, and let her examine well whether the pannier be empty, or no. If
(says Sir Thom^s Smith, in his Treatise De Repub. Angliae. ^ol. 104.) I marry
the widow of one lately dead, which at the time of her husbands death was with
child, and the child is b^^ne after marriage solomnized with me, this child
shall be mine (...) and lawful son, so* precisely do we take the letter,
Peterest quem (...) demonstran^. Littleton ^aith, 18. E. 4. fol. 30. If a man
marry a woman which is gro^^ment ens^^nt by another, and within four days
after marriage she is delivered, this child shall be his that has newly
married the woman and inherit his land, for it is no bastard. It (...) would
have it understood of a woman enseint by ^^p ^^zard, and in such cases it is
reason; that he which takes the Dame should have the Fool* So ^s it also when
^ ^^man elopes with a stranger in (...), and (...) her husband John at Noke
being between (...) four (...), must father the ^hilde, and it shall be his
heir, it he die; for the Law will not ^^ing into trial directly, wh^ (...)
the child, 44* Edw. 3. fol. 10. and ^. H^^. 4. (...). ^^^ though issue may
(...) ^^ taken, whether a woman (...) ens^m^ by her (...), ^^ ^h^ time of his
death^ dea^ing out the question by whom, as appears by the for^^^ Books, and
1. H. 6. fol. 3. Then if it may be found by Engu^st, that a woman was with
child at her husbands death, the Law which permits not to enquire by whom,
affirms it to be the husbands, and that husbands which might lawfully beg^t
it. I think ^urely, ^ir Thomas Smith mistook the Law: for by Thorpe and
Willowby, 24. E. 2. fol. ^9. If a man dye seized of land in Fee simple, and the
wife which is (...) with a son, marry again, and after is delivered, ^^is
son shall be adi^dged son and herro to the first Bar^n and not to the
second* Though Justice Be^ there were of opinion, that the Infant might ^hu^e
his father* It were better reason perhaps, that the second husband might (...)
whether he should be his son, or no, and by allowance make him hi^ heir.

Sir Ed. Coke in his Comment upon Littleton, fol. 8. a. says, I^ a man has a
wife, and dies within a ^erie short time after, the wife marries again, and
within nine moneth^ has a child, so as it may be the child of the one or the
other, some have said in this case the child may choose his father, Quia in ho^
cas^ filiatio non potest probari, and so is the Book to be intended: For
avoiding of which question, and other inconcemences, this was the Law before
the Conquest, Sit omnis vidua ^ine marito 12. mensibus, and si marita verit
perdat dorem. But if women had all been of such sobriety, as many are, many
of these questions had never risen, and I must confess it is great p^^ulancie
in any widow, that slippeth to second wedlock, w^ilst she yet nourishes in
her womb, the pledge of vn^^n and love, betwixt her and her late husband: I
thank God, I cannot say that I have known in my life time any widow so
want^n. In old time women used now and then to saine themselves left with
child, and to bring forth borrowed brats, to deprive the Deceaseds right heir
of his inheritance, sometimes of their own mischievous malice and
deceitfulness, and sometime by consent and combining with the Lords of whom
the lands were holden. Bracton in his second Book, cap. 32. has a large
discourse, De partu supposito: and there is a Writ to the Sheriff, to call
before him, and the Keeper of Pleas of the Crown, the woman that pretends to
be enseint, to have her examined, by tractation and search of good and lawful
women, per vbera and per ventrem, whether she be pregnant or no, and if the
matter he found doubtful, to commit her to a Castle, and wary custody,
without access of any suspected woman, Qu^usque de partu suo corstare possit.
But this is a piece of learning so obsolete and wor^e out, that I think since
I was borne, and a long time before, there never was any such Writ put in ^re*
I conclude therefore, that our widd^wes now adays are honester than they were
in Henry the thirds time, in the fifth year of whose reign, Mariell widow of
William Constable de Mauton in Comitat. N. rff. practiced this cousenage:
widows of this age are nothing so deceitful, though deceived sometimes by
bad husbands.

THE WOMAN'S LAWYER. The fifth BOOK.
THe widow married again to her own great liking, though not with applause
of most friends and acquaintance. But alas what would they have her to have
done, she was fair, young, rich, gracious in her carriage, and so well became
her mourning apparel, that when she went to Church on Sundays, the
casements opened of their own accord on both sides the streets, that
bachelours and widdowers might behold her, Hic trahebatur and ^lle, and er^^
cunctis amor vnus habendi. Her man at home kissed her pantables, and served
diligently; Her late husbands Physician, came and visited her often* The Lawyer
to whom she went for council, took opportunity to advise for himself. If
she went to any feast, there was ever one gues^, sometimes two or three, the
more for her sake; If she were at home, suitors ouertooke one another, and
sometimes the first commer would answer the next, that she was not within; All
day she was troubled with answering peretitions. And at night when she would go
to rest, her maid Marion was become a Mistress of reque^^s and hum^le
supplications. This kind of life the widow liked not I ask again what she
should have done; he to whom she gave a den^all would not take it; if she
denied him twice, he said two negations made an affirmation; and he
challenged promise; therefore to set men's ha^ts and her own at rest, she
choose amongst them, one not of the long robe, not a man macerate and dried up
with study, but a gallant gulburd lad; that might well be worthy of her, had
he been as thrifty as kind hearted, or half so wise, as hardy and
adu^nturous; This youth within less than a year, had set the Nuncios which
his predecessor kept in prison at liberty round about the Country, the bags
were all empty, the plate was all at pawn, all to keep the square bones in
their amble, and to relieve Companions; One of which notwithstanding, that had
cost him many a pound, for none other quarrel, but vous me^tes challenged him
one day into the field, which was appointed, and there my new married man was
slain; Now his wife will bring her Appeal.

SECT. I. Appeal of the husbands death.
BY Bracton li. 3. cap. 29. A woman can have an Appeal, but only in two cases;
per quod alicui lex debeat apparens adiudicari. As in case where injury and
force is committed against her person by rauishment, or when her husband is
killed imer Brachia iua: This form of appeal therefore is, A. late wife of B.
appeals ^. that whereas B. her husband was at such a place, such an hour,
such a day, and such a year. C. came with force, ^equiter and in felonia
contra pacem regis, and killed him betwixt her arms, and that he did this
against the Kings peace, and fellonio^sly, she will prove and maintain as the
Court shall think good; Again, the same A. appeals E. of this, that at the
same place, the same year, day and h^wer, E. ^ame with C. felloniously, and
against the Kings peace, and held B. till C. killed him, etc. If he which is
appealed, de facto, were taken upon the fact* with his knife or sword all
bloody, and this very^^ed by Testimony of good and lawful men* non erit
v^terius ^^quiren^^^. Thus Bracton.

Now let us ^^^ how she shall be understood, there is no doubt, but a woman
may have other Appeals, besides th^se tw^, of rape* or death of her husband.

11. Hen. 4. fol. 9^. An Appeal of Robbery was brought by a woman, the
defendant said, the Appealant was his (...), judgment, si el ^erra respondue,
and to the robbery, non culpa^le. So that he pleaded to the fellonie, and the
^^^fty admitted a good plea* And a woman may have an appeal of may hem. 13.
Hen. 7. 14. Hussy says, it was demanded of him for a doubtful question,
where parish Clarke ^ell out with another man, and threw the Church ^^re key^s
at him with such force, that they ^^ang out at the Chamber window, and put out
a woman's eye, whether it were may h^^ or no? And for the evil intent of the
Clarke, it was deemed may h^^* but considerati^n ought to be had in a^^e^^^ng
^a^^ages. But true it is a woman shall not have appeal of any man's death, save
only of her husbands, therefore if a man be killed that has neither wi^^, nor
son, but his next heir is either daughter, sister or female Cos^^, albeit he
has many other ^^^red, E^si^s, or V^e^es, the pro^^^ity of a female he^^e,
^^^es away the Appeal quite and clean; for of ^^^ Ancestors death, if he had
no wife, the Appeal belongs over to the heir, who here cannot have it,
because it is a female* for Mag. Char. does directly d^ny it. ^ap. 34. N^llus
c^pictu^ a^^ imprisonet^^, propter apellum ^eminae de mo^^e a^^^^^u^ quam viri
sui. And upon such an Appeal brought by an heir female, the Defendants cannot
be arraigned at the Kings suit, because the Appeal was never good. Neither
shall the Defendants recover damages, because (as Shard makes the reason) he
may be arraigned and condemned otherwise ad Sectam regis, for any thing yet
done to the Contrary. 27* A^^. p. 25.

A daughter or sister, etc. can have none Appeals of a fathers or brothers
death, no more can a mother have* Appeal of the death of her son. If a woman
have issue a son, which is murdered, and there is no heir to him on the
fathers side, by Billing chief Justice, Needham, and Choke, none uncle nor
other kinsman which must co^^^y as heir by the mother, can have the Appeal,
because the Statute, before remembered, excludes her, from wh^m they must
derive: Bria^, Littleton, N^ale, and the chief Baron are contra. For, said
they, the V^cle on the ^^ther side may have Appeal of the Nephews death,
which the father from whom the Uncle must conueigh, (...) have any more than
the mother. But Billing tells them* the Cases are nothing like, for a father may
have an A^peale of his Ancestors death; but so cannot another i^ any case; the
bridge therefore being once broken, ^d e^^* the mean of conueyance stopped and
disabled, the Appeal is altogether, and for ever taken away. ^7. E^^* 4* fol.
1. And so is it adjudged likewise ^0. Hen. 6. fol. ^^* where there was
grandfather, mother and son, the mother died, the grandfather was murdered,
the s^nn^ might not have Appeal, because he conveyed by a woman, scilicet, by
his mother, and* there it was* stood ^^^* that an Appeal shall never descend,
but he to whom it first falls, shall have it, and if he dye, the A^tion
d^^^^* It is a good case well argued in the book at large. See the book of
11. Hen. 4. 1^. It appears that in Appeal o^ Rape by the husband ne vnques
accouple, etc. nest p^^^ for the husband in Act or possession shall have that
w^er^ the marriage is not void, and yet that plea is good in Appeal by the
wife of the death of her husband, for there she shall not r^uenge his death to
whom she was not lawfully married, and see 50. E. 3. 15. Br^^^on agrees with
Bracton qui null ^ee, puisseare appeller de felony, de mort ^orsque de mort
son baron, ^u^ deins ^^^ and l^ ^our enter ses bra^. And it is true, that by
the ancient Law neither woman or other person might have appeal of death,
unless the appellant ^^^^ pr^s^n^, or did see the dead man, at the ti^^ when
he was slain. But the Law is changed by ^lo^. cap. 9. which wills that no
Writ henceforth shall go out of Cha^^^ry, for the d^^^^ of man* to enquire
whether a man killed another, by ^^^aduenture, or in his own defense, or
^therwi^e ^e^^niou^^y, but he shall remain in prison, till the coming of
Justices errants, or gai^^ delivery, and before them, put himself to the
country, for trial of good and evil. And if it ^e ^ound by the country, that,
what he did, was ^^ his own defense, or by ^^sad^enture, the I^^^^^es ^^^ll
d^e the King to wit, and the King do the party grace, ^^luy plei^^. Also it is
provided, that no Appeal shall be ^^^ted si le g^^r men^ come (...) a^ ^e^*
^u^ if the Appeal ou^ show t^^ d^^d, the y^^re, the day, and ^o^^^, ^^ ^^mps l^
^^y, the Town where, and the weapon wherewith the s^aughter was committed, ^he
appeal shall stand go^d, and ^^^^e appeal shall be abated for want of ^resh
^u^^, i^ it be per^^ed within a y^^re and a day after the ^^^t co^^i^^^d.
Before this Statute the Appell^nt always (...) o^ ^^s proper view, ^ow ^^
n^^ds not. The (...) that ^^^ll ^^ing ^his appeal, (...) be wi^e to the ^a^^^
(...) ^^ (...), ^or ^^en^ accouple in loyal matrimony is a good plea, in bar
o^ her appeal, as before is said. But this plea is not so per^mptory, but that
after the Bishop has ^^^ (...) ^^y^^ment ^cco^^^e, etc. the Defendant may
afterward ^^^ad non culpable, and this in (...) in vit^^, but he cannot ^^^ad
on to the felony immediately upon the ^^rst plea. Therefore here is requis^te
two trials, as it seems 50. ^^. ^^ ^. Idem 27. (...) p. ^.

Furthermore it is requist^e, that she be sole and unmarried, married that made
this Appeal for if she marry again(...) her Appeal is gone, though the new
married husband be dead within the year and day after his death that was
slain. Yea, and not only a widow which has an Appeal* hanging abateth her
Appeal, and loses it for ever, by new marriage, but also if after Judgment
and before execution* she take an husband, she loses execution of the
Judgment, 11. H. 4. fol. 48* By Brian and Hussy 2^ F. 4* fol. 72, 72. If a
woman pursue her Appeal till the Defendant be outlawed, and then marry, she
may sue execution. And so did Skr^^n^ hold the Law to be in the (...), ^. ^. ^.
^ut Gaseo^g^e* Chief Justice denies it. And ^* or 2. Mariae, Brook Appeal
100 the Justice of the Kings Bench did all agree, that a widow loses her
Appeal, by taking of a second husband. Et idem videtu^, (says Brook) de
executione; for the reason wherefo^^ this Action is given to a widow, is not
as Glanuell makes it, Quia vna caro est v(...) and vxor. For then the Baron
might have an Appeal D^ morte v^oris, which is never granted, but her heir
shall have it* And if the wi^^ kill the husband, his heir shall have the
Appeal. And I hear^, says Stanford, Plee^ de Coron* fol. 5^* it has been
adjudged, If she King pardon the woman all manner of treasons, the heirs
Appeal is gone. But the true reason why a woman has the Appeal De morte
vi^i* is because by his death, she is thought less able to live and maintain
her self* so said the Judges in Q(...)ne Ma^^^s days, and that therefore when
she takes another husband, cc^^ante causa, ce^^at effectus, and her Appeal is
gone, like as a widows Quarentine is determined, when she is once remarried.
But where a woman continues sole, she (...)d ^^ne other shall have this
Action, either in her life or after, though she dye within the year, and
before Appeal^ commenced, 20. H. 6. 42.

It is not requisite that the Appellant here ^e dowable of his possessions
which is slain, for though a woman ^lope from her husband, and never be
reconciled* yet (...) may have Appeal of his death, per I^glibie, 50. ^. ^.
15. Sir Edw. Cokes* Comment vp^n Littleton, fol. 3^* says. That if the Baron
be attainted of treason, etc. his wife shall not be endowed, and yet if any do
kill him, the wife shall have an Appeal. So likewise agrees the Book of 35.
H. 6 58. where, in an Appeal de mor^^ viri the Defendant said, the Baron was
indicted, arraigned, for^d culpable, and judgment to be hanged etc. and to the
felony nient culpable: It was agreed, that there is no such corruption betwixt
a man and his wife, by Attainder, as is the corruption of blood betwixt a man
and his heir, for the heir of a man attainted shall not have an Appe(...)e,
and she is his wife notwithstanding the Attainder, but the other is not heir.
And per Markham, If an Appeal be not good, the Defendant shall not be
arraigned at the Kings suit, when the Plaintiff is at non suit: Also in this
case it was delivered, that the Marshall of the Kings Bench, the Viscount, or
such Officer, that is commanded to execute a man condemned, is a Felon, if he
execute him in other manner than he is commanded, as if he cuts off his head
where the judgment was he should be hanged. But if he do execution according
to the judgment, then he may justify in an Appeal, and needs not plead non
culpable: Yet in Appeal against a Judge, for adiudging a man to death, he
cannot justify, but must needs plead non culpable, and give the matter in
evidence, Simile 27. assi. p. 41. where, in Appeal de morte viri, the
Desendant pleaded vtlagary de felony. Judgment si, etc. Shard said it was no
more lawful to kill an Outlaw, than to kill another man, and therefore the
Defendant pleaded non culpable. Ludd said, that one was excused of the death of
the Baron of Woodhall by the Outlawrie, etc.

It appears now what wife, and of what husbands death she may have an Appeal.
Stanford in his third Book, cap. 15. notes, that in ancient time there were
certain presumptions so vehement* that they were a condemnation of the party
without other trial, they ^oe not so at this day, but every man shall have
his trial, how great soever the presumption were. But the vehemency of
presumption may oust battle. For 6. H. 3. The Coroner and others testified,
that the Defendant was taken cum cultello sanguinolento, etc. ideo consideratum
est. quod se non defendat per duellum.

SECT. II. How a woman shall sue this Appeal.
IT seems that all Appeals ought to be sued in proper person, and not by
Attorney, as Appeal of Mayhem must be in proper person, 21. E. 4. 7^, and 73.
A woman which was grossment enseint, sued this Appeal, and the Defendant was
attainted, the woman's appearance was recorded for the whole term, and yet by
the better opinion, she might not pray execution, by her Council, but ought to
come in proper person; therefore one of the Judges did ride to Islington to
her, to see if she were alive, and desired execution, which she required, and
the Defendant had judgment. An Appeal is called but a suit of revenge, and
therefore is not much favored, Dver 5. M. 152. If one of the Defendants in an
Appeal makes default, the Court cannot proceed, but otherwise in an
In^itement, as it is there said. This by Common. Law; If any Liege subject be
slain by another subject in any foreign Realm, the wife of him which was
slain, may have an Appeal in England, before the Constable and Marshall, etc.
And this is by Statute, 1. Hen. 4. cap. ^4* Stanford, fol. 65. Feme auer^
appeal^ de mort viri tue in esco^e per commen L^y comme semble* 13. H. 4.
Brook 153. By the said Statute it is also ordained, that none Appeals from
henceforth be pursued in Parliament. Likewise I find by Statute, v^z. 15. R.
3. cap. 2. That of the death of a man, an^ of Mayhem done in great ships, being
and houering in the stream of great rivers, only beneath the bridges of the
same, nigh to the sea, and in none other places of the same rivers, the
Admiral shall have conusance, etc. saving to the King all manner of
forfeitures, etc.

SECT. III. The Statute 3. H. 7. cap. 1.
But for the ordinary course of suing of Appeals, 3. H. 7. cap. 1. lays the
best foundation: This Statute recites the Law of the land to be, that if any
man be slain in the day, and the Felon not taken, the Township shall be
amerced. If any man be wounded, and in peril of death, the offender should be
arrested, and put in surety, till knowledge be had, whether he which is hurt
will live or no. And where any man is found dead, the Coroner upon view of the
body, should enquire who were the murderers, their abettors, consenters and who
were present at the murder committed, whether man or woman, and he ought to
inroll, and certify their names. The use had been also (as says the Statute)
that within a day and years after any death or murder, the felony should not
be determined at the Kings suit, and that for saving of the parties suit, or
else the party was agreed with, by which it is the more chargeable, and
thereby murders were increast: and also, he that will sue in Appeal, must sue
in proper person. The constitution of this Law therefore is, that every
Coroner henceforth do his office, and that if any man be slain or murdered,
the slayers, murderers, their abettors, maintainers, and comforters should be
indicted, arraigned, etc. at the Kings suit, within the year after the felony
or murder done, without tarrying a year and a day for any Appeal. And if any,
either principal or accessarie thus arraigned, be acquitted at the Kings suit
with^n the year and day, the Justices before whom he is acquit, shall not
suffer him to go at large, but either remit him again to prison, or let him
to bail, till the year and day be past: And the wife or next heir of the
party slain, may take their Appeal within the year and day, after the
felony or murder done, (if the benefit of Clergy be not yet had) with all
advantages that acquitall or Attainder at the Kings suit notwithstanding.
Furthermore, the wise or heir of the person slain or murdered, may commence
their Appeal in proper person, any time within a year after the felony done,
before the Sheriffs and Coroners, etc. or before the King in his Bench, or
Justices of Jail delivery: And the Appellant in any Appeals of murder, of
death of man, where battle by the course of Common Law lies not, may make
Attorney, and appear by the same in the said Appeals, after they be
commenced to the end of the suit, and execution of the same. And if the
murderer do escape untaken, the Township, etc. shall be amerced, and the
Coroners shall deliver their inquisition before the Justices of the n^xt Jail
delivery, which Justices shall proceed against the murderer, if they be in
Jail, or else the said Justices shall put the Inquisition before the King in
his Bench. The Statute also gives the Coroner thirteen shillings and four
pence, for taking inquisition super v^s^m corporis.

By this Statute and the other of Gloc. cap. 9. a womon perceiues that within a
year and a day, she comes timely enough with her Appeal. Stanford notes,
that (though the Law have been taken otherwise) if he which is robbed make
fresh suit, albeit he commence not his Appeal, two or three years after the
robbery, yet his Appeal is good: for if the party robbed have his endeavor
to take the Felon, he may commence his Appeal at any time, at the Justices
discretion. For Gloc. if it be rightly understood, seems to speak only of
Appeals de mort. And where it says, Deins l'an and iour apres le fait, this (
le fait) is understood the felony, whereupon Appeal must commence. Therefore
if a man be stricken and wounded on one day, and dye within the year another
day, the Appeal must be begun within a year and a day after the wound given:
And if a year after a murder committed, one become accessarie, there lies an
Appeal against this accessarie, as it seems within the year and day after
he became a Felon. And the Appellant is not confined to a year and a day next
after the murder committed, Stamford fol. 63. a.

But in Heydons case Sir Edw. Cokes 4. Rep. fol. 42. Wray Chief Justice said,
that the common experience of the Kings Bench was, and so was the Law without
question, that the year for the bringing of the Appeal, shall be accounted
from the death, and not from the stroke, against Stamfords opinion. And the
rest of the Judges there said, that there is no felony until the death. And in
the 7. Rep. fol. 30. it is said, If the Appeal be delivered to the Sheriff
within the year, and before its return, or that the Sheriff has done
nothing, and the King dies, and the year ends before the return, in that
case the Plaintiff shall have a Certlorare to the Sheriff, returnable in the
Kings Bench, and upon that the Plaintiff shall have Reattachment, etc. and
that for necessity, etc. otherwise she should lose her Writ lawfully purchased.

SECT. IV. Within what County an Appeal must be brought.
REgularly this Appeal ought to be brought into the County, where the
homicide or murder was committed. But admitting that a man he wounded in one
County, and go into another and there dye, where shall the appeal commence,
by Common Law? Titulo coronae. In Fitzherbert 59. it appears, that it ^as
commenced in the County where the wound was given: but both Counties joined in
trial, as well where the wound was, as the death. And in the same title
Placito 60. in such case the Appellant commenced in the County where the
party died; and trial by ambideux Counties. By these books it should seem,
that at Common Law the Appellant might choose his County, but now the Statute,
2, and 3. E. 6. is plain, which ordains, whereas Jurors in one County could
not take knowledge of things done in another by the Common Law. That in cases,
vt supra, an Indictment found by Jurors of the County where the death
happens, whether before the Coroner, supra visum corpo^s or before Justices
of Peace, or other Justices* or Commissioners, which have authority to enquire
of such offenses, shall be as good, as if the stroke, wound or poisoning had
been in the same County, where the party shall die, etc. And the Justices of
Jail delivery, or if Dyer and Terminer, a^ the same County where such
Indictment shall be taken, And the Justices of the Kings Bench (after the
Indictment removed before them) may proceed as if the stroke, or poisoning, and
the death had been all in one County. And the party to whom Appeal is
given, may commence, take, and pursue in the same County, where the party
feloniously stricken or poisoned shall dye, against the principals, or
accessaries, in whatsoever place or County the same accessaries shall be
guilty. And the Justices before whom the Appeal shall be commenced, sued, and
taken, within the year and day after the slaughter committed, shall proceed
against all such accessaries in the County where the Appeal shall be so taken
in like manner and form, as if the offense of such accessarie had been done
and committed in the same County, where such Appeal shall be taken, as well
by trial of twelve men of the same County where^^ such Appeal is so sued,
upon plea of not guilty, or otherwise. And further it is ordained, that where
murder, ^^ any manner of felony shall be committed in one County, and another
person or more shall become accessory, or accessories in another County; an
Indictment found or taken by Justices of Peace, or other Justices or
Commissioners, to enquire of fellonies, in the County where such offense of
accessories is committed or done, shall be as good, as if the principal
offense had been committed and done in the same County, wherein the Indictment
of accessory is found. The Statute appointed further, how the Custos rotulorum,
or Keeper of the Records, of the principals attainder, or aquitall shall
certify, etc.

Before this Statute, if one man had committed murder in one County, and
another had been accessory in another County, there was no remedy against this
Accessory by the Common Law, Stanford fol. 63. yet Kinuet said, 43. E. 3. fol.
18* If a man were slain in one part of the Town, and another man received the
Manqueller in another part of the Town, which is in another County, Appeal
might be sued against them both in the Courty where the killing was committed,
and that so it had been adjudged.

SECT. V. Before whom appeal shall be sued.
By the before recited Statute it appears before whom appeal must be sued: but
Stanford sets it out yet more largly, Libro 2. cap. 14. The party entitled to
an appeal, is at election to take it by Writ or by Bill. If he take it by
Bill, he must sue al procheuie County maintenant, as soon as the felony is
committed, and by Britton fol. 5. the Plaintiff, must stude two sufficient
pledges, liable to the Visco^^^^ distress, to pursue his appeal, according to
the La^ of the land, and the Coroner shall enter the appeal, and the ^ame of
the pledges. Then it shall be commanded to a Bayley or seriaunt du pais,
wherein the fell^ny was done, that he have the bodies of the appellees at the
ne^t County, to make answer, etc. If the ^^rieant testify at the next County,
that ^ee cannot find them, it shall be awarded, that the principals which are
appea^^d*d ^ fait, be solemly demanded to come to the Kings pea^^ and due
trial of the felony, whereof they be appealed, and so they shall be called from
County to County, until they appear, or until they be outlawed. So says
Br^^ton, and with him a^cord^th 22. Assis. 97. 98. which seems a maruello^s
matter to S^a^^ord, viz. that any Viscount* or Coroner should award process of
outlawry in such a case. Because, Magna Charra. 17. (written long time before
either Br^tton, or the ^^ok of Assizes) is, that no Viscount, Constable,
Escheator, Coroner* or other the Kings Officers may hold any pleas of the
Crown. Therefore many do hold opinion, that (...) app^ale is comme^ced,
before the Sheriff or Coroner* although they may awa^^ process till exigent
yet the exigent it self they cannot award, neither if he appear, can they put
him which is appealed to answer, but only commit him to prison, because of the
Statute. An^ when appeal is commenced before the Viscount or Coroner, it may
be removed into the Kings Bench by a Cer^iorari, out of either the Chancery or
Kings Bench, and this Cer^iora^^ shall be directed to the Viscount and
Coroners, as appears by the Register fol. 76. So that by the register, and by
(...)* c^p^^ ^. whi^^ wills that Coroners shall atta^h and represent the
pleas of the Crown, and ^h^^ the Viscount shall have Counterroules with them,
as well of appeals, as of enquest of Attachment, or of other things which
belong^ to that office, etc. as also by the b^^ke* ^^^ (...). 15. (where ^
C^r^^orari directed to the Viscount only, for remove of a^ Appeal was h^ld^n
vo^d) and so it is evident, that an appeal^ is of record a^ well before the
Viscount as before the Coroner, and ^^ did the makers of the ^aw* 3. Hen. 7^
cap* ^. take it, ^^ is to (...) ^^ene by the Letter.

Also appeal by Bill may be begun before Justices of Goal delivery, but then
the appellee must be in prison in the same Goal, etc. at time of the appeal
so taken against him, or at the least one of the Appealleds must be in prison,
etc. else the appeal ought not to be taken, and if it be it is not good, 13.
H. 4. ^o. 12. 9. H. 4. ^o. 2.

But an Approuer may appeal them which be at large by the Statute de
Appell^tis. Note that, when appeal is commenced before Justices of Goal
delivery, against diverse, whereof one only is prisoner before them, the appeal
must be remoue^, into the Kings Bench, and from thence process shall go
against such as are at large. And if Justices of Goal delivery have power to
receive appeals by Bill, the Justices of the Kings Bench may do it much more,
for as Scot said 17* E. 13. fol. 13. they are the chief Coroners of the land.

If a man be in prison for felony in the Kings Bench, or before Justices of
Goal delivery, and afterward he is let to Bail, appeal by Bill may be
against him notwithstanding: for he is prisoner sti^l when he goes by
^ai^ement. 21* Hen. 7. ^o. 33. 32. Hon. 7. ^4* and ^^^ulo Maineprise in Fi^z
^erb^rt, for there Shar^^ said, that they which took him to bail were his
Gardenis, and should be charged upon his escape. And some said, that they
might be hanged for him. 33. E. 3. ma^^epris^. But p^a. 1^. in the ^a^^e titi^
(...) ^aith, semble q^^^^. for the entry is (...)* ^ (...). And by the book
(...) 3. Ed^. ^. a^oresaid, the entry is ^r^^i^ur in bali^um. And where a
Prisoner is delivered unto two in bail, they may imprison him if they will,
per W^lby. 16. E. 3. And 21. Hen. 7* supra* he which is let to ^aile shall
find surety to answer all men.

But a man cannot have appeal against him which goes at large by maineprise*
9* ^. 4. fol. ^* and 29. Hen. 6. 37. for he is not in ward. There is some
difference between bail and maineprise, but learn how it stands, an^ ^^^ther
appeal may be co^^ience^ before Iusti^^^* of the Peace or no, quaere, for
their Commission is to hear and determine fellonies. Also, quaere, if a man
be stricken in France, and dies in England* Whether appeal lies thereof (if
the parties were not in the Kings service in France,) before the Constable and
Marshall, etc. by the Statute of 1. H. 4. ca. 14.

SECT. VI. Of Appeal by Writ.
HOw an appeal shall be begun by Writ, Stamford says no more thereof, but
only chescun sceit comment a ceo purchaser: And as his knowledge made him
presume that other men were not ignorant of it, some ignorance makes me
pr^sume, that many do not know it. Bracton ^. 3. cap. 30. says, that sometime
it happens by negligence of the Viscount and Coroner, that the appeals must
be attached by the Kings Writ in hac forma: Rex vicecomiti, etc. si A. ^^ cerit
te securum de clamore suo. prosequendo, tunc attachiari facias B. per corpus
suum, qd^ sit coram Iusticiariis nostris ad primam assis^m, cum in parts illa^
vene^int: responsurus eidem A. de morte L. mariti, etc. vnde eum appellat, etc.

He sets down likewise the Writ for removing of appeals begun, and already
attached: to fetch them into the Kings Bench with a pone per vadium saluos
p^^gios, for the Defendant to be there ad respondendum praedict' le plaintiff
de praedicto Appello. But if this Writ be granted at the instance of the
Defendant, then it is with a summone as per bonos summonitores; to the
Appellant ad* sequendum appellum, etc. and those words per vadium and plegios
are omitted. After much like matter not unworthy to be observed, he comes to
the Writ when app^ale is begun before the King in his Bench immediately; Rex
vicecomiti, etc. s^l^tem. si A. fec^rit te securum de clamore suo prosequendo,
pone per vadium and faluos pleg ios. B. andC. qd' sint coram etc. tali die ad
responden^um eidem A. de morte. D patris vel alterius antecessoris, vnde ^os
appellat. And at the ^^y, he says, they which are attached ^ay essoine
themselves, vnle^^e they be appealed for death of man, or for a more heinous
crime. West. 2. cap. 13. is against the appellee, non iaceat de caetero
appellato^^ in appello de mor^e hominis essoinum, in quacunque curia appellum
^uerit terminand u^; Now whether Bractons form of the Original pone per
vadium and saluos plegios, be good or no, when any appeal of murder comes in
the Kings Bench, learn, for the book of Entries is praeceptum fuit vicecomiti
quod si A. secerit cum securum de clamo^e suo prosequendo: atta^hiaret B. per
corus, etc.

SECT. VII. Diverse appeals for one felony is but in few Cases.
BY the ancient Law one might have diverse appeals, against the principal,
one* and against the accessory, another, as appears by the old Writers. And
28. E. 3. fol. 90. But since that time the Law has been changed, so that
unless in a few special cases a man can have but one appeal, which must
comprehend both principals and ace^s^aries. And therefore 9. Her. 4. fol. 1^.
in appea^e against two, whereof the one was present, and the other appeared
not, the Plaintiff declared against the^ ^oth, and the Law which compels to
declare at one time against all the appeals, compels to make but one
appeal. The case was, 47. E. 3. that a woman brought an appeal against one as
prin^ipall, which was attainted and hanged at her suit* and then she brought
an appeal against two others of the same felony, against one, as principal,
and against another, as accessory, and awarded que el prendrariens person brief.

And so should it have been if the first appealee had been acquit, or if the
appellant had been at nonsuit after appearance. 47. E. 3. to 18. and see more
of this matter St^mford li* 2. cap. 15.

SECT. VIII. The Declaration in Appeal.
THe Count or Declaration in Appeal of murder, according to the ancient form
was thus. A. appellat. B. de morte. C. fratris sui, etc. quod cum ipse A. and
C. essent in pace Dei and Domini regis apud S. etc. venit idem B. cum talib.
etc. and nequiter and in felonia, in assultu premeditato, contra pacem domini
regis fecit idem B. praedict' fratri suo and vnam plagam mortalem in capite cum
quodam gladio, vel quouis alio genere, armorum multorum, etc. vt obierit infra
triduum de plaga illa. Et quod hoc fecit nequiter and in felonia, and contra
pacem Domini regis, offert se dirationare versus ^um per corpus suum, sicut
ille qui praesens ^uit and hoc vidit, sicut curia Domini regis considerauerit,
Et si de eo male contigerit per corpus fratris sui, vel alterius parentis, etc.
Et sic plures possunt appellare vnum de vno and eodem facto, siloqui possunt,
de visus sui testimonio. So that Bracton shows, if one of the appellants had
died, or made default, the other might take the appeal, and be admitted ad
dirationandum. But if the Appealee had defended himself against one, or been
aquit by judgment; he was freed from them all. The reason why no man was
admitted to bring appeal de morte, unless he could speak of his own eye
witness, was (says Stanford) the reasonableness, which seemed to be in it,
that a man should not combat for the truth, when the Accuser was not able to
verify it, but by relation from others. And therefore in a Writ of right,
until West. 1. cap 40. had changed the Law, the Demandants Champian in his
oath, did ever affirm, that he or his ^ather, had seen the seisin of his Lord
or Master, so that his own sight, or his fathers, caused him to combat. And as
it seems battle did not lie in any appeal de morte in Bracton* time, except
the wound were given with some sword, dagger, or such like, as he calls (...)
mos^^^. Also his form speaks nothing of the length, breadth or deepnesse of
the wound, as the Declarations do at this day; I will leave Stamfords
president, and take one or two out of the book of Entries. There ^ol. 43.
Katherin Johnson* late wife of Robert Johnson, comes in person and does
instantly appeal, John Bishop late of Harling in the County Norff. Ye^man, and
W. F. late of the same Town and County, Yeoman, and R. W. late of H. in the
same County, Yeoman, of the death of the aforesaid Robert Johnson late her
husband. videlicer, of that, that whereas the said Robert Johnson was in Gods
peace and the Kings, at Harling aforesaid, upon Monday next before the Feast of
Saint Matthew the Apostle, in the second year of eur late King H. 7. about two
of the clock after noone, of the same day, John Bishop, and W. F. there came
felloniously, and as Felons of our Lord the King that now is, of their
premeditate assault, against our Lord the Kings peace, Crown and dignity, in
the day, year, hour, place, and County aforesaid, and the aforesaid John
Bishop with a sharp pointed weapon called a dagger of twelve price, which he
had and ^eld there in his right hand, did feloniously strike the aforesaid
Robert Johnson upon his breast, and into the heart, giving to the same Robert
Johnson then and there, a mortal wound four inches deep, of the which
mortal wound, the said Robert Johnson, did forthwith then dye, at Harling
aforesaid. And so the aforesaid John Bishop, did then feloniously kill and
murder the aforesaid Robert Johnson, at Harling aforesaid. And W. F. the same
monday, in the same year, at the same town of Harling, was present,
feloniously procuring, consenting and keeping the same John Bishop, to do the
felony and murder, in form aforesaid done and committed. And after the felony
and murder aforesaid committed by the aforenamed John Bishop, the same W. F.
and R. W. the same Monday in the same second year of our Lord the King, at
Harling in the County aforesaid, did feloniously receive the said John Bishop,
harbor, comfort, and maintain him, knowing that he the said John, had done
the felony and murder in form aforesaid, and as soon as the same felons had
committed the said murder and felony, they fled, and the said Katherin did
fresly follow them from Town to Town, into four of the next Towns, etc. And
if the Felons will deny the felony ab^^esaid, in form aforesaid alleged
against them, Katherin the Appellant, is ready to prove it against them, as the
Court shall think meet.

Again fol. 51. is another Declaration. Thus, Elizabeth, etc. in person does
instantly appeal the aforesaid John Clerk of this: That whereas the aforesaid
John Brown was in peace of God and our Lord the King that now is, at W. in the
City of N. in a certain place called Carrow, the twelft day of January, etc.
about ten of the clock aforenoone; There came the aforesaid John Clerk which
now appears, and the aforesaid William Clerk which appears not, and whom
the aforesaid Elizabeth would likewise appeal, of the death of her said
husband, if he were present; And they two did feloniou^ly, and as felons, of
our Lord the King that now is, in the day, yeer^, hour, and City aforesaid,
give to the aforesaid John Brown a certain drink, which they, the said John
Clerk and William Clerk, had mixed and compounded with powders, and
intoxicatiue spices, viz. Ratsbane, and others, and they did feloniou^ly incite
and provoke the said John Brown, to drink up the said drink so intoxicate,
which said John Brown having good trust and confidence in them, and being
utterly ignorant of the intoxication aforesaid, did then and there, and at
their persuasion, drink up the said drink, and therewith was then and there,
by the said John and William feloniously poisoned: And afterward the said John
Brown at Billingford in the County of Norff. the 20. day of January next
ensuing in the same year, being so poisoned of the same poison, died, and so
the aforesaid John Clerk and William Clerk, feloniously, and as felons of the
King, at Billingford aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, the 20. of January,
the aforesaid John Brown did kill and murder, etc. And if John Clerk, which
now appears, denies the felony aforesaid of death and murder laid against
him, the aforesaid Elizabeth is ready to prove it against him, as the Court
shall think good.

It might be collected out of these presidents without any more help, that a
woman may maintain her appeal, without expressing any arma moluta, as the
fashion was: Bracton says, the Appellant needs not set down the hour wherein
the party was stain, but the Statute of Gloc. makes it material, yet Stanford
acknowledges, that the Declaration which was at Common Law, without the hour
may be used at this day, because Gloc. is but affirmative and prohibits
nothing. But the place where, etc. must needs be set down certainly in the
count, for so commands the Statute, therefore in Appeal against diverse men,
n^ming them to be of sundry places and Towns, if it be said afterward, at the
place aforesaid, this is not good, there are diverse other forms of
Declarations in this Appeal: As 44 E. 3. fol. 33. in Appeal against three as
principals, the Appellant declared that one of them, such a day, and hour,
wounded her husband to the brain, whereof he died, and at the same hour
another, with a dagger struck him to the heart, so that if he had not died at
the first wound, he must have died of the second, and the third wounded him in
another place, etc. counting severally against them, that every one gave him a
mortal stroke, according to the fact. For so wills the Statue que il counta
le fact, and this fact must be declared as it was done, or as the Law does
expound it to b^e done* Therefore if two be pr^sent at the death of a man, and
one of them strikes never a stroke, but only comm^ndeth the other to kill,
etc. in the appeal, declaration must be, that they both did wound him
mortally* ^^. E. 4. fol. 71* And there it is said, that where the Count goes,
that they all did stricke, etc. the stricking is not t^^^ersab^e. So is it in
Appeal of Rape, where one does the Rape, and the other being present does abet
him, for there the Count shall go that both ravished her, for so the Law
says. In the same book 21. E. 4. in appeal de mort against two, whereof but
one appeared; the Plaintiff declared against him which appeared, and would
have counted against them which made default, that they likewise wo^nded, etc.
and the Justices ^ade him speak, but only of him which appeared* Ga^coigne was
of contrary opinion 9. Hen. 4. ^o. 2. and with Gaseoigne agree very many
presidents. But see Waits Case Sir Edward Cokes 4. Rep. fol. 47. there ought to
be but one Appeal against all the principle^ and accessaries, except where
there be accessaries after the Appeal brought, for there there may be another
appeal brought against them, for that they could not be named in the first
Writ, and if an Appeal be brought against diverse, and all but one make
default, yet the Plaintiff ought to count against all, says that book.

SECT. VIIII. Defense in Appeal.
THe Defense in Appeal, is that the Defendant came and defended all felonies,
awa^ts, assaults, forethinkings, and all that is against the Kings peace,
Crown, and dignity, and pleaded non culpable. E^ ponit se super patriam de
bono and malo. This is the general plea, etc.

SECT. X. Pleas to the Writ.
AGainst the Writ to abate that, may be pleaded false Latin, or want of form*
And note that none may have more writs of Appeal than one of one felony
hanging at once. 7. Hen. 7. fol. 6. Yet where there are two such Writs hanging,
they must not be abated, but by notifying to the Court, that they be both
pursued by the Plaintiff, and that must appear by some ^t of his. As that he
has appeared and declared upon them both. For though one Writ were delivered
to the Viscount of Record to serve it, this might be as well the Act of a
stranger as of the Plaintiff, and therefore no conclusion toward him, but
that he may say, it was not at his suit.

So where an Appeal is commenced in the County by bill, removed to a Court of
Record, and there hanging, if now the Plaintiff pursue another appeal of the
same felony by writ, the appeal by writ abateth: But where the Appeal by
brief is purchased, before the Appeal by bill removed out of the County,
there the Court ought to send, for the Appeal in the County without abating
the Appeal^ which is commenced by Writ, for the Appeal by Writ is more worth
than that Appeal commenced* i^ the County, which is not but a (...)* until it
be removed in an Appeal against two; ^^^ may plead that his companion named
with him in the Writ died at such a place before the Writ purchased; or that
there was no such person in re^um natura, when the Writ was purchased, as is
named with him, for there is no body else to plead these pleas, but only he
which appears: But he cannot plead, that the party named with him in the
Writ is entered into religion, or is a married woman, etc. for there is another
party to plead so, but in the other cases there is none. And in these cases of
appeals against more than one, an appeal abated toward one is abated toward
all. In appeal where misnomer of the Plantiffe is pleaded, if it be confessed,
the Plaintiff shall be examined whether it were by couin^or no^ The cas^ is 9.
Hen. 5. fol. 1. A woman sued appeal by name of Cicely, B. whereas her name
was* Johan, and after the defendants imparlance ^he came and said* her name was
Johan, she was examined* and it was found to be done sans couin. per que* el
ala sa^s fair fin^, quere ^^ el ^^^ra novel appeal per nosm^. Johan Brook
Appeal 38.

It seems in appeals the Defendant may ha^^e 1, 2, 3, or 4. or more pleas to
the Writ, as well as he which is Tenant in an Assise may; But then he must
take good heed, that one be not Contrary to another. Bracton, Et in omnibus
appellis maioribus vel minoribus non potest appellans variare vel ^ppellum suum
in aliquo mutare, adiicere tamen potest interdum, vt si prius non dixerit,
quibus armis, etc. potest nominare ^^ma, scilicet gladium vel b^sacutum, Et
potest, qui actionem ci^^^iter (...) mutare eam, and agere criminaliter and sic
accresce^^ and appellum augere, ^ed non contra. In the book of Entryes fol.
47. the Defendants came in proper person, and defenderunt vi^^ and iniuriam,
quando etc. om^em felloniam and quicquid etc. and they said that in the said
County of W. there were two Towns called M. one old M. and another new M.
absque* hoc, that in the County, there was any Town, Villadge, Hamlet, or
place, ^nowne and named by the name of M. only, without addition, and hoc
p^rat^ sunt verificare, vnde petunt iudicium de breue illo and petunt inde
allocationem and quoad feloniam praedictam seperatim dicunt quod ipsi in nullo
sunt inde culpabil^s, and inde de bono and malo ponunt se super patriam. It ^^^
found non habebatur aliqua villa, etc. named M. (...). Ideo consideratum, vt
nihil capiat per bre. and that the Defendants ^ant inde sine die, and the
Plaintiff capiatur. 9. H. 7. To. 33.

SECT. XI. Pleas in Bar of the Action.
IN Bar of the Action may be pleaded, that the woman which brings the
Appeal, etc. has taken another husband, or that she was never accoupled in
loyal matrimony, to him of whose death she brings the Appeal* And if it be
brought by the heir, it is a good plea in Bar, to say, the wife of him which
is dead, is yet alive, and the Action given to her.

In the book of Entries fol. 50. Praedicta Alicia dicit quod ^^mpore mortis
praedicti Thomae ^adem Alicia fuit v^o^ praedicti Thomae, in quo casu, ^idem*
Aliciae, and non praedicto Nicholao, de ^ure pertinet h^bere, and prosequi
appellum, etc. Et v^terius ^adem defendens dicit, quod praedictus Nichola^s
appellum praedictum versus ^andem Aliciam inter Alios per couinam ea
intention, ad eam de prosecutione appellinus de morte, praedicti Thomae
excludendam impetrauit, que oia and singula, etc. and petit inde allocationem
etc. and quoad felonia, non culpabilis. Et inde, de bono and malo ponit se
super patriam. 30. H. 6.

Also it is a good plea in Bar to say, that the Plaintiff has succeased her
time, in that she has not brought her Appeal within the year and day after
his death, which is supposed slain; or to say, that he of whose death the
Appeal is brought, is yet alive at such a place, and to bring him in the
Court, that he may be viewed and known; see thereof 43. Assis. pa. 26. in
Appeal de morte viri, the Defendant pleaded le Baron in vi^, etc. and the
Plaintiff contra^ day was given to bring in their proofs, which, when they
came, were found, one both sides defective* The Defendant therefore, for his
safest way pleaded ^on culpabilis vide^ur ergo, that the first issue if it had
been found against him, should have been peremptacy, and that he may waiue
it before trial, in fauorem vitae. And note, that if a man plead not guilty,
and pute himself upon the Jury in an Indictment of felony, and he may
confess the fact before verdict and pray a coroner, otherwise in an Appeal as
it was holden 11. Hen. 7. 5.

8. Hen. 4. fol. 18. In Appeal de morte viri, and at the day the Baron was
brought into Court examined (...) known: and the woman for her false Appeal
was committed to prison, till she paid a fine. The general bars against all
Appeals, of which some may be objected against the Plaintiff here, are
those, That the Plaintiff is attainted of felony or treason, or a Monk, or a
Priest, a mayhemed body (by some other than by the Plaintiff) or of non sane
memory, or deaf and dumb, or a lay^r, or a natural fool. Attainder by
outlawry, if it be erroneous, is a bar no longer than until it be reuersed;
It is a good plea in bar also; that heretofore the Plaintiff brought an
Appeal of the same felony, in which she was at non suit after Declaration, or
withdrew her self from her Action: Or that heretofore she sued Appeal of the
same felony against another person, which was acquitted or condemned at her
suit. Or the Plaintiffes release may be pleaded in bar, if it were made to
the Defendant himself; for release made to another will not serve, though it
were made to one, joined with the Defendant in the Appeal. Corone in
Fitzherbert 9. and 2. Rich. 3. 9. agrees. And so if the Plaintiff withdraw her
self, as against one of the Defendants, her Appeal shall stand good against
the other. And note where the Defendant pleads in bar any of these pleas, yet
in favor of (...) the Law permits him to plead over to the felony, and his
pleading shall not therefore be counted double, exceptin the case of release,
in which indeed he may not plead to the felony, for not guilty in contrary to
accepting of rel^^^^, which ^^t^li^th guilt. So also of a woman bring Appeal
of robery, and the Defendant pleads villenage in the Plaintiff, he shall not
conclude over to the felony (...) culpable, for that were an i^franchisment.

But perchance when the villenage is found against the Defendant, he may then
take his plea of rien culpable as well, as he shall have when he plead any
other pleas, for if he plead them without concluding to the felony, he may
after his bar is found against him plead rien culpable notwithstanding. quod
vide 28. E. ^. fol. 91. 22. E. 3. fol. 38. 18. E. 3. fol. 32. except only in
pleas of release, as is said, which implies always a confession of felony. 9.
Hen. 4. fol. 2. in Appeal de morte viri, the Defendants pleaded the wives
release, made since the darraine, continuance of all accords, real and
^^rsonall, and she demurred, the best opinion was, that real actions are of
things real and durable, as lands, rents, etc. and personal actions are of
damages and such like, yet p Hulls, personal is as well the punishment of the
person as damages, and the punishment here is death, which is released and le
bar is good.

But Littleton teaches us contrary in his book, for he says, that Appeals
of robery, rape or death, or any Appeal wherein the ^^dgement is of death, are
more high than personal Actions, and therefore they are not barred by release,
unless it be of all manner of Actions, or of all Appeals.

See Sir Edward Coke in his Commentaries upon Littleton fol. 287. b. in any
Appeal wherein judgment is of death, a release of all Actions real and
personal is no bar, for that release extends but to common or civil
actions, and not to criminal, but if a release of actions personals is good in
an Appeal of mayhem for every Action wherein damages are only recovered, is
in Law taken for personal, fol. 288. a. And in Sir Edw. Cokes 4. Rep. in
Hudsons Case it is said, although the Appeal of mayhem runs feloniously,
^uy mayma, yet he shall recover but damages, and therefore recovery in
trespass is a good bar therein.

SECT. XII. Auterfoits acquit.
ALthough it be now no plea in Appeal of death, for the Defendant to lay, that
he was here to fore acquit of the same felony; yet because Stanfords handling
of it contains good learning, and it may still serve in appeal^ of rape: And
likewise in Ind^ctments of death, for he that was acquit in appeal may have
it: I will not omit it. By Common Law therefore, in all Appeals or Inditements
of felony, for the Defendant to say, that he was A^ter^oirs a^raigne de mesme
le felony, before ^uth Justices, and acquitted (vouching the record) is a good
plea, and he needs not to have the record in Court, because this plea is not
delatorie, but in bar, Coron. in Fitzherbert, 2 ^.

This plea the Common Law disalloweth not, because it allows, that a man
should not put his life in ieopardy twice for one and the same offense. The
acquitall then must be of the very same offense, or else this plea is to no
purpose: Therefore if two men be indicted of felony, as principals, and
afterward by another Indictment, it is ^ound that one of them did the felony,
and the other did feloniously receive him; after the felony committed; he that
is secondarily indicted and arraigned as acces^ar^e, shall not be discharged,
by pleading arraignment, and acquitall upon the first Indictment; for the
offense is not supposed the same and one, but committed at diverse days, 27.
Ass. p. 10. And this for accessaries after the felony: But when felony i^ done
by force of commanding, and procurement of another, he that shall be arraigned
as accessarie, may plead that he was acquit, etc. though it were as principal,
and the offenses were at diverse days, for, Vulnus, pre^eptum, and factum, sunt
quasi vnum factum. Yet Stanford notes the ancient Law to have been taken
otherwise. See 8. E. 2. is, Potest quiuis acqui^tari pro morte alicui^s per
patriam* and ho^ non obstant^ ex indictamento, vel secta alicuius de ^^xilio,
abetto, v^^ procuramento, potest suspendi pro morte eiusdem. And note that he
that was indicted and arraigned of the death of John at Style, may plead that
he was heretofore indicted and acquit of the death of John at Noke, auerring
that John at Sti^e and John at Noke were one person. E^ seira disc^arge.
Fitzherbert Co^one, 189.

So likewise if a man were slain two years since, and one which was indicted
and acquit of his death, is again indicted of the same man's death, supposing
that ^e killed him this present year; he shall plead the first acquitall, and
be discharged notwithstanding the variance; for a man can be slain but once,
and the Court in this (...) shall charge the Inquest with the time of his
death, which is supposed slain, and whether it were the same parson supposed
to be slain, by the (...) Indictment. So likewise if a man be indicted, and
acquit in one County, and afterward indicted of the same death in another
County, the acquitall at first shall discharge, etc. But in robberis it
seems otherwise; for one and the same man may be robbed by one other man
s^ndrie tunes; and therefore acquittance of a robbery done at one day, is no
discharge of a robbery done at another day. Now if a man be indicted of
robbery in one County, he shall not plead th^^ ^e was indicted and acquit, of
the same robberis, in another County, 4. H. 7. fol. 5. But it is said there,
that in appeal of robbery it is a good plea; because the Plaintiff is to
recover his goods again by the Common Law; not so in Indictments, in the book
at large the Defendants plea is, that he was indicted of taking the same
goods, etc. which (...) said ^ust be take (...) i^lly for the King, that the
same goods ^ere shall ^^ twice* (...) said the Count^^s (...) not ioyns in
trial of the a^^rment de^ me^^ne ^^ felony, when one County had acquitted
him. Fro^ioke said, That by the same ^e^son, (...) by he might be found
culpable in one County, of felony done in another, by the same reason
acquitall in one should discharge him in another.

Se^ Corone in Fitzherbert, 220 41. ass. p. 9. A man indicted in the Kings
Bench of rape and robbery, pleaded acquitall at the County of Cornwall, at
the Assizes, and it was adi^dged good* Stanford bids us enquire where the Kings
Bench was at the taking of the Indictment, and whether any other Indictment in
Cornwall, of that matter, were removed into the Kings Bench, because the Book
says, one indicted in bank le Roy, etc.

Ye must know, that if there were not sufficient matter of felony in the
Indictment or Appeal, upon which the acquitall was had, auter^orts acquit is
no plea, to stay a man indicted of new from new arraignment, for it falls out
upon the matter, that the parties life was never in ie^pardie.

And so is it if a man be acquit in an erroneous Appeal, which acquitall is
reuersed by error; he may be arraigned at the Kings suit upon Indictment;
for by the reuersall he is become as never acquitted. But before re^ersall
outer^oi^s acqui^e is good plea, and if the error were only in the pro^es^e,
it is not material, for appearance sal^es those defects: And it see^^eth also,
that he which was once acquitted in appeal, shall not answer any more to the
Appellant, though the acquitall be reuersed by ^^^^ur howsoever, for so the
Court might be delivered (...) and the Defendants never be delivered.

But if one bring an Appeal, which has no cause or title to it, as perhaps
one which is neither wife nor heir, etc. and the Defendant takes none
advantage of it, but pleads (...), and is acquitted, this will no^ serve to
(...) the right heir or wife in their appeal, or the King upon arraigning him
upon Indictment, or upon the new Appeal, if the wife or heir be at non suit
therein.

And if one be arraigned upon Indictment at the Kings suit and acquitted,
whereas by order of Common Law, the King should have stayed, till the Appeal
hanging had been determined. Yet this is no error, for the plea of auterfoits
acqui^e shall serve the Defendant in Appeal well enough. And Auterfoits
acqui^e in Appeal is no plea against the King, in an Iindictment of the same
felony; if the acqui^all were by battle and not by Inquest, 12. E. 2. Corone
in Fitzherbert, ^75. For battle lies not against the King, and therefore
that trial against another shall not bind. Quaere, says Stam^ord, for
Bracton is contra. Si a pluribus appellatus, sit de vno facto and vna pl^ga,
and versus vnum se defend^rit recedet quietus versus omnes alios appellan^es,
and etiam de secta regis, quia per hoc purgat innocentiam suam, etc. Before the
Statute 3. H. 7. cap. 1. Whereby Auterfoits acqui^e is become no plea in
appeal of death, if a man were indicted of another man's death, the Justices
would not arraigne him, (as appears by recital of the Statute) till the year
and day were past. And in Corone Fitzhe^^ert, 44. Ye may ^ee that in 22. E. 4.
the Justices of England advised, all men of Law to observe this order and
course thorowout the Realm; yet before this time it appears, 7. H. 4. fol.
^0. and 21. H. 6. fol. 32. That where th^re was no appeal hanging, if
suggestion had been made to the Justices, that the ^uidence was manifest and
apparent against the party indicted, they would arraigne and try him upon the
Indictment, al^hough it were within the year. Likewise if the Appellant were
under age, the Justices did use to arraigne and try him that was indicted
maintenan^! For otherwise the party indicted might cause by Couin, that the
Appeal should be brought by an Infant under age, as perhaps three years old,
and so perish the Kings s^^t for ever. But all this seems now to be remedied
by the Statute, in Appeals which are of death, but other Appeals are left as
they were before. The Common Law therefore unchanged is, that if a man be
indicted of robbery, whereof there is an Appeal hanging, and the ^ppeale is
proceeded so far, that the Justices may percei^^^ the felome is all one, they
ought to surcease trial upon the Indictment, as it is 1. 31. H. 6. fol. 3. For
note that in Appeal of robbery when it is by Writ, the robbery cannot be
certainly known before Declaration. Otherwise it is, if it be commenced by
bill, or that the Appeal be of death of a man any.

SECT. XIII. Auterfoits attainted.
THis is a sore saying, which some men have to plead for themselves, viz. that
they are already condemned to be hanged, and ask Judgment, whether during the
Attainder, they should answer to the felony whereof they are condemned, or to
any other: And this plea serves, where the party condemned has already
forfeited as much as he can forfeit, so that it is to no purpose to tra^^^^ him
any further. But in some special cases, when there is some end of it, a man
already condemned may be arr^igned again. As if a man attaint of felony, were
guilty of treason also, at the time of the felony committed, he may now be
put to answer the treason; because thereby the King shall have the ^scheat of
his land, of whomsoever it were holden, 1. H. 6. 5. Otherwise it is if the
treason were committed after the felony; or at the least, if it were after the
attainder had of felony; for then the title vested in the Seigniors, before the
Kings title, might not be deuested by matter accruing ex post facto. And if
diverse men have diverse Appeals of robbery against one, to the end that every
man may have again his goods, whereof he was robbed, by making fresh suit, he
shall be attaint at every one of their suits. But note (says Stamford) in
cases where the Defendant will discharge himself of answering, by attainder of
any other felony, than that whereof he is arraigned; it may be replied either
for the King or the party, that since the Attainder the King has pard^ned him
the said Felony and Attainder, whereby he is now restored to the Law, and
ought to answer to all other felonies, though they were perpetrated before the
felony whereof he says he was attainted. Titulo Coronae in Fitzherbert, 227.
10. H. 4. etc.

But to the felony whereof a man is attainted he shall answer no more after
he has his pardon of it. Thus far, Stamford. See Brook, Titulo Coronae, 11.
Quaere. Whether a man attainted of felony, and pardoned, shall answer at the
Kings suit, to other felonies before committed, and whereof he was not indicted
at the tune of the Attainder, per aliquos videtur quod ita, as well as at the
suit of the party in Appeal; yet some held otherwise, 10. H. 4. That a man
can die but once at the suit of the King, and he that is pardoned is as a new
man, all former Judgments, as against the King, being determined: Quaere de
Appeals, Cor il est^foredure de maintainer Appeal in le case. For all
Appeals were determined once by the Judgment upon Indictment.

Note that it was resolved in Wrote; case, Sir Edw. Cokes 4. Rep. fol. 45. That
Auterfoits convict of manslaughter upon an Indictment of murder, and Clergy
allowed is a good plea in an Appeal of murder, and that although the
conviction was had hanging the Appeal. But it was also there resolved, that if
the Indictment upon which the conviction was had were insufficient, the
offender may, notwithstanding that conviction, be indicted or appealed again,
for that his life in judgment of Law was never in ieopardie: and so it was
resolved also in Vauxes case in the same Report.

SECT. XIV. Clergy.
IF the Defendant in Appeal crave his Clergy, and the Plaintiff say that he
is Bigamus; if he be so certified it is peremptory, and he shall be hanged
without pleading Ouster to the felony. See 11. H. 4. fol. 10. That Clergy is
allowed in Appeal de morte viri. In the Book of Entries, wherein scil. fol.
5. is the Kings writ to certify, whether the party appealed were Bigamus as
E. which appealed him of the death of A. her husband alleged: But at this day
Bigamus shall have his Clergy, by the Statute of 1. Edw. 6.

SECT. XV. The Kings pardon.
IF a woman which brings an Appeal de morte viri, let fall her suit, the
Kings suit is not prejudiced thereby, and if the wife release all Appeals, and
afterward by verdict in Appeal brought by her, the release is found, the
entry is, De appello praedict' quoad sectam praedictae Aliciae sit quietus,
and quod ipse eat inde sine die, etc. Sed quoad secta^ Dom. Regis in hac part
instante allocutus est qualiter se velit acquietare, and dicit quod in nullo
estinde culpabilis, etc. See the Book of Entries, fol. 47. b. So likewise in
Appeal De morte patris, or De morte viri, the Kings pardon cannot take away
execution, 13. H. 4. But it is a good plead against the King, when an Appeal
is once determined. And if the Appeal be determined not by act of the
Appellant, but by act of Law, the Kings pardon shall not be allowed without the
Appellants priuitie. As if the Plaintiff pursue her appeal till the Defendant
be outlawed, by this Outlawrie the appeal is ended: and now if the King pardon
the felony, etc. this pardon shall not be allowed without Scire facias
against the party, at whose suit the Felon was outlawed. And at the day of
Scire facias returned, the party may appear, and pray execution, which is
grantable, the pardon notwithstanding. But if the Sheriff return, that he
warned her to appear, and she make default, the pardon shall be allowed
without more ado. And this Scire facias, upon pardon granted, may be required
against the Appellant, though the Appellee never desire it, and though he show
no release or other matter in discharge of the Appeal. For he shall come
timely enough with that, when the other appears upon the Scire facias. Also
the Scire facias is grantable, though the Charter of pardon have not the
clause. Ita quod stet rectus in curia.

Vide Fitzherbert. p. 17. titulo Charter, 11. R. 2. In appeal against
Principal and Accessarie, the Principal was pursued till Outlawry, and
Exigent went out against the Accessarie, and at the day of the return, the
Plaintiff was at non suit in his Appeal, and then came the Principal with
his Charter of pardon, and prayed it might be allowed, because the Plaintiff
was at non suit. Gascoyne made answer, That the non suit could not help him,
for the Appeal had run his full course, and was determined as toward him, by
the Outlawrie.

SECT. XVI. Damages in Appeal.
NOw to draw toward an end of this matter, though a woman cannot be put to
trial by battle in appeal, any more than the King may in his suits, yet
she prosecutes appeals, not altogether without danger, as y^e may perceive by
the entry made in the Book of Entries, fol. 49. b. and by the Case 8. Hen. 4.
fol. 18. likewise 41. Assis. pl. 8. In appeal de morte viri in the Kings
Bench, the Plaintiff was at non suit after appearance, wherefore it was
awarded, that she should be taken to pay a fine, and she came and paid it,
the Appellee was afterward discharged, and inquiry made of damages and
abbettours, and two abbettours being found, damages were taxed to a hundred
pounds, and the appellant was not worth above a hundred shillings, yet it was
awarded, that the Defendant should recover his damages taxed at a 100. li.
against the woman, and that he should sue against the abettours if he would,
but no Capias against the woman, because she had fined before.

It is by the Common Law, says Iustire Stanford, that damages in Appeals of
folony are always for the defendant, when he is acquit, for common reason
wills, when a man is put to undergo a trial, whereby his lands, goods, life
and reputation are all put in hazard, without desert or matter of good
foundation, by only the malicious accusation, of his adversary, and he is found
by due acquitall of Law, a loyal true man, that he have amends against his
false Accuser, and (if the Accuser be himself insufficient) against them,
which procured and abated the Plaintiff to pursue the Appeal, but for so much
as damages were not recouerable against Procurers and Abbettors, but by
original Writ of conspiracy, which was no such speedy redress or
satisfaction, as the great mischieffousnesse of the offense required, a Statute
was made for a more quick remedy.

SECT. XVII. West. 2. ca. 1^.
AS follows. Because many men of pure malice and purpose to grieve others,
procure false appeals, to be brought of ^^^^cide and other felonies by
Appellants, which are nothing worth, and therefore can neither answer the King
for their falsety, nor yield damages to them whom they. Appeal. It is
provided, that if any man be appealed of felony, and acquit himself in due
manner in the Kings Court, at suit of either the King, or of the Appellour, the
Justices before whom such Appeal shall beheard and determined, shall punish
the Appellour by one years imprisonment* and nevertheless such Appellours
shall render damages to the Appeals, according to the Justices discretion,
having regard to the arrest and imprisonment, which the Appeal has sustained,
and to the Infamy, which by the imprisonment or otherwise, the Appelle^^ have
incurred. And nevertheless they shall be grievously fined toward the King.
And if peradventure such Appellours have not wherewith to make amends for the
damage aforesaid, it shall be inquired, by whose abatement the Appeal was
maliciously thus formed, if he which is appealed do so require that. And if it
be found by the Inguisition, that any man were an Abbettour by malice, he
shall be distrained by a Judicial Writ at the Appellees suit, to come before
the Justices; And if he be in ^^^ manner conui^ted of abbetting by malice, he
shall be punished by imprisonment, and restitution of damages. sicut de
Appeslatore superius dictum est. And from henceforth in appeal of death of a
man, there shall lie no essoine for the Appellour, in what Court soever the
Appeal shall be determined. The Statute is against Appeals by malice, etc.
therefore if the Defendant were indicted of felony, before the Appeal sued
(though he be acquit afterward,) he shall recover no damages, for it is to be
intended, that the indictment induced the appeal, and not malice* Otherwise it
is, if he were not indicted till after the appeal commenced, or if there be a
variance betwixt the appeals and indictment, as the acquitall of him upon the
one, is no acquitall of him upon the other, as if he be indicted as a
principal, and appeals as an accessory, vel contra But if the variance be in
things of no substance, so that the acquitall in the one be an acquitall in
the other, there shall be no damages. And though the word malice by the letter
of the Statute does seem to reach only to the Appellours and Procurours, yet
it is to be understood by the books, that it reach as well to the Appellant
as to them. And the word felony in the Statute stretches to feloni^s, so made
after this Statute, and ancient felonies made so before the Statute. Acquitted
in due manner is as well where the Defendant is acquit by battle, as if it
were by the Corntry, and he is intended acquit by battle, when the Appellant
acknowledges in the field his appeal to be false (which is a kind of
vanquishment) for if the Appellant be flaine in the field, the damages are
gone; Now there is as well an acquitall in Law, as an acquitall in fait.
Therefore if two be appealed, one as principal, and the other as accessory:
the accessory shall recover damages, upon acquitall of the principal (if the
enquest, which tried the principal, were charged with the accessory,) though
they gave no verdict of the accessory, for the accessory in such case may have
by the Common Law his Writ of conspiracy, as appears 33. Hen. 6. fol. 2. But
if the principal be acquitted, the accessory never appearing, but hanging
still in process, he shall neither recover damages by this Statute, nor have
a Writ of Conspiracy by Common Law, till he come and be acquitted by verdict, as
appeare^ 41. Assiss. p. 24. un bone case. If the Defendant bar the Plaintiff
in appeal, he shall not recover damages, except the bar did acquit him of
the felony* Therefore if his plea were bastardy in the Plaintiff, or that he
has an elder brother, or ne vnques accouple in legal m^^^imonie, and such
like pleas, although th^se ple^^ may discharge the appeal as well against the
King, as against the party, yet notwithstanding any such plea in bar, he may
be afterward indicted, and attaint of the felony, and therefore he is not to
recover damages, for th^se plea^^ry not his innocence any more, than pleas
which are only in abatement of the Writ. So is it likewise, if the Plaintiff
be barred upon a demurrer in Law, and so, where it is found by verdict
akilling se defendend^^, or by misaduenture, for this is none acquitall of the
felony, in so much as the Defendant can never be cleared thereof without
purchasing his pardon: So is it also, when the Defendant upon arraignement
takes him to his Clergy, and the Court takes an enquest of office, whereby he
is found riens culpable: this is none acquitall, whereby he may recover
damages; for claim of Clergy, is rather by implication, confession of felony
than otherwise: But he that will waiue his Clergy, and put himself in
inquest, if he be a quit he shall recover damages: So if the Appellee have
both the Kings pardon, and the Appellants release, and yet he will waiue them,
and plead riens culpable, he shall recover damages, if the Country ac^uit
him, yet he has done a matter of record, which by implication acknowledges
the felony, quoe^e: for if the pardon were by Parliament sans question, he
might not waiue it. See thereof 11. Hen. 4. fol. 40. He is not acquitted debito
modo, that is, acquitted erroniously, without dew process, As 9. Hen. 5. fol.
2* the Defendant come in by exigent, upon which the Viscount had returned ce^^
corpus, whereas he should have returned exigifeci and the Defendant appearing
upon the exigent, without taking advantage of the process, pleaded riens
culpable, to the appeal, and so was found; but yet he could not get judgment
to recover damages, for the cause aforesaid quaere. for 19. E. 3. Titulo
Corone in Fitzherbert 444. is contra. that error in the process is not
material, so long as there is no error in the Writ of appeal, Declaration or
pleading* for the Defendant is arraigned upon the original, and not upon the
mean process.

The Statute speaks thus, vel ad sectam domini Regis, vel appellatoris. The
Kings suit here is understood in appeal, when after arraignement of the
Defendant, the Appellant having declared, is at non suit, f^r if the Defendant
be acquit at the Kings suit upon an Indictment of the same felony, he shall
recover no damages.

And the manner of recovering damages, when acquitall is at the Kings suit,
differs some what ^^em recovery upon suit of the party, etc. for in the first
^ase he which is acquitted, shall recover no damages, till he have sued* scire
fac. to bring the Plaintiff into Court, which by non suit was become out of
Court. But in the other case he shall recover damages without other process*
Titulo Damages in Fitzherbert 7. 7. Whore the Ca^e was, that the Appellant
took a husband after non suit, and yet scire facias was awarded against the
woman only. The Statute is further, that the Justices before whom, etc. shall
punish the Appell^ur, etc. this cannot be understood by Justices of Nisi
prius, though by the Stat^te 14. Hen. 6. cap. 1. they have power to give
Judgment in treason and felony tried before them, and that ^s well where the
Defendant is acquitted, as where he is attainted; But yet within this Statute
they are not, (...) the plea of the whole appeal is not heard before them, nor
any more, save only the trial, as you may ^ee, 10. E. 4. ^o. 14. The Statute
is further, that the damages shall be considered, having respect to the
impriso^^^nt, etc. Therefore if appeal be against diverse men, and they all
are acquitted, damages shall be taxed to them severally, because perhaps one is
more damni^ied than another, for one may be appealed as principal, and another
as accessory, and one may be a Gentleman, and another n^^^, ^. Hen. 5. fol. 1.
and 40. E. 3 titulo Damages in Fitzherbert p. 77. But note that this recovery
of damages is not for every one, for if an appeal ^ee against a Monk, ^^
Feme covert, without the joining the Sovereign or ^^^band, as it must be,
(except the Sovereign with his Monk, or the Baron with his wife commit^^ the
^^l^ny) the Monk or Feme covert shall recover no damages, though they be
acquit. Titulo Corone in Fitzherbert 276. 22. E. 3. The principal Case was an
appeals against a Monk, and the Justices said it was all one for Law, if it
had boene a Feme covert. quaere. for if an appeal be against Baron and Feme,
which are acquitted, damages shall be taxed, and recovery severally, viz. The
Baron sole shall recover for his own imprisonment, and the Baron and Feme
jointly for the imp^^sonment of the wife. The Statute is moreover, versus
Dominum regem grauiter redimantur. This fining to the King is never, but where
the Defendant is to have damages also, for otherwise the Plaintiff shall not
fi^e, but only beeamerced, as 9. Hen. 5. fol. 1. the appeal abated for
mis^o^mer, and the Plaintiff was but only amerced. vide 41. Assis. Corone 219.
the appellant was at non suit after Declaration, and the Court presently
awarded process against the Appellant, to come and make fine, agreeing that if
the party were afterward acquit, at the Kings suit, so that he recovered
damages against the Appellant, yet she should not pay a new fine. Put the
ca^e therefore, that at the Kings suit the Defendant had been found culpable
of the felony, what remedy there might be, for the Plaintiff to recover his
fine again, which he paid before noone, as it s^^meth, for it seems the
Plaintiff which is at non suit in the appeal, shall pay a fine by the Common
Law, and this was the cause why they awarded it to be paid maintenant. Then
for enquiry of Abbettours, etc. Cum appellatores non habeant vnde praedicta
dam^a restitue^^, inquiratur per quorum abettum. These words imply, that if
damages be not by Law recouerable against the Appellours, there shall be none
enquiry of Abbettours. And where the Statute is, that if the Appellants are not
able to restore damages, it is intendible all the damages, for if the
Appellant be sufficient to render part, but not all the damages, enquiry
shall be of the Abbettors, and they shall be charged. 8. E. 4. fol. 3. and 8.
Hen. 5. and 219. ^itulo Corone in Fitzherbert. The Statute is, shoppellatus hoc
petat. Of office only therefore, and without request, as it should seem, the
Court cannot enquire of Abbettors. And ^8. Assis. 222. titulo Corone. where
they ^ad enquired of Abbettors, at the desire of one Defendant, and they found
none, and afterward another of the Defendants, being acquitted, prayed enquiry
likewise, it might not be obtained, because it appeared by the first verdict,
that there were none Abbettors, there rem ined therefore no more to be enquired
o^, but what damages were sustained. This Stamford affirms to b^e in
appearance against Law, for says he, it is against the words of the Statute,
and against reason, for what reason is it, that a man should be bound by an
enquest, whereunto he is not privy, and against which he can have no remedy,
because it was but an enquest of offi^e, for albeit that commonly the enquiry
of Abbettors, is by the same enquest that acquitted the Defendant, yet their
enquiry in this point is but of office, for if they find Abbettors, these
Abbettors when they come may trauerse all that is found in this point; As if it
be found, that the Appellant is not sufficient, and A. and B. were Abbettors,
A. and B. may come and say by protestation, not knowing the felony for plea,
that the Appellant is sufficient, or that they never abetted. 8. E. 4. fol. 3.
and the words, S^ legitimo mod^ conuictus fuerit de huius^odi abbe^to per
ma^^^iam, prove also that answer is allowed, to that which is found by the
enquest. And note that it is a good answer for the Abbettor to show matter,
wherefore the Defendant ought not to have damages, or to show that he was
acquitted, not lawfully, bu^ erroniously. But the Abbettors shall not take
exception, against the Inquisition, for that it is not found at what day,
year, or place they abetted, for the Abe^nent simply found satisfies the
Statute, which wills, v^ inquiratur per quorum abe^^um. And when that it is
once found, the Defendant may supply that which wants, adding to the
inquisition, the year, day and pla^^. ^i^ulo Corone in Fitzherbert 45. 22. E.
4. By the words, per br^ue de iudicto ad sectam appellati distringantur all
veni^ndum coram Iusticiariis, etc. And the process should seem to be
distress infinite. But Titulo Corone, 102. the Court awarded first a Venire
facias, and then Dis^resse, which course has little authority for it, for all
the other Books give a D^string as for the first Process, which is always
sued out by him which is acquitted. And for his better speed, he may pursue this
if he will, though the Appellant be not in Court. As if the Appellant be at
non suit, and the Defendant arraigned at the Kings suit is acquitted, his
damages taxed, and his Abbettors found, now he may have Process against the
Abettors maintenant, though the Judgment of damages be suspended till Scire
facias ^e sued, and returned against the Appellant: and note if the Defendant
which is acquitted in an Appeal, be non suit in his Process against the
Abettors, this is not peremptory, but he may commence process again of new,
if he will, Corone, 386. And 3. E. 2. titulo Action sur le Statute, 28. An
original Writ brought for Abetment and Declaration against the Abettors, for
greater damages than were assessed in the Appeal is awarded good. For of
damages taxed in Appeal, there lies no attaint, because the Enquest, as to
the damages, is but of office, and the Defendant cannot compel the Justices
to increase damages, therefore it is reason that he aid himself by Action. So
says Stamford.

SECT. XVIII. Of the old Law.
I Have waded further into this vindicatiue Action than I thought to have done,
and yet not touched what the Princes warrant of a man's life may avail him,
against the instant appeal of a widow. I know one or two that are thought to
be buckled against Appellants, by a lease of their own lives from the King;
but how tr^^ it is, or how contording with Law, I know not: Howsoever it be, I
advise a widow, that is full of spleen for the slaughter of her husband, to
read over mine instructions here, to a^^a^ choler, and then if composition be
offered, not to refuse it. For first I do you to weet, that appeals d^ more
are but slipperie Actions. Be judged by the case, 33. H. ^. Dyer ^ol. 50
Warnforo of the Temple was sued in an appeal of murder: the Writ was, Ad
respondendum A. B. alias dict* A. B. fra^^^ and haetedi, to him that was
murdered, and the Defendant was discharged, because the Plaintiff was not
named brother and heir in the substance of the Writ, but only in the Alias
dict^, for it ought to have b^^ne, Ad respondendum A. B fratri and ^^^^* redi,
alias d^ct^, etc. This was the chief cause why the Defendant was discharged.
Then, I say, it is a more Christian thing to take five hundred po^nds of a
mankiller, for a release, leaving him to agree with the King for his neck, as
good cheap as he can, than to seek blood and death (though of one which has
deserved it) in anger, malice, and reuengefulnesse. Last of all I affirm, that
it agrees with the eldest custom, and ancientest English Laws. For that
which learned M. Lamberd in one place speaks but as coniecturall, is (me
thinks) true without all peradventure. Id ^st, that this form of proceeding
against an homicide given to the dead man's heir, or widow, is a ^euengefull
Action first given to appease such quarrels and capital enmities of families
and kindreds, as the Northern men yet use and call F^awds, which heretofore
(but a long time since) were general, and ouerspread the Realm. So that an
Appeal du mort, is but an image of deadly Feawd. The inducements to think so
are these. The action of Appeal is preferred before the Kings action: the
offer of trial by the Appellant, by Bracton is, per corpus, etc. and si de eo
male contigerit per corpus fratris, etc. And the ancient use was, when the
Appellee condemned went to execution, that all they which were of blood to him
that was murdered, should draw the man-flayer to the gallows, by a long rope,
or cord, to show love to their kinsman, and desire of revenge, per Bromley in
Plowdens Commentary, 306. And 11. H. 4. fol. 12. When T^rwit had affirmed,
that by the ancient Law in Appeals de mott, the dead man* kindred and his wife
should draw the Felon to execution. Gas^olgne added, Hoc ^uit in diebus
nostris. By these days Appeals de mort showed, by their outward face and
phisnomie, from whence they sprung. But by the old Laws of King Inas, King
Edmun^, and the rest, ye shall plainly perceive, that Feawd was their mother,
and that money was the quencher of the quarrel, very often, if not always.
See therefore in M. Lamberds Book, Depriscis legibus, the Law 7^. of Inas: If
a bond man kill an Englishman, his Lord shall deliver him into the hands of the
Lord or kinsman of him which is slain, or redeem him at sixty shillings: If
the Lord will not pay the money, he shall at the least emancipate his bondsman,
and the kinsman of the murderer so emancipate, may undertake for him, to pay
the price of him which is dead. If he have no kinsman that will do so much
for him, Metuat sibi malum ab aduersar^is, Let him be at the hazard of his
enemies. And I have read an old Law which I cannot find again, Parentibus
occisi fiat emendatio, vel guerra eorum portetur. But in the same book, De
priscis Legibus, ye may find that King Edmund, which reigned an hundred
years and more before the Conquest by the advice of Odo of Canterbury, and
the Archbishop Wolstan of York, with many other of the Clergy and Laytie,
made Laws, amongst which one has this Preface; Etenim nos omnes harum taedet
pugnarum quotidianarum: and therefore we ordain as follows.

SECT. XIX. King Edmunds Law.
IF any man hereafter do kill another man, he alone shall take upon him, and
sustain the deadly enmity of the dead man's kindred, unless he can by the
help of his friends pay the whole price and estimation of his head, whom he
has killed, (what condition soever he were of) and that within the space of
twelve months* If his kindred forsake him, and refuse to pay any thing for
him, he alone shall bear the quarrel, and his kinsmen shall not be reputed
as enemies: But if they give him sustenance, or have any peace and society
with him, he that does so shall forfeit all that he has to the King, and be
taken also as an enemy ^o the blood: But otherwise, if any man to revenge his
kinsmans death, pursue and kill any one, but only the first murderer, he shall
lose all that he has to the King, and be deemed an enemy to the King, and to
all that love him. This Statute abridges ^eawds excepteth the Felon^ kindred,
forbidding to kill in Withernam, and for money it seems the ^eawd was stripped.

SECT. XX. Of Rape.
CHu^^ now whether ye will imagine, that the widow has agreed with him which
was her husband^ bane, or that she has pursued him to death: She remains
from henceforth a widow, giving her self to alms and deeds of charity, and
of this good mind are many of our widows, which purpose constantly to live
out the residue of their days in a devout remembrance of their dear husbands
departed, to whom perhaps they made vows never to marry again after their
deaths. But to what purpose is it for women to make vows, when men have so
many millions of ways to make them break them? And when sweet words, fair
promises, tempting, slattering, swearing, lying will not serve to beg^ile the
poor soul: then with rough handling, violence, and plain strength of a^mes,
they are, or have been heretofore, rather made prisoners to lusts thieves,
than wives and companions to faithful honest lovers: So drunken are men with
their own lusts, and the poison of Ouids false precept,

Vim licet appellant, vis est ea grata puellis. That if the rampire of Laws
were not betwixt women and their harms, I verily think none of them, being
above twelve years of age, and under an hundred, being either fair or rich,
should be able to escape rauishing.

This is therefore a matter concerning maids, wives, widows, and women of all
degrees and conditions, if either they be, or possess any thing worth the
having, and because the ignorance of Law may here turn a mollifying heart to
harm, I were to blame, if I left my Scholars without warning to take heed.

SECT. XXI. Rauishment i^ in two sorts.
THere are two kinds of Rape, of which though the ^^^ be called by the com^^^
people, and by the Law it self, Rauishment; yet in my conceit it borrows the
name from r^pere, but improperly, for it is no more but Species stup^^, a
hideous hateful kind of whoredom in him which commits it, when a wom^n is
enforced violently to sustain the fury of brutish conc^piscence: but she is
left where she is found, as in her own house or bed, as Lucrece was, and not
hurried away, as Helen by Paris, or as the Sabine women were by the Romans, for
that is both by nature of the word, and definition of the matter: The second
and right rauishment, Cum quis leonestae f^mae soeminam, sieve virgo, sieve
vidua, sieve sanctimonialis sit inuitis illis in quorum est potestate, abducit.
Neque refert, an quis (volente vel nolente rapta) id faciat, nam vis quae
Parentibus vel Curatoribus fit, moxime spectat. It seems the first kind of
rape deserved always death by Gods Laws, unless the woman ravished were
vnbetrothed, so that the rauisher might marry her, as you may read
Deuteronomy, chap. 22. verse. 23. and by the Civil Law. Raptores, in the second
kind, subjiciebantur poenae mortis rapta si fue^t ingenua. How heinous they
be both, and have a long time been, by the Laws of England, ye shall now
perceive.

SECT. XXII. The old Law of libidinous Rape.
BRacton in the eight and twentieth Chapter of his third Book shows, that by
the antique Law of King Adelstan, He that meeting a virgin sole, or with
company, did but touch her unhonestly, was guilty of breaking the Kings Edict,
Et emendabit secundum iudicium comitat. If against her will he threw her on
the ground, he lost the Kings favor; if he discovered her, and cast himself
upon her, he lost all his possessions; if he lay with her, he suffered
judgment of life and member: yea, if he were an horse man, his horse lost his
ta^le and maine, (as Stamford cites it to be, lib. 2.) But the words are,
Equus suus ad de^ecus suum decoriabatur de superiore labro, and cauda quae
proprius natibus abscindere debent; item canis si secum habeat, etc. codem modo
dedecorabitur. His Hawke likewise lost her beak, tallons, and ^raine. And the
virgin had in recompense all his land and money by the Kings warrant. This was
in King Adelstanes days, at least an hundred and twenty years before the
Conquest, when ^o^roprores v^ig nitatis and casti^^tis were hanged, and their
fautors also. But in Brractons time it seems, that these kind of rauishers
were otherwise punished, they lost their eyes and were gelt. She that brought
an Appeal was to complain her self presently to the next neighbor, or to
the chief men of the Hundred, or to the Coroner, or Viscount, showing her
garments bloody and torn, and in the first County to enter her Appeal, and
pursue it, at coming of the Kings Justices. Before whom, unless the offender
aid himself by exception, that the Appellant was still a virgin, (which was
tried by inspection of women) and if she were found a virgin, the Appellant was
imprisoned for her slander, or that he held her before times as his Concubine,
or that she consented to his imbracements, or some other like plea, he l^st his
eyes and stones, for they calorem s^up^^ induxerunt. Except the woman before
judgment given, demanded him for her husband, for that was only in the woman's
election, and not in the man's, because of the inconvenience which otherwise
might have happened, if some hardy strong Leacher had ravished a Dame noble, or
of great birth, he should either go away unpunished, or else by means of one
pollution, perpetually desire her, to the disgrace of her whole stock. Thus
far Bracton. And in the Book, De priscis l^gibus, it is s^t down for a Law
made by King William the Conqueror; Interdico ne quis occida^ur vel
suspendatur pro aliquo culpa, sed eruantur oculi, etc abse^ndantur testiculi,
vel pedes vel manus, ita vt truncus vivus remare ^t, in signum proditionis vel
nequitiae. I command that from henceforth no man be hanged, or put to death
for any transgression, but let the offenders eyes be pulled out, or his stones,
feet, or hands cut away, that the trunk or mutilate body still left alive, may
remain as a testimony of his prodition and lewdness. Now if this mangling Law
of King William were still in force in Bractons time against rauishers, was it
Mag. Chart. cap. 29. Or what was it that made the Law so meek in Edward the
first his time* that the first Statute against Rape, speaks of it so mildly,
as if it had been at Common Law a very small trespass.

SECT. XXIII. West. 1. cap. 14. anno 3. E. 1.
THe King commands, that no man ravish or take by force any damsel within age,
either with her consent or without. Nor any dame or damsel (of sull age) or
other man's wife, against her will. If any do, the King will do justice and
common right, at his or her suit, that shall sue within 40. days, if none
commence suit within 40. days, the King shall have the suit, they which are
culpable shall be imprisoned two years, and be ransomed at the Kings
pleasure. And if they have not to satisfy the ransom, they shall suffer a
longer imprisonment, as the trespass shall require, a man may well suspect
that there was something, which had allayed the rigor of former Law, before
this Statute was made. It may be the importation of Clergy men urging
satisfaction according to Moises Law, if the woman ravished were unmarried, and
otherwise the bashfulnesse of those which are betrothed and espoused, kept in
the truculent Law of King William. Howsoever it were, this Statute of West. 1.
(in my poor opinion) being rather affirmative than otherwise, runs not in
favor of rauishers, to abrogate their old punishment, but inflicteth a greater
punishment upon them, than that which had lately been put in practice. Or it
may be very well that the common right, which King Edward promised here to do
for them that would pursue within forty days, was according to the severity,
which B^ac^on speaks of.

SECT. XXIV. West. 2. cap. ^5.
THe mitigation of the old Law, one way or other, in a few years brought forth
so many enormities, That at the next Parliament, which King Edw. held ten
years after, it was ordained as follows.

It is ordained, that if any man ravish any woman espoused, or damsel, or
other woman, which consents not before, nor after, that he shall have
judgment of life and member. And whosoever rauisheth any woman by force,
though she consent afterward, shall have judgment as before is said, if he be
attainte^ at the Kings suit. And if any woman be carried away with the goods
of their husband, the King shall have the suit, for goods so carried away. This
Chapter contains also the ordinance against Elopement, and another for
Nuns, qui monachialem a domo suo a^^ucat, li^et monach^^li^ consentiat,
puniatur perpri^onam trium annorum, etc. and satisfaciat dom^i, a qua abducta
fuerit and nih^lominus redimatur ad vol^^ratem reg^^.

SECT. XXV. 6. Richard. 2. cap. 6.
A Man would have thought, that this Statute should have repressed for ever,
all violence toward the persons of women, but quantos motos scies, reclamante
ratione, Priape: In the sixth year of King Richards reign, and about the 16th.
of his age, this villainy of rape was so increased, and women so little offended
with the injury, or so ashamed to confess the outrage, that a new Law was made
to punish women, which consented to their rauishors, vt sequitur. Against
rauishers of Ladies and daughters of Noble men, and other women in every part
of the Realm, now a days more violently offending, and oftener than was wont;
It is ordained, that wheresoever, and whenever such Ladies, daughters, or
other women be ravished, and after rape do consent ^o such reuishers, that as
well the rauishers, as they which be ravished, be from henceforth disabled, to
have or challenge Heritage, Dower or Iointfeoffement after the death of their
husbands; and ancestors. And that incontinently the ne^t of the blood of those
rauishers, or of t^em that be so ravished, to whom such Heritage, Dower or
Iointfeoffement ought to reuert, remain, or fall, after the death of the
rauisher, or of her that is so ravished, shall have title m^^ntinently after
the rape, to enter upon the rauisher, or her that is ravished, and their
Assigns and lands, tenements, in the same heritage, Dower, or Iointfeoffement,
and the same to hold in state of Heritage.

And that the husbands of such women, if they have husbands, or if they have no
husband living, the father or other next of the blood, have from henceforth the
suit to pursue against the Offenders and Rauishers in this behalf, and to have
them thereof convict of life and member, though the woman after such rape do
consent to the rauisher. And the Defendant in this Case shall not be received
to wage battle, but that the truth of the matter shall be tried by the
Country. Saving always to the King and other Lords of the Realm, their
escheats of the Rauishers, if they be convict.

This is a shrewd Statute. Till this time he that had ravished a woman might
hope for a clemency, at the least at her hands, because he had ventured his
life for her sake, but what shall lusty leachers now do? the more a woman is
worthy to be won, because she has or shall have wherewith to keep a man,
the more danger it is to meddle with her. She that perhaps might have b^ene
persuaded, (had this Statute not (...)) to (...) a matter of greater
astonishment, then (...) bares not now be merciful, lest sh^e b^e cruel to
herself. Therefore now men look on fair Gentlewomen, heirs, and widows,
as the ea^^ looks at a fish in the water, she would (...) ^e dealing, but is
l^th to go (...).

And now comes in the second rape by a^duction, wherein avarice is as great an
ag^^t as ca^^^lity, and something wiser in auo^ding of danger, now men turned
themselves for loves sake into Centaures first, and took on them the shape of
Bulls afterward.

SECT. XXVI. 31. H^^. ^. cap. 9.
THerefore in the 31. y^ere of Hen. 6. was a Statute made, beginning with
complaint, that in all parts of the Realm, diverse people of power, moved by
(...) cousnesse, against all right and gentleness, had (...) new (...), to the
danger, trouble, (...) of Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other women sole, having
substance of ^^nd, tenements, or moveable goods, (...) then great innocence and
simplicity, wishing to take them by force, or otherwise come to them, seeming
to be their great friends, promising them the^r faithful loves, and to by
great (...), they caught them into their possession, co^^^ying them into places
where the Offenders were of power, not suffering them once gotten into their
governance, to g^^ a^ liberty, till they h^d bound them by Obligation or
Statute merchant, and enforced them to marry against their own liking,
otherwise they would leuy the said sum in the said Obligation or Statutes, to
prevent danger of forfeiture of the same Obligation or Statute, or further
peril to their persons. The purueyance of this Statute, is but a Grant of a
Writ, whereby to call before the Chancellor, or before the Justices of Assizes
in the County, or before some other noble persons, assigned by the Chancellor
of England, the persons offending, to make void the Obligation or Statute, if
there be cause, with a severe penalty of 300. li to be forfeited by the
Sheriff, if he did not execute she same Writ duly, according to the tenure
thereof. This Statute was too meek and gentle, something like him that made
it. H. 6.

SECT. XXVII. 3. H. 7. c. 2.
But 3. Hen 7. cap. 2. beginning with a better complaint against takers for
lucre, of maids, widows, or wives having substance of lands or goods, or
being heirs apparent, which takers sometimes married them, and sometime
des^owred them, to the breach of Gods Law, and the Kings, the disparagement of
such women, and utter heaviness and discomfort of their friends, ordains,
that whosoever takes against her will unlawfully, any maid, widow, or wife,
shall together with the procurors, abbetters and receivers of any such women
(knowing her to be so taken against her will,) be felous, and every of them
been reputed and judged as felons principal. But this extends not to
taking, where a woman is claimed as a ward or bondwoman. And Mr. Lambard
notes, that anno 3. and 4. Phil. and Mar. this Statute was construed to make
no felony, unless the woman married were either taken or deslowred.

SECT. XXVIII. 4. and 5. Phi. and Mar. cap. 8.
THerefore to supply what hitherto was wanting against takers, and also
intisers, rauishing by allurements and flatterers, 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar.
cap. 8. says, that for want of sufficient Law, it remained still a faml^ar and
common mischief in the Realm; That maidens and women children of Noble men,
Gentlemen, and others, which were heirs apparent, or had lands in great
substance left by their Ancestors or friends, by flattery, trifling gifts, or
fair promises of light persons, and also by subtility of such as bought and
sold them for reward, were many times allured to contract matrimony with
unthrifty persons, and thereupon oftentimes with slight or force were taken
from their parents, friends or kins^olke, to the high displeasure of God, the
disparagement of the children, and perpetual condolence of their friends;
Therefore it is ordained, that it shall not be lawful to convey any maid or
woman child, unmarried, or under the age of sixteen years, out of the
possession, and against the will of her father, or of such person, to whom by
his will or otherwise in his life time, he shall have appointed the keeping,
education and governance of her, except such taking, as shall be without fraud
by the Master or Mistress, or Guardian in So^age, or in Chiualry, of or to such
maid or woman child. And if any person that is above the age of fourteen
years, shall convey, or cause to be conveyed, any such maid being within the
age of sixteen years, out of the possession, and against the will of the
father or mother, or any other person which then shall have by lawful means,
the order, keeping, education, or governance of her, the offender duly
attainted or convicted (other than such, of whom she shall hold by knights
service,) shall suffer two years imprisonment, without bail or mainprise, or
par such fine, as shall be assesed by the Queens Council in the Starchamber.

And if any shall take away, and deflowre any such maid, or woman child, or
shall against the will of her father, or he not knowing (if the father be in
life) or without the assent or knowledge of the mother having ^ustody and
governance of the child, the father being dead* by letters, messages or
otherwise, contract matrimony with any such mard, (except it be by the consent
of the person or persons, by interest of wardship entitled to have the
marriage) he shall suffer (being lawfully con^^ted) five years imprisonment,
without bail or maineprise, and pay such fine as shall be assessed in the
Starrechamber, etc. the one moity of all which fines shall be to the Qu^^e and
her successors, and the other to the grieved.

And the Council in Starrechamber, by Bill of complaint or information, and
Instices of assise by inquisition or indictment, (in which process shall be
awarded, as inditements of trespass at the Common law) have authority to hear
and determine the offen ^s.

Moreover, if any woman child, or maid^n* being above the age of twelve years,
and under sixteen, do at any time consent to such person as shall make
contract of matrimony contrary to the form of this Statute, the next of kin to
whom the inheritance should come after her death, shall from time of such
assent have and en^oy all such lands, tenements, and her editaments* as she
had in possession, reuersion, or re^^^nder, at the time of assent, during the
l^te of such person, so contracting matrim^ny, and after her ^^cease so
contracting, etc. then the said lands shalldescen* re^e^^ remain, and ^ome to
such person or persons, (other than t^ him that shall so contract matrimony) as
they should have done, in case this Statute had never been^m^de^ But th^s. At
exten^eth not ^o di^^^sh any libe^ty, custom, or authorite, in London or like
corporations, as touching Orphancs, their lands, goods, or chattels.

See Ratcliffs Case in Sir Edward Cokes 3. Rep. fol. 38. upon this Statute of
4. and 5. of Phil. and Mar. In an Eiectione firm upon special pleading, a
special verdi^t was thus in effect, that William Wilcokes married the daughter
and he^re apparent of John Edols and Alice his wife, and has issue by her,
John, Elizabeth* and Martha, William Wilcokes afterward by his will in
wrighting appoints the order, custody, education, and government of his said
three children, to their said grandfather and grandmother, during the
grandfather and grandmothers lives, and then dies, the widow of Wilcoke^
marries Raphe Radcliffe, John Edois dies, and his widow being Tenant in ^ee
simple of the lands in question holden in soccage by her will, deniseth them to
her grandchild John Wilcokes in tail, the remainder to Elizabeth and Mortha,
and the heircs of their two bodies equally to be divided, the remainder in fee
to her said daughter and heir apparent, the mother of these three deuisees,
and dies, John Wilcoke dies without issue, his sister Elizabeth married one
Andrews, and he, his wife, and her sister Marth^ enter the lands, and were
seized accordingly, and Mar^ha abiding with Raph R^tcl^ffe, and his wife being
above fourteen, and under sixteen years of age, with Raph R^t^l^ffe his
consent, and of her own accord departs eight miles off from them, where six
hours after she was married to Edward Ra^cliff^, who enters and made the
Plaintis^e his lease; And (the issue being whether Elizabeth Ratcliffe the wife
of Raph Ratcliffe had the custody of Martha the wife of Edward R^tcliffe the
lessor at the time of their contract and marriage,) all the Judges and Co^rt of
Kings Bench resolved that Eliz^beth had the governance of her daughter Martha
at the time of her contract and marriage within the intent and meaning of the
Statute.

It was resolved in that case, that those words father and mother within the
second branch of the Statute shall be expounded father or mother after the
death of the father.

And it was resolved in that Case, that there be two manners of custodies or
wardships, the one by the Common Law, the other by the Statute: And that also
at the Common Law there are four manners of Gardians, namely, Guardian in
Chiualry, Guardian in So^age, Guardian in nature, and Gardina for nurture, and
now the Statute makes a new Guardian, namely by assignation; but the mother in
that case cannot be Guardian for nurture, because her daughter was past 14.
years of age. But she had the custody of her within the prouis^on of the Act
^ure naturae, and the assent of Raph Ratcliffe the mothers husband was not
material, for the custody of a child is an inseparable incident to the parent,
and marriage may not transfer that to a husband. And that was resolved, that
although the issue was whether Elizabeth had the custody of Martha at the time
of the contract, and that did appear, that she departed from her mothers
house six hours before the contract, yet in judgment of* Law her mother had
the custody of her at the time of the contract. And that was resolved, that in
that Case Edward Ratcliffe, and Martha his wife, had good title to the land
against Andrews and his wife, for the one daughter, as that Case is, shall not
take benefit of forfeiture of the other, for the statute gives the forfeiture
to the next of kin, to whom the inheritance should descend or come after her
decease, during the life of such person that so shall contract matrimony, so,
that first he ought to be of the blood, and secondly, to whom the inheritance
should descend or come, etc. and although the wife of Andrews be of the
blood, yet in that Case by the death of Martha, the land if she has issue,
shall deseend to her issue, and if she has not issue, that shall reuert to
her mother, etc. but judgment was against the Plaintiff, for that the issue
was found against him.

These are the Laws, whereby rapes and rauishments of women are repressed,
which if they be well looked unto, will prove that there is now no cause, why
lying L^onicus Chalcondilus should be believed, who writing of Englishmen,
affirms that we have no care what becomes of our wives and children; That in
our peregrinations and travels we interchange and use one the others wives
mutually: That we count it no reproach by whom soever our wives or daughters be
got with ^hild; That (with us) if a man come to his friends house, he must lie
with his wife the first thing that he does, vt deinde benigue hospitio
accip^arur. And though some of the last recited Laws were unmade, when
Chalcondilus did write, above one hundred years since, yet there were then
Laws enough to prove him a deep liar; and had he ^eene in England, to have
trussed him up too perhaps for lechery, had his learning steaded him no better
than his honesty; this is no less cause, why I should be thus bitter against
Chalcondilus a dead man, for that it may seem he wrote by hearesay, nullo odio
gentis: and in other matters he reports honorably of us. But it is strange
that a man writing, not a great while since, but even the other day, not at
Athens, neither at Rome, or Reams, where they use to belie us head and foot,
but here at London should be bold to wr^te and put in print matter to this
effect, That beggars and the poorest sort of our women, we do use to punish
and to whip them, when they are taken for leachers and dishonest livers, But
Gentlewomen and Ladies of honor and worship, they are never p^nished for
incontinency, but rather for their amorous wantonness, and lubricity the more
esteemed and magnified. This follow deserves plainly better to be hanged,
than to be believed. For neither is it true that any wom^n with us can better
her reputation by dissolute life and manners; Neither can any woman learn a
more deuillish lesson, than so to be persuaded. And seeing the Lawrs themselves
declare what detestation they have of brutish concupiscence, by punishing
consent, with l^sse of inher^tance; I would I could perswad all women to
eschew, not only these gulfes, but also the ecclesiastical Censures, (which I
meddle not with) together with the ^^^^my, which they purchase sometime with
outward la^^^^iousnesse, from the report of them, which judge a care^^ss^
liberty in behavior, an infallible argument of sensuality* whereby some men
have been imboldened to offer ^or^^, because they thought it was expected.

SECT. XXIX. Appeal^ of rape.
NOw let us consider a little how these Laws (...) to be put in practice, if
any virgin, widow, or ^^gle woman be ravished, she her self may sue an
Appeal of rape, prosecute the fe^on to death, and the King^ ^^^don (as it
seems) cannot help him. If a Feme co^^^^ be ravished, she cannot have an
Appeal without her husband, as appears 8 Hen. 4. fol. 21. But if a Feme
^ouert be ravished, and confent to the rauisher, the husband alone may have an
Appeal, and this by the Statute 6. Rich. 2. cap. 6. The husband that this
Statute speaks of, which may sue the Appeal, must be a lawful husband in
right and possession, for ne vnques accouple in loyal matrimony is a good plea
against ^im. 11. Hen. 4. fol. 13. So does Justice Stanford affirm the book to
prove without question: and that the Law is so too, where Appeal is brought by
Baron and Feme. Brook abridging the case, 11. Hen. 4. seems to incline to
the contrary opinion. The case at length is thus, Thomas Hausegle s^^th Appeal
de rauishment sa feme against Thomas V. and others according to the Statute. 6.
Rich. 2. rehea^^^^^ in his Declaration the order of the Statute, and that they
had ravished her against the form of the said* (...). The Appell^^^ said, the
Plaintiff had another Writ hanging, returnable the same term, of the same
rape, and because the Writ was not served, he had obtained a sicut alias, Ergo,
this Writ of the same nature should abate; Ha^^said, he might pursue which Writ
^e would. And by their writ a Praecipe quod reddat, or an Assise for the like
cause shall abate, for of one land a man cannot have two recoueries. But in
this case it may be, there were two rapes at several times, etc. and also the
first Writ was not entered in the roll, nor the ^^cut alias in the Record, then
the Declaration was challenged as insufficient, because it was ^elonice rapuit,
and not carnaliter cognouit: but to that it was answered, that felonious rape
implied carnal knowledge, for rape without such knowledge is buttrespasse;
Another exception to the Declaration was, that two had ravished as principal,
etc. which, Rolfe said, could not be, therefore the Plaintiff ought to have
declared against one as principal, and against the other as accessory, or else
to have brought several Appeals, whereunto was answered, that it two or
twenty go and come together, to commit any fel^ny, as robbery or murder,
though one of them only commit the Act, yet all the rest are principals. A
third exception against the Declaration was, that the Plaintiff had not showed
how his wife assented after the rauishment, and the Appeal was given by W^st.
2. to the Baron and Feme, and not to the Baron alone by the Statute of Rich. 1.
But this exception also was disallowed, because the Count had recited the whole
purueyance of the Act, and the rauishment was contra formam etc. Last of all,
the Appellees pleaded, that long time before the espousals, betwixt the
Appellour and the woman supposed to be ravished, one of the Appellees had
affianced the same woman, after which affiance the Appellour married her, at a
certain Church against her will, (after which marriage, whereunto she never
agreed) she came of her own accord to the Defendant who had now married her,
so that the Appellour and she were never coupled in loyal matrimony. This
manner of pleading was said to be a con^ession both of the first marriage and
of the rauishment, which the Council would have taken by protestation. But
^^^scoigne told them, they might not have protestation, to prove them guilty
of felony. Therefore the Defendant pleaded generally, Ne vnques accouple. etc.
which the Plaintiff accepted of his own accord, and a Writ was awarded to the
Bishop. But all men's opinions seemed to be, that this was no good plea, because
the Statute is, that the husband shall have the Appeal, though they agreed
that when the Action is by Common Law, as an Appeal De morte viri, ne vnques
accouple, is a good plea, for no woman shall revenge her husbands death by
Appeal, unless she were wife as well in right as in possession.

The Statute of Richard gives the Appeal, where the woman ravished has no
husband, to her father or next of blood, etc. which is understood vt supra,
where the woman consents to the rauisher, for otherwise the woman her self
must pursue the Appeal, upon West. 2. cap. 34. for the father cannot have by
the Common Law, either Appeal of rape of his daughter, or of death, either of
son or Daughter: But it seems that by this Statute, if a woman be next heir
to her which is ravished, and consents, she may have an Appeal of rape
against the rauisher, as well as any procheuie heir male may. And learn, If a
woman which is ravished dye, and her husband takes another wife, whether he
may now have an Appeal or no. It is said, that if a Lord ravish his Nief, she
cannot have an Appeal of rape against him; but the King may punish it by way
of Indictment.

SECT. XXX. Within what time Appeals of Rape must be commenced.
BY Bracton, Si virgo sit corrupta and oppressa con^^^ pacem Domini Regis, she
ought to go straight way, D^^ idem factum recens est, and with ^ue and Cry
complain to the good men of the next town, showing her wrong her garments
torn, and (...) and then she ought to go to the chief* Cons^^ble, to the
Coroner, and to the Viscount, and at the next County to en er her Appeal, and
have it enro^led in the Coroners ^oll: and then day was to be given her, till
the coming of the Kings Justices, before whom she was again to re-intreat her
Appeal, and if she varied from the Coroners roll, she lost her suit. Bri^ton
tieth the commencement of this Appeal to forty days after the fact, agreeing
with West. 1. ^ap. 13. But by this Statute (says S^a^ford) rape was but
trespass, insomuch therefore, as it is since made felony by another Statute,
and no time limited, within which the suit shall be beg^n, it seems a woman
is at choice to bring it when she lists, so that she exceed not time
reasonable.

SECT. XXXI. Within what County Appeal of Rape shall be brought.
Appeal of rape must be brought within the County, where the rauishment was
committed, and if a man take a woman against her will in one County, and
leading or carrying her into another County he there rauisheth her, the
Appeal must be where the rauishment was committed: and though the Declaration
be, of taking in another County, yet the trial shall be only where the Writ
was brough, Titulo v^s^e, in Fi^zherbert 28. And it seems, that to speak of
the taking in another County* in a Declaration of Rape, is but surplussage and
more than needs, for it abates not the Count if it be left out. But perhaps
such a leaving out in Action of trespass, would abate the Writ, because the
Plaintiff is to recover* damages* for the taking in another County, and they
of the County where the Writ is brought, cannot assesse damages for the
taking: But in this Appeal there is nothing to be recovered, but only that
the off^nder s^ffer death for his offense.

SECT. XXXII. The Declaration in Appeal of Rape.
47. E. 3. fol. 14.
IS a good form of Declaration in this Appeal, where in a Writ of Appeal of
rape, the plaintiff counted, how she was in Gods peace and the Kings, such a
day, such a year, and in such a place, and the Defendant came feloniously, and
as a Feion against the Kings Crown and dignity, then and there did r^^i^^^er,
and carnally know her, and that she did pursue him from Town to Town, and
from County to County, till he was taken at her suit; and that A and B. were
at the same time and place in force and aid of the same Felon, etc. And if the
Def^ndant will this deny, she is ready to prove it, as the Court shall award,
that a woman ought.

But know that the several Statutes have made two several forms of Appeals
of rape, one upon the Statute of West. 2. and in that there needs ^^ mention of
any Statute. But in the other which is upon the Statute of Richard, the use is
always to recit^ the Statute in the Declaration, and that the words, Contra
formam statuti, implies sufficiently, that the woman has consented to the
rauisher.

SECT. XXXIII. Pleas to the w^it.
PLeas to the Writ may be many, as false ^atine, or want of ^or^^, or that the
Plaintisse has another Writ hanging, of the same fe^ony, as is s^ewed you
before ^^ the other Appeal. And 5. H. 6. Fol. 1. Exception was taken against
the Writ ^^ Appeal of ^ap^, because it was ad respo^dendum the Plaintiff
se^und^m formam sta^^ti, etc. Whereas it ought to have been, Vnde eum appellat
secundum formam statuti. Whereunto it was an^^dred, that the Statute of 6. ^.
1. gives not the Appeal, for that is by the Common Law, but he must answer
according to the Statute, which oute^h ^attaile; for the Statute says, Ad
duellum vadiandum non recipiatur and issint le brief bone.

Another exception was taken against the Writ, because it was not, felonice
rapuit, but the Defendant durst not stand upon it, but pleaded over, rien
culpable; for rapu^t imply^th felony. But in every Appeal of rape, if the
Writ want the word rapuit, it shall abate, though it have words amounting to as
much as car^^^^ter cognovit, or any such ^t^^e, 9. E. 4. ^ol. 26.

SECT. XXXIV. Pleas to the Action.
THough it be true, that where ^^^ shall be charged with rape in Appeals or
otherwise, it ^ust be by the Word rap^it, and ^^t carnaliter cognouit only,
yet by Bracton it is a g^^d plea in App^ale of rape to say, Non abstullt e^
^ucellagium^ suum, qu^a a^^u^h v^^go est* and ve^i^^^ probab^^u^ p^^ asp^c^^^
^o^po^i^, and pe^ quatuo^ legales fem^nas iurat^s de ve^itate dicenda, quaere.
Stamford says it is a good plea for the Defendant, though h^e lay with the
woman, yet he did not carnally know her, for the force of the Declaration
rests in that. And by ^^i^ton* fol. 45. If at the time of rape supposed, the
wom^n conceive child, there is no rape* for none can conc^^^e without consent.
Also by Bracton, it is a good plea, to say that before the rape supposed, he
kept the Plaintiff, and used her as his Concubine. But by the same Bracton, it
was no plea to say she was another man's Concubine, or Harlot, Quia licet
meret^^x fuerit a^ea, cer^^ ^^^c ^emporis non fuit, cu^ nequi^iae eius
reclamando consenti^e noluit.

And note, if she which is ravished, assen^ for fear of death at the time of
the rauis^^ent, ^t ^s a rape* against her will, notwithstanding such consent;
for assent must ^e voluntary, per curiam, 5* E. 4. Crompton, 44.

SECT. XXXV. A question what is meant by rauishment with force, in W^st. 2.
cap. 34.
STamford leaves it doubtful, and to be learned what the difference is
betwixt rauishment with force, and without force. M. Lambard thinks the word
to be but declaratorie, signifying all rauishment to be forcible. And it is
true, that no woman is ravished in this sort only by parroll, or influence of
Rhetoric. But in mine opinion, the Statute must needs intend two kind of
rauishments, because it makes one more odious than the other* and propounds
death inevitable to him which rauisheth with force, though the woman forgive
h^^, and cons^^^ to him. A more detestable villainy* I think, therefore was
meant in this parase, of him which being himself overcome with concupis^^nce,
overcomes a woman hand to hand, by length of breath, and strength of his own
sinews. You shall understand therefore, that about those days there was an
Appeal of ^or^e in use, as it were against the rauishers yeomen of the
stirr^p, vi^. against him or them which were holders, and assisters to the
principal carnal oppressor, as appears about the end of the 28. Chapter of
Bracton, Lib. 3. Eadem A. appellat C. quod eadem die eodem anno, etc. quo
praedict* B. and eadem hora dum idem B. abstulit pucellagium suum fuit idem C.
in fortia, ita quod tenuit eandem A. dum idem B. abs^ulit pucellagium suum, vel
concubuit cum ea, postquam, etc. Such fellows were termed appellati de fortia,
and they which take such Coadiutors, might very well be called rauishers with
force and aid, of all other most hateful, in judgment of all indifferent
honest women.

SECT. XXXVI. De muliere abducta cum bonis, etc.
THis Statute touches also the most covetous rauishment, that is, when a man's
wife and his goods are ravished together: so much against woman's mind, that
she is loath to leave either money or plate behind her, and because some men
used in those days, to let their goods go, lest otherwise they might perhaps
call their wives home again, the suit is given to the King, if the husband
neglect it, 44. Assi. p. 12. A man brought a Writ of trespass against a Knight
and his Lady, and two others in Bank le Roy, for taking away the Plainti^^es
wife, and his goods, and they all came by Capias in custody of the Viscount,
and the Plaintiff counted of rauishment of his wife, and his goods carried
away, etc. a protection was showed forth for the Knight and his wife, and
allowed, and Judgment was demanded of the Writ, because the Plaintiff and his
wife were divorced. Justice Kniuct said, that though the woman were dead, the
husband might have the Action of rauishment notwithstanding, and so is it if
they were divorced. For he was not to recover his wife by the Action, nor any
thing else, save damages for the trespass. Then it was said, the di^orce was
causa frigiditatis; Kniuet said, the weather might wax warmer with him, Il poet
recouerer son nature, and ouerer come home, and reauer sa feme; and therefore
answered to the Writ. Then Judgment was asked again of the Writ, because it
was against a man and his wife, and one woman cannot ravish another, sed non
allocatur; for a woman may be assenting or aiding to any rauishment, therefore
the Defendants pleaded non culpable. The very same, or very like case is
again, 23. E. 3. 23. See 21. H. 7. fol. 13. The opinion of Fin^ux, that it is
lawful for a man to travel with another man's wife to London, at her request,
and to carry her behind him, when she will ride to sue a divorce, or a
reuersment of Outlawrie, or for a warrant of the peace, against her goodman.
Yaxley was of contrary opinion. And where the party which takes another man's
wife, cum bonis, etc. is indicted at the Kings suit of trespass only, the
Indictment is, Quod vi and armis, Mariam vxorem cuiusdam A. B. apud S. rapuit,
and ^am cum bonis and cattallis, viz. etc. ipsius A. B. cepit and abduxit, and
^a ^idem A. B. adhuc unjust detinet, contra p^cem, etc. and contra formam
statuti, etc.

So likewise at the husbands ^^it the Writ is, Attachias B. quod sit coram
nobis, etc. ad respondendum prefato A. quare vi and armis vxorem prefati A.
apud N. rapuit, and ^am cum bonis and cattallis, etc. ad grave d^mnum, and
contra formam statuti, etc. as appears by Fitzherbert. So that you see the
differ^nce betwixt rapuit in Trespass, and in Appeal, or Indictment of
felony. Presidents whereof are in M. La^^bards Book, and M. Crompton^.

SECT. XXXVII. The case of Elizabeth Venor.
NOw that women may learn to stand upon their own guard partly, and not trust
altogether to defense, or courtesy of Laws, which are not more rigorously
penned, than sometime put in execution against them, let them mark^ this ca^e.
Lands were given in ^a^le to William Ve^or, and to Elizabeth his wife, and to
the heirs of their two bodi^s, the remainder to the said Elizabeth and the
heirs of her body, the remainder to Robert Babbington in tail, the remainder
to the right heir of T. S. father of Elizabeth. William Venor dyed without
issue, and Elizabeth being sole seized, was afterward ravished by John Worth,
which after that h^^ had married her, was indicted of rape, and took ^anctuarie
at Westminster, Elizabeth his wife being there with him, was advised to
disassent, and to part from him to save her inheritance, which she refused to
do, and was afterward brought before the Council in the Star Chamber; being
there demanded if she assented or not, and she answered, that John Worth was
her husband, and she would not forsake him, whereupon the issue of Robert
Babbington, ( Robert being dead) entered upon her land by the Statute of 6. R.
2. which wills (says ^rook^* if any woman assent to the rauisher, that he to
whom the land should descend, reuert, remain, or escheat may enter. And though
it were contessed, that there was another person, more near in blood to
Elizabeth than was this issue of Robert Babbington* yet because he was next in
remainder, his entry was lawful. But Eliz^beth did ^ust him, and h^^ brought
an Assise: Then to prove the assent, it was gi^en in ^uidence that she had
married him, assenting to him as well in Sanctuary, as before the Council.
And for Elizabeth* it was alleged, that the espo^sa^ and all the assentings
were by dures and force, and for fear of the rauisher, which might not be
called assenting, for none consents but frankly, voluntarily, and sans fear,
Quod videtur Lexibidem. But in the end, because she might have disagreed
before the Council, and did not, her assent was holden voluntary, and the
Assise passed for the Plaintiff. And it was agreed for Law, that if title of
entry into lands be given to a daughter by force of this Statute, and she
enters: that she shall retain and enjoy them, notwithstanding the birth of
any son Posthumus coming afterward, though he be more near, or worthy of
blood. And so it is generally where the entry is given by Statute: but if by
Common Law, adiscent be cast upon a daughter which enters, she must give
place to a son borne afterward. It was remembered in this case, that in former
time a woman being ravished, after she had continued seven years with the
rauisher, and had borne him a child, escaped from him, and sued in Parliament
in the time of H. 6. against him, till he was attainted. And being demanded how
she could now say, that she never assented, having conceived, etc. she
answered, that her flesh consented to him, but her soul and conscience did
ever abhor him, 5. E. 4. fol. 58.

SECT. XXXVIII. The Statute 18. Eliz. cap. 7.
I Am at the end of my voyage; but before I take shore I will show you how our
late most excellent Lawgiuer, renowned Queen Elizabeth, (whose vigilant care
has always been, that all her people might live under her in peace, and
without oppression) has given strength and perfection to the former functions
of other Princes, to make them a firm bulwark against all manner of iniurers
that possibly might oppress women; and I can but marvel, that when so
da^^abl^ a crime ^^ rape, had given so often to the whole Realm, such cause of
bitter complaint; and men in sundry ages, had beaten their brains so carefully
in finding out remedy against it: how it was possible, so long space together,
to lea^e such a privilege to him that could read the blessed Psalm^ of
Mi^erere, etc. that though he had ravished the fairest Lady in the Land, he
might almost go away without touch of breast for it. Therefore the eighteenth
of Queen Elizabeth, for repressing of felon^ous rapes, and rauishments of
women, and of felonious Burglaries, it was enacted that they which were found
guilty by verdict, or by confession, or outlawed of or for such felonious
Rapes or Burglarie, they should suffer death, and forfeit as in cases of Felony
had been used by the Laws of the Realm, without allowance of privilege, or
bene^^t of Clergy. Further, that they which were in other cases to have
benefit of Clergy, should immediately after burning in the hand, according to
the Statute in that case provided, be forthwith enlarged by the Justices* and
not be delivered to the Ordinary. But yet that the Justices* before whom the
Clergy shall be allowed, may detain such persons in prison for correction, as
long as they shall think convenient, so it be not above a year: Then because
in the fourteenth year of her Majesty's reign (as you may perceive in Die^,
fol. 304. in the case of a Scot which had ravished a girl^, being not past
seven years old, the Justices were in doubt whether rape could be of a child
of such tender years, not yet nine years old, and therefore they went not to
judgment of the Scot, though by evidence of diverse Matrons he seemed guilty,
this Statute ordains, that if any person, unlawfully and carnally, know and
abuse any woman child under age of ten years, every such unlawful and
carnal knowledge shall be felony, and the offender being duly convicted shall
suffer as a Felon, without allowance of Clergy. And as M. Lambard and M.
Crompton do both of them note, it is not material whether she consent or no,
for the Law ad^udgeth her unable to consent, at so tender age. The last prouiso
of this Statute is, that they which are admitted to their Clergy shall answer
to all other manner of felonies, whereof they have not formerly been acquitted,
convicted, attainted, or pardoned, as they should have done, if as Clerks
convicted they had been delivered to the Ordinary, and made their purgation.

SECT. XXXIX. The Statute 39. Eliz. cap. 9.
LAstly, because this exemption of Clergy was leuelled only against
Burglaries, and felomous rapes by violence, and of the antique Faulkoners
fashion, leaving unto covetous rautshers by abduction, and I might say by
insinuation, the benefit of their Book, by reason whereof diverse maids,
widows, and wives, had of veri^ la^^ days, been first carried away, and
then defiled, married, etc. It was enacted at the first Parliament, begun Ann.
39. of the late Queen Elizabeth, That whos^euet shall be convicted, or
attainted, of or for any offense made felony by the Act above specified, 3. H.
7. or which being indicted, or arraigned, of or for any such offense, shall
stand mute, or make no direct answer, or shall challenge peremptorily above the
number of twelve, shall in euer^^ such case suffer death, without benefit of
Clergy, provided that nothing in this Act contained, shall extend to take
Clergy from any person or persons, which ^^^ not either principals, or
procurors, or accessaries, before the offense committed.

SECT. XL. The Conclusion.
THus have I sailed betwixt the capes of Magna Charta, and Quadragesima of
Queen Elizabeth, collected the statutes principally belonging to women,
conioyning customs, cases, opinions, sayings, argumeuts, judgments, and
points of learning of like sort and subject, dispersed in our Law books: now
coming to take haven, God grant I may fall in at port Grace, and good
acceptance of all that shall read what I have gathered, they which are less
learned than my self in this study (which I account to be those, that have
but newly taken acquaintance of Littleton) may spend some t^me here, not
without some fruit and profit. They that are better learned than I, (into which
company some may crowd, that perhaps might be challenged of intrusion) will
give me no thanks for my pains. Rather I must thank them if they vouchsafe
to read them without open scorn and bitter censuring; but they to whom my
travels are chiefly addressed are women, so many as bear the title of honest
women, how good and virtuous soever they be, I s^e not how they can escape the
taint of ingratitude, if they give not a reasonable favor and applause to my
good intention and labor, whereby things behoouefull for them to know are laid
plain together, and in some orderly connection, which heretofore were
smoothered, or scattered in corners of an uncouth language, clean abstruded
from their sex. Which concealment, because it seemed to me neither just, nor
conscionable, I have framed this work, admonishing them not to take it for so
strong and substantial a pee^e as London bridge is, whereon you may boldly set
up great buil^ings; but I willsay to you, as Littleton said in his Tenures to
his son: There ^ee some things in these Books which are not Law, yet even
those may enable you the better to understand the reasons and arguments of Law,
and to confer and enquire what the Law is, amongst the sage Masters thereof.

FINIS.

