A LETTER from a Soldier of good place in Ireland, to his friend in London,
touching the notable Victory of her Majesty's Forces there, against the
Spaniards, and Irish Rebels:

And of the yielding up of Kynsale, and other places there held by the
Spaniards.

LONDON Imprinted for Simon Waterson. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful my especial good friend, Sir W. D. Knight.
SIr in my last of ye 19. of December I wrote to you at large of the arrival
of the new supply of Spaniards at Castel-haue^, Baltemore, and Beerhauen, and
of their intents and beginnings to fortify, in all those three important
places. Likewise that Sir Richard Leuison towing out of Kinsale Haven against
wind and weather, fought with them within Castle Haven most valiantly, and of
their ships being six, sunk and made unserviceable five: the men being most
landed before he could come to them, by reason of the weather, and beating
upon him very dangerously from the land with their ordinance. That they were
said to be 2000. in number, with great store of ordinance and munition, and
that as they reported, some thousand more were coming after. That a great part
of the Irishry of Mu^ster becommen Rebels of new, were revolted to them, and
received into ye King of Spaines pay. That Odonell with good Forces of horse
and foot out of the North, by the benefit of the then extreme and sudden
frost, gat passage almost unlooked for by himself, and slipping by the Lord
President of Munster (who was sent to impeach him) with such forces as could be
spared from the Army) was joined with them. That Tyrone, with O Rourck, Redman
Bourck, Mac Guyre, Mac Mahone, Randal Mac Surley, Oconor, Slygoes brother,
Tyrrel, the Baron of Lixenho, and the rest of the old fugitive Rebels of
Munster, with the greatest and choicest force that was ever amassed in Ireland,
were drawn nere our Camp. And that these all, together with six Ensigns of
those newly arrived Spaniards, in all to the number of 6000. foot, and 500
horse, by Powle, were on foot ready to march toward Kynsale and our Camp,
with intent and most assured confident hope with help of them in the Town,
which should have salyed out on the Camp, upon the attempt of Tyrone and
Odonell, and were above 2000. Spaniards, almost all old soldiers, as well to
relieve and rescue the Town, as to remove our siege, and utterly to break,
dishonor, and defeat us. And truly Sir, when I did then consider, on the one
side this great strength, the newly joined men and horses to be all fresh,
vigorous, and strong, having all the Country open to them, abounding with
victuals, forrages, armies, munition, and all furnitures: those in the Town,
the most of them experienced soldiers, well armed, and in no such want as was
supposed: On the other side, our men in numbers scant equal to them, all
almost tired and wearied out with the misery of a long Winters siege, our
horses decayed, lean and very weak, our best means of victuals and forage
likely to be cut from us, with many other impediments whereof I speak not;
When I say, I well wayed and pondred with my self these points, and laid
together withal, this one of great importance, that when we should be forced
(as it was likely) to answer two forces at once, one from the Town, another
without, a great part of our men were like enough to shrink, or at least not to
stick firmly to us (which by good conjectures I could make probable to you)
Blame me not, if upon these consideratio^s I wrote to you then somewhat
distrustfully of our estate, as taking indeed our lives and honors, this
service, and by consequence this whole Country likely to be put to an unequal
iumpe. And so may I well say they were, although by the goodness of GOD
especially, and by the most vigilant circumspection and valiant prowes of our
worthy General, things out of these difficulties have now sorted to so happy
success, as by that which follows you shall sufficiently perceive. To
continue therefore my accustomed Relation to you, and to begin from that said
day of the 19. of December, It may please you to know, that on Sunday the 20.
we still plying our attempts to the Town, with face and show as though we
nothing cared for Tyrone and his company, at night certain intelligence was
brought us, that he would be the next night within a mile and a half of us,
with all the above recyted Forces. And accordingly upon Monday the 21. toward
night, he showed himself with most part of his horse and foot, on a hill
between our Camp and Cork, a mile off us. At which time seeing two Regiments
of our foot, and some horse drawn out of our Camp, and making a resolute
march toward him, he fell back to the other side of the hill, where he
encamped that night, strengthened with a fastness of wood and water. Whereby
though his retire might be imputed to some touch of credit, yet had he this
advantage, that he might keep from our Army all passages and means for
forage: The other side over the River of Ownibuoye being wholly at his
disposition, by reason of the general revolt of those parts.

On Tuesday the 22. some of Tyrones horse and foot made show again in the
place where they had done the day before, and that night were some of their
horse, and 500. foot discovered, searching if they might find fit way to the
Town.

On Wednesday the 23. as well by intelligence otherwise, as by letters of Don
John d'l Aquila, General of the Spaniards, and Captain of the Town newly
intercepted, we found that he had importuned Tyrone and his company very much,
to give an attempt upon our Camp; inumating unto them his own necessity, and
likelihood to be shortly forced within the Town, their faithful promises to
succor him, the facility and undoubted success of the enterprise, he
assuring them, that our numbers could not be but much lessened, and those that
were remaining, greatly decayed and weakened with the long winter siege, so
that it was not possible we should be able to maintain so much ground as we
had taken when our strength was full, if they on the one side, and he on the
other put us well too it: which he for his part promised them assuredly to do
very soundly from the Town, whenever they should think fit to do the like
from their Camp. And it seems that upon this advise they took their
determinate resolution for this course, and to put it in execution with all
speed, either that night or the next at the furthest. Those of the Town in the
mean time gave us alarums, made Sallies, and did by all means what they could
to keep our men in continual travel, that they might be the less able for
resistance when this attempt should come to be performed. The Lord Deputy till
now applied himself in show wholly toward the Town, but indeed not meaning
any forceable effectual attempt upon it, till he saw what would become of
Tyrone and his Forces.

and therefore had an especial eye, by continual espiall, upon his
meanings, and lest sudden hurt should be taken from him, or the Town, if
both he without, and they within should invade at once, he made Fortes and
Barracadoes, heightened the ditches, deepened the Trenches, stopped and
strengthened all the Auenues to the Town, had the whole Army in a readiness
upon every sudden warning, and kept strong and watchful guardes always in
all places. And now late in the night of this Wednesday, the three and
twentieth day, being assuredly enfourmed of their intent of attempt upon his
Camp that night, or the morrow after, his Lo. gave order to strengthen the
ordinary guards, and to put the rest of his Army in readiness, but not as yet
into Arms: commanding that the Regiment volant, which was a squadron of viii.
Companies of foot, selected out of all the old Bands, conducted by Sir Hen.
Poor, and appointed to be always in a readiness to answer all Alarames, and
therefore exempted from all other duties, should draw out beyond the west part
of the Camp, and there stand in Arms, not far from the maine guard of horse.

A little before the break of day Sir Ric. Greame, who had the guard of horse
that night, sent the Lo. Deputy word, that the skowts had discovered the
rebels matches in great numbers, whereupon his Lo. caused the Army presently to
arm, and 300. choice men to be drawn out of the quarter, where the Earl of
Thomond and 3. other Regiments lay, to make stand between that quarter, and
the Fort upon the west hill, himself with Sir George Carow, Lo. President of
Munster, Sir Richard Wingfield, marshall of Ireland, advanced forward toward
the skowt, and having given order to Sir Hen. Dauers Liuetennant general of
the horse, for the ordering of those troops, sent the Marshall, to take view
of the Enemy, who sent word he was advanced horse and foot near the top of
the hill, where the Earl of Thomond first quartered, within less then 2.
musket shot of the town. Whereupon the Lo: deputy calling to him sir Oliver
Lambert Governor of Connaught, who being there without Charge, was commanded
to attend his Lo. that day, made choice of a piece of ground beetweene that and
the town, of good advantage, both to embattel, and fight, as having on the
back a Trench drawn from the Earl of Thomonds quarter, and so secured from
the Town: And on the front, a boggish glyn passable with horse only at one
foord: The ground whereon the Enemy must have drawn in gross to force the
passage flanckfered from the Earls quarter by the canon, and situate in the
midst of allour Forces, and returned word to the Marshall, that in that place
he was resolved to give the Enemy battle, if he came forward: commanding
further, the Regiment of Sir H. Folya^ and three old Companies of the Regiment
of Sir Oliver Saint-Iohn to be brought thither, the rest of the Army being al
ready in Arms, together with five hundred Seamen, brought by Sir Richard
Leueson to attend, when, and what, he should command.

But Tirone, whose meaning over night, was, to have been with us before day,
and as we since learned, to have put all the Spaniards into the Town, with
viii. hundred of the best Irish under Tirrell seeing it now fair day light,
and discovering the Marshall and Sir Hen: Dauers to be advanced with all the
horse, and Sir Hen: Poer with his Regiment, stopped at the foot of the hill, and
anon, thinking it to be no day for him, retired the Troops he had advanced
again, to the body of his Army beyond the Foord. Presently the Marshall sent
the Lord Deputy word, that the Enemy retired in some disorder, whereupon his
Lo: commanding the forenamed troops to follow him with all speed, advanced
himself into the head of al, to see with his own eye, the manner of the enemy,
and in what sort thereupon he might determine to proceed. But before he could,
either well view, or direct, a violent storm, during some quarter of an hour,
gave the enemy opportunity, not yet perfectly disconered, to draw off over a
plain in three great bodies of foot, all their horse in the Rere, and the
wings with all their other loose men fallen up into the head. Which the L.
Deputy, the day now clearing, perceiving and dicsouering, by this their
disorderly March, that they were in fear, being certified also, that there was
not before them any place of so good advantage to make head on, as those they
had passed and quited, resolved to follow, and to see what profit might be made
of an enemy thus troubledly retiring. Whereupon dispatching presently Sir Geo.
Carew, Lo. President of Munster with three cornets of horse back to the Camp,
to attend there against the Town, and whatsoever other attempt, because he was
to be the fittest Commander in his Lo. absence, and because there had
otherwise no horses been left in the Camp, himself having with him, in all,
between three and four hundred horse, and under 1200. foot, made after the
Enemy. And advancing some mile further on, pressed him so hard, that he was
forced to stand firm in three bodies upon a foorde of a bogge (which bogge to
assail them, we must of necessity pass) and in all appearance, with a
Resolution there to abide us and fight. They maintained a good skirmish on our
side the Bogge, with their loose wings, newly drawn out of their bodies, and
hurt some of our men and horses, till with our wings they were at length beaten
back.

The Marshall being somewhat aduau^nced, espied a Foord, a musket shot off on
the left hand, neglected by their foot, and only guarded by their horse:
whereof aduertising the Lord Deputy, with desire of leave to force them that
way: the Lord Deputy approouing it, and commanding to draw up draw up the
foot with all expedition, the first wings of foot once arrived, seconded with
sir Henry Poers regiment, the Marshall, with the earl of Clanricard, who never
ceased urging to fight, taking with them sir Richard Greame, and other
companies of horse: with them, and those foot, forcing the enemies horse that
kept the passage, passed over, and with that advantage, finding themselves side
by side with the enemies battle, and further on then their rere, charged their
battle in flank, but finding them to stand firm, wheeled about. At which the
enemies taking courage, drew on their horse, with a cry to a charge, who came on
bravely within fifty or sixty paces of our horse, and there after their
country fashion stopped, shaking their staves, and railingly vaunting, but
durst charge no further. Which the Lord Deputy seeing, sent presently over the
Foorde to them his own cornet of horse, under sir William Godolphin, and the
Lord Presidents cornet under Captain Minshow, (which two cornets he had
appointed before, to keep still a gross in the Rere, to answer all accidents)
together with two af our three bodies of foot under sir John Barkeley Seriant
mayor of the Camp. Whereupon the Marshall and Earl of Clanrickard seeing a
second at hand, uniting themselves with Sir Henry Dauers, having with him
Captain Taffe, Captain Flemming, and other companies of horse, charged again
the Enemies horse, who not abiding the shocke, fled. At the sight whereof,
the battle dismaying, our men thought it better to charge again upon them,
then to follow the horse, and so coragiously doing, utterly brake them. The
rereward of the Enemy, in which was Tyrrell, and all the Spaniards, stood
firm upon the bogge on the right hand, unto whom, within caliuer shot, the
Lord Deputy had drawn up our Rere, which was Sir Oliver Saint John's 3.
companies, commanded by Captain Roe, in absence of sir Oliver, (dispatched few
days before by the Lord Deputy, and Counsel, for special affairs to her
Majesty) charging him first, not to stir, till he received direction from him.
But seeing Tirrell, and the Spaniards drawing between our horse, being on the
execution, and the bodies of our foot, his Lo. having hitherto, by direction,
set al other men's swords on work, himself now in the head of our said Rere,
where he had before resolved to fight, charged the Enemy in flancke, and put
them to a disorderly retreite after their fellows to the top of the next
hill, where they made stand a little while. But the Irish quiting the
Spaniards, the Spaniardes in short time were broken by the Lord Deputies horse,
commanded by sir William Godolphin, and most of them slain. The vantgarde of
the Enemy, with all the loose wings, which were many, seeing what happened,
threw away their arms (and all our men being otherwise busy) escaped. The
chief Commander of the Spaniards, Don Alonso d'Ocampo was taken prisoner,
with three Captains, six Alferrez, and forty soldiers. Tirone, and Odonell,
with the rest of the Irish Lords, ran apace, and saved themselves. Those of the
battle were almost all slain, and there were (of the Irish Rebels only)
found dead in the place, about twelve hundred bodies, and about eight hundred
were hurt, whereof many dyed that night: and the chase continuing almost two
miles, was left off, our men being tired with killing. The Enemy lost two
thousand Arms brought to reckning, besides great numbers imbezeled, al their
powder and drums, and ix. ensigns, whereof 6. Spanish. Those of the Irish
that were taken prisoners, being brought to the Camp, though they offered
ransom, were all hanged. On our side, only one man was slain, the Cornet of
sir Richard Greame. Sir Henry Dauers was hurt with a sword slightly: sir
William Godolphin a little raced on the thigh with a holbert, Captain Crofts
the Skowt-master with a shot in the back, and not above six more common
soldiers hurt. Many of our horses were killed, and more hurt. And thus were
they utterly overthrown, who but the very night before, were so brave and
confident of their own good success, as that they reckoned us already theirs,
and as we since have understood, were in contention whose prisoner the Lord
Deputy should be, whose the the Lord President, and so of the rest. The Earl
of Clanrickard carried himself this day very valiantly, and after the retreite
sounded, was Knighted by the Lord Deputy, in the field amongst the dead
bodies. So did all the rest of the Captains, Officers, and Soldiers, named
and unnamed, and especially the Lo. Deputy himself, who brake, in person, upon
the flower of the army the Spaniards, and omitted no duty of a wise diligent
Conductor and valiant soldier. Upon the fight ended, he presently called
together the Army, and with prayers, gave God thanks for the victory. A
victory indeed given by the God of Hosts, and marvelous in our eyes, if all
circumstances be duly considered, and of such consequence for the preservation
and assurance to her Majesty, of this deeply endangered kingdom, as I leave
to wiser consideration, contenting my self with this, that I see the God of
power and might, disposed to protect the just cause of his servant, our
gracious Queen Elizabeth, against the pride, malice, and powerful disdain of
the greatest potentates, her enemies. To him be the glory.

After this glorious victory thus valiantly achieved, the Lord Deputy the
same day hasted to his camp, lest any thing (in his absence) might happily
have been attempted there. But, not finding the Ennemy to have made any sally,
which indeed had been but vain for him, considering the small fruit he
reaped by them heretofore, every one that he made hitherto redounding still to
his own detriment and loss, and every place of our Camp, at this time, being
so well and sufficiently strengthened and provided for against him as is said
before.

The next day his Lordship commanded Captain Bodlegh Trench-maister general
of the Camp, who as well in the fight, as in the works, had deserved special
commendation, to see the formerly begun Forte and platforms, to be undertaken
again, and nearer approches to be cast out toward the town. But after five
or six days labor Don John d' lAquila, captain of the Town and Forces
within, offered a parlee, sending the Drum mayor of the Town with a sealed
letter to the Lord Deputy, by which he required, that some gentleman of
special trust and sufficiency might be sent into the town from his Lordship,
to confer with him, whom he would acquaint with such conditions, as he then
stood upon. His Request being assented unto by his Lordship, sir William
Godolphin was employed in the negotiation, which was carried in this forte,
word for word, as it is taken out of the originalls here, viz.

Don John told sir William, that having found the Lord Deputy (whom he termed
the Viceroy) although a sharp and powerful, yet an honorable Enemy, and the
Irish, not only weak and barbarous, but (as he feared) perfidious friends,
he was so far in his affections reconciled to the one, and distasted with the
other, as did inuit him to make an ouerture of such a composition as might be
safe and profitable for the State of England, with least prejudice to the
Crown of Spain, by delivering into the Viceroy his power, the Town of
Kynsale, with all other places in Ireland, held by the Spanish, so as they
might depart on honorable terms, fitting such men of war, as are not (by
necessity) enforced to receive conditions, but willingly induced, for just
respects to dis-ingage themselves, and to relinquish a people, by whom their
King and Master had been so notoriously abused, (if not betrayed.) That if the
Viceroy liked to entertain further parley touching this point, he would first
be pleased to understand them rightly, and to make his propositions such as
might be suitable, to men thoroughly resolved, rather to bury themselves alive,
and to endure a thousand deaths, then to give way to one Article of accord,
that should taste of baseness or dishonor, being so confident of their present
strength, and the royal Second of Spain, that they should make no doubt of
yielding good account of themselves and their Interest in this Kingdom, but
that a just disdain, and spleen conceived against the nation, dissuaded them
from being further engaged for it, then of force they must, Sir Will. Godolphin
being commanded by the L. Deputy only, to receive Don John's propositions and
demamaunds. Having made his L. and Counsel this Relation, was by them returned
with the answer following. That howbeit the Lord Deputy having lately
defeated their succors, did so well understand his own strength and their
weakness as made him nothing doubt of forcing them within a short time, whom
he did know to be pressed with irresistable difficulties, how much soever they
labored to cover and conceal the same, yet knowing that her sacred Majesty
out of her gracious and merciful disposition would esteem the glory of her
victory to be blemished by a voluntary effusion, and an obstinate expense of
Christian blood, was content to entertain this offer of agreement, so as it
might be concluded, under such honorable articles for her highness as the
advantage she had against them gave reason to demand: being the same which
are set down in the Articles of agreement following, signed by the Lord
Deputy, and Don John and others: saving that there was in them besides, the
leaving of his treasure, munition, artillery, and the Queens natural Subjects
to her disposicion, all which points he did peremptorely refuse, with constant
asseueracion that both he and all his would rather endure the last of misery
then be found guilty of so foul a Treason against the honor of his Prince and
the reputacio^ of his profession, though he should find himself unable to
subsiste, much more now, when he might not only hope to sustain the burden
of the war for a time, but with patience and constancy in the end to
overcome it. That he took it so ill, to be misunderstood in having Articles
of that nature propounded unto him, as were they but once again remembered in
the Capitulacion, the Viceroy should from thencefoorth use the advantage of his
sword and not the benefit of his former offers: adding, that the Viceroy might
rather think to have made a good and profitable purchase for the Crown of
England, if with the expense of 200000 Ducats he had procured Don John to
quite his interest and footing but in Baltymore alone, to say nothing of
Kynsale, Castell-hauen, and Beerehauen: for (said he) suppose that all we with
the rest of our places here had perished, yet would that Pen Insula (being
strong in it own nature, bettered by our art and industry, provided as it is
of victuals, munition, and good store of Artillery) preserve unto the King of
Spain a safe and commodious port for the arrival of his Fleet, and be able
to mayntaine it self against a land Army of ten thousand, until Spain
(being so deeply engaged) did in honor relieve the^: which would draw on a
more powerful invasion then the first, being undertaken upon false grounds,
at the instance of a base and barbarous people, who in discovering their
weakness and want of power, have armed the King my Master to rely upon his
own strength, being tied in honor to relieve his people that are engaged, and
to cancel the memory of our former disaster. But this was spoken (said he) in
case the Viceroy were able to force this town, as I assure my self he cannot,
having upon mine Honor within these walls at this instant, above two thousand
fighting men, that are strong and able, besides those, which having been sick
and hurt, recover daily: the greatest part of these, composed of old Soldiers,
which fall not but by the sword, and those that were new, being now both
trained to their Arms and grown acquainted with the Climate, are more able to
endure then at the first: our means as good as they have been any times
these two months, such as the Spaniardes can well away withal, and thereof to
suffize us for three months more. We lodge in good warm houses, have store of
munition, and (which is best of all) stand well assured that our succors will
be shortly here. To be plain, we preserve our men, and reserve our strength
the best we may, hoping to front you in a breach, which if our hearts fail us
not, we have hands and breasts enough to stop against treble your forces:
though I will give the Viceroy this right, That his men are passing good, but
spent and tired out with the misery of a Winter siege, which he has obstinatly
maintained beyond my expectacion, but with such caution, and upon so good
guard, as having nicely watched all aduauntages, I could never fasten a Sallie
yet upon him, but with loss to my self: wherein I must acknowledge my hopes
deceived, that grounding on some error in his approches, promised my self the
defeat of at least a thousand men at one blow. But when we meet on the
breach, I am confident on good reason, to lay five hundred of your best men on
the earth, and rest hopeful that the loss of those will make a great hole in
an Army that has already suffered so much extremity.

But to conclude our business, the king my Master sent me to assist the
Condees, Oneale and Odonnell, presuming on their promise, that I should have
joined with them within few days of the arrival of his forces. I expected
long in vain, sustained the Viceroyes Army, saw them drawn to the greatest
head they could possibly make, lodged within two miles of Kynsale, reenforced
with certain companies of Spaniards, every hour promising to relieve us, and
being joined together to force your camps, saw them at last broken with a
handful of men, blown asunder into diverse parts of the world, O Donnell into
Spain, Oneale to the furthest of the North, so as now I find no such Condees
in rerum natura (for those were the very words he used) as I came to join
withal, and therefore have moved this accord, the rather to disingage the King
my Master from assisting a people so unable in themselves, that the whole
burden of the war must lie upon him, and so perfidious, as perhaps might be
induced in acquitall of his favor, at last to betray him. Upon relation made
by Sir William Godolphin to the Lord Deputy and Council, of these offers of
Don John, which at several conferences had been brought to such heads, as are
spoken of before: it was thought good, for diverse important reasons, to
proceed roundly to the agreement. For whereas in the propositions by him made;
there was not any thing that admitted exceptions on our part, but only, that
he required to carry with him his ordinance, munition, and treasure, that
being no way prejudicial to the maine scope or drift of our Treaty, which
cheefely respected the common good and safety of the kingdom, deserved not
almost to be thought upon. Besides that, the Treasure being at the first but a
hundred thousand Ducats, with four months payment of so many men, and other
necessary deductions, could not but be very near wasted; and that little
remaynder, more fit for a prey to the poor soldier, after his tedious
travel, than for a clause in the composition. Furthermore, how needful it was
to embrace this accord, may clearly be seen by whosoever considers the
state of our Army, almost utterly tired: how full of danger and difficulty
it was to attempt a breach defended by so many hands: how long time it might
have cost us, if we had lodged in the Breach, before we could have carried
the Town, it being full of strong castles: how her Majesty's ships and others
lying in the harbor, should have been forced speedily to forsake us for want
of victuals: how by a long contrariety of winds, our selves were not provided
for above six days, at the time of this parley, though within few days
after good store arrived: it being indeed worthy of observation, that by her
Majesty's great care, and the diligence of her ministers, so good providence
was used, as, though this descent of Spaniards drew into that quarter all the
forces of the kingdom which could be spared, all which were only to live by
provision out of England; notwithstanding all the difficulties of
transportation, in so unseasonable a time, no notorious wants were found in the
Army, but that which is inseperable from a Winter siege, in that Climate: that
we had neither munition nor Artillery left but for one battery in one place
at once, five of our pieces being before crazed: and finally, that if we had
missed of our purpose, the whole country had been hazarded. Furthermore, that
which seems of greatest consequence to induce his Lordship to this agreement,
was: That the Spaniards in Baltymore Castle-hauen and Beerehauen, by virtue of
this contract were likewise to surrender those places, and depart the country,
which would have proved a matter of more difficulty, and have drawn on a
long war in a corrupted kingdom, to root them out, being strongly fortified
and well stored with victuals, munition, and artillery, for that of necessity
the Army for some space, must have rested, and in the end have been
constrained after a new supply of al necessaries, to her Majesty's
intolerable charge, to transport themselves thither by sea, the way by land
being altogether vnpassbale. In which time, their succors out of Spain in all
likelihood, would have been come unto them, the king being so far engaged in
his honor to second his enterprise, and we barred of that prosecution of the
Rebels, which now by this Agreement we may wholly entend.

The Treaty therefore was thus concluded, as by the Articles ensuing, signed
on both parts, appears.

Mountioye.
IN the town of Kynsale, in the kingdom of Ireland, the second day of the
month of January, 1601, between the noble Lords, the Lord Mountioye, Lord
Deputy, and General in the kingdom of Ireland, for her Majesty the Queen of
England, ^and Don John d'L Aquila, Captain and Campe-maister, General and
Governor of the Army of his Majesty the king of Spain, the said Lord
Deputy being encamped, and besieging the said town, and the said Don John
within it, for just respects, and to avoid shedding of blood, these conditions
following were made between the said Lords Generals, and their camps, with
the Articles which follow.

First, That the said Don John d'L Aquila shall quit the places which he holds
in this kingdom, as well of the town of Kynsale, as those which are held by
the soldiers under his command in Castle-hauen, Baltymore, and in the castle at
Beerhauen, and other parts, to the said Lord Deputy, or to whom he shall
appoint: giving him safe transportation, and sufficient for the said people,
of Ships and victuals, with the which the said Don John with them may go for
Spain, if he can at one time, if not, in two shippings.

Item that the Soldiers at this present being under the command of Don John,
in this Kingdom, shall not bear arms against her Majesty the Queen of
England, whersoeuer supplies shall come from Spain, till the said soldiers be
unshipped in some of the Ports of Spain, being dispatched as soon as may be
by the Lord Deputy, as he promises upon his faith and honor.

For the accomplishing whereof the Lord Deputy offers to give free passeport
to the said Don John and his army, as well Spaniards as other nations whatsoever
that are under his command, and that he may depart with all the things he
has, Arms, Municions, Money, Ensigns displaied, Artillery and other
whatsoever provisions of war, and any kind of stuff, as well that which is in
Castlehauen, as Kynsale and other parts.

Item that they shall have ships and victuals sufficient for their money,
according and at the prices which here they use to give. That all the people and
the said things may be shipped if it be possible at one time, if not, at two:
and that to be within the time above named.

Item that if by contrary winds or by any other occasions there shall ariue at
any Port of these kingdoms of Ireland or England, any ships of these in
which the said men go, they be entreated as friends, and may ride safely in
the harbor, and be victualed for their money, and have moreover things which
they shall need to furnish the^ to their voyage.

Item, during the time that they shall stay for shipping, victuals shall be given
to Don John's people, at just and reasonable rates.

Ite^, that of both parts shall be cessation of arms, and security that no wrong
be offered any one.

Item, That the Ships in which they shall go for Spain may pass safely by
any other Ships whatsoever of her Majesty the Queen of England: and so shall
they of the said Queen and her Subjects by those that shall go from hence:
and the said Ships being arrived in Spain, shall return as soon as they
have unshipped their men without any impediment given them by his Majesty, or
any other person in his name, but rather they shall show them favor, and
help them if they need any thing, and for security of this, they shall give
into the Lord Deputies hands Three Captains such as he shall choose.

For the security of the perfourmance of these Articles, Don John offers
that he will confirm and swear to accomplish this Agreement: and likewise
some of the Captains of his charge shall swear and confirm the same in a
several writing,

Item that he in person shall abide in this Kingdom where the Lord Deputy
shall appoint till the last shipping upon his Lordshippes word: and if it
happen that his people be shipped all at once, the said Don John shall go in
the same Fleet without any Impediment given him. But rather the Lord Deputy
shall give a good Ship in which he may go, and if his said men be sent in
two shippinges, then he shall go in the last.

And in like sort the said Lord Deputy shall swear and confirm, and give
his word in the behalf of her Majesty the Queen and his own, to keep and
accomplish this Agreement, and jointly the Lord President, the Lord Marshall of
the Camp, and the other of the Council of State, and the Earls of Thomond and
Clanrykard shall swear and confirm the same in a several writing.

J promise and swear to accomplish and keep these Articles of Agreement, and
promise the same likewise on the behalf of his Majesty Catholic the King
my Master. Don John d'l Aquila. George Carew. Thomond. Clanrikard. R.
Wingfeild. To. Gardemor. Geo. Bourcher. Rich. Liueson.


And so is this troubled Cloud, of most likely perilous danger for this time
dissolved, to her Majesty's most singular renown; Not so much for the glory
of the event, as for her own Magnanimity and Princely resolution, to leave
nothing undone which might preserve that Crown, how dear so ever it cost her;
to the great honor of our General, Leaders, and Soldiers by land and Sea
Actors therein, who, if it be well considered, that after the Enemies arrival
xxviij. September, it was xxvi. October before they could get all things ready
to sit down nere the Town: xxix. October before their Ordinance could play,
And that by j. November. they had gotten Ricorren castle, And then vij.
November were driven shrewdly to diminish their strength by sending the L.
President from them with two Regiments of foot and 325 horses against Odonell,
That he returned not till xxv. November, his Companies 26. And then that the
Supplies of Spain were landed. That the most of our shipping that did us
special service were gone toward them, That Odonell was already come, Tyron
shortly after, and xx. December all in sight: 24 beaten: That xxxj. December
the Parley begun, ij. January the Articles were sworn: ix. the Town
yielded. These things (I say) considered, it cannot be thought they spent any
idle time, as by the Iournals also which I sent you heretofore does
particulerly appear. Nay, let it be duly considered indeed, that the Town
though not regulerly fortified after the modern sort, yet was of strong
situation, well walled, and rampierd of the old fashion, and apt to receive
fit fortification, which the Enemy by his skill and leisure had given it, both
within the Town and without, as being accounted of great knowledge in
fortification, and having been a Month in it before our men could come near
much to molest him. And it may rather be maruailed, ye such an Enemy with
such a Company, so provided, not being constrained by sickness, famine, or
other defect of provision, and expecting shortly (as himself terms it) a
Royal supply from Spain, should so soon yield up, not only it, but the
other Castles, and that of Baltymore especially so important, so strong, so
fournished to hold so long out, as by his own acknowledgement appears
before. Well, going they are with ye loan of ordinary vessels which they also
pay for: for whom yea and almost for any enemy of less quality than these,
all ancient estate wisdom would have advised to have made and given them a
goulden bridge to pass over, rather than they should have stayed longer upon
any Condition, much less upon doubtful hope of a small contemptible pillage
to have been gotten of them, which must needs also have been bought with
much blood, and with what further Charge and hazard to the main, God knows.
And howsoever any particular humor may take it, I think Don John (all
Circumstances considered) did advisedly for his King to leave it: And for our
part I take it a Service to have been most honorably performed, with
singular evident profit, and all probability of certain future security to
our Prince and Country, and that otherwise it cannot be conceived off, of any
that will indifferently judge. The proof whereof by the fruit begins here
presently to appear, by the diminishing of her Majesty's Charge, daunting of
the Rebels, quiet, comfort, and encouragement of the good, and before dismayed
Subject, and will (I doubt not) but be generally felt with you there, by
sparing your men and monneys, and putting you out of fear hereafter, of your
and our, and all Englands potent Enemy for his further attempting this way.
And this for this of the late victory and yielding of the Town, which is my
purposed task unto you at this time. As for that which was done from the first
landing of the Spaniards till the fight, I refer you to the Iournals sent you
before. And for the general course of the noble Lord Deputies whole
proceedinges in this Land, since his first arrival here, I leave it to others
to be treated of more at large hereafter, only this I will now say in
general, let it be but without humor iudicially considered, in what estate
he found this Land, and to what he has now brought it, and there is none so
vnindifferently affected, but must be forced to confess, Quantum mutatus ab
illo! And here I end my object of the fight, and yielding of the Town, and
whole quiting of all the Inuadors, with Salmacida Spolia, an unbloody victory
of our part, most befitting a Virgin Queen, and a Bacheler General. And so
do betake you to the Almighty. At Corcke this 13 of January, 1601.

Your assured at command. I. E.


