Ariosto's SATYRS, IN SEVEN FAMOVS DIScourses, showing the State,

1 Of the Court, and Courtiers. 2 Of Liberty, and the Clergy in general. 3
Of the Roman Clergy. 4 Of Marriage. 5 Of Soldiers, Musicians, and Lovers. 6
Of Schoolmastrs and Scholars. 7 Of Honor, and the happiest Life.
In English, by Garuis Markham.

LABOR ET CONSTANTIA


LONDON Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Roger Iackson, dwelling in Fleet Street,
near the great Conduit. 1608.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, the virtuous, with their own, having always regard to an
others good, do painfully bestow hours, days, and years, to make that easy
to others, which they with great labor have obtained; in their places, using
all means, to reclaim all persons, from all manner vices, and to furnish them
with such gifts of grace, as make the possessors all jointly happy. From the
man of experience, which has learning and wisdom, thou may be sure to
receive good instruction. I know my self unable to give the Author of this
book, his due commendation: if I were, and did, yet should I seem to some, to
flatter, to others not to have said enough: wherefore for thy contentment, let
this suffice thee, the author had his education with the learned, his living
among the greatest concourse of people, and his life unreprovable. For his
gifts, the world has already had sufficient experience, in that famous work
of Orlando Furioso. Whosoever thou art, I dare assure thee, thou may in this
discourse (as in a glass) see thy present estate, and so not miss to judge
rightly of thy end. In reading thou shall find pleasure, both in the matter
and form; by considerng thou shall be able to instruct thy self and others;
but by practicing as thou ought, thou shall find settled happiness. Let the
example of others be thy instruction, to fly that evil which has bin their
overthrow, and to embrace that good which was their advancement. Be thankful
first to God, then to the author, and lastly to thy Countryman, who for thy
sake, without any other recompense, has taken the pains in most exquisite
manner, to be thy interpreter.

Vale.
The argument of the whole work, and the reasons why Lodouico Ariosto writ
these Seven Satyrs.
THE reasons why Master Lodouico Ariosto writ these seven Satyrs, so much
renowned and esteemed amongst all the Italians, were grounded upon these five
principles or discontentments.

First, the Poet being given wholly unto his book and study, was in the
twentieth year of his age (at what time he began to write his Oriando Furioso)
entertained into the service of Don Hypolito, Cardinal of Esta, a great
favorer of learning and good wits; where he continued certain years at his
study, being employed by his Lord in many matters of great importance, until
this strange accident happened, which was the first occasion why he fell into
disgrace with his Lord and master; and this it was.

The Cardinal Hypolito Master unto Ariosto, falling in love with a young Lady
his kinswoman (who for her own part was no less in amored of Don Iulio the
natural brother unto the Cardinal) she confessed unto him, that the only
thing which occasioned her (above all other) to affect his brother, was the
sweet aspect and beauty of his eyes; upon which the Cardinal grew into so
great a hatred against his own brother, that by jealousy turning his love
into too violent fury, he set espialls over Don Iulio when he should go out of
the town on hunting, and set upon him with a company of villains, whom the
Cardinal commanded in his own presence to thrust out the eyes of his brother,
because they only were the choice companions of his love; an act no less
infamous to the Cardinal, then intolerable to all humane government.
Whereupon the Cardinal to escape all punishment that might happen to be
inflicted upon him, he presently fled to Agria a City in Hungary, whereof
he was Archbishop, and lived there until the death of Iulio the second then
Pope of Rome, to avoid his fury, who was much incensed against him. And
because Ariosto would not follow him thither, as other of his servants in his
rank did, he took it maruellously ill at his hands, and casting him from
favor upon so slight an occasion, gave the Poet a ground for his invention.

The second cause of his coffeehouse was, that he being of very familiar and
inward acquaintance with the Medices of Florence, of which family two were
Popes in his time, the one Leo the tenth, the other Clement the seventh, both
which he followed in good will, and stood them in great stead as well when
they were banished their country, as when they lived as private men in their
own city: but when he saw his expectation was deceived, and that he found
them not so ready to requite his service as himself imagined he had (and that
rightly) deserved, he gave them over quickly, and left the Roman Court,
retyring himself to live privately in Florence. For above all things he loved
not to dance long attendance at the Court for any preferment, neither would he
be bound (longer then he pleased) unto any man, although he might have had
never so much, he prizing his liberty at so high a rate, as he esteemed the
same more then the best Cardinals hat in Rome, as himself in his second Satyr
affirms more plainly.

The third cause which made him passionate, was this: his father dying, left
him a great charge and very little living, there being five brothers of them,
and as many sisters (besides his old mother) all which lay upon his hands to
provide for them; which was no small corsiue unto him, to be troubled with so
many worldly businesses, he being given by nature to ease and to sit quietly
at his book; and this grieved him so much, as oftentimes he was giving over
his study clean, meaning to follow the world another while, had it not been
that he was persuaded to the contrary by a gentleman a d^are friend and kinsman
of his, whom he dearly loved, called Pandolfo Ariosto, whose death afterward
he very much lamented.

The fourth cause of coffeehouse was, he was much galled with the love of
women, whereunto he was a little too much given, it being a venial sin
amongst the Italians; yet is he the rather to be pardoned, in that he often
confesses his fault, and shows himself to be sorry for the same, wishing
that he could have amended it: and also because he devoted himself unto the
service of such as were honorable, as was that most fair and virtuous widow
descended of the noble family of the Lapi in Florence, as he himself
testifies in one of his Canzons, in which he celebrateth the beauties and
honors of his Mistrisse, setting down therein the time when, and the place
where he first was inamored of her; which was in Florence, in the year 1513.
upon Saint John Baptist day in June: at what time the Florentines under the
conduct of their chief Captains, Julian and Peter di Medices did solemnize
many great feasts, and presented diverse rich shows and plays before the
people, in honor of their brother Leo the tenth, who then was newly chosen
Pope. But after Cardinal Hypolito dyed, Alfonzo Duke of Ferrara allured
Ariosto by all the means he could unto his Court, offering him great offices
and preferments to have served him in ordinary, but he loving his liberty more
then any treasure refused his proffer, and yet not altogether in such sort, but
that in some fashion he was content to retain unto him. Again, had he been
given to have sought wealth and to have heaped riches together, he could no way
have been without them for diverse great Princes being willing to have had him
live in their Courts with them, made tender of many great pensions unto him,
but he accepted of none: only he was content to offer his service (as I said
befor^e) to the aforesaid Duke Alfonso, whom he chose rather for country sake,
and of mere love to the place wherein he was borne, then for any great gain
or promotion which he expected.

Fifthly and lestly to conclude, he wrote these Satyrs in Cardinal Hypolytoes
time, and whilst he continued with Alfonso Duke of Ferrara; who amongst other
favors done unto him, made him president or lieutenant of acountry called
Grassignana (subject unto his Dukedom) but because the people were very
facticus and the country rebellious, and therefore he troubled over much with
them, he took small pleasure in that government, but rather mightily
complains thereof, as is to be seen in the fourth and seventh Satyr:

He was borne in Anno 1474: in the Castle of Reggio, which stands in
Lumbardy, his father at that time being governor thereof: He dyed of a pain
he had in his stomach, and was buried in Saint Bennets Church in Ferrara,
having a fair monument of marble with his statue placed thereupon, and an
Epytaph which a gentleman a friend of his bestowed upon him.

The first Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows what qualities such men ought to have, who go about to purchase
credit and wealth in the Courts of Princes: and that both his service and his
writings have been most ungratefully required by his Lord and Master.

BRother, both of your self and of my friend To his Brother Mr. A. A. and his
friend L. B.

I feign would know this doubts uncertain end:
Whether the Court thinks of us as we be,
Or in oblivion drownesour memory.
Whether my Lord accuse my staying here,
Or if I have a friend so nobly dear,
As in mine absence will excuse my blame,
And against mine imputations, reasons frame:
That albe others follow him, yet I,
May stay behind with ample honesty.
Or whether all of you most learnedly,
Read in the wealthy rules of flattery.
(That Goddess of great Courtiers) rather augment
By your soft smoothings, his high discontent:
And so lift up the fury of his heart,
Beyond both reason, sense, and my desert.
Well, if you do so, you are then most wise,
For so in these days Courtiers only rise:
He is a fool that strives to live by loss,
And it is wits madness when our prince we cross:
Not though he said he saw the midday bright,
Covered with stars as in the dark of night;
No, he that will by great men's favors live,
To sooth and flatter, must by no means grieve.
Let greatness either praise or discommend,
Do we not see how his attendants send,
Their verdicts sorth, to iumpe with what he says
Like Echos, or the Actors of stage plays,
And from their lips send vollies of consent,
As if it were done by Act of Parliment:
And if by chance, any amongst them be,
(As it were most strange in such a company)
That dares not speak so much for bashfulnesse,
Yet shall his look applaud it nearthelesse:
And his old shining countenance tell, that he
In silence does commend their flattery:
Though this in others you do discomend,
Yet me it does much reputation lend:
Because what ever my resolves have molded,
I plainly without flattery have unfolded,
And vtterd sorth my reasons in such sort,
That no disgrace would to my fame retort,
The least of which in this extremity,
I hold of worthy strong validity.
As first my life, which nature bids me prize,
Above all wealth that's underneath the skies,
Nor will I it by folly shorter make,
Then fortune or the heavens predestinate.
If I should spend in travail my best times,
And suck the infectious air of foreign climes,
Being already sickly, I should die,
Two famous Physicians belonging to Alphonzo Duke of Ferara, the second of that
name, the last of which is said to have been borne with a green palm in his
hand, and therefore was thought he would prove an excellent Physician, as
afterward he did.
Else Valentine and Post^ do lie.
Again, men say I know my bodies state,
Better then any other can relate.
Can judge what for my self is good or ill,
And therefore am referd to mine own skill,
Which being so, I know my natures strength
Can not endure your cold climes: as at length,
Your selves have proved and found that Italy,
Does far exceed the North in dignity.
Besides, the cold does not offend me more,
Then does their stoues, whose heat I much abhor;
My nature being such, that even the sent
I loath as it were a plague maleuolent.
Nor the winters breaths with you a man,
Without his hot house, bath, or warming pan;
Where here with us, nature does order keep,
We drink until we sweat, sweat till we sleep:
Eat til our jaws ache, game till our bones are weary,
Kiss till our lips smart: all things make us merry.
Then who that comes from us, with you can live
In health, or to himself contentment give?
He compares that part of Hungary where the Cardinal was unto the cold
Ryphean mountains in Scythia, which are ever covered over wit snow.
When like Riphaean, snowie mountains hie,
Many through sharpness of the air do die.
As for my self, the vapors which exhale,
And from my queasie stomach rise and fall,
Breeding Catharres, and my sick brains unrest,
Which soon from thence fall down into my breast,
Would quickly rid me, in one night I know,
Both of my life and sickness at a blow.
Add unto this the strength of fuming wine,
Which boiles like poison in these veins of mine,
Which custom makes them quaffe and to carouse,
Who does refuse is sacrilegious:
Their me^t with pepper, and with spices hot,
Is mixed to make them relish more the pot:
Which diet Reason my Physician says,
Will make my sorrow long, and short my breath.
But you will answer me, that if I please,
My self may be the Steward of mine ease.
And both prouid warm lodgings and sound friends
Who will not tie me those drunken ends.
Which custom and the countries liberty,
Has knit to men of place and quality.
You Will say I may provide my self a Cook;
Whose care might over my provisions look.
And that my self according to my pleasure
Might with my coin, my conduit water measure,
Whilst you and your associates with delight,
Should make of one just length both day and night:
And I like to a Charterhouse close Friar,
Sit in my chamber, and attend my fire,
Eat mine own breath, and most impatiently,
Like Timon live without man's company.
And yet this is not all, behind is worse,
I must have household stuff to plague my purse:
Both for my kitchen, and my chambers grace,
As fathers furnish brides in such a case.
This was Cardinal Hyp^oes Cook, whom he had with him into Hungary.
Besides, if master Pasquin, from his love,
For once or twice, should dain^ but to approve,
To dress my meat alone, yet in the end,
He would my severe humor discommend,
And say, if such particulars I hold,
I must provide a Cook of mine own mould.
And truly were my wealth strong as my will,
Such counsel I would earnestly fulfill.
This was one of the greatest landed men in Ferara, whose father married the
base daughter of Borzo, sometime Duke of that City, by whom he had a mighty
Mass of treasure,
Or if I had Francisco ste^iars wealth,
No Prince should be more followd then my self:
But this great charge, I can no way support,
My means does yield my mind so little comfort.
Besides, if to my Steward I should say,
(What best these watrish humors does alay)
That buy and buy (what ere thou paiest) the best,
Because such things my stomach does digest.
If once or twice to please me he do frame,
Four times at least, he will forget the same.
Not daring sometimes buy them from this fear,
Lest I should it cause the price is dear.
Hence comes it, often I feed on bread alone,
Which breeds in me the chollicke and the stone.
Hence I live private, hence I am subject much,
Ariosto by nature was very choleric, and be moved for any small trifle, as
may appear by the breaking of the Potters pots, which is spoken of in the
story of his life.
To choler, and to every peevish tuch:
Fretting and fuming with such peevishness,
That in my best friends, I leave doubtfulnesse.
Apollo thee I thank, it is thy will,
And you fair Muses of the learned hill:
I find that for your sakes I not possess,
Apparel that will cloth my nakedness.
But say my Lord does (as it is most true)
Each several year make me apparel new.
Yet for your sakes that he perform the same,
It Is most untrue, or so to think a blame.
Himself auowes as much, as well I may
With reputation write what he does say,
Yet am no nearer my cares to rehearse,
Since he respects strawes better then my verse.
All creatures can commend sweet poesy,
But none respects the Poets poverty
He means Orlando Farioso, about which work Ariosto spent almost 18 years,
taking his subject out of Connt Boyardo, Earl of Scandiane in Lumbardy, who
finished 3. books of Orlando, (...).
That famous work which I in painful wise
Composed to raise his glories to the skies
He does deny the merit of all fame,
Learning must beg; but rich men are to blame,
To gallop up and down, and post it hard:
My Lord auowes it is he deserves reward,
Who keeps his banquet-house and banco sweet
And like a Spaniell waits upon his feet.
That nicely plays the secret Chamberlain,
And watches every hour with great pain:
Or he that to his bottles cleanly looks.
And cooles his ale or wine in running brooks:
Or else his Page that dares not close an eye,
Until the Bergamiskes industriously,
Beat on their anuils, whose very sound
Brings the poor sleepy boy into a swound.
To these he gives his great benevolence,
And does approve their worthes by recompense:
He says if in my books he praised be,
It Is nothing or to him, or unto me.
And that it was the seed of Idle time,
Nourisht by vanity and foolish rhyme,
And from my service he might more have gained,
If I in other sort to him retained.
This was a certain office of no great value in Millain, which the Cardinal
bestowed upon him.
What if within the Millan chancery,
Under the show of some authority,
He has bestowed not fully out a third,
Of that true gain the place might well afford
Unto my labor, yet what was done therein?
Was that my travel might his profit bring,
And that mine endless travel and my cares,
Might bring an end unto his great affairs?
Well Virgil if thou will be worldly wise,
Let my too dear bought counsel thee advise,
Thy h^rp, thy books, thy verse with darkness shade,
And in thine old age learn some handy trade:
Or if thou hopest in this world to gain,
Some office get, or to some Prince retain:
For worse plague I near wish mine enemy,
Then to be famous for sweet Poetry.
Yet this be sure, thy liberty is lost,
Uncertainty of place so dear does cost:
Nor think although thou live until thy hair
Like flakes of snowie Apenius appear,
Or that thy Lord as many old days have,
As aged Nestor bore unto his grave.
Think not, I say, that thou shall ever come,
By him or by his means to hier Rome:
Or if once tired with servitude thou please
But to look back or turn unto thine ease.
Blessed may thou be if he vouchsafe to take,
But from thee what he gave for virtues sake,
And so without more thought of injury,
Send thee away with thred-bate charity.
As for my self what ever he has given,
If he back take and make my fortunes even,
Two famous cities in Hungary, whereof the first now called Osen, has under
the walls toward the north west side, two fountains or springs running out
of a maine hill, the one of which is passing cold, and yet sauoureth of
brimstone, and the other so hot that one cannot suffer his finger in it. The
other city celled Agria was an Archbishopprick, and the Cardinal Lord
thereof, where he staid during the papacy of Iulio the second, whose fury he
feated, because he had dealt so unnaturally and barbarously, with his own
brother, as is showed before in the general argument. Both these towns now
are subject to the Turk.
Because that Buda neither Agria I
Would see or follow him in Hungary:
Yet I mislike not, force makes me content,
And shall do, since against me he is bent;
Although away those prosperous plumes he bring,
Which even him self did fix unto my wing;
The Cardinal Hypolite was much incensed against Ariosto, because he would not
follow him into Hungary, as the rest of his men did.
Although he do exclude me from all grace,
And will not smile on me with cheerful face:
Although he say I am disloiall proved,
Respectlesse, base, unworthy to be loved;
And that his public speeches do declaime,
How much he hates my memory and name:
Yet patience shall within my bosom sit,
And think that I was borne to suffer it.
This was the reason that I have removed
My best observance, since I was not loved:
Knowing it was effectles to approve,
To bring incensed greatness back to love.
The house of Esta is said to have descended from Rogero that famous Palladine
which belonged unto Charles the great. This Rogero is reported to come from the
stock of Alexander the great, his father was King of Riza not far from the
mountain of Carena, and his mother was called fair Galacuella, who was sister
unto Agramant King of Africa, whose chief city was Bizerta quite raced and
destroyed by Charles the great, and his Palladines. Rogero afterward lost his
life through the treason of that notable arch-traitor Gano, falling into a
wonderful deep pit, wherein he with Gradasso king of Sericano, who had married
Rogeroes sister Marsyza, were most pitifully famished to death: for which, with
other horrible treasons more, Gano being after taken, was torn in pe^es with
wild horses.
Rogero, if thy royal progeny,
From their disdain blast me with obloquie,
And I from them have nothing got, although
Their worthy valors and brave deeds I shoe,
Spending my time and wit most studiously,
To raise them tombs unto eternity,
Then what should I do with them? it is well known
Ariosto neither loved hu^ting, hauking, nor much riding, for growing in years
he became very corpule^t, gross and unwieldy.
I am no falkconer, all my art is flowne.
From such light vanities, I have not the skill,
To make my spaniels noses please my will:
Nor was I ever brought up to the same,
Or can there to my worst indeauors frame:
For I am big, unwieldy, gross and fat,
And such strong motions gree not with my state.
I have no curious taste, or eye of fire
To please the tongue or the unchaste desire.
Steward nor Cater to a noble man,
I was not borne to be, I nothing can
In those low offices. It had been good,
I then had lived when men eat homely food.
This was the Cardinals Steward, meaning he would not if he might have his
place, although he fared very daintily, for he was given by nature to feed
meanly and grossly.
Gismundt accounts, I will not on me take,
Pope Iulio the second, intending to make wartes upon the Duke of Ferara,
(whose brother the Cardinal Hypolito was) Ariosto was chosen as a most fit man
to go in ambassadge unto him, to pacify his wrath, which business he managed
so well, that he wan great reputation upon his return home again, yet the
aforesaid Pope, afterward falling out again with the Duke, and every man
shunning the office of ambassador, unto him, knowing his furious and angry
nature, Ariosto once more for the service of his Prince, and the safety of his
country, did aduenter to take this hard enterprise in hand, where he had like
to have lost his life, but that he secretly got away. This Pope Iulio was
fitter to have been a Soldier then a Priest, of whom it is said, that hearing
he had lost certain of his army in the battle, apparelled himself in complete
armor, and marching on the way as he came over Tyber, he in a great rage threw
the keys of Peter therein, saying, he would see if the sword of Paul would
stand him in better steed.
Nor unto Rome an idle journey make,
Posting with all my reasons to assuage
The fiery heat of great Secundus rage.
But say my fortune at such ods should run,
That needs by me such service must be done:
I fear me in the business would be found,
Dangers more great, and able to confound.
Besides, if such hard services must be,
And that men must attend with slavery,
He alludeth a certain sign in Rome, where a man is painted, waiting and
attending on a Bear.
As does Arctophylax upon the Bear:
He that desires to purchase gold so dear
Let him enjoy it freely; for my self
I will not at so high rate buy my wealth.
Before advancement in such sort shall please,
I Will only study how to gain mine ease:
Rather then cares shall compass me about
And from my mind thrust contemplation out:
Which though my body it enrich not right,
Yet to my mind it adds such rare delight,
That it deserves in immortal stories,
To be enrold with all admired glories.
And hence it comes my poverty I bear,
As it on earth my best of best things were.
This makes that brothel wealth I do not love,
Or that great name or titles do me move:
Or any State allurements so adore,
That I will sell my liberty therefore.
This makes me never to desire or crave,
What I not hope for, nor am like to have.
Nor choler nor disdain does me assail,
Nor inward envy shows my countenance pale;
Since M^ron or C^lio are Lords created,
Or from low baseness into greatness stated.
Nor do I care for sitting at great tables,
Soothing the humors of these pufpast bables;
But hold them as the scum of foolery,
Whom rymers tax in idle balladry:
That I without attendants am content,
To walk a foot, and make my self consent
To follow mine affairs; and when I ride,
To knit my cloak-bag to my horses side,
As much does please me, as at my command,
A world of mercenary knaves did stand.
And sure I think my sin is less each way,
In this (for I respect not what men say.)
Then when in court I am inforst to bribe,
And every scornful proud delay abide,
Ere our most lawful suits unto the Prince,
We can prefer and be dispacht from thence,
Or slander honest titles, or subvert,
Right without reason, conscience or desert,
Only to show our malice, or what is worse,
(Because thereon does hang a heavy curse)
To make poor parsons buy their tenths so dear,
That they are double forced their flocks to sheare.
Besides, it makes me with a pure devotion,
Thank my good God for my low safe promotio^,
And that where ere I come I this have proved,
I live amongst the best and am beloved.
It Is known though I no service had, I have
Ariosto being of nature desirous to be quiet, and to be his own man, had
rather have a small thing of his own, then to serve others and enjoy much: for
indeed his living was but small, although he set a good face on the matter.
Goods to maintain me, and to buy a grave.
That which to me from birth and fortune came,
Is such as I may boast without my shame:
But for I will not work your too much pain,
To my first song I will return again,
That I no true occasion have to grieve,
Because in your commercement I not live.
I have already strength of reasons shown,
And yet if more should be unto you known,
It would be to no end, since I do see,
That our opinious wars will not agree.
Yet with one other more I will contest,
Because I hold it stronger then the rest:
If I from my poor house should start away,
All would to wrack, I being all their stay.
Although Ariosto were his fathers eldest son, yet he had 4 brethren more,
and five sisters, and therefore his l^uing could not be but small, considering
his charge. The names of his brethren were Charles, Alexander, Galasso and
Gabriel. cha^es was a soldier, and was then in Hungary with a friend of
Ariostos, a captain called Cleanth^, who having the keeping of a castle there,
was driven from it by the Turks. Alexander was secretary to the Cardinal
Hypolito, and followed him into Hungary: but Gabriel although he were borne
^ame, yet Ariosto brought him up so well, as he became a reasonable good
scholar, and followed his book hard, yet much inferior to his brother.
Of five of us (all which now living are)
Three are removed into Regions far.
As Charles, who in that kingdom means to stay,
From whence the Turks Cleanthus drive away:
G^llasso for a Bishopric in Rome,
Does daily gape and looks when it should come.
Thou Alexander do with my Lord remain,
Making thy service purchase of thy gain.
Only poor Gabriels here: but what would thou
That he should do hereafter? or what now?
He as thou know, of hands and feet is lame,
And so into this wretched world first came.
Abroad he has not gone, which cannot go,
Little has seen, and le^ethen then that does know:
Only at home he does securely bide.
Now he that takes upon him for to guide
A house, as I have done, must have respect,
That they do not the impotent neglect.
My maiden sister is with me beside,
Whose dowry I am bound I shall provide:
Til which I have effected honestly,
I can nor say nor think that I am free.
He was a most duetifull and charitable man to all his poor kindred,
especially unto his old mother who lived in the house with him many years, of
who^ he had a most reverend care and respect.
Lastly, th'unweildie age of mine old mother,
Does all my other cogitations cover:
She must not be forsaken of us all,
Unless to ruin we will headlong fall.
Of ten I am the eldest, and am grown
An old man full offortie four years known,
My head is bald, and for I sickness fear,
My brains to comfort, I a night cap wear.
The small remainder of my life behind,
To keep it curiously is all my mind.
But thou whose issue from my mothers womb,
After me fully eighteen years did come,
Go thou and serve my Lord, and spend thy breath
In heat, in cold, in danger and to death.
Go view the world, high Duch and Hungary,
Attending on him most obsequiously.
Serve for us both, and where my zeal does lack,
Make thou amends and bring my favors back.
Who if he truly please of me to think,
The service I can do him is with ink
To give his fame large wings, not in the field,
To prove my force, in such assaults I yield.
Say unto him, Great Lord at thy command,
My brothers services do humbly stand,
Whilst I at home with a shril trumpets sound,
Will spread his worthy name upon the ground:
That it shall go as far as Sea or land,
Yea and beyond the Gadean pillars stand.
Two cities standing in the furthermost parts of the duke of Feraras dominions.
To Ariano and Filo it shall fly,
But not so far as flows swift Danuby:
For my weak muse can hardly iumpe so far,
So wet(alas) my feet and body are.
But could the glass of time to me restore,
Those fifteen years which I have spent before,
Then would I never doubt but that the fire
Of my quick brain through all worlds should aspire.
But if he thinks because he gives to me,
Each four months twenty five crowns for a fee:
Which pension is not always duly paid,
But many times by many humors staid:
I therefore shall such bondage to him owe,
As if I were his villain, and not know
Ought but his will, my health and life neglect,
Enter all dangers without all respect:
If so he think, his greatness is mistaken,
Nor shall he find my liberty forsaken.
Tell him ere i will live in such slavery,
I Will entertain most loathsome poverty.
Once there an Ass was, of his skin and bone A tale.

So lean, that under them he flesh had none,
Who stealing through a hole that broken was,
Into a barn well stuffed with corn did pass,
Where he so cloid his stomach and his heart,
That he grew fat and full in every part;
His body grown to such a shapeles mass,
That like a tun his huge proportion was.
But in the end fearing if he should stay,
His bones too dearly for his meat should pay,
Intends to issue forth where he came in,
But is deceived, for why his bellies skin,
Has made his bulk so great with that he stole,
His head can hardly now peep through the hole:
Nearth'lesse he strives and struggles much in vain,
Lost is his labor and his booteles pain.
A little mouse which spied him, thus did say,
Ass if from hence thou will thy self convey:
Thy body thou must bring to such poor case,
As when thou first did come into this place,
Lean and like carrion must thy carcass be,
Else near expect safe harmless liberty.
Hence I conclude, and boldly dare impart,
That if my Princely master from his heart,
Think with his gifts that he has purchased me,
It shall not to my self ought grievous be,
That I restore them back to him again,
So I my former liberty may gain.
Freedom I only love, since I did hear,
That men do many times buy gold too dear.
The second Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows in his own person that nature is contented with little, and how
much a man should esteem of his liberty. The troublesome life of Churchmen,
and the great miseries wherein those of the Court of Rome live.

Since mine affairs, not my desires become, To his reverend Brother G. A.

The causes why I go to visit Rome:
At the election of new Cardinals, and at the death of the old, the other
Cardinals use (through friendship) to exchange their first livings for others
that are better.
When Card'nals change their skins like to the Snake,
And for their God do better choices make:
Now when no dangerous sicknesses abound,
To infect men's bodies that are weak or sound,
Although a greater plague afflicts their minds,
This is one of the greatest offices belonging to the Apostolieal sea, it is
not much different from the Roules here with us in England.
Whilst that same wheel or Ruota turns and winds:
O not that wheel, which does Ixion scurge,
But that which does in Rome so shrewdly purge
Men's purses; whilst through long and vile delays,
Lawyers on them (As foul on carrion) prays:
This was his third brother, of whom he spoke in his first Satyr, he was a
Churchman, and lay in Rome to get some benefice or Church living.
Gallasse pray thee take for me (not far
From that same place where thy commercements are,
I mean near to that sumptuous Temple brave,
Which ancient Fathers that stout Priests name gave,
Who Malchas ear from off his head did cleave,
And more had done, might he have had but leave)
A lodging for four beasts: by which I mean,
This was his man he kept, and one that had served him long his name was John
de pascia, to whom when he died, he left half of all the moucables les he
had, because he had bin an honest and faithful servant unto him
Account me with my man (old John) for twain.
The other two a Moile and Gelding is,
A tired jade, that all his teeth does miss.
Let it be lightsome, but not mounting hie,
I cannot brook this climbing to the sky.
A chimney let it have that will not smoke,
For such perfumes do both me blind and choke.
Of our poor iades, thou likewise must take care,
For should their prouender be scant or bare,
Little the stables warmt'h would them avail,
And in my journey I should hap to fail.
My bed and bedding of the best I crave,
That so my rest might sweeter quiet have.
The matter cotton of fine wool and thin,
By no means let it be within an Inn.
My wood to burn, I would have old and dry,
That it might dress my meat conveniently.
A bit of Mutton, Biefe, or Lamb, or Veale,
For me and for my man does full avail.
Although the Poet was very careful of his health, and very precise in small
matters yet in his diet he was very plain and gross, and not oner dainty in
feeding at all, as himself affirms in the first Satyr.
No curious Kitchen cook I do desire,
With sauce to set mine appetite on fire:
Making me have a stomach against my will,
Or being full have still desire to fill.
Let those proud curious Artists use their brain,
To keep their pots and vessels silver clean,
And tend on Ladies, or for recompense
This was a noble man of Mantu, a who delighted so much in gluttony as he had
choice and change of all sauces for all kinds of meats, he used to ea^e the
more to increase his appetite. He was surnamed by some, Lucuilus of Mantua.
Strive to content Varranos glutton sense:
Whilst I with a poor scullion am content,
And being cleanly, think him excellent.
He that by eating, seeks still how to eat,
And makes not hunger sauce unto his meat,
Let him go cast his vomit far from me,
I Will neither hold his rule nor company.
Cooks now on every vpstart fellow wait,
Who but erewhile did cheese and onions eat,
And in a russet frock was glad to keep,
On barren hills his masters flocks of sheep;
But now (this bore) grown rich by fortunes grace,
Sh^mes even to hear of his first fortunes place.
His Pheasants, Larks, and Blackbirds have he must,
Who erst was glad to leap cuen at a crust:
Always to feed upon one dish of meat,
Does cloy his stomach, and he cannot eat.
He now the wild bores taste does truly know,
Which up and down the drier mountains go,
From the other which rich Elizean fields,
(Fatned) unto the Roman market yields.
I seek no water from the fountains clear,
But that which come from Tyber, and is near,
So it be settled well and very pure;
For troubled waters hardly I endure:
For wine it skils not, yet good wine I love,
And mixed with water many times do prove,
(Though very little) and the tavern still,
Will yield as much or little as I will.
The wines which grow upon the marrish brinke,
Unless delayed much I never drink.
The stronger wine, my brain does make the worse
Offends my stomach, and my voice makes hoarse.
What then will these do, which are drunk with you'
I doubt the proof I shall but find too true.
The wines of the Island of Corfica, are so excellent good and strong, as there
is a ptouerb in Italy of them, which is An Corso, un Greco, un Romanesco.
The Corsick wines, and those of faithles Greece,
Nor the Lygurian, though all of one price,
Are not so vile as these: these are so strong,
That to the best conceits they do much wrong.
The Friar that in his study private sits,
Is with this liqu or thrust out of his wits,
The whilst with expectation and much doubt,
The wondering people gaze and look about.
When he the Gospels blessed truth should shoe,
Who comes no sooner forth, but up does go
Into the pulpit with a fiery grace,
A red-rose cheek, and a dislemperd face:
Making a noise with violence of passion,
And swearing out the scriptures in strange fashi^o,
Threatening such judgments, and such damned fate,
That all his audience he makes desperate.
A notable drunkard, ^ut otherwise a man that had good parts in him, being
Steward or Bailiffe unto the Monestarie of Sta. Maria, Ara Coeli, a house of
Franciscan Friars in Rome of which covet also Friar Gnaling was, a good
scholar, but over much given to drinking.
This also troubles M^sier Moskins head,
Whilst he is carried drunk unto his bed,
And F^ier Gnaling with his company,
Faining to hate Vennachia mightily,
Who once but got out of their cloister door,
Two of the chiefest Tauerns in Rome, where most commonly the best wine and
best victuals were, and where most Dutchme resort, when they come to the City.
Toth Gorgon or the Aeihiopian More
They go, and there Pigeons and Capons fat,
They eat until they breathe and sweat thereat:
So likewise use they, when as all alone,
They forth from their Refectorie are gone.
Provide me books to pasle those hours away,
In which Romes prelates, only feed and play.
Who once abroad, they give a strait command,
None enter at their gates in any hand:
As Friars do use, who bout the mid of day,
It is a fashion in religious houses, when they are once set at dinner or
supper never to open their door unto any man, knock they never so much, until
they are ris^n from the table, which order the Jesuits observe more strictly
then any other.
(Although you ring the bell, cry loud or pray)
Yet once set at the table, they will not move,
Were it to gain more then a Princes love.
My Lord I Will say (for brother is too base,
Since Spanish complement took plainnes place,
And Sr. is sent to every bawdy house,
It Is now so common and ridiculous:
Signior I Will term the basest Rascal now,
And making courtsie low unto him bow)
For Gods sake pray your reverend Lord to daine
To lend his ear whilst I of wrongs complain.
He sets down the proud humor of the Spaniard when he is at his table, in
his own language.
Agora non sepuede, will he say,
Es megiore, (good sir) to go your way.
Evo^ torneis a la magnana. Then
If you reply upon him fresh again,
And say; yet let me trouble you once more,
Tell him I do attend him at the door.
Then surely Cerberus grows Peacocke proud,
And this rough answer thunders forth aloud.
I tell thee friend, my Lord is at repose,
And will not troubled be with suitors woes:
He will not speak with Peter, Paul nor John,
Nor hear the embassy of any one:
This speech is reported to come from Cardinal S. George, who being high
Chamberlain unto the Apostolic sea, and a man of migh, tie wealth and
authority, it happened that the Pope (that then was) sent one of his chief
officers to speak with him about some matter of importance: he being then set
at dinner, whereupon one of the Cardinals Gentlemen told his Lord in his care,
that there was one very desirous to speak with him from his holiness: but he
not noting any thing, made show as if he did not hear his man: whereupon the
party returned back unto him that was at the door, certifying him that he
had delivered his message, but his Lord Seenied to give no care unto him.
Notwithstanding this the messenger told him, he must needs speak with him,
and with all, used such persuasions unto him, that the young Gentleman (although
very loath) knowing his Lords choleric nature, returned back unto the
Cardinal, certifying him once more that the aforesaid party desired very
earnestly to speak with him but one word from the Pope, and that it was Mr.
Paul Archdeacon of Saint Anastalens one of the Masters of the Chauncery: to
whom Saint George (raising himself up a little in his ch^, and looking very
angerly upon his man) burst out into these blasphemous speeches. Tell him I will
not speak with Paul nor Peter, no nor with their master the Nazaret himself now
I am set at dinner. The Gentleman hearing such a terrible shot discharged at
his care made haste to report the same to the Archdeacon, who was walking up
and down before the door to cool himself, who hearing the Cardinals
answer, made the sign of the cross and blessed himself, saying, it may well
be that Saint George who is a Soldiers rough companion, and one that wants
good manners might send such (...) answer: But I am sure, Christ himself
would never have sent so plain a message unto his holiness, and thereupon he
de^ed.
No though his master Narzareth were here,
He would not daine to move out of his chair.
And therefore thou nor manners have nor shame,
Thy suits at such unfitting times to frame.
But had I Linx his eyes on them to pry,
As with my minds eyes I them full espy,
Or were they but transparant like to glass,
That through their inmost thoughts my sight might pass:
Such deeds I then (perhaps) should see them act
Within their privy chambers: that the fact
Would give them iuster cause themselves to hide,
From heavens sun, then any man beside.
But they in time I hope will quite forsake
This loathed life, and better virtues take.
This as an Item is to their transgression,
To show I wish and pray for their conversion.
But sure I am, thou longst to know why I
Desire to visit Rome thus speedily.
This office I spoke of before, was given him by the Car dinal, which he sought
to get during his own life by patent from the Pope, the same being one of the
chief occasions why he would lie a while in Rome.
Well, I will tell thee: It Is because I seek
A living small by patent safe to keep:
An office it is, which I in Millan hold,
(Although but small) yet more then lose I would:
St. Agaps is a Church in Rome, not far from the Piscaria or Fishmarket, the
reuersion of which benefice, Ariosto was offered, although he would not accept
thereof, as you may read a little after.
And to provide St. Agaps parsonage,
I might possess if the old Priest worn with age,
And much expense of time, should hap to die,
During the time, my fortunes there should lie.
Thou will suppose I run into the net.
Which I was wont to say, the devil did set
To catch those fools, whose over burning hearts
Swallows their makers blood without deserts:
But it is not so, my thoughts did never agree,
To love this cure or callings soueraginty:
My meaning is, the living to bestow,
On such a one as mine own thoughts do know
Fit for the same, for his lives gravity,
His learning, manners, virtue, honesty.
Two things our Poet reverenced, and would often commend them, the one was
Priesthood, and the other Marriage, and yet he liked neither of them both.
To be a sacred Priest I will not prove,
Cope, Rochet, Surplice, nor a Stole I love:
Nor will I have a shau'd anointed crown,
Or wear the ring which Bishops do renown.
In vain I go about to take a wife,
If I should aim at a religious life:
Or having taken one but to suppose,
That for the Church it were fit my wife to lose:
But both these callings are of such desert,
That albe I adore them in my heart:
Yet when I think how full they are of care,
Of neither (with resolve) I venture dare.
Priesthood and marriage, who so does obtain,
Save but by death, no freedom can attain.
But here (perhaps) thou may demand of me,
My reasons fault and insufficiency:
Wherefore so great a burden I do take,
And instantly the same away do shake,
Seeking to give mine honors to another.
Well though thy self, my friends and every other,
Shall blame, nay hate me, since I do let go,
And will not take my fortunes when they floe;
Yea since at bounties hands I Will not accept
The gifts of greatness, but do all neglect,
To shriue my soul to thee, and show the cause,
Which me to such a course of folly draws:
Ariosto was a man of so good a conscience, That a certain old Priest, having
a fat benefice, called S. Angello, in the Piscaria in Rome, of which we but
now spoke, and being in doubt to be poisoned, for greediness of the same, by
some of his nearest kindred who thought to have had the next Aduowson thereof,
had so good an opinion of the honesty of Ariosto, as he offered to resign the
same unto him, during his life, and to soiourne with him rather then with any
of his own friends. Ariosto in some sort accepted of his kind pro^, pe^ading
him to resign it unto one of his brethren, because he liked not (as I ^old you
before) to be a (...), which when he could not by any means bring the old
P^est unto, he the^ got him ^o bestow it upon another honest man fit for the
place.
It Is thus. The old priest having understood,
By the best friend both to his age and blood:
That underhand his death was closely wrought,
By one that for his holy living sought,
Fearing by poison to be made away,
He sends for me, and humbly does me pray:
That I into the open court would come,
And there take resignation of his room:
Thinking this means to be the only best,
By which his life might in most safety rest.
I thankt him for it, yet did all I could,
That he to thee or Alexander would,
(Whose nature in no opposition stands,
With holy orders or with holy hands)
His right and intrest pass, but it would not be,
Nor to my motions would his sense agree.
Nor you, nor his own kindred would he trust,
But (like himself) thought all men were unjust:
Only my self above a world he chose,
And on my faith did all his trust repose:
But when I saw from him I could not have it
To do you good; unto a third I gave it.
Many I know will me condemn therein,
Since (careless) I refuse such good to win.
The rather, since preferment in it is,
Whose paths who treads can never honor miss.
He taxes religious men, who under the color of humility are grown so proud,
as the greatest monarchs are glad to humble the^^ selves unto them.
Those poor religious worms scarce profitable,
Simple, unlearned, weak unfit, unable,
Base and despised, contem'd of greatest part,
Have got on best deserts so much the start,
As greatest kings are glad they may adore them,
And blessed is he that most may fall before them.
But who so holy or so wise has been,
As in his life no fortune has ore seen?
Either in little or in much I know,
There Is none that can himself so perfect shoe.
Each man his humor has, and this is mine,
He priseth his liberty at a higher rate then to be the wealthiest Cardinal
in all Rome.
Before I will my liberty resign,
The richest hat in Rome I would refuse,
Though King or Cardinal they should me choose.
What good to me is got by highest place,
Or at the Table to receive most grace?
If thence I rise no better satisfied,
Then he which in the meanest rome does bide:
So though my head with weight down burdned be,
Of miters stored with precious Iewelrie,
What does it me avail, if for all this
True joy and quietness of mind I miss?
Let others think it a beatitude,
That they are sought unto, observed and su'd,
That armies of attendants do them grace,
Treading their steps through every public place,
Whilst all the people with astonished eyes,
Stare to behold their flattred majesty's.
Yet I suppose them idle vanities.
Yea worse, even worst of earthly miseries.
I am so foolish mad, that ost I say,
In brothel Rome the Lord is every way,
More slave then is his slave man to his man;
And it is most true, deny it who so can.
The bondage wherein seruingmen do stand,
Is barehead to obey each slieght command,
To run or ride with him, which once expired,
There nothing else is at his hands required.
This being done, he may go where he please,
Frolic or game, revel or rest at ease.
In Rome every base fellow has his mistres, which he keeps Ala po^ta, as
they term it.
Only his care is, that at every leisure,
He cannot see his wench, or have that pleasure.
Else as he list, he may go sport about,
Either with company or else without.
On foot or horseback (if he money have)
Be civil, or else swagger like a knave.
In market, in the Tavern, in The Exchange,
Or in the brothell if he list to range.
Clothes he may wear, of cullers light or dark,
Go as he please; he is not enuies mark,
None take exception against him, he may go
Naked, if naked he himself will shoe;
Whereas his Lord (because he will have place,
To suit his rank, and give his glories grace)
Does leave the safer seat, and though he gain
More honor, yet does lesser wealth retain.
With profit less, and yet with greater charge,
He steares the helm in vain expenses barge.
Many he feeds, since many on him tend,
Though his revenues are but small to spend:
For count his first fruits with his bribes and all,
Many years profits do to ruin fall.
Add unto this, how he in debt does stand,
For furnishing his house at second hand.
His gifts to courtiers (but in courtesy)
Chiefly to that great patron Simonie,
Who is his chiefest saint and advocate,
Because he best does know his purses state.
But all the sport is, when his holiness
Sends to employ him in some seriousnes.
O then, if any of his followers miss,
He cannot go, the way forbidden is.
If that his coach be not in sight at hand,
Or if his moiles do not most ready stand,
If any thing be orderlesse displac't,
He rages straight, his honor is disgraced:
If one rude wrinckle in his gown be found,
It Is to his place more then a deadly wound:
His servants must in comely equipage,
March two and two according to their age:
When if the basest groom in all his train,
His very scullion but behind remain,
He swears as though he gave the world this tuch,
That he is divine, he names God so much.
Out does he cry he is discredited,
If by such slaves he be not followed.
On no Evangelist he now does look,
(Good man) his age cannot endure his book.
Only he does devise how he may spend
Little; and how his living he may mend,
To draw the bow too far, breaks it in twain,
And thriftie sparing is the Lord of gain.
I will not say but diverse there may be,
That have both offices and lands in fee.
Who live at hearts ease far b^yond the best,
Free from disturbance, tumult or unrest:
Nor horse, nor beast, nor man he scarsly keeps,
Whilst with a full purse he securely sleeps:
But there are few of t^ose, for in these days,
He Is blessed that lives content with his own case;
Now he that's plumed with stern ambitious wings,
And up to heaven his cogitations flings,
He never with his own estate is pleased,
But shapes new scales by which he will be raised;
From Bishop straight he has a wishfull hope
To climb to be the second next the Pope:
When he has that go^ will he then be quiet?
No; for his stomach must have choicer diet.
He now aims at the sea^e Pontifical,
To tread on kings on ^mperours and all;
But when he has obtaind this blessed chair,
Will he be pleased then and free from care?
Neither: for now his children and his friends
To places of great honor he co^nds;
When he was poor he sca^e was known to any,
Now being Pope he is a kin to many:
Yet from the Epyrots, nor from the Greek,
To give them kingdoms does he ever seek,
Neither of Africa nor of Barbary
Plotteth to give them any (...)
Nor will he strive to pull the Pagans down,
And to impale his kinsmen with their crown,
To purchase which all Europe is at hand,
Furnished with men and money at command,
Whilst he but acts what does to him belong?
Weakningthe Turks, making the Christians strong.
He rather seeks by treachery and art,
The noble Colonessi to subvert,
Or to extirp Ursinos princely name,
The names of the two chefest and most ancient houses of the Colonessi and the
^sini
To gain all Talliacorzos worthy fame;
As from the other he got Palestine,
By royal policy surnamd divine:
Whilst in the mean time drunk with Christian blood,
He sits and triumphs in his ample good,
Some he sees strangled, some their heads do lose,
And every thing quite topsie turuie goes.
Nor will he stick to give all Italy,
A pray to France, to Spain or Germany;
And making a confusion of each thing,
Here Ari^to is very plain with the Popes and their kindred.
It shall go hard but one half he will bring
Unto his bastard blood, nor does he care
Tho the other part fall to the Devils share.
Then flies abroad excommunications,
Like vollies of great shot, in strangest fashion:
Then roares the bulls worse then the Basan host,
Whilst Belles and books and candles curses bost.
Hence Indulgence and pardons have been found,
To be of wars the instruments and ground.
The gentlemen of Italy for the most part keep no table for their followers
as they do here in England, but hire them by the months, giving them so many
crowns every four weeks as they agree upon, and every morning they come into
their masters hall, where they have certain equal allowance of bread and
wine, which (God knows) is but course and small, every one severally to
him^lfe, and that is all he shall have for that day.
From hence with gold the bearded muffe is pressed.
Of all his valures power to shoe the best.
Sons the drunken Dutchman who for pay,
Is hired in right or wrong or any way,
These must have gold (without which thei'le not fight,
And all this charge does on the subject light.
Often have I heard (and do believe the same)
By those which know the truth of every fame:
That neither Bishop, no nor Cardinal,
Nor yet the Pope, who is the head of all,
Had ever money to supply their want,
But that the end grew niggardly and scant.
But let this go, times now are at such pass,
That though one be a fool, a dolt, an ass,
Base of conditions, and (if it may be) worse,
Yet if he have a well filled heavy purse
He may do what he list, nor need he care
What others of his actions shall declare:
Yet those which hoard most, and have most to give,
Most commonly most wretchedly do live.
Witness the starued household, who with grief
Complain their ruins, yet find no relief.
The more the wealthy witty courtier holds,
The less unto the worlds eye he unfolds.
Of four parts of his living, three he will
Be sure (all charges borne) to coffer still.
Some great estates there are in Italy, as Barrons and Bishops that keep a
table for their followers, but their cheer with their bread and wine, is so
bad as it does them little good, and the rather because they can never eat
their bellies full, for the steward sitting at the table, as soon as ever he
holds up his white staff, (which is the sign of his office) straight the
cloth is taken up, and they are forct to rise from the board, when oftentimes
they have not half eaten what would satisfy nature, and this is the cause
instead of saying grace, that they fall a cursing when they leave the ^able.
A man's allowance or of bread or biefe,
Is half a pound of either for relief:
And that (God knows) is either tough or crusty,
Or hardly man's meat, being old and musty.
Now as his bread and flesh is of worst sort,
So think his drink deserves as vile report,
Either it is like vinegar most tarte,
Or Rasor-like it makes the pallat smart:
Either in taste or relish it is so small,
That it has lost both color strength and all.
Or to be brief, in ilnes it is beyond
The Puddle water or the stinking pond:
The Swizzers or Muffes are those people which the ancient Historiographers (as
Caesar and others) call Heluetians, they have their habitations in the most high
hills of ^ura, named S. Claude, they are a race of men naturally warlik and
rude, and for the sterrillitie of their country more given to grasing then to
tillage. They are free of themselves, sometimes they were under the Duke of
Austria, and now are subject unto no Prince, but live of themselves. They are
divided into thirteen co^minalties, called Cautons, and will be hired of any
Prince for money to fight in their wars, be it right or wrong they never
respect the same, so they be well paid, and have their pay truly.
Yet had a man sufficiency offoode,
And at his pleasure drink to do him good:
Though they were homely and indifferent,
His grief were less, and time much better spent:
But both being bad, and of that bad no store,
Needs must the heart break or else covet more.
But thou will say, a servant that is wise,
Will bear with this and smoothly temporise,
Because that scale which raises up his Lord,
Does some advancement to him self afford,
And as the master mounts the man shall rise,
If with discretion he his wrongs disguise.
But such like fortunes are not general,
For they like blazing comets seldom fall.
"Honors change manners, new Lords makes new laws
"And all there servants to their purpose draws.
"Old servants like old garments are cast by,
"When new adorn them with more majesty.
"Service is no inheritance we know,
"For he and beggerie in one base rank do go.
"A chamberlen, a steward and a caiter,
A secretary, a caruer, and a waiter,
Thy Lord must have to beautify his days,
When thine age can supply not one of these.
Then may thou think that thou art highly loved,
Iffrom his service thou art not removed:
It Is well for thee if thou can find that grace,
To live as thou have done still in one place.
A livery once a year, and nobles four,
Is a brave price for serving til four score:
And then it is ten to one that beg thou must,
Therefore unto thy self, not others trust.
How rightly spoke that honest Mulitar,
When coming into Rome from regions far,
He in the evening heard as he did pass,
That his own Lord for Pope elected was.
Ah (quoth the slave) to speak impartial,
It Was best with me when he was Cardinal,
My labor then was little or else none,
Having but two poor moiles to look upon.
Now shall my toil be double or else more,
And yet my wages paid worse then before.
If any think because my Lord is Pope,
That I on great aduancements ground my hope,
Let him but give me one chicken or less,
And all my rasures he shall full possess.
No no, the wealthier that the Master proves,
So much the less his oldest slaves he loves.
In Naples where Nobility does flow, The Tale.

(Though little wealth does with their greatness go)
There was of good descent a pretty Lad,
That from his tender years still followed had
A Lordly caualier, who promisd him
(As courtiers breath^ can smoothly speak and trim)
That he no sooner should advanced be,
To any place of worth or dignity,
But that his page should rise as he did mount.
And for the youth had spent the first account
Of his lives glory, since since he presumed
Upon this hope full thirty years consumed.
His Lord now bids him be of merry cheer,
For nothing that he held should be too dear.
The honest servant thinking all was gold
Shind in such words, him^ content does hold.
Now whilst the hungry master and the man,
Gazd to behold which way preferments ran;
It hapt the Naples king (through some request)
Him of his privy chamber did muest.
No sooner was he in his wished for room,
But he forgot his ancient tru^ty groom,
And prided with his fate now entertaines,
New gallants with brave clothes and better m^anes.
His old true page was in oblivion thrown,
And naught save novelty was to him known.
Which he perceiving, taking time and place,
Unto his Lord he breaks his heavy case,
Humbly entreats him that he would remember
His honest service, and some merit render
To his expense of time, and wasted store,
As he with earnestness had vowed before.
To whom the surly Neop^stan,
Taking him sharply up, thus brief began:
Fellow, the world is changed from that it was,
When I was scarce my self, the^ thou might pass
And rank with my dependants: but as now
Thou can not do it, nor may I allow
Thy baseness so high place, s^h it is fit,
My men be of more means, more doom and wit.
Yet nerethelesse since thou have served me long,
And that I will not do thy labors wrong.
Countnance, but no reward thou shall possess,
Since thou art old, and even seruicelesse.
The honest man being gald thus impiously,
Returns his Lord (with grief) this short reply.
Could I your best imploiments serve before,
When (save my self) you kept no creature more?
And now that you have many, may not I
My place with as great diligence supply?
Has all my practice and experience
Brought me no wit, but taken away my senfe.
Now when my pains expected their advance,
Must my reward be naught but countenance?
Have I consumed my lives best flowers with you,
My youth and manhood, to reap this poor due?
But you will abandon me I do perceive.
Well, me you shall not, for it is you i will leave.
Nor you, nor others, nor no time shall say,
You me dischargd. Lo I put you away.
No greater plague can hang on servitude,
"Then to be chaind, to base ingratitude.
And here withal away poor soul he went,
Mourning his service, and his time misspent.
By this true story wit may plainly see,
What servants are, and what these Courtiers be.
"Youth spent in Court, often brings age to poor state
"Past service, past reward, that is servants fate.
I rather would be king of mine own grave,
Then unto greatest greatness be a slave.
"To live of others lendings is most base,
"In Court to dance attendance is disgrace.
I like not prison music, nor such mirth,
Free was I borne, free will I live on earth.
"He is truly rich that has sufficient,
"And hating envy lives with content.
Yet liberty exceedes the gain of wealth,
And therefore I will only serve my self.
The third Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this Satyr (as in the other before) he condemns the service of the
Popes Court, grieueth that the promises made unto him by Leo (the tenth of that
name) were not performed: shows the discontentments that arise by gathering
together of riches. And la^ly enueigheth against the couetousue and wicked
lines of the Roman Courtiers.

SInce ( This Hanibal Mallaguzo was a noble man of Regio, a City in Lumbardy,
belonging unto the Dukedom of F^rara, and kinsman unto Ariosto, whose mother
was of that house.
noble Hanibal) thou wil'st me write, Written to the Lord Hanibal. M.

b After the death of Cardinal Hypolito, Alphonso Duke of Fera^a, allured
Ariosto by all the means he could, unto his court, using him more like a
companion then a servant, offering him diverse offices of preferme^ to allure him
to serve in ordinary, which with much ado he was content to do, and which he
did rather for his countries sake, and by reason of the love he bare unto the
place where he was borne, then for any great gain he got by following of him,
as he himself sets down in his Satyr.
How I of Duke Alphonsos service like:
Or whether having laid old burdens by,
New waights press on my back as heavily:
Or if they lighter be, for I do know,
If you shall hear creations of new woe,
Proceed from my complaints, you will conceive,
That I am barbarous, and unto me cleave
Ulcers which will not heal, or like a jade,
That I am dull, though nere so much of made)
Then to speak freely with infranchis'd mind,
Meaning that he is discontented as much with following the Duke as he was
with belonging unto the Cardinal his first Lord and master
Both of my burdens, I like heavy find,
And think I had bin blessed, if unto neither
I had been subject, since I lose by either.
Say then (since I have broke my back with all,
Like a good Ass, that's laden till he fall)
Say that my spirits heavy dull and ill,
Say both in jest and earnest what you will:
Yet when you have said what you list or can,
I will speak truth, and be an honest man.
But had I played the paricide or slave,
And brought my father to an early grave,
Regio is a City (as I said before) subject unto Ferara, it was first built by
Marcus Lepi^us one of the Triumuerats of Rome.
In wealthy REgio, or but that have thought,
Which Jupiter against great Saturn wrought:
Only that I alone within my hand,
Might hold his wealth, his living and his land:
Which now among brothers and among sisters be
Divided into ten parts equally:
I nere had played the fool as did the frog,
That for the Stork, did change his kingly clog:
Nor had I wandered to seek forth my fate,
Or crept for favor to each great estate.
I had not learnt the Apes duck with my head,
Nor crooked cringging curtsie should me stead.
But since I was not borne heir to my sire,
Nor that his lands fell unto me entire.
Meaning he was but poor, considering the great charge he had, for the
Astronomers hold opinion, that he which is borne under that ^aner, shall be
very rich and wealthy.
Since I perceive that subtle Mercury,
Was near my friend, but rather enemy:
And that (against my will) I am nereth'lesse
Compeld to live on others bounteousnesse:
I think it better, that I do retain
Unto the Duke, and be of his great train:
Then to a lower fortune make my moan
Although my means and risings are all one,
Hardly so much, as his who is most poor,
And asks the misers alms from door to door.
Few I do know are of my thoughts or mind
And fewer of mine humors I do find.
Most think to be a Courtier is most brave,
I say a Courtier is a glorious slave.
Let such be Courtiers, as by Courts can rise,
To me they are bright suns, and blind mine eyes,
Far will I live aloof from these great fires,
"If strength of fortune strengthen my desires.
"Never one saddle one each horse we place,
"Nor does one garment every body grace.
Beasts are not for one use ingenerall,
"For some we see bear much, some naught at all.
The cage is to the Nightinglale a hell,
The Thrush and Blackbird both do love it well
The Robin red-brest robbed of liberty,
Grows sad and dies with inward melancholy.
Who seeks to be a Cardinal or Knight,
And that great honors on his house may light,
Let him go serve the Pope or some great King,
Whilst I live safe, and hunt no such vain thing.
I am as well contented with the meat,
Which (though but gross) in mine own house I eat:
And think a carrot root does taste as well,
Which does of vinegar or pepper smell:
As if of foul or fish, or other bables,
I had even glewd my self to graet men's tables.
And I as well can rest my drowsy head,
Upon a quilke, as on a downie bed:
And under rugs, as much safe quiet hold,
As under Turkey works, Arras or gold.
Rather had I at home stay with my rest,
Save my poor skin from scars, and know me blessed,
Then vaunt that I had seen the India land,
Or frozen Scythia, or the Aethiop strand.
So many men, so many minds we say,
Each one delighting in his several way,
Some will religious be, some marshall bent,
Some travel, some at home live with content,
Yet he that's pleased to be a traveler,
Let him behold each country far and near:
Rich France, sweet England, fruitful Germany,
Proud Spain, Greece spoild with Turkish tirany.
As for my self, at home ^le live alone,
And like no country better then mine own.
Yet have I seen how Lumbardy does stand,
And all Romania, and the Tuscan land.
Besides, that mountain mighty huge and tall,
Which locks up Italy as in a wall,
And both those Oceans beating on each side,
I have beheld, and yet no danger tried.
And this contents me well, for other cost,
Or greater travels whence mine ease is lost.
I can with Ptolomie behold them all,
In every sort, vnile or several.
All seas I likewise can behold and see,
(Without vow making in extremity,
When heaven threats, with speaking thu^der claps)
More safely in our modern painted maps,
Then when I shall a rotten vessel enter,
And my poor life to certain danger venture,
The Dukes service, I take it as it is,
Which if it be good, it is better much by this.
In that he seldom from his Court does part,
And so is friend to study and to art.
Nor does he seek to draw me from that place,
Where my lodged heart does live in its best grace
But now me thinks I see you all this while,
How at my words and reasons you do smile.
Saying, that it is neither countries love
Nor study, which incites me not to move.
But it is my Mrs. eye that only blinds me,
And in these everlasting loue-knots binds me.
Well, I confess the truth, it is so indeed,
(And then confession, better proofs not need)
It Is most true, I list not to contend,
Or any falsehood with my sword defend,
What ere the reason be, I stir not out,
Or like a pilgrim walk the world about.
It is sufficient that it does me please,
Nor would I other have themselves disease
About mine actions, since my self knows best,
Why I do here with homely quiet rest.
Some will object, and in their wisdom say,
That if to Rome I had kept on my way:
And aimed at Church promotions, I might then
Have far exceeded many other men:
So much the rather, as I was approved,
This was Le^ the (...) a Horentine born of the house of Medices, and was of
familiar acquaintance with Ariosto.
To love the Pope, and was of him beloved:
As having of his first acquaintance been,
Long ere he had his days of glory seen:
Which came to him for virtue, or through chance
And therefore reason he should me advance.
Yea long before the Florentines set open,
Their gates to entertain him, or that hope.
Julian di Me^dices, and Peter were breth^en to Pope Leo the 10. who made the
for^aid Julian Duke of Nemours, and married him to the Lady Philibert of Sauoy,
aunt to Francis the French King, the first of that name. This man before his
brother was Pope, being banished with the rest of their family, out of Flor^ce
were entertained with great kindness by Fra^cesco Maria, duke of Vebin, who in
their exile did the^ all the honors that might be, notwithstanding al which
courtesies, Leo co^ing to be Pope most vnki^dly drove the aforsaid duke out of
his country at the perswasio^s of Alphonsina, mother to his Nephew Laurence, on
who^ he bestowed the dukedom, who did continue in the same until Adrian the 6.
that succeeded Leo, expulsed him, and restored Pra^cesco Maria the true owner
to the estate again, who enjoyed it until he died, being the space of (...)
years, in so great reputation, that all the Princes of Italy both loved and
honored him to many of which he was entertained as General in their wars, but
he was so great a builder, and so liberal to his Soldiers, that when he died
he left no money behind him.
Moved worthy Julian his ennobled brother,
In Vrbins Court, his losses to recover.
^embo was borne in a Castle in Lumbardy, called Arralano, he was an excellent
Poet and Orator, he was Secretary to Pope Leo the 10. and at last was created
Cardinal, he died in Pad^a, his monument being in S. Francisses Church, in the
City where he lies buried by Castilian, he means Count Balthazar Castilian
who made that excellent piece of work called the Courtier.
Where with learnd Bembo, and Castilian sage,
Apollos hair, flowers of that formal age,
He spent the days of his first banishment,
In great delight of thought and hearts content.
And after when this subtle Medicy
Over their Country vs^ his tirany.
The Medicy having gotten the Emperors army, (who then was in Italy) to repose
them in Florence, and to call them home into their City again, diverse of the
Citizens were against it, especially Peter S^derine, who wa^ then Gon^er, which
(was the chief officer of that City) but in the end they were enforced to
admit them, and the aforesaid Peter glad to leave his authority, and hardly
escaped with life from out the palace, at what time. (not long after) what by
fair means of Leo the tenth their kinsman, and afterward by favor of
Charles the fifth. they seized upon the whole estate, and after got to be
absolute Princes thereof, as at this day they are.
When the Gonfalconer forsook the Court,
Leaving his place, his honors and his port,
Till Leo unto Rome did make repair,
And was installed in St. Peter's chair.
In all which time, to none he showed such grace
As unto me, whom he did ever place
Next to himself, affir^ing I and none
Was else his friend and best companion:
So that in rank of favor, I alone,
Stood still vnseconded of any one.
Besides, when he as Legate first did pass
To Florence, this his protestation was:
That I as dearly in his favor stood,
As did his brother, or his best of blood.
These circumstances well considered,
And every favor rightly ordered,
Though some of little value will esteem them,
Yet others of more better price may deem them.
And think if I would daine to Rome to go,
And to his holiness my fortunes shoe:
Doubtless I might obtain for recompense,
Any fair suit of worthy consequence.
And that at my first motion or request,
A Bishopric were granted at the least.
But they which think, such great things so soon got,
With judgment nor with knowledge reckon not.
And therefore with a pretty history,
I will to such men give a short reply:
Which has in writing put me to more pain,
Then any man in reading shall attain.
Long since, there was a scortch Summer seen, A tale.

Which burnt the parcht earth with his beams so keen:
That it was thought Phoebus once more had given
His Chariot to his bastard to be driven.
For every plant and herb was dead and dride,
Nor any greenes on the ground was spide.
No fountain, spring nor poole, or low or hie,
But had his veins stopped up and now stood dry:
So that through rivers, channels and great lakes,
Men their long iourneies safely dry-shod takes.
In this hot time a wealthy swain did live,
(Or rather style of poor I may him give)
Who had great store of cattle and of sheep,
But wanted moisture them alive to keep,
Who having long searched every hopeful ground.
(Although in vain) where moisture migh be found:
He now inuokes that God omnipotent.
(Whose ears on faithful orizons are bent)
And he by inspiration in a dream,
Grants ease unto his griefs that were extreme:
Telling him that not far from that dry land
Within a certain valley nere at hand,
He should such store of wholesome water find,
As should give ease and comfort to his mind.
The swain at this, takes children and his wife,
And all his wealth (the second to his life)
Leaves neither slave, nor household stuff behind,
But hasts the blessed valleys help to find;
Where he no sooner came, but in the ground
He causd to dig, and water did abound.
But now he wants wherewith to take it up,
And therefore is enforced to use a cup,
A little cup, whose little quantity,
Hardly did serve one draught sufficiently.
Which as he held, he said, now my hot thirst
I Will cool, since it is reason I be first.
The next draught does unto my wife belong,
Next to my children (if I do not wrong:)
When they have done, my servants shall begin,
Each as his merit and desert does win.
And as they have bestird themselves with pain,
To make this well, from whence this good we gain.
This said, he then upon his cattle thought,
The best whereof, he means shall take first draught:
And those which leanest were should be the last,
He thus his damage and his profit cast)
When every thing was ordered in this fashion,
He tastes the water first and cooles his passion,
Next him his wife, his children followed than,
(As he had made the law) man after man.
Now every one fearing the waters loss,
Began to press about him, and to cross.
His fellows merit where most worth was cast,
All would be first, none willingly the last.
When this a little parret had suruaid,
With whom this wealthy shepherd often played,
And had in times past made it all his joy,
Taking delight only with it to toy.
And when it well had understood their strife,
It clamord forth, ah woe is my poor life.
I nor his son, nor of his servants am,
Nor for to dig this well I hither came:
Nor can I either profit to him bring,
Then foolish mirth, and idle wantoning.
And therefore must be quite forgot of all,
And made the last on whom last lot must fall.
My thirst is great as theirs, my death as ni^,
Unless I can to better safety fly,
Therefore I must elsewhere seekemy relief,
And so away he flies with all his grief.
My Lord I do beseech you, with this story,
Pack from your ears, those fools that fr^ vain glory.
Think that his holiness will me raise before,
These are noble families in Florence, which were great friends to the Medices.
The Neri, Vanni, Lotti, and some more.
His bastards, Nephews, kin and other such,
Shall quench their thirsts ere I the water touch.
Nay there shall step betwixt me and my hope,
All those whose helping hands did make him Pope.
When these have drunk, their steps forth to be served,
Whole bands of martialists half pinde and sterued.
That against stout Sodernie did weapons bear,
Making his passage into Florence clear.
The country of Cassentine amidst the which ^eth the river Arno, it is a
territory narrow, barraine and full of hills seated at the foot of the
Appenine mountains, of which Bib^na is the chief town, this the Medici went
about to surprise when they were Banditi and banished from their country, but
being repulst by the Florentines army, which then kept them out, they escaped
from ^hence not without great danger of losing their lives. The chief captain
of this company, was this Peter brother to Pope Leo, who afterward was most
unfortunately drowned as he was going toward Cai^a not far from Naples, He
was elder brother to Pope Le^ and Julian di Medices, which three were sons to
that famous Laurence di Medices, of whom Guychardine in the beginning of his
history makes most honorable mention of, Cosimo the great being their great
grandfather, who was a citizen of fingular wisdom and of infinite wealth.
One boasts that he in Casentino was
With Peter, when he scarce from thence could pass
Brandine is the surname of a rich fam^lie in Florence, whose chief wealth
consists in money, and who lent great store of coin unto the Medices when
they were in want.
With his life's saftie whilst Brandino cries,
I lent the money which his honors buies.
An other does aproue, it was only he
Maintaind his brother with a yearly fee:
And at his proper charges did provide,
Both horse and armor, and what else beside.
Now if whilst these drink I stand gazing by,
Either of force the well must be drawnedrie:
Or else my thirst my bodies health must slay,
Since still such violence brooks no delay.
Well, it is much better to live as I do,
Then to aproue if this be true or no.
Or whether fortunes fools which wait upon her,
Do drink of Lethe when they rise to honor.
Which though it be most true that few do climb,
But they forget the days of former time,
Yet can I hardly say his holiness,
Has drunk much water of forgetfulness.
No I may well protest the contrary,
Since I did find that in his memory.
I held my place, and when his foot I kissed,
He with a smiling countnance pressed my wrist,
Bowd down his forehead from his holy chair,
And gave me words of grace, and speeches fair,
He gently stroakt my cheeks and did me bliss,
And on them both bestowd a sacred kiss.
Ariosto shows himself to be of a good nature, which took so thankfully so
small a reward, considering how much he had deserved at the Medices hands.
Besides he did bestow that Bull on me,
Which Bibie^ after seriously
Dispacht, and got, although I yet did pay
Some bribes before I was dismissed away:
But being done, and I ioyd therewithal,
(All wet through rain and storms which the^ did fall.
Unto Montano fast I rode that night,
Where I reposd with merry heart and light.
Thus courteous words and speeches I had many,
But other favors I possessed not any.
But say twere true the Pope should keep his word
And to me all his promises afford,
That I might reap the fruits which I did sow,
Both now and elsewhere many years ago:
Imagine with more Miters and read hats
He would adorn me, and with greater stats,
Then ever at the Popes great solemn masle,
Has or been seen or ever given was.
Nay say he filled up all my bags with gold,
And cramd my chests as full as they could hold:
Shall yet the ambition of my greedy mind,
Enough contentments for her humors find?
Or shall this quench my thirsts consuming fire?
Or will my thoughts take truce with her desire?
No; I from Barb'rie to Catay will go,
From Dacia, where seven headed Nile does flow:
Not Rome alone must hold my soueraign^y,
So of my affections I might master be;
And so I might have power and both be able,
To tame my thoughts, and hopes insatiable.
But when I shall a Cardinal be instald,
Or what is more, servant of servants called,
Nay when I shall above the Pope be spied,
And yet my mind rest still vnsatisfi'd.
To what end then should I so much disease me,
Or toil my self for that which will not please me?
It Is better privately to live, then thus
To vex and grieve for titles frivolous.
I speak not this as though my self were he,
Whose nature could with no content agree:
But to this end, that since all greatness ever,
Does in this endless Avarice persevere,
(Who though they all possess, yet more do crave.
As if they would employ them in the grave.)
I think its better live a private life,
Then wealth to hold with vnabated strife.
Then when this world was in her infancy, A tale.

And men knew neither sin nor treachery;
When cheators did not use to live by wit,
Nor flattery could each great man's humor fit,
A certain nation (which I knew not well)
Did at the foot of an high mountain dwell,
Whose top the heavens counsels sent to know,
(As it apear'd to them that lived below)
These men observing how the moon did rise,
And keep her monthly progress through the skies:
And yet how with her horned forehead she
Alterd her shape, her face and quantity,
They straight imagined if they were so hie,
As the hills top, they easly migh epsy,
And come where she did dwell to see most plain,
How she grew in the full, how in the waine.
Resolved thereon, they mount the hill right soon,
With bask^ts and with sackes to catch the moon,
Striving who first unto the top should rise,
And make himself the master of the prize,
But mounted up, and seeing that they were
As far off as before, and near the near,
Weary and feeble on the ground they fall,
Wishing (though wishes are no help at all)
That they had in the humble valley staid,
And not like fools themselves so much dismayed.
Th^rest of them which did remain below,
Thinking the others which so high did show,
Had touched the Moon, came running after then
By troops and flocks, by twenties and by ten:
But when the senseless misconceit they found,
Like to the rest they weary fell to ground.
This lofty mountain is the Wheel of fate,
Upon whose top sits roializd in state,
(As ignorance and folly does suppose)
All quietness, al peace, and sweet repose.
But they (alas) do all mistake the ground,
For there nor joy is, nor contentment found.
Now if with riches or with honors went
(Like loving twins) the minds desird content:
Then had I reason to commend that wit,
Which were emploid and spent to purchase it.
But when I see both Popes and mighty Kings,
(Who for the sovereigns are of earthly things,
As gods within this world esteemed are)
That they of griefs and troubles have their share,
I needs must say, content they do not hold,
As long as they have sorrows manifold.
Should I in wealth the mighty Turk ou^oe,
Or boast more glories then the Pope does know,
And yet still covet higher to aspire,
I am but poor, through that my more desire.
Well it is most reason and our best best wit,
To live of things are competent and fit,
Whereby we may not pine away with want,
Nor of our needfulst needements to be scant.
For every one all strength of reasons have,
To nourish life, and not live as a slave:
But if a man be so sufficient rich,
That he too little has not, nor too much,
That has enough his nature to content,
And in desire is not ore vehement:
He that can ease his hunger at his pleasure,
And give each appetite his equal measure:
He that has fire to warm him when he is cold,
A house to shelter him when he is old:
That when he should ride forth is not compeld,
To lackey spaniel-like through every field,
But to command a horse is always able,
And keeps a man to wait upon his table.
Besides a cleanely houswife that will keep
His house in comely order neat and sweet:
If this I have, what need I more request?
For having thus much, I have all the rest.
Enough is never then abundance less,
He that all couets, nothing does possess.
Besides this duty, reason does demand,
That on strict terms of honor we do stand,
Yet in such sort that we be never found,
T'exceede the golden mean in any bound;
For nothing is on earth more dangerous,
Then to be noted as ambitious.
This is true honor when the world does cry
Thou art an honest man and so do die:
Which if thou be not, it will soon be known,
And as thy faults are so thy fame is blown.
Hypocrisy is wouen of fine third,
Yet few in these days can in nets be hid.
Because each one right reverend does thee call,
Or Earl or Baron, Knight or General,
I would not have thee think they honor thee,
Unless more in thy self then titles be.
But when I see thy merits worth does move
From virtue, then thou shall enjoy my love.
What glory is it to thee when I behold,
How thou apparel'd art in silks and gold?
Or that the wondering people with amaze,
As up and down thou walk, upon thee gaze?
If afterward, as soon as thou art gone,
And thy back turned, they sing this hateful song.
See there the man who for a bribe in gold,
The gates of Rome unto the Frenchmen sold:
Which gates to keep, he had of special trust,
Yet sold the same, an art base and unjust.
Fie, fie, how many knight-hoods here are bought,
How many Bishoprics desertlesse caught?
Which after being known abroad become,
The foul disgrace and scandal unto Rome.
To be an honest man in word and deed,
Though on my back I wear a course plain weed,
As much does please me as if I did go,
Royally clad in roabes which kingly shoe.
Let him that will or gold or velvet buy,
For I will not with spots of infamy.
Under this name he taxes some notorious and wicked man that grew rich through
villainy.
But now me thinks base Bomba does reply,
And unto mine assertions gives the lie:
Saying, let me have riches, I not care,
Or how they come, or how they purchased are:
Come they by villainy, by drabs or dice,
Riches are ever of most worthy price.
Virtue is riches bastard, nor do I
Respect, against me what the vulgar cry.
"All men of no man speaks reverently,
"And some have raild against the deity.
Hushed Bomba hushed, do not fly all so fast,
But flag thy wanton peacocks train at last,
I tell thee none blaspheme the deity,
But such as are more damned in villainy,
Then those who naild their maker to the Cross,
Whose woes eternally do mourn their loss:
Mean space the good and honest sort one word,
Will not of goodness to thy fame afford.
They say false cards, false dice, and falser queanes,
Purchased thy livings and thy large demeanes.
And thou administrest to every tongue,
Matter to talk of, as thou walk'st along:
Wearing and tearing out more cloth of gold,
More silks and Tissus from Arabia sold,
Then all the worthy gallants Rome does breed,
So much thy pride and riot does exceed.
Those thefts and cosenages thou should conceal,
Unto the world and me thou do reveal.
Making even fools and silly Infants know,
That cottages where hardly thatch did grow,
Thou in these few years palaces have made,
By thy smooth cheating and thy cosening trade:
The world does see thy banquets and thy feast,
Where in thou surfet'st like an ore fed beast.
Yet thou conceiu'st that thou a gallant art,
And all that smile on thee do take thy part.
Fool, those same smiles are like the serpents hisle,
And they would kill thee feign which do thee kiss.
This is also a shadowed name, whereby he biteth at some others of as bad
faults as may be.
Bor^o (so no man tell him to his face,
How vile he is) believes it no disgrace:
Although behind his back he hear men cry,
He has nor faith, nor love nor piety:
And how that worse then bloudy-handed Caine,
He his own brother tyrant-like has slain:
Although an exiles life he has endured,
Yet all agreed, all evils now are cured:
And he the whole inheritance has got,
Without vexation of a partners lot.
Therefore let all men say what all men can,
Hee^e walk the streets (since rich) an honest man.
Another that is as vile as is the best,
Tiers out his days with labor and unrest:
Till he have got a Miter in such fashion,
As shames himself, his kin and all his nation:
When he no worthier is to bear the load,
Then a base ass is of a Purple roab.
But knew the world how to this height he came
The very stink would poison them with shame.
O times corrupt, O manners worse then naught,
Where nothing but what is vile is sold and bought!
Too true it is, which all the world has told,
All things at Rome, even heaven for coin is sold.
William surnamed Rufus, when in hand, A ta^e.

He swaid the English Scepter at command,
It chanced a wealthy Abbey void did fall,
Whose great demeanes being rich in general,
Many came to the king the same to buy,
(For he did money love exceedingly)
Now when Church chapme^ al were com'd unto him
And with their utmost sums did amply woe him,
He spide a Monk stood half behind the door,
Whom straight he called, and bade him come before:
Imagining he came as did the rest,
With full filled bags, to make his offer best,
And therefore thus the king most graciously
Speaks to the Monk; Tell me man willingly,
What thou will give; great the revenues are,
And thou free leave to offer for thy share.
My gracious Lord (the old man did reply)
I came not hither this rich place to buy:
For I am poor: or had I wealth at will,
I would not load my conscience with such ill:
As to ingrosse Church livings above other,
Making me rich by robbing of my brother.
Besides, I were an ass to undertake,
To lay too great a burden on my back:
Which to support, I know I am unfit,
Both for my learning, industry and wit.
Only I hither came in humble wise,
To beg of him which to this place should rise,
That I this pe^ty favor might but have,
To be his Priest, his beads-man or his slave.
The King who heard this old man graciously,
And finding in him true humility,
Whence his rare virtues sprang so curioufly,
That they excelled his rank in dignity:
Freely and frankly without recompense,
Gave him this Abbey and dispatched him thence.
Saying he it deserved most worthily,
Since he so well could brook his poverty.
Neither such gift nor King I ere shall know,
Yet such a mind and thoughts within me grow.
I have a mind which harbors calm content,
Void of all lucre, and from malice bent.
And would I fish for livings, there is no doubt,
But I should easily bring my wish about.
Ari^o was somewhat variable in his desires and a little humourous withal, and
therefore would hardly be bound or tied to any thing longer then himself
listed.
"But home is homely, I am best at ease,
"When I have none but mine own self to please.
"Riches are still the children of much care,
"Who couets nothing, only rich men are.
"Great is the labor which does purchase gain,
"Greater the sorrow which does it maintain^.
"But once to lose it, even death does bring:
I Will no such bees which have so sharp a sting.
Sufficient for my self is my small store,
And greatest monarchs do enjoy no more.
The fourth Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows that it is good and necessary to marry, and yet by the way
glaunceth merrily at that state of life, showing how hard a matter it is for a
man to keep his wife honest and chaste.

I Hear Ariosto being not given to mary, his kinsman the Lord Hanibal was loath
to make him privy to his wedding; which he takes very unkindly in this Satyr.
by strangers, friends the world and all, Written to the Lord Hanibal Malaguzzo.

(Except thy self, thrice noble Hanibal)
That thou art now about to take a wife,
Knitting these worlds cares to a better life.
I not mislike that so your fancy stands,
Only I take unkindly at your hands,
That unto me you would not tell your mind,
Since in my counsels you might comfort find.
Perhaps thou have conceald it, from this fear,
Lest I should hap to oppose what thou holdst dear,
Thinking because my self unmarried am,
Therefore I marriage will in others blame.
If so thou censur'st me, thou do me wrong:
For though I never knew what did belong,
To wedlock: yet I never have withstood,
Those which choose marriage as their chiefest good,
He excuses himself in that he lived a batchellor so long, which he says was
his hard fortune, and not his fault: although there is no doubt, but if he had
listed, he might h^ matched very well, and every way to his contentment.
Often have I grieved, and yet I sadly mourn,
That then to marry, I have chose to burn.
My self excusing that I still was crossed,
By hand of Fate, and so my fortunes lost:
For though unto it I was fully bent,
Occasion still my meaning did prevent.
But this has ever mine opinon been,
Nor ever shall there change in me be seen:
That men cannot in perfect goodness stand,
Unless he live within the marriage band.
Nor without women can live free from sin,
For he which thrusts such guests out of his Inn,
Is either forced to borrow of another,
Or theese-like without consci ence robs his brother.
He could give good counsel himself, but could not follow it, as Medea
says in (...). -- Video me^ra proboque deteri^ra sequer --
Besides, who unto stranger sheets does cleave,
Turns Cormorant, and temperance does leave.
For if to day he seed on lark or quail,
Next morn, heel have the Pnesant or the Rail.
And which is worst, he loses sense of love,
And that sweet touch which charity should move.
He enueigheth against some Priests, who lived too much incontinently.
Hence comes it, priests of all men are the worst,
Biting like dogs with madness made accursed.
The whilst no common Palliard, baud nor slave,
Carries more viler surfets to his grave.
Borrow of all they do, but none they pay,
Base are their deeds, how well so ere they say.
Again, in public carriage and in shoe,
They are so void of judgment, and do go
So far from virtue, that I wonder much,
Women will daine but to be touched by such.
You know it is true, who do in Regio dwell,
But that all truths, for fear you dare not tell.
Bug-beare confession whispering in your ear,
I^is damnation to tell all you hear.
Well, though you nothing say, yet from your eyes,
I read the depth of all these mysteries,
Modena is a City in Lumbardy, subject unto the Dukedom of Ferara (now the
Popes) where the Churchmen bare them selves over licentiously and more vnc^
then becomeed them. In this town Sadolet^ and Molza, two learned Italians of
their time were borne.
Ofstubborne Modena I speak naught at all,
Who though this great plague did upon it fall,
Yet it deserves to be punished worse,
May on her and her priests light heavens curse.
But now to you. Elect betimes your mate,
Better too soon to marry then too late.
And since perforce thou needs this life wilt try,
Aduenter on it most courageously.
A famous Physi^on of Ferara, who married not til he was all 80. years old,
and then (doting) took a marvelous fair maid unto his wife, and presently
after died.
Do not as did doctor B^on Leo old,
Who took a wife when all his blood was cold:
When age had made him for a grave more fit,
Then or for wife or youthful appetit.
Defer not thou till age come creeping on,
Lest strength consumed, thy body suffer wrong.
"Old ages Herbingers and snow-white hairs,
"Warm drinks and clothes are good for many years:
A cup of wine in withred Hermons head,
Is better then a fair maid in his bed:
Age with such liquors often is well eased,
Venus with gouts and palsies is not pleased.
Fair Hym^ is not painted old,
But youthful, fresh, with saffron hair like gold:
The old man feeling but some sparks of fire,
Which with much labor does but warm desire,
Begins to rouse his Icie spirits up,
As if he had caroust on Aesons cup:
Much he imagins he can do, when lo,
Strength does forsake him, ere his strength he know:
And he poor soul even in his height of pride,
Is conquered ere the encounter he have tried.
Yet so he must not think his wife will yield,
Her better spirit better joys the field.
"Fire with water, never will agree,
"Nor nature will not loose her sovereignty.
But say it were not so; yet in these days,
The world being rather given to dispraise,
Then to speak well of any, who are they,
Will marry Winter unto youthful May?
But they will wish Saint Lukes badge on his head,
And that in horne-bookes he be deeply read.
And thus although they merit not this blame,
Yet can they not escape all poisoning fame,
Who for the most part does of falsehoods prate,
But be it false or true it is then too late
To call i^ home again, if once the vent,
About the bussing busy world be sent:
And who his honor or good name does love,
Must patient be for he this cross must prove.
Yet this bad p^n nothing is at all,
But that which we damned iealo^sie do call:
Although it is ill enough when we behold,
An Infant whom the cr^le does infold:
And two or three crope newly from the shell,
Who in their clamours do their grieuance tell.
Add unto these a pretty girl or twain,
Whom thou in virtues manners seek'st to train:
Yet have not any whom thy soul can trust,
Will honest be to them, or to thee just.
But rather will allure them by all means,
To vicious living, and to shameless strains.
Choose wisely then, since thou do know this curse,
He finds fault with diverse Gentlemen of Ferara, that were younger brothers,
who because their wealth was little, would not marry when they were young, and
yet coming to be old, they made their choice worse, when getting their own
maids and drudges with child, they were after glad to marry them because the
children which they had got by them should not be counted bastards.
And like our Gentlemen be not found worse.
Many of which buried in cloisters low,
Lie hid, while'st grass does ore their grave stones grow,
On marriage their minds did never set,
Because they meant not children to beget,
And so be forced that little to disseauer,
Which scarce would serve, when it was unite together
That which in strength of youth they did refuse,
Now grown in years most shamefully they choose,
Showing themselves to be so base of mind,
That even in Borish villages they find:
And in the Kitchins greasy scullerie,
With whom to sport themselves lasciuiously,
Boys are begot, which as in years they grow,
Such abject vile behauiours from them flow,
That they are forced to marry them perforce,
Unto Clownes daughters, or to creatures worse,
Even to cracked Chambermaids broke up of late,
Because they would not have their sons in state
Of bastardy, and here hence does proceed,
That noblest houses in Ferara bleed,
With wounds of tainted honor and with shame,
As all eyes do behold which view the same.
This is the cause the worthies of this town,
Are seldom seen to flourish in renown
Of virtue, or of valor, or of arts,
And hence it is their ancestors best parts,
I mean those of the worthy mothers side,
Are of their generous qualities so wide.
My Lord, to marry you do passing well,
And yet attend these precepts I shall tell.
First think thereof, lest when you would retire,
You cannot, being slau'd unto desire:
This Poet gives his friend better counsel then he himself could follow,
for although he would never marry, yet is he noted to have kept at his own
proper charges one Alexandra, a proper woman a long time, although his friend
say that he was married unto her privily, and durst not be known of it, for
fear of loosing some s^all spiritual livings which he had, and which were not
lawful for any married man to enjoy.
In this important matter, most, most great,
Although my counsel you do not entreat.
Yet I will show you how a wife to choose,
And which among women wisemen should refuse:
But you perhaps, will wondering smile at me,
And place it with impossibility,
That I this weighty charge should undertake,
Yet never knew what meant the married state.
I pray you tell me; has not your Lordship seen,
When as two gamsters have at tables been:
The third man which (as lookers on) stood by,
More to have seen in play then they could spy:
If you do find I shoot nere to the white,
Follow my rules and hold my judgment right:
But if you see I roue far off and wide,
Then both my counsels and my self deride:
And yet before I further do proceed,
It Is meet, that first this caution I do reed.
If you to take a wife have strong pretense,
Yet build your ground on naught but lustful sense,
Twere madness to persuade you from her love,
Though reasons against her honor I could prove.
If she do please you, then she virtuous is,
Nor any gift of goodness can she miss:
No Rhethorick, reason, nor no strength of wit,
Can make thee loath when lust rules appetit:
So much thou art besotted on her face,
That reason must to pleasure yield her place.
I for a wilful blind man am no guide,
But if in lists of wisdom thou will bide,
Then scholler-like examine what I say,
And I shall merit thanks another day.
Who so thou art that meanst a wife to take,
(If of thine honor thou account do make)
Learn what her mother is, that step begin,
And how her sisters live, how free from sin:
If we in horses, kine, and such like creatures,
Desire to know their lineall race and natures,
What ought we then to do in these, who are
Then other cattle, more deceitful far?
A Hare you never saw bring forth a Heart,
Nor do from Doves nests Eglats ever part.
Even so a mother that is infamous,
Hardly can bear a daughter virtuous.
From trotting races, amblers seldom breed,
From self like natures, self like things proceed.
Besides the branch is like unto the tree,
And children keep what first they learned be.
"Ill education spoileth manners good,
"Corrupts best natures, and infects the blood.
"Homebred examples and domestic illes,
Grafts errors in cleannest breasts, and good thoughts kills.
If she perceiues her mother to possess,
Many saire servants she will have no less:
Nay she will more have, or her better skill,
Shall leave to be the agent of her will:
And this she does to show in courtlinesse,
That (then her mother) she is nothing less,
And that heaven did with equal bounty place,
Within them both one beauty and one grace,
To know her nurse, and how her life she leads,
What her commercements are, and how she treades:
Whether her father brought her up or no,
If she can play the cook, weaue, work or sow,
Here Ariosto is a little malicious against the court for many gentlewoman, yea
and those sort are as well brought up, and as virtuously given, living in the
court, as if they had all the days of their youth been trained and (...) up
in their fathers own houses, music and a sweet voice, being two as
commendable qualities as can adorn any Lady, only the liberty of courts to
diseased minds, is the ground to these inventions.
Orifinidle courts she have remaind,
And there in song and music has been traind.
To judge the better of her virtues this,
And all the rest to know, most needful is.
Seek not a wife whose style and nobleness
Shall fill thy veins with much vaingloriousnes:
Such often their husbands unto wrath provoke,
Whilst they to him are nothing else but smoke.
It Is good to match with one that's nobly borne,
So she her husbands birth hold not in scorn.
Such one take thou great Lord as fit shall be,
Both for thy living and thy pedigre:
For hardly thou thy better shall content,
Unless on her dependence much be spent.
A brace of pages, serving gentlemen,
And for her state a flock of gentlewomen,
To keep their Lady from all faults offense,
Without the which there is no patience.
Nor so content, a dwarse she needs must have,
A fool, a pandor, and a jesting knave,
With dogs and munkies, parrets and such toies,
Whose idle service, idle time destroies:
With other company for cards and dice,
Whose wits can sort with courtiers that are nice;
Nor when she takes the air, will she forth tread,
Without her rich caroche well furnished.
But this last charge is nothing to that cost,
Must on more private toies be vainly lost.
Now if thou no such prodigal fond part,
(Who for of birth and living chief thou art
Within thy native home) shall prove, then know,
The poorer sort such glories dare not show.
If hackneymen do round about the town,
Run for to let their coach horse up and down,
What then will he do? who at his command
Has of his own, which ever ready stand?
If others two horse keep, the rich will still
Have four at least, yet think the draught but ill.
With such an one thou shall possess more care,
Meaning that (...) wife will make a man (...) Oriando became through the
vn^nes of Angelica.
Then mine Or^do in his madness bare.
Here the Poet sets down many excellent rules how a man should choose a
wife, and having chosen one, how he should b^haue himself toward her.
If she shall braule with thee maliciously,
Govern with patience her extremity,
And as Ulysses against the Sirens song,
Made himself deaf to shelter him from wrong,
So her expostulatings do not hear,
But against such clamarous noise glue up thine ear.
"When she speaks most do thou least speech afford,
"For silence cuts a shrow worse then a sword.
"A froward wife for very spite will cry,
"When thy neglect does scorn her tyranny.
Have special care that with no foule-mouthd speech,
Thou make into her fury any breach:
For then thou all confound'st, and one small shower,
Will on thy head a world of new storms power,
Which with such bitterne^e she will declare,
That stings of wasps not half so noisome are.
Let her as near as (...) or wit can find,
Agree with every humor in thy mind,
That ancient customs in thy house remain.
And that no danger lurk within her train,
In being greater then thou can support,
For things do fall to ruin in that sort.
I do not like that beauty whose rare merit
Will praise beyond all excellence inherit
Nor such a one whose court audacitie,
Bears her beyond all comely modesty.
Twixt fair and foul there is a golden mean,
Unto which path I feign would have you lean.
A loving maid, not lovely strive to choose
The faces beauty; for the minds refuse.
Please thy best judgment, it is no matter then,
Though she seem foul or black to other men.
The Italian has a praire of such a wife.

Chi ha b^anco canello, et bella moglie,
Non (...) may senza doglie.
Whose horse is white, and wife is fair,
His head is never void of care.

Her to possess whose beauty does exceed,
Does to all curious eyes much sorrow breed:
For she even frozen hearts does set on fire,
Making them languish in unchaste desire.
A world will venture her fair forte to spoil,
Wherein albe she give some few the foil:
Yet at the last comes one with bribes and prays,
Who so in pieces all her forces tears,
That at the last having no more delay,
She yields, and he her honor bears away.
A wife that's more then fair is like a stale,
Or chanting whistle which brings birds to thrall.
He alludeth to the common saying in Italic.

Fa peccat^ nisieme col penitenza,
Chi piglia bruta m^glie a credenza.
Who takes a woman foul unto his wife,
Does penance ever, yet sins all his life.

Yet of no sluttish foulenes fix thy mind,
(...) There Is no ill quality so vile in a woman, as to be a fool, for I have
often heard a wise man say, he had rather have a willy wanto^, a witty shrow, or
a foul slut to his wife, then one that was so^ or foolish, affirming that the
first if she did a fault would with discretion hide it. The second with her wit
would now and then delight him. The third because of her deformity, study and
endeavor always to please him, but the last which was the fool, would shame
both her self, her husband and her friends.
For so perpetual penance thou shall find.
Beauties which are indifferent most me move,
Fair which is still most fair I do not love.
Pure of complexion let her be and good,
And in her cheeks fair circled crimson blood.
Hie coulors argue choler and distaste,
And such hot bloods are seldom made to waste.
Let her be mild and witty, but not cursed,
Nor foolish, for of all breeds that's the worst.
None so deformed are, or ugly foul,
As fools which more are gazd at then the Owl:
For if she any fault abroad commit,
Her long to^gd gossip straight must know ofit:
Nothing so pr^ate can be done or said,
Which through the whole world shall not be conuaid.
Thus she her husband and her self does bring,
To be a scorn to every abject thing:
Where as the witty wench so careful is,
There Is none shall know albe she do amiss.
Like to the Cat who buries under ground
Her ordure, le^t by men it should be found.
Let her be pleasing, full of courtesy,
Lowly of mind, prides deadly enemy:
Pleasant of speech, seldom sad or never,
And let her countnance cheareful be for ever,
A viniger tart look or clowdy brow,
Furroud with wrinckles I do not allow,
And so to pout or lowre through sullenness,
Is a strong sign of dogged peevishness.
Let her be bashful and of modest grace,
Hear, but not answer for thee, wherein place
Thou art: for it is extremest oblo quie,
When she does prate and thou must silent be,
No idle huswife let her ever be,
But always doing some thing seriously.
Sluttishnes in women was so much detested with the ancient Romans, that one of
the chief noble men of the city put his wife from him by divorce, as if she
had been incontinent and unchaste of her body, yea only for that fault.
Let her well loved self, her self preserve,
And from all goatish sents he skin conserve.
Women do often like golden tombs apeare,
Worthy without when naught within is fair.
Some ten or twelve years younger then thou art,
Elect thy wife, for that's a wise man's part:
Because a woman's glories ever fail,
Long ere the man's strength do begin to quail,
And so within thine eye will breed dislike,
Ere mutual years thee in like weakness strike,
Therefore I wish the husbands age should be
Thirty at least, for then th'impaciency
Of youthful heat begins to assuage,
And with more moderation rules his rage.
Let her be such a one as fears God,
Lest she aproue the sting of heavens rod,
Religious, not scrupulous, and boue all,
Let her know none whom puritans we call:
To run from Church to Church through all the town,
To wear a thin small ruff, a bare black gown,
To faigne to speak like chickins when they peep,
Or leare like cats when they do seem to sleep.
To make long prayers and goggle up their eyes,
As if their zeales would tear God from the skies.
To chide if any thing we say is good,
(Excepting God) as Prince or alms, or food,
Christmas to name but Christ tide, as it were
Damnation, but the bare word mass to hear,
To speak to none that walks in the street,
Or with these words God save you, any greet:
Not to look up, but fix on earth the eye,
Aparant signs are of hypocrisy.
God pleased is with plainness of the heart,
And not with dumb shoes of the outward part,
Such as her life, such her religion is,
Where arts and words agree not, all is amiss.
Many good gentlewomen especially old widows are abused by counterfeit Priers
in Italy, they making a show of more holiness then the rest of their coat,
when it is nothing else but mere knauerie and dissimulation.
I would not that acquaintance she should have,
With a precission Fri^ for he is a knave,
They under color of confession frame,
Mischief and many matrons do defame,
Nor shall she feast them with delitious fare,
For they but counterfeits and cheaters are,
To widows, wives and maids they do remain,
Vild, as in harvest are great showers of rain.
These be such women as the Poet speaks of, Meruit formosa videri, that is,
she deserved with the pains she took, to seem handsom^ though indeed she was
not.
Let her own beauty be her own delight,
Without adulterate painting, read or white,
Nature has fixed best colors to the face,
No art has power to give so sweet a grace.
Great pains to little purpose and much shame,
They spend, who to adorn their bodies frame,
Do profitlesse consume whole days away,
Let such a one not in thy favor stay.
A golden time, a glorious world it was,
When women had no other looking glass
Then the clear fountain, and no painting knew,
But what they from the simple sleikstone drew.
Complexion now in every place is sold,
And plaster wise daubd upon young and old.
Old iades must have read bridles, and the hag,
Will not in toies behind the youngest lag.
An Italian gentleman, whose mistress face was like a painters table.
Knew Herculan but where those lips of his,
He lays when his Lid^a he does kiss.
He would disdain and loath himself as much,
As if the loathsom'st ordure he did touch.
It is most true that the Jews make the best colors, either Rosa or (...), as
may be seen in Famag^sta in Cyprus, and it is also credibly reported that they
make it after this filthy manner as the Poet here sets down.
He knows not, did he know it he would spewe,
That paintings made with (...) of a Jew,
(For they the best fell) n^ that loathsome smell,
(Though mixed with musk and amber nere so well,
Can they with all their cunning take away
The fleame and snot so rank in it does stay.
Little thinks he that with the filthy doung,
Of their small circumcised infants young,
The fat of hideous serpents, spaune of snakes,
Which slaves from out their poisonous bodies takes.
All which they do preserve most curiously,
And mix them in one body cunningly,
Making that unguent, which who buies to use,
Buies hell withal, and heaven does refuse.
Fie how my queasie stomach up does rise,
To think with what gross stuff in beastly wife,
They make this hateful vomit of the face,
With which fond women seek themselves to grace,
Daubing their cheeks in dark holes with the same,
Lest the days eye should tell the world their shame:
But knew men which do kiss them, what I know,
They would so far in detestation grow,
That ere they would touch maskes so foul as this,
Mensis profluuium they would gladly kiss.
Nay knew but women how they are abusd
By these plague salues (so generally vsd
Of them) and by those drugs where with they fill
Their closets, cabinets and cofers still:
They soon would find their errors and confess,
It Is they alone which makes them beautilesse.
Although this doctrine be as true as true may be, yet will not many
gen^lewomen believe it, but hold it to be mere heresy and no truth.
This curious painting when they undertake,
True natures beauty does the cheek forsake:
All that is excellent away is fled,
Hating to live with hell being heaven bred.
Likewise those waters which they use with care,
To make the pearl teeth orient and more fare,
Turns them to rottenness, or black like hell,
Whilst from their breaths does issue forth a smell,
More noisome then the vilest iakes can yield,
Or carrion that corrupts within the field.
Well, let thy wife to none of these sins cleave,
But to the Court these rarer cunnings leave.
The virtues that in women praise do win,
Are sober shows without, chaste thoughts within:
True faith and due obedience to their make,
And of their children honest care to take.

Let her apparel be in comely fashion,
And not stragnized after every nation.
Head-tires in shape like to a corronet,
With pearl, with stone, and Jewels richly set,
Befits a Princesle right; a velvet hood,
With golden border, for thy wife's as good.
The Loome, the Needle and fine Cookery,
Does not disparage true gentility.
Nor shall it be amiss, if when thou art,
Within thy country home, thy wife impart,
Her huswifely condition, and suruay,
Her Dayrie and her milk-pans once a day.
The greatest states in these days will respect
Their profits, when their honors they neglect.
The bringing up of children in good sort, is one of the chiefest parts which
belongs to an honest wo^ as the Poet says in his Orlando Furio^
But her cheese care shall on thy Children be,
To bring them up in each good quality.
And thus, if such a wife thou can attain,
I see no reason why thou should refrain.
For say that afterward her mind should change,
And from corrupter thoughts desire to range:
Or that she seckes to scandalize her house,
With black disdain, or shame most impious,
When in her harvest years thou comst to mow,
And findst where corn was, naught but weeds dohgrow:
Yet thou thy self as faulty, ^nst not blame,
But spiteful Fate, the author of defame:
And that her infancy was misgouerned,
And not in virtue truly nurtered.
Thou can but sorry be for her offense,
When want of grace does draw on impudence.
But he that like a blind man does run on,
And takes the first his fortunes fall upon,
Or he that worse does (as does basest he)
Who though he know her most unchaste to be:
Yet he will have her in dispight of all,
Even though the world him hateful Wittall call.
If after sad repentance him importune,
Let him accuse himself for his misfortune:
Nor let him think any will moan his case,
Since his own folly bred his own disgrace.
But now since I have taught thee how to get,
Thy best of choice, and thee on horseback set.
I Will learn thee how to ride her: wild or tame,
To curb her when, and when to rain the same:
No sooner thou shall take to thee a wife,
But thou shall leave the old haunts of thy life,
Keep thine own nest, lest some strange bird lie hid,
And do by thee as thou by others did.
Good counsel to all such young men who have long war^d themselves by other
men's fires.
Like a true Turtle with thine own dove stay,
Else others t'wixt thy sheets may falsely play.
Esteem her dear, and love her as thy life,
No matchless tr^sure like a loyal wife.
If thou will have her like and honor thee,
First let her thine affections amply see:
What she does for thee, kindly that respect,
And show how thy love does her love affect.
If by omission she do ought amiss,
In any thing that against thy nature is:
With love and not with fury let her know,
Her errors ground, for thence amendments grow.
A gentle hand, A Colt does sooner ^ame
Then chains or fetters which do make him lame.
Spaniels with stroking we do gentle find,
Sooner then when they coopled are or pinde.
These kind of cattle gentler then the rest,
Without the use of rigor do the best.
Good natures by good usage best do prove,
Disdain breeds hate, it is love ingenders love,
But that like asses they should beaten be,
Neither with sense nor reason does agree:
For where loves art auailes not, there I fear,
Strokes will more bootlesse and more vile appear.
Many will boast what wonders they have wrought
By blows, and how their wishes they have cau^.
How they have tamed their shrewes and pulled them down,
Making them veil even to the smallest frown.
But let those Giants which such boastings love,
Tell me what they have got and it will prove,
Their wives their blows, on hands and face do bear,
And they their wives marks on their foreheads wear.
These braggants are like that honest man whose wife having broke his pate, and
he wearing a nightcap, being asked why he ware it, answered that his wife
falling on the sudden ficke, he took such thought for the same, that he
became himself ill also, and so was glad to excuse the matter.
Besides who least a wicked wife can tame,
Does oftest brag that he can do the same.
Remember she is neighbor to thy heart,
And not thy slave, she is thy better part.
Think it is enough that her thou may command,
And that she does in loue-knots loyal stand:
Although thy power thou never do approve,
(...) that's the way to make her leave to love.
Give her all wishes whilst she does desire,
Nothing but that which reason does acquire.
And when thou have confirmd thee in her love,
Preserve it safe, let nothing it remove.
And yet to suffer her, do all she will,
Without thy knowledge, may much virtue kill.
So likewise to instruct without all reason,
To perfect love is more then open treason.
To go to feasts and weddings among the best,
Is not amiss: for there suspect is least.
Nor is it meet, that she the Church refrain,
Since there is virtue, and her noble train.
In public markets and in company,
Is never found adulterous villainy.
But in thy gossips or thy neighbors house,
And therefore hold such places dangerous.
By this trick Ariosto shows himself to be a right Italian: for so do many
Italians use to dog their wives when they go abroad, the poor women not
thinking that their husbands do watch them as they do.
Yet as devotion to the Church her leads,
Thou shall do well to mark which way she treades:
For often times the goodly pray is still
The cause why men do steal against their will.
Chiefly take heed, what consort she lives in,
Beware of Wolves that wear the Weathers skin.
Mark what resort within thy house does move,
Many kiss children for the nurses love.
There was in a certain University either here or else where a certain Malt
man, who having a very sweet and lovely brown woman to his wife, many
Gentlemen Students and others, would be his kinsmen, in so much that a familiar
of his demanded one day of him merrily, which way it came that so many gallants
were allied unto him: who replied laughing (like a good companion) by my truth
sir I know not, except this kindred come by my wives side: for before I was
married unto her, there was not one scholar in this University that was
acquainted with me. This fellow though he was plain, yet had he a shrewd
pate, and altough he said little, yet did he think more, and many dry
blows he would give these lusty youths which resort unto his house, whereof I
will give yoy a taste and so away: One day a gentleman of a good house came to
visit him (or rather if I should say truly his wife) who meeting him at his
door saluted him, calling him kinseman, and withal asked how his cosen his
wife did, saying he would be so bold as to go in and see her. I pray you do,
said the goodman, and yet before you go a word with you. With all my heart,
replide the scholar: then said the malt-man, since I came acquainted with you
and other kind gentlemen my kindred, I have learnt two Latin verses, and I
would know the meaning of them. Let me hear them said the young student: that
you shall said the townesman, and these be they. Tuta frequensque via est, per
amici fallere nomen:
Tuta frequensque licet sit via, crimen habet.
Now, said he, I pray you tell me them in English, I am not so good a scholar
at the first sight to explain them, replied the studdent. Then I am said the
married man, and this it is: Friendship with greatest safety does deceive,
And yet though safe, it is knauish by your leave.
Hereupon he fell a laughing, saying, I think I have now paid you home, and
so away he went, leaving the student to go visit his wife.
Some for thy wives sake much will honor thee;
Do not with such men hold society.
When she is abroad, thy fear is of small worth,
The danger's in the house when thou art forth.
Yet wisely watch her, lest she do espy
Thy politic and waking jealousy.
Which if she do, then is her reason strong,
Thee to accuse, that do her causlesse wrong.
Remove all causes what so ere they be,
Which to her name may coople infamy.
And if she needs will cast away all shame,
Yet let the world know thou art not to blame.
I know no other rules to set thee down,
How thou may keep unstained thy wives renown.
Nor how thou may keep men from having power,
Thy wives chaste honors basely to devour.
Many hold of opinion that to be a cuckold is destiny and not their wives
dishonesties, as a good fellow in the world said to a friend of his, who
telling him he was sorry that so honest a man as he should be abused as he
was, seeing the fault was his wives and not his. I thank you neighbor
(replied he) for your good conceit of me: but I assure you I think it was not
her fault, but rather mine own fortune that made me a cuckold: for I verily
believe whosoere I had married would have bin n^ught as well as she. Nay then
(quoth his neighbor) if you think so, God forbid I should dissuade you from an
opinion you hold so confidently, and so left him.
And yet I Will tell thee this, if she have will
To tread awry, thou must not think through skill
To mend her, for she is past all recure,
And what she will do thou must needs endure.
Do what thou can by art or observation,
She will create thee of a forked fashion.
All Is one if thou do use her ill or well,
When women are resolved spite heaven or hell
They will strike sail, and with lascivious breath,
Bid all men welcome though it be their death.
And for you shall not justly think I lie,
Lend but your ear to this true history.
There was a Painter whom I cannnot name, A tale.

That used much to picture out the Devil,
With face and eyes fit for a lovely dame:
Nor cloven feet, nor horns, nor any evil,
So fair he made him, and so formally,
As whitest snow, or purest Iuory.
The devil who thought it very great disgrace,
The Painter should overcome in courtesy:
Appeared unto him face to face,
Declared what he was in breuity:
And that he came but only to requite,
His pains in painting him so fair and white.
And therefore wild him ask what so he would,
Asluring him to have his whole request.
The wretch who had a wife of heavenly mould,
Whose beauty brought his jealous brains unrest:
Entreated for the ending of that strife,
Some means to be assured of his wife.
Then seemed the devil to take a goodly ring,
An put it on his finger, saying this;
So long as thou shall wear this pretty thing,
Thou may be sure she cannot do amiss.
But if thou use to leave this ring vnworne,
Nor man nor devil can keep thee from the horn.
Glad was this man, and with his gladness waked,
But scarce had he opened both his eyes,
Before he felt his wife stark belly naked:
And found his finger hid between her thighs.
Remembering then his dream how it concluded,
He thought the Devil had him in sleep deluded.
And yet not so (quoth he) for it is tr^e
If so we mean our wives shall be no flingers,
There is no such devise, nor old nor n^w,
As still to wear such rings upon our fingers:
For else though all our hairs were watchful eyes,
We should not see their subtle treacheries.
Nor can this policy scarce us avail,
For if she means Cha^cers jest to try,
She to another will her love entaile,
Although she knew she for the same should die.
Antonie Siluis a noble man of Venice, having a marvelous fair woman unto his
wife, and being sent ambassador into Germany unto the Emperor the^ living, the
Signori of Venice, was so jealous over her, as he devised a most wonderful,
strange and artificial lock and key per la Fico sua, which the good Lady took
unkindly (being mistrusted without cause) that he no sooner was gone onward on
his journey, but that she by the counsel and persuasion of her amorous servant
(assisted by the cunning devise of a most ingenious and excellent workman, a
Dutchman) got a false key for the lock, and so enjoyed her loving friend all
the absence of her husband, who returning home again never perceived the
fraud But after the death of this Lady, the knowledge whereof coming to the
Signori of Venice, they for the strangenes of the matter, caused the lock and
chain to be amongst their other chief momuments in Graund Sala in S. Marks
palace, it is made of silver plate, very thin, and in proportion not much
unlike a horse-shoe, with small little holes in the midst, and is as smooth at
the one end as at the other, having two little small chains which came round
about her middle, and were shut close on each side with a lock, it is at this
day with other antiquities to be seen there.
The sly Venetian locked his Ladies ware,
Yet through her wit Acteons badge he bare.
My Lord, few married men do live content,
Their wives as crosses unto them are sent:
So must I say the single life is ill,
Since in the same dwells many troubles still.
The Poet compares marriage to Purgatory, whereas they say they continue in
pain but for a certain time. But the Batchellors life he terms hell,
because in respect of the comforts in marriage, it may be termed a hellish
life, or else he terms the batchellors life hell, because he thinks that none
perhaps live honest until they be married: and therefore in the greater danger
if they die not maids.
Yet better it is in purgatory dwell
A little space, then always live in hell.
What my best strength of reasons are you see,
And therefore your own caruer you may be.
Our Poet here is very merry with his kinseman, especially being an Italian,
who of all sports cannot abide any jest that sauoreth of the horn, for if he
say No doubt,

Ioco di ma^^, Ioco di villano
Pigliata nell ^ran scorno
Il Ioco dello corno.
But in the end he makes him amends, wishing him as good a wife as good may
be, even the best amongst women.
It Is all but one resolve, who ere is borne
To marry, likewise must possess the horn.
Yet I but merrily do write and jest,
The married man's estate of all is best:
And they who cannot chastely lead their li^es,
May in the world find many worthy wives.
One of the best of which I wish to you,
One that is loving, loyal, wise and true.
The fifth Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows by occasion of a certain kind of government or Liuetenancie over
a country which the Duke of Ferrara bestowed upon him, hor^ unfit he was for
any thing but only for the Muses. And that to be a lover is the greatest fault
and greatest absurdity that anyman can commit.

THis day has fully sum'd an even year, To Master Sigismond Malag^zzo.

Since hither first I made my sad repair:
(Leaving Ferrara, where I first drew breath,
By endless toil to hasten speedy death).
Two rivers so called, not far from the Apenine mountains.
Hither where swift T^rrita, Serchio meets,
Betwixt two bridges whence their billows fleetes.
Making continual noise through diverse springs,
Which their own flowing waters to them brings.
To govern as the Duke did me assign,
A little town upon the borders of the Dukedom of Ferrara, and in these days
somewhat dangerous by reason of the woods and mountains there abouts, where a
number of Bandity kept.
His poor distressed flock of Graffanine,
Leo the 10. was no sooner dead but Alphonso Duke of Ferrara, entered into the
field with an hundred men at arms, two thousand foot, and three hundred light
horsemen, and so went to incampe before Cento, after he had recovered by the
will of the Italians Bondena, Finale, the mountain of Moden^, and Gra^gnana,
and other towns about Romagnia which Leo had taken from him, although he
challenged them to be his.
Which craved his aid asloone as Leo died,
Because the Romish yoke they would not bide.
Even Leo who with much stern cruelty,
Had brought them to the gate of misery,
And worse had done, but that the mighty hand
Of heaven, did all his tyrannies with stand.
And this the first time is in all this while,
That ever I did write or ought compile:
Or to the learned Muses have made suit,
But dumbly lived, tong-tide and sadly mute,
The strangeness of this place has so dismayed me,
That like a fearful bird I durst not play me,
Who having changd her cage, flutters her wing,
And through amazement scard, does fear to sing.
(Kind kinsman) that my case is in this sort,
And that from me thou have not heard report.
Wonder thou not, but rather do admire,
That in this space my breath did not expire,
Seeing I am an exild man, at least,
An hundred miles from that I fancy best,
Since rivers, rocks, and mountains boue the skies,
Ariosto had no fault, but only that he loved Venerie, which was a venial
sin amongst the Italians.
Keeps me from her is dearer then mine eyes.
All other businesses which me concern.
I can excuse, and from mine ease do learn,
To make my friends conceive in general,
That all my greatest faults are venial.
But to thy self I will in plain phrase speak,
And all mine inward cogitations break.
To thee I Will shriue my self, for thou shall know,
Both how my wisdom and my follies grow,
Where as to others should I so much tell,
My folly would be made my passing bell,
To ring my death of wit, whilst with stern look,
The world would hardly my confession brook:
Saying no question he is mighty wise,
Which can see nothing, yet has both his eyes,
And is most fit to be a fool to other,
When his affects he can nor rule nor smother.
Fie to be fifty years and yet to glowe,
As ifI did fully fifteen know,
And then he tells the scriptures strictest laws,
Both scriu'ners ordages, and old men's sawes.
Well though I err, I am not fully blind,
But can my bloods fault in large measure find:
And which is more, I do condemn the same,
And not as others do, defend my shame.
He is the rather to be pitied in that he confesses his fault, being sorry
for it, and willingly would he have amended it, but that he could not.
But what auai^es my penance, when nearelesse
I know my faults, yet make my faults no less,
Or since no precious Antidote I find,
To heal the ranckling v^cer of my mind:
But thou art wiser, since when thou do please,
Thou can affectious sicknesses appease,
Which being hid in man, Nature does mix,
And to man's inward soul the same does fix.
This is the worst the world of me can say,
Whose ill perhaps may have a worse display
Then it deserves, although some verbal care
They have of me, when great their sorrows are,
(And would have more) if I could this redress,
And these my fleshly motions quite suppress.
Those which in this world speak most curiously,
Close in their hearts the deepest injury.
Thou know I know the world has many a slave
That will blaspheme, swear, curse, be mad and rave,
Accusing others that they cuckolds be,
When his weak judgment has no power to see,
How goodly, large and spreading is that horn,
Which his own forehead many years has borne:
Other diseases every one can spy,
But none will mend his own deformity.
We can reprove in strangers what is amiss,
And see not in our selves what vilder is,
We take delight that we can reprehend,
When it were mo^ generous our selves to mend.
The wallet which behind hangs with sins store,
We never see, our eyes are both before.
I neither kill, nor strike, nor do contend,
Nor am I hurtful, but the whole worlds friend,
The worst I do, is that I only grieve,
Because I cannot with my mistres live,
And think it torment more then torments be,
To live from her which only lives in me,
And yet I not forget t'acknowledge this,
That herein only I do still amiss:
Yet not so ill but that by intercession
I may be pardond through mine own confession.
The vulgar sort with water oftentimes,
(Not only greater faults then my small crimes)
Wash clean away, but (which breeds greater shame
Baptiseth vice with noble virtues name.
By Hermilian Rainard and others, he shows how many in the world commit
grosse^ faults by far then he did, and yet what they do passes for current,
and are not condemned of the world.
Hermilian that is grown so covetous,
(As to behold the same it is monstrous)
Nor rests by day nor slumbers in the night,
But makes his gold his God and his delight,
No love of friend or brother will he hold,
Hates his own self, loves nothing but his gold,
Yet is esteemd a man of industry,
Of perfect wisdom and great policy.
Rainard swells big and does disdain his state,
Looks as the world would tremble at his hate.
He thinks himself what he can never be,
And feeds his hopes with idle imagery,
He will surpass in spending ill got wealth,
And in apparel goes beyond him self.
A steward he will have, a huntsman, faulkoner,
A cook, a chamberlain, and a curious caruer.
Lordships he sels, and makes them fly away,
A manor or a park goes every day.
What his old auncestry had many years
Gathered together, and left unto their heirs,
That with immoderate lauishnes he spends,
And through the world in all disorders sends.
But what for this? none murmures at his will,
Nor does demand why he consumes thus ill:
But rather calls him most Magnanimus,
Most bountiful, gallant and virtuous.
The common sort the Hydra multitude,
Thus with their flattery do him delude.
Solonio so much business takes in hand,
And meddles so with all things in the land,
That even the weight is able to confound
The strongest horse that ever trod on ground.
Within the custom house he has a charge,
And in the Chancery, a pattent large,
To Ports and Keys immediately he flies,
Where both his profit and commandment lies.
One of the strongest and richest places in Rome belonging to the Pope, which
Pope Clement the eight bestowed upon his nephew Don Pietro, it being worth
better then 12000 crowns by the year.
To Castle Angelo then will he scower,
And all this done in minute of an hour,
The very quintescense of all his brains,
He does distill to bring the Pope new gains,
Nor does his cares or painful studies end
To any thing save profit only tend,
It joys his heart when he hears Rumor say,
That with his toiles he wastes his life away,
And so that to his Lord he crowns may bring,
He nor respects acquaintance, friend nor kin.
The people hate him, and they have good cause,
Since it is true, it is he which only draws
The Pope to plague the City, and still lades
Her with new customs, taxes and intrudes.
Yet a Magnifico this fellow is,
High stated and can nothing do amiss.
Whilst like to peassants noblemen not dare
To come to him and their great suits declare:
But they must cap and crouch and bare head stand,
As if he were the Monarch of the land.
Laurino takes upon him (of pure zeal)
In upright justice, chief affairs to deal,
His country heel defend through his deserts,
Whilst public good to private he conuarts,
Three he exiles, but six to death he sends,
Begins a Fox but like a Lion ends.
From tyranny his strength he does create,
Whilst gifts and bribes do even dam up his gate:
The wicked he does raise, the good keeps down,
And yet this man is rich in all renown,
He is renound to be both just and good,
When he is full of whordome, theft and blood:
Where he should honor give, he gives disgrace,
Malice with pride, and pride with wealth does place,
Whom he should most relieve, he most offends,
His ope-eied sustice, loves none but his friends,
Crows often for Swans and Swans he takes for Crows,
Now knew this Justice but my loue-sick woes,
What sower faces from him would apeare,
Like him that on a close-stoole straining were.
Well let him speak his pleasure with the rest,
I care not for their speeches, that's the best,
Only thee which art mine only friend,
I do confess my pleasures are at end,
Since I first hither (against my will) was tossed,
My joys are gone and my delights are lost.
This of my reasons I have chiefest tried,
Though others more I could allege beside,
Why I have left Pernassus learned mount,
Nor with the Muses talked as I was wont,
Then when with thee in Reggio I did stay,
(My native soil) and past the time away,
In all best Iouiall sollace and delight,
Priding my self in weighty verse to write,
Those glorious places did me ample good,
Revived my spirits and inflamed my blood.
He discribeth a maruailous dainty ba^queting house in Reggio, beloaging to the
Mallaguzzi, and called so because it is built after the manner of the buildings
in Barbary, full of great and wide windows for coolenes in summer, and
beautified with many excellent and admirable pictures, and statues of great
price and worth.
Thy Mauritanian lodge for banqueting,
Withal the worthiest pictures flourishing,
And call my Rodan^ not far from thence,
Of water nymphs the choicest residence,
Thy crystal fishponds, and thy garden, which
A silver spring with moisture does enrich,
Watring by Aite those checkerd flowers still,
And in the end falls down into a Mill.
O how I wish for that and for the rest,
Which whilst I did enjoy my sense was blessed.
Nor can my memory forgo the thought,
Of those brave vines from fertile Luco brought;
Those valleies, nor those hills, nor that high Tower
Can I forget, where I have many an hour
Reposd, and searched out every shadowie place,
The Fresco cool I loved to embrace:
Whilst I one book or other would translate,
Which foreign Authors did communicate.
O then I youthful was and in my prime,
My years even April, or the springs best time,
Which now are like October somewhat cold:
For I begin, and shall ere long be old.
But neither can the fountain Hellicon,
Nor Ascras valleies, no nor any one
Be of the power to make my verses sing,
Unless my heart be free from sorrowing:
Which being so, then this place where I dwell,
Is not for study, since it is my hell,
When here no pleasure is, nor any joy,
More then dissension, horror and anoy.
This soil I barraine and unwholesome find,
Subject to storms, to tempests and to wind.
One part is hilly, the other low and plain,
Wherein there does no pleasantnes remain.
The place wherein I live is like a cell,
Deep and descending downward as to hell.
From hence theirs none can come at any time,
Unless he pass the River Appenine.
I tell thee gentle Cuz, ill is my taking,
Since thus of all my friends I am forsaken.
For stay I in my house or to the air,
Seek to disburthen some part of my care
Nothing I hear but spightfull accusations,
Brawle brabbles or more shameful acclamations,
Murders and thefts and such like villainy,
To which I must attend most patiently.
This is the cause s^one while am compeld
With mildest reasons to make some men yield,
Others to threaten, and by force to draw,
Others to punish by strict penal law,
Some I absolve, to some I pardon give,
In hope hereafter they will better live.
Then to the Duke I straight do packets write,
For counsel or for soldiers which must fight,
Leo the Pope used the people of this country so hardly, that they took up
arms amongst themselves and became rebels.
To the end those outlawes which about me stay,
May or be slain, or driven quite away:
For one thing I must let thee understand,
That in most wretched state abides this land.
Some think by the Panther he meant Julius the second, not long before Pope,
and by the Lion Les the tenth.
Since the wild Panther first, the Ly on then,
Did in this woeful country make their den.
So many lurking thieves do here abide,
And in such numbers flock on every side,
As not the best commanders which we have,
(Whose charge is to pursue them to the grave:
Dares with his ensigns spread their strengths invade
Such proofs the slaves have of their valors made:
So that he wisest is which safe does stand,
And stirs not to take danger by the hand.
Still I do write, and write to him again,
Whom it concerns, but all my labors vain:
For though he send (as reason is he should)
Yet he not sends that answer which I would,
Fourscore and three Castles or small villages were there in all, which were
risen up in arms by reason they were so mightily oppressed by Pope Leo.
Each Castle arms (within it self) does take,
And fourscore three in number they do make
Of perjured rebels, who maliciously
Spoil their own country with hostility.
Judge then if great Apollo when I call,
Will come or show himself to me at all,
Leaving his Cynthien or his Delphian shore,
To hear these brabbles which he does abhor,
Both he and all his sacred sisters nine,
To look upon such places do repine:
But here thou may demand of me the cause
Which me to this vexation headlong draws,
Leaving my study with obscure neglect,
And my dear mistress without all respect.
O Cuz, thou know'^ I near was covetous,
Nor from ambition have been envious.
With a poor pention I have been content,
Which in Ferrara got I there have spent.
But thou perhaps this chance did never know,
That when the wars began with us to grow.
When Ariosto first followed the Duke of F^ara, he of his own voluntary mind
bestowed a yearly pension of him, but afterward having waries with the Pope
and the Venetians, both at one time, he withdrew his fo^mer lib^tie, nor when
they were ended did he restore the same unto him again, which Ariost^ took
very unkindly.
The Duke but slowly did my pension pay,
And at the last did take it quite away.
During the wars I grieved not to be barde
Of my best due, but when as afterward,
All things was quiet and the world at peace,
It troubled me to see my payment cease.
Aliud ex ^io malum, here is one (...) upon an (...) ^eck, he no sooner lost
his pen^o^ in F^rara, but his offi^ (...) the Cardinal Hypolito had bestowed
upon him in Milla^, was taken from him by reason of the civil wars in Italy
also.
And so much more, since by ill boading fate,
I then had lost an office in the state.
In Millain, through this unexpected war,
Hoping in vain, short time would end the jar,
Horses do sterue (they say) whilst grass does spring,
And I found he said true that so did sing.
At last unto the Court I weary came,
And thus my suit unto the Duke did frame^
My gracious Lord (said I) vouchsase some gain
Unto the elder merits of my pain.
Or suffer me that I may else pursue
My fortunes some where else, and not with you.
The Grass^ at that time by chance,
Began themselves with courage to advance,
This was the chief captain of the rebels, who did persuade his companions to
leave the Pope, and yield unto the Duke of Ferrara, which upon the conditions
aforesaid, they did-Whereupon the Duke sent Ariosto th^her thither as governor
(to make him amends for his late unkindness) where he behaved himself so
w^sely, that he broug^ the country into great (...), in such w^e as when he
came from them he left them in a manner in g^od peace and concord, although
whilst he remained there, he was much (...) and disquieted in mind.
Being persuaded by Marzoccus song,
To leave the Pope who then had done them wrong.
And thereupon sent many embasies,
Unto our Duke their minds to specify.
The Effect was this, they humbly crave,
They might their ancient privileges have.
With their old customs whereto he is content,
And they forthwith yield to his government.
And hence it came out of some sudden grace,
I chosen was to govern in that place.
Either because the time so short did grow,
That well he knew not where he might bestow
The office but on me, or for I best,
Might spared be as one of merit lost,
For which I count my self with humbleness
Bound by this grace unto his mightiness.
It is his love which binds me to his grace,
For which I thank him more then for this place.
Which though beyond my spirits it aspire,
Yet does it not accord with my desire.
Now if about these rebels you demand,
What mine opinion is: it thus does stand.
They rather did deserve severity,
Then any touch of gentle lenity:
For when I do but call into my mind,
How perjured and perfidious I them find,
Although what ere I did was still to ease them,
Yet there is no doubt but I did still displease them.
They nor like me, nor I their country love,
And therefore daily pray for my remove.
In this I do resemble Aesops Cock,
Who having found a pearl, the same did mock.
A place I have obtained of gain and fame,
And yet (in sooth) I care not for the same.
As with the sea Venetian, so with me A tale.

It fares, to whom a swift-foot barbary,
(A gallant horse) was given by the king,
A Portugale for some great meriting,
Who for he would show that he did accept,
His royal gift, and not the same reject,
(Forgetful how the difference to discern,
T'ixt use of bridles, and the the tall ships stern,
Mounts on his back, and therewith takes hold,
Upon the pannell, like a horseman bold,
That done he strikes his spurs into his side,
Saying softly to himself, for all thy pride,
Thou shall not fling me down do what thou can,
If the girths hold, I Will show my self a man.
The fiery jade, feeling the wounding spur,
Began to plunge, to bound and keep a stir:
Which when the good old Seaman felt, he more,
Draws in his bridle then he did before:
And spurs him worse, both on the flanks and side,
Till with his blood his riders heels were did.
The horse not used to be ridden so,
Nor can his riders doubtful meaning know,
The bridle holding back, and bidding stand,
The spur to go on forward does command.
But in the end, madly resolved thereon,
Flat on the ground he flings sir Pantalon.
Our great Magnifieo lies on his back,
And cries as he were torturd on a rack.
With thighs all sore, and shoulders out ofioint,
His head sore bruisde, his heart at deaths last point,
All pale with grief and fear in piteous wise,
Be smeard with dirt, at last he up does rise:
Right malecontented that he was so mad,
To deal in that where he no judgment had.
Far better had he done, and so had I,
He with his horse, I with this country,
To Have said my Liege, or Lord, I am not fit
For this high place, nor do I merit it.
This bounty does exceed what I deserve,
Let it some better worthes and not mine serve,
If either I or he had been thus plain,
I had had much more ease; he (...) pain.
The sixth Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows what qualities a good Schoolmaster ought to have, and how hardly
any is found honest of that coat, and in the end sets down certain
grievous losses which he endured in his youth time.

BEmbo, He wrote this Satyr before Bembo was Cardinal, who as I said before was
Secretary to Leo the 10. who advanced him to that degree,
I nothing covet or require,
(Though it is the careful parents strong desire) To Mr. Peter Bembo.

Although he were never married yet had he two sons by a very fair woman
called Alessandra, whereof this Virginio whom he loved best was one. The other
was called Gran Baptista, but the Lady to who^ he was d^ed (...), (...) called
Geneu^a, a^ he himself confesses in his seventh Canzon or (...), where he
does figuratively set it down in a most schollerlike manner.
So much as I might my Virginio see,
Rarely instructed in Philosophy,
Which who so has he then is in request,
And may take up his rank amongst the best.
Now since I know that thou most learned art,
And of each liberal science holdst best part:
Even from my best of love, I humbly crave
That of this youth, some watchful care thou have
And yet I would not have thee to conceive,
That with thee any trouble I would leave:
Or that I would thou should his Pedant be,
To teach him Grammar rules industriously:
It Is not my mind: for I would have thee know,
Better good manners does within me grow,
Such men of worth as thou, and of thy place,
With these disparagements we do not disgrace:
Only my meaning is that at thy leisure,
Thou would vouchsafe to do me that hie pleasure.
As to bethink thee, if unto this end,
Thou know in Venice any worthy friend,
Or else in Padoa among the learned throng,
Who speaks the Grecian and the Caldean tongue,
Skillful in knowledge, just in deed and word,
With whom he may have learning, and his board.
If such a one thou know of worth and skill,
He shall (with reason) have what ere he will:
Let him be learned, but especially
Look that his life be fixed to honesty:
For if in virtue he do not surmount,
Of the other qualities I make no accoun^
It Is easy to find learned, but we can
Hardly find out a learned honest man.
For in this age, who most of art does brave,
Has often most vice (reading makes him a knave)
This is a common speech in Italy when any has committed any notable or
horrible sin, they term it Ironice, or a small Peccadillo of Spain: which
grew first from this occasion. A certain Caualier of Spain came to his
Co^fessor to be shriuen of his (...), to whom the Friar giving ^are, he began
to tell him that he had mightily offended in pride. His Ghostly father told him,
that it was the root of all evil, and the chief president of all the other
deadly finnes: but said he, despair not, and believe faithfully, and thou
may be forgiven, and the rather because all Spaniards by nature are proud
and surly. Secondly he told him he was given to be very wrathful and full of
choler: and this, answered the Friar, is another deadly sin, and yet
pardonable, in that you being a Soldier and a brave man at arms, ought not to
pocket up any indignity or abuse: especially if it were to the disparagement
of your honor. Thirdly he said, he was given to lust and lechery: and that
repl^d the Confessor, is a heavy finne: yet may prove to be light through
grace, and may well be forgiven as venial, because thou art a lusty young
man, and in the prime of heat and youth, and no doubt but age will tame it in
you. Fourthly he said he was given much to gluttony, and that (said his Ghostly
father) may be pardoned, in that when you live at home at your own house, you
live with little, not surfeting in meat or drink, as you do when you are
abroad. To conclude, the spani^rd told the Friar, he was guilty of the other
three sins, which were Sloth, Envy and Covetousness: the more is the pity
(answered the Priest) yet for your slo^h, take more pains hereafter: In stead
of being envious, be loving and charitable: And for your covetousness,
entertain liberality and bounty, which will bring you soon to heaven, and so
God forgive you and I do. And having so said, he rose to go his way, when the
Spaniard staying him with his hand, told him, he had one little thing more to
tell him of. The Friar asked him what it was. He replied, that it was a matter
of no moment, and a me^e (...). Yet (quoth the other) clear your conscience of
all, now you have begun. But said the Span^ard it is not worth the speaking of,
it is nothing, Nados, nados, Peccadillos, peccadillos. The Friar hearing him
make so small account of the same, and yet not willing to disclose it, was the
more earnest with him to tell it. Whereupon on the sudden, the Spaniard burst
out into these words. Non credo in Deos: I do not believe in God. The Friar
hearing him say so, blessed himself with the sign of the cross, as if he had
bin some devil, and away he got from him as fast as ever he could trudge. And
ever since that time any famous or notorious villa^y, is termed Peccadillos di
Spagna, by the contrary.
Besides, the Peccadillos small of Spain,
They say he in his speeches does maintain.
Of Atheism they him challenge and approve,
The faith Apostolic he does not love:
Nor of that Unity (admired most)
Betwixt the Father, Son and holy Ghost.
He cannot think how the one from the other goes,
Like diverse springs which from one sountaine flows.
Nor can he in his sense conceive how one,
Should or be three, or that three still be one.
He rather thinks that if hold he shall,
An argument quite opposite to all.
Contesting with all sacred verity,
Alleging for sound reason Sophistry.
That then his wit is excellent and rare,
And his conceir beyond the best compare.
Making the world believe he climbs the air,
And reaches to (...) sacred chair.
Two famous Friars, the first of the order of S. August^, the other of S.
Francis, and now of late days, Lupo Panigarola and Aqua penden^e have been
counted very learned Preachers in the court of Rome, insomuch that the Pope
would say Lupus monet, (...) sua^, and Aquapendente ^cet.
If Nicoletto preaching holy writ,
Or famous Martin with his learned wit:
Suspected be of infidelity,
Or if they chance to hold strong heresy:
Their too much knowledge, I accuse thereof,
Nor will I angry bethereat or scoff,
Since their ambitious spirits mounting hie,
To search Gods deep forbidden secrecy.
No marvel it is though they confounded are,
When they beyond their strengths will wade so far.
But thou whose study is humanity,
Wherein no such depth lies confusedly:
Whose subjects are the woods and shadowing hills,
Or crystal springs whence water clens'd distills:
Whilst thou old martial stories do rehearse,
And blaze abroad in proud Heroicke verse:
Or with the rhetoric of sweet words dostmoue,
And turnest harsh thought unto pliant love.
Or else with pleasing flattery too too base,
Princes do praise when they deserve difgrace.
Tell me what thou in thy conceit do find,
That thou with madness should perturb thy mind?
Or what does with thy knowledge disagree,
That thou as others should not honest be.
Many Italians both men and women will choose rather to be called after the old
Romans then as Christians are, as Peter they will be called P^rio, for John,
Iano, for Luke, Lucio, for Mark, Marco and such like.
The name thou did receive when thou were borne
Of Saint or of Apostle, thou do scorn:
When they thy suerties do Christian make,
And so into th e holy Ch^ch do take,
In Cosnico or in Pomponio,
Thou changest Peter to Pierio,
John into Iano or Iouinian:
Turning the cat Reureso in the pan,
As if the worse thou should be for the name,
Or thou thereby should purchase greater fame,
To be a better Poet, then ifseriously,
Thou plid'st thy book with lesser vanity.
Such fools as these are such as Plato did,
From every civil commonwealth forbid.
By his grave discreet laws, Since he well knew,
Nor good nor profit would from them accrue.
Yet Phoebus music nor Amphions art,
Shall not compare with these in any part.
Nor those which first did holy verse devise,
Whose sacred tunes persuaded Angel wise,
Men for to live with men, and to give ore
To feed like beasts on achornes (as before)
Whilst in the woods and thickets woefully,
They savage like did range confusedly.
Most true it is, such as were strongst of all,
(Whose lawless force the weakest did enthrall
Taking from them their flocks, their food, their wives,
And often times (without all cause) their lives)
At last became obedient to that law,
Which to be needful for themselves they saw,
Whilst following plowes and ^ling of the land,
They justly got by labor of their hand,
And through the sweat which issued from their pains,
The worthy harvest of their honest gains.
Hence did the learned persuade the ignorant,
And simple people, who did judgment want:
That Phoebus buil^ up ^oy with musikes sound,
And Amphions harp rai^d (...) out of the ground:
That music could make mountains to obey,
And stones to dance about when they did play:
As Orpheus did, who with his holy song,
Lions and Tigers drew with him along.
Yet think not though against these of mine own coat,
I thus enueigh with loud and open throat:
But that (besides us Poets) I do see,
In other schoolmen as much vanity,
Who do deserve worse punishment then speech,
If to the world I durst their crimes appeach.
Quintilian was the first famous Gra^marian that ever read openly in Rome.
It Is not Quintilian, it is not he alone,
That does his Scholars villainies bemone,
But others, whom if here I should display,
And tell their vices, thou would quickly say,
This was an excellent Ora tor called Gi^nan di Pistoia: He wrote diverse
epistles in Italian, but very wanton which are much in request amongst his
countrymen the Italians.
That from Pistoius closset (not from mine)
He means from some of Aretynes lascivious works, which are of great account
in his cu^try. Ar^yne was borne in Arezzo, a town subject to the duke of
Florence, and where excellent dishes are made of fine earth for banquering
stuff. At first he studied diu^tie: But when he saw the Court of Rome to make
no account of virtuous learning, he gave over that course, and writ most
villainous books, as Villa dille (...), del^e Maritale, and delle Curtezant. He
was such a severe taxer of Princes faults, which lived in his time, that he was
called ^lagello delli Principi, the scourge of Princes. He died in Venice, and
lies buried in Sebastians Church, with this ^tathe.

Qui iacet l (...) Amara Tosco,
Del s^men humani lacia lingua tra^e,
Et viue, and morti (...) Idnio mal disse:
Et si scuso con dio I nol conosco.
Here biting Aretyn lies buried,
With gall more bi^er never man was fed.
The living nor the dead to carp he spared,
Nor he for any King or Key sar cared.
Only on God to rail he had forgot,
His scuse was this (quoth he) I know him not.

They stolen have, and from Peter Aretine.
From others studies, honor often and shame
I reap, and so with pleasure mix defame:
Yet not in such wise as when I do spy;
That Poets praise as well do live as die.
More I do grieve and inwardly lament,
By this covert name be bewaileth the disgrace of Poetry that is in this age.
To hear how fair Aonio by consent,
Is senseless held without all brain or wit,
And that the wind so wavering does not flit:
Then if from some most foolish Doctors voice,
His near Ally in solly and in choice.
I should have heard the same, to who^ some fool
(Like to him self) in his unlettered school,
The self same honor on his same should clap,
With a scarlet gown, and formal corner cap.
Under these feigned names of Placidian and others which follow after, as
Andronoco, Pandarus, Curio, Po^ticus, Flauius, Cu^tro and the rest, he taxes
some great me^ that have lived, of grievous faults.
It greeues me more that weak Placidian still
With feasts and surfets should his old age fill,
As when he did his youths first heat enjoy,
And that from man he should become a boy:
Then for to know how that the same disease,
Andronico my neighbor does displease,
Who has possessed it full this seven year,
And yet (as at the first) is nothing clear.
If it be told me, greedy Pandarus
Is ore much griping, Curio Iealious,
That Ponticus affects Idolatry,
And Flanius swears most egregiously:
It does with spite go to my heart more near,
Then when, for small gains I Cusatr^ hear
False Judgments upon any one to fix,
Or that Mass Baptist does strong poison mix
Amongst his Physic, whilst (through treachery)
His spanish figs kills us unnaturally.
Or, since that Master in Theology,
(The counterseit of deep Divinity)
Who (for the nonce) to do his country wrong,
Mixeth his Burgamasks with the Tuscan tongue,
Keeps in pay a sniueling durty whore,
Who at one birth two bastards to him bore:
Whilst for to please her greedy nere-fild gut,
He spends. Gods cope upon that brothell slut,
Though his own sterued mother among the poor
Goes up and down, and begs from door to door:
Yet afterward I hear him blushlesse cry,
As if he were naught else but sanctity.
Saying I am the man does pray and fast,
Gives alms, and leads my life pure virgin chaste,
And which is more, thou know, o God above,
Dear as my self I do my neighbor love.
But neither this dissembling nor the rest,
Brings to my thoughts or trouble or unrest,
So that it shall nor break my quiet sleep,
Nor me from food or other pleasures keep.
It is not me, it is themselves they wound,
The sores whereof will on their souls be found.
But to return from whence this speech me drove,
He means Virginio of who^ we spoke of before, who afterward became a Church
man, and had very good ecclesiastical livings, but his other son Gian
Battista was a soldier, and became Captain of a band of men of the Duke of
Feraras, of whom he was well accounted, and lived in good esteem with him.
I for my son would such a Master have,
As by my good will with these ugly crimes,
Should nor be staind, nor challenged by the times:
One that would truly make him understand,
From the great language (so loved in our Land)
He means Homer that famous Greek Poet.
What politic Ulysses did at Troy,
Both of his travels and his sad anoy,
Appolonius of the sect of Pythagorians, wrote an excellent discourse of his
travels in greek, which is extant.
Or all that ever Appolonius writ,
Or what Euripides (that fount of wit)
With tragedies of stately Sophocles,
And the Astrean Poets works of praise.
To them add Pindarus whose famous books,
Called Galatea from the water-brookes:
With all those other writers which so long
Have been renowned for the Greekish tongue,
Already has my self taught him to know,
Virgil and Ovid, and Horace long ago.
Plautus and (...) he does understand,
And often have seen them acted in our land.
Thus (without me) by this his Latin aid,
His meaning was when his son had gotten the Latin tongue pe^sitly, then he
should learn the Greek, and not before.
He may hereafter safe to Delphos traide,
Nor can he misle the way to Hellicon,
But safely to his iourneys end pas^e on,
Yet that his journey may the safer be,
And he more strengthened by his industry.
Ariostos care is to be commended, in that he is so desirous to have a good
schoolmaster for his son.
I feign would have for him a trusty guide,
Whose knowledge in these countries has been tried,
My slothfulness, or rather desteny,
He was for^e he could not teach his son Greek as well as he did Latin.
Forbids my self to keep him company.
From Phoebus Temple unto Delos I Will,
As Roman gates I opened him erewhile,
My meaning is, that I am far to seek,
Though Latin I him taught, to teach him Greek.
Alas, when first I was by nature given
To verse, and not thereto by strong hand driven:
My bloome of youth being in the first apeare,
As having on my chinne not one soft heir,
My father with all rigor of his wit,
Quickly compels me to abandon it,
To study glosses and the ci^ll Law,
In which five years I spent, but no good saw.
But when he from his wisdom did perceive
That I an endless web began to weaue,
And that against my nature I did climb,
The scale I loved not, and so lost my time,
With much ado he gave me liberty,
And made his will my will accompany.
Now was I twenty years of age and more,
Nor had I any schoolmaster before,
So as (to tell you true) I scarce was able
To understand in Asope any fable,
Till smiling fortune brought me to converse,
This was an excellent Latinist, and a good Grecian, and the best schoolmaster
that ever Ariosto had.
With Gregory of Spoleto whose commerce,
I shall renown and ever love his name,
Because what skill I have, from him it came.
In Roman language he was excellent,
And in the Grecian tongue as eloquent;
So that he well could judge from skill profound,
Whose trumpet had the shrill or better sound,
Or Venus son, or Thetis lovely boy:
But I in those deep judgments took no joy,
Nor sought to know the wrath of Hecuba,
Nor how Ulysses slily stole away
From valiant Rhesus, both his life and horse,
By art of wit, and not by manly force.
For I desirous was to know at first,
Why to Aeneas, Juno was so cursed,
Or why her malice with prolixitie,
Held him from being king of Italy.
Besides me thought no glory would arise,
From the Greek tongue, to me in any wise,
If first I did not Latin understand,
It being once the tongue of our own Land.
Whilst thus the one with industry I sought,
Hoping the other would with ease be caught:
Angry occasion fled me, for because,
Offering her fore-lock, I did seem to pause:
He means Isabel daughter to Alphonso, king of Naples, whose husband John
Galbazzo Sforza was duke of Millan, over which state his uncle Lodwick
(surnamed the More, because he was of a tawny complexion) did usurp, and in
the end poisoned his foresaid nephew, who died at Pania, after whose death his
son called Francis Sforza, who married Beaterice the daughter of Hercules Duke
of Ferrara, being very young, succeeded his father in the Dukedom, but his
foresaid great uncle Lodowick ruled all. To this young Duke Francis Sforza, was
Gregory di Sp^lete rutor, by the means of Isabell his mother.
That hapless duchess took my Gregory
From me, to fix in her sons company,
Whose Uncle did usurp his souerainty,
For which she saw revenge sufficiently.
(Though to her cost) alas why was it not meant,
That he which wrongs should have the punishment^
After Iodowick had a while usurped upon the duchy of Millan, which belonged
unto his Nephew, both he and his Nephew were betrayed by the Swizers, and sold
unto Lewis the 12. then King of France, who sent them prisoners to the castle
of Loches, wherein they remained as long as they lived. The aforesaid Lod^wick
was a Prince most excellent for his eloquence and industry, and for many good
gifts of nature and spirit, a creature of very rate perfection, had he not
been of a too ambitious and aspiring mind. others report that there was no
commendable quality in him, but given to be busy headed and troublesome, ^ing
his neighbor Princes together by the ears: he was the first which brought
Lewis the 12. King of France into Italy, being one of the chief occasions of
all the troubles that happened unto hi country: others say he began an usurper,
lived a dissembler, and dyed a beggar, and which is worse, a wretched prisoner.
The uncle and the nephew, such was fate,
Lost at one instant, kingdom, goods, and state:
Both being conuaid close prisoners into France,
One instant giving date to each mischance.
But Gregory at the suite of Isabel,
Followed his scholar whom he loved so well,
Gregory of Spoleto following the young Duke Francis Sforza into France, within
a while after dyed there.
To France he followed, where he lived, till death
Took from his best of friends their best of breath.
This loss so great, with other losses more,
Which (unexpected) I with patience bore,
Made me forget the Muses, and my song,
And all that to my study did belong.
When Ariosto was 24. years of age, his father died (who in his youth had
been a companion of Duke Borzo, and after that an officer to Duke Hercules)
leaving his mother called Maria to live with him, and another of his sisters
called Maria also, for whom he was to provide a dowry.
Then dyed my father: from Maria now,
My mind I to Maria needs must bow,
I now must find a husband who must take
One of my sister to his loving make.
Then for another I must straight provide,
That to a lesser charge I might be tide:
Although Ariosto was the eldest son, yet was he not left rich, because his
fathers living stood most upon offices and fees which died with him.
For though the Land came unto me as hair,
Yet others held in it with me a share.
Then to my younger brothers was I bound,
Who me a father in my love have found,
Doing that office which most dutiously
I ought perform to sacred piety.
Some of them unto study did attain,
Some in the Court did covet to remain:
Each one to such good courses so well bent,
That to my conscience they gave good content,
Whereby I saw their virtuous infancy,
Would save their age from all indignity:
Nor was this all the care which from my book,
Kept my long thirsty and desiring look:
But many more, (though these sufficient be)
That I was forced in this extremity,
To ty my Bark unto the safe calm shore,
Lest it should sail at randon as before,
And so unawares upon the quicksands run,
Whereby the rest and I might be undone.
He was so much perplexed with the change of so great a family as he had, and
with bestowing his sisters, and providing for his brothers, that he was in a
manner ready to give over his study, had not the emulation which he had with a
gentleman of his own name and kin, called Pandolpho Ariosto, still renewed
his former disposi tion.
But I as then so many crosses had,
And in so many folds of griefs was clad:
That I desired nothing but my death,
As weary only of a weary breath.
Pandolph^ his chief fred and cousin dying: he took his death so heavily, as
for a while he gave over his book and study.
Ay me! as then my chiefest pleasure died,
The column whereon all my hopes relied,
He whose commerce did only joy my heart,
Gave life unto my study, bred mine art:
Whose sweetest emulation made me run,
That from the world I might the goal have wun.
My kinsman, friend, my brother most, most, dear
My heart, my soul, nay the^ my soul more near,
My best Pandolpho died, o that my death
Had been the happy ransom of his breath.
O hard mishap, o cruel overthrow,
That to the Ariostian house could grow,
To lose their choicest branch, their garla^ds grace,
Whose like shall never grow in any place.
In so great honor living did thou live,
That I but rightly said, when I did give
Thee first pre-eminence to virtues crown,
In all Ferrara, or Bologna town;
From whence thy noble ancestors first came,
And at this day do flourish in the same.
If virtue honor gives, as vice disgrace,
Then never was there any of his place,
More likelier to obtain in each degree,
All honor, worth, and famous dignity.
Now to my fathers death, and next to his,
(Two images my soul can never miss,)
This was Hypolito the Ca^dinall, of whom we spoke so much in the first Satyr,
having received but small kindness for his great pains in service.
Add how I was oppressed with the thrall,
Of servitude unto the Cardinal:
The honest disposition of the Poet, who commends the Cardinal, although he
had no cause thereto.
And yet no Prince with him may be compared
For bounty, though to me perpetual hard.
For from the time Pope Iu^o was create,
Even till his breath of life did consummate,
Andafterward, of Leo seven year,
He did not suffer me stay any where,
And so my wits about his works applide,
That in no certain place I could bide:
That from a Poet I was straight transuerted,
And to a worthless Caualier converted.
This was above 18, years in all, all which time he followed the Cardinals
service with exceeding great pains, yet received little or no benefit.
Note then if posting always up and down,
Through Cities, Courts, and every country town,
I could the Greek or Chaldean tongue obtain,
Whilst to my self my self did not remain.
Now I assure thee I do much admire,
That such a fate my fate did not acquire,
Aulus Gellius mak^th mention of a certain philosopher in Athens, who through a
blow he had upon the head with the fall of a great stone, fell into such a
strange ifinrmity, that after he was recovered he lost his memory, (...) such
wise, that he forgot that ever he was scholar, nor unto his death could
rem^mber that ever he knew or had any learning at all.
As did to that Philosopher befall,
Upon whose head a stone fell from the wall,
Whose very stroke did from his brain disseuer
All former thoughts and motions whatsoever.
But to be brief good Bembo I thee pray,
(Ere I too late should wish) elect the way,
To choose for my Virgini^ such a friend,
As thy best judgment may with worth commend,
That right might guide him to Pernassus hill,
Since I thereto have neither fate nor skill:
Yet no such Pedagogue I crave as this,
Whose story I Will relate, and this it is.
There was an youth in Spain, of ill-bred blood, A Tale.

In learning poor, but rich in wordly good,
Whose friends when he was young put him to school,
But all in vain, the fool proved still more fool.
At last a living of the Church there fell,
In that same town where this rich fool did dwell:
And to the same a free school joined was,
Whither the townsmens children all might pass
Gratis, and teaching have, since stypends great,
Allotted was to the one and the others seat.
Now when his kin of this had heard the fame,
They thought with coin to plant him in the same:
Meaning for school an usher he should have,
And for his Church some Deacon, sober, grave,
To both of which, small pensions he should give,
And on the surplussage himself would live:
For this was in the days of ignorance,
When men did wealth, not worthy arts advance,
Besides they thought, by this devise to make
The world this fool for some wise Solon take:
When they should hear what livings he possessed,
In which they none but men of note inuest.
Hence from the King of Spain by coin they got
His royal letters, to commend this sott
Unto the Pope himself, for it was he,
That held this gift in his own charity.
Besides a privy item in them was,
His holiness should suffer this rich ass
To be instald, and not examined,
As one whose art was only famozed.
Only three words of latin he was taught,
When with his letters first he should be brought
Before the Pope: which spoken artfully,
He should have his dispatch with breuity.
The first was this, making a reverence,
He only should say, Salve sancte parens.
The Pope then, Vnde venisti, would reply,
De Spania must he say, then by and by.
Vbi sunt litterae (last) the Pope would say,
He then must answer, In mantica mea:
And take them forth, and kissing them he should,
Forthwith dispatched be, with his bribing gold.
Thus being taught his le^on by his friends,
Toward Rome he h^, for there his journey tends.
But half the way he hardly had discernd,
Ere he had lost the Latin he had learned.
Now as he beat his brains again to find,
What he had lost, though it was out of his mind:
It fortuned as he did amuze thereon,
To see come by a great Procession.
One of the Priests whereof did loudly sing,
Sal^e sancte parens, that the streets did ring.
When as this dunse no sooner heard the same,
But into his dull brain forthwith it came:
Those were the words he only had forgot,
And therefore ouerioyed at his lot:
Great have he makes to have a swift access,
(By means of friends) unto his Holiness.
Where falling down low, Salve sancte parens,
Says this fool Scholar, in an open audience.
The Pope not knowing what he meant by this,
Says, Non sum matter Christi, you your mark do miss.
The other senseless ( Paraquito like)
Not knowing what he spoke or wrong or right,
De Spania, did reply with countenance bold,
The Pope, that with a frown did him behold,
Mumbled, Demonium habe adolescen t^;
In mantica mea, he replied, and drew
His bag, to give his letters to the Pope:
Who thinking with the Devil he should cope,
Cried out, and for to run was ready pressed,
Till oneofsome more wit then all the rest,
Found that an Ass was in a Lions hide,
Whose base ambition all men did deride.
But when the Pope the Spanish King did see,
So earnest in this fools behalf to be:
And likewise did consider how much gain,
His coffers by such Idiots did retain:
Accipiamus pecuniam then he said,
Et admittamus Asinum in his stead.
Thus was the Spaniard lightened of his gold,
And both these livings undeserved did hold.
Bembo, no such like Pedant do I crave,
We and the world too many of them have.
Let him be learned, and an honest man,
Let him have both these virtues if you can.
"Where virtue reigns most, least vice is still:
"Thy iudgement's good, I ask but thy good will.
The seventh and last Satyr.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows that honors change manners, and that many men increasing in
fortune and riches, change their first good virtues and qualities, being e^her
vnmiuafull or unthankful toward such f^ whom they have received former
courtesies, and how his desire always was to live at his study and book
quietly, and with a small living.

NOble Arioste writ this Satyr a little before he got leave to give over his
Liu^nancie of Grassanana, which he so much misliked: and this Pistofil^ being
Secretary to the Duke of Ferrara, obtained license for him to come away, not
long before which time he offered him to go Ambassador to Pope Clement, but he
would not in any wise accept it.
Pistofile, thou do write to me,
IfI the Dukes Ambassador would be, Written to the honorable Bonauenter, (...),
Secretary to Alphonso Duke of Ferrara.

Clement the seventh, was base son to Iulio ( Leo the tenths brother) he was
called Iulio before, and was first made knight of the Rhodes, by the before
named Leo his kinsman, and after that, Cardinal and Legate of Bologna. He was
so mighty when he was Cardinal, as making his entry into two Conclaues, he was
absolute commander of 16. voices. He was at last made Pope within two years
after the death of Leo, notwithstanding the many obtrusions and emulations of
the most ancient Cardinals. This man married Catherine di Medices, his Niece,
unto the second son of Francis the French king: and in his time was Rome
sacked by the Emperial army (whereof the Duke of Burbon was General, and was
slain before the walls) and the Pope himself, with certain Cardinals, taken
prisoners. He died hated of all his Court, suspected of most Princes, and for
the order of his life, he left behind him a renown, rather hateful then
acceptable: for he was accounted covetous, of little fidelity, and naturally
far of from doing pleasure to any man, insomuch that he was in a manner
unwilling his own house of Medici should be advanced.
Unto Pope Clement, and for three years space,
In Rome live Ledger, with all port and grace:
To give thee notice, and thou will with pain,
To my request this suit and glory gain.
Besides, with reasons thou do me persuade,
That I would in this noble motion wade:
As first that all men have esteemed me,
A perfect friend unto the Medici:
That we acquaintance most familiarly,
Have had together, and most inwardly:
As well when they at first were banished men,
As when their C^y called them home again.
Although our Poet was well acquainted with Pope Leo and all the house of
Medici, when they were but private Citizens, and after when they obtained
greater dignities: yet he like a wise man, looking into the world, and
perceiving the fashion of countries, how they would give fair words, but do
few kind deeds, considering how well he deserved at their hands, he very
cunningly drew his neck out of the collar, and gave over the Court. But to
come to Leo the tenth again, he was chosen Pope, the seventh day after the
Cardinals went into the Conclaue, being then bu^ (...). years old, the young
Cardinals being the occasion of his election, by their great industry, having
long time before secretly agreed amongst themselves, to create the first Pope
of their number: his name was John before. He was a mighty Prince in his time
for he possessed in peace, and great obedience, the large estate of the Church
of Rome, and his whole court florisht wonderfully under him, in plentiful
happiness and felicity. He had full authority over the sta^e of Florence,
which in those da^es, was a common wealth mighty in people, policy, and riches.
He was naturally inclined to pleasures, and therefore took no great delight in
hearing of suits and busying himself about such a^faires as concerned the
Apostolical sea: his custom was to consume the day in hearing of music, in
seeing of stageplaies, and trifling with scoffers and ^esters, and was so
^nate, a^ he was altogether estranged from wars, giving himself so much to
ease, that he grew so corpulent and fat, as though he was but a young man, yet
was he scarce able to go upon his legs. Besides, he was over liberal and
m^gnificall, insomuch that he not only wasted the treasures that Iulio the 2.
his Predecessor left him, but also was ever poor and needy. He had no great
care to raise or make great his house or kindred, after his 2. brethren Iulio
and Peter were dead, being greatly unfortunate in this, that he lived to see in
himself the end of his own house, excepting one young maiden, who was called
Katherine de Medices, of whom we spoke before. He died in ^ome of a fever But
as some say, he was poisoned by B^rniby Malespina, his Chamberlain, whose
office was always to give him drink, and it was thought he was hired thereunto
by the French king then li^.
That I knew Leo after and before
On crimson shoe the golden cross he bore.
Next (that besides thou think, I profit should
The Dukes estate) unto my self it would
Exceeding gain, and mighty profit bring,
Besides the steps of honor I should win.
That in a river great, more fish are caught,
Then in a little brook of easy draught:
That Princes services have no compare,
And where we profit find, all pleasures are.
But now that you have to my minds best eye,
Explained your wisdom, hearken my reply.
First to thy noble virtues thanks I give,
That thus in thy remembrance I do live:
And that I find thou always did contend,
How me unto aduauncements to commend:
Seeking to make me worthy as the best,
When my dull spirit with no fire was blessed.
Next, I assure thee, willingly I would,
Pass fire, or flood, or any, freezing cold,
To serve the Duke: nor shall thou me command,
To Rome alone, but every other land
I Will post through willingly, and try the fate
Of France, of Spain, or of the Indian state.
But where thou say, that I shall honors gain,
And to my self a world of wealth attain,
If that thou think will move, then pardon me,
For in that point I cannot iump with thee:
Vultes annosahaud capitur laqueo. Ariosto had tried the Court so often, where
he found only words and no deeds.
Other devices must allure my mind,
Ambition in my thoughts I never find,
Honor I have too much, I none do lack,
And feign I would discharge some from my back.
It shall suffice, as through Ferrara I
Walk, to dispatch my buisinesse seriously:
Each one that meets me, gives me courtesy,
Vaileth his hat, and speaks thankfully:
^lphonso duke of Ferrara used him very kindly, making him in some sort his
companion, though otherwise he got little in his service.
For all men know it often has pleased his grace,
That I at his own table should take place.
Nor when or for my self, or for my friend,
I do the weight of any suit commend,
Am I repulst: but what I wish to draw,
(So it agree with reason or the Law)
And (if although my mind be satisfide,
With all that does in honors power abide)
I had so much of wealth that my desire,
Unto a greater height could not aspire:
I then should quiet be, where now my mind,
To keep a compass right, I never find.
I for my self but this wish and and no more,
That I might live, not beg of others store.
Which henceforth i will not hope for, since I prove,
So many mighty men have vowed my love,
As might have made me rich, and yet refused,
(For little I have had, and less have used)
Whence grows the cause that thus I poorly serve,
Although I might say, better I deserve.
Fortune is fained by the Poets, to be slow in escaping from the vessel of
Epimetheus: that is, an after w^ is better then a forewit, a good luck comes
not so soon as an ill. Of this Epimetheus, you may read more in Plato.
I will not that the power which once was slow,
From careless Epimethius crew to go:
Shall draw me like a Buffone by the nose,
Nor will I more delight in flattering shoes.
Much does the painted turning wheel me fear,
Which after one self manner every where
Is drawn by painters: true it is like to be,
When as so many in one thing agree.
Alluding to the common saying, Fortuna fauet fatuis: for commonly it is seen,
who deserves best, finds least favor at he hands.
He that sits on the top thereof's an Ass,
All know this riddle, and may let it paste
Withour a Sphynx which may the same expound,
The meaning with such easiness is found.
He says that every one that is lifted up upon the wheel of Fortune looks
hie, for-getting his old friends, and becomes a new man as it were, not
remembering his old poor acquaintance, with whom he so familiarly conuersed
before.
Besides, these seen that all which mount on hie,
E^soones refine their members curiously.
Meaning honors changes manners: Affirming that a mean man raised to
dignity, and then humbling himself, as he did before, shall be rather hindered
then advanced thereby, and therefore he must keep state still.
And what of earth behind does heavy stay,
That keeps him back in all things as it may.
The very hope it self to mind I call,
Which with the leaves and flowers came first of all,
But after fled away: nor did September,
Expect all this, and more I can remember,
He mean th Leo the tenth of whom we spoke before.
The day the Church was unto Leo given,
For spouse, and (for her dowry) endless living:
When at that marriage, I so many saw,
Of my best friends, who then to Rome did draw,
On whom fair, scarlet honors were bestowed:
Whilst I lived still with my poor needy load,
The Calends came, the Id^s were past and gone,
Yet I of any was not thought upon.
I could not be remembered, and yet I
Remember this, and shall do till I die.
An excellent saying of Ariosto, and a worthy precept to know the inconstancy
of common friendship.
O it is most vain, for man on man to trust,
I Will none believe, they all are most unjust.
That day came down from heaven fond foolish hope
And went to sorraine soiles, when first the Pope
Embraced and kissed me (though it was unmeet)
Whilst prostrate I fell down before his feet.
But afterward, when I perceived that naught,
(Save air^ of words) his favors to me brought:
And that experience taught me how to know,
That only shadows from such grace did flow:
I then began to give despair my hand,
And plainly saw, I fisht on the dry land:
And since that time I vowed, none to believe,
Nor more (for what I cannot have) to grieve.
He applies his hasty posting to Rome, to be advanced by Leo when he was made
Pope (of which he was deceived) and the sudden rising of Leo and the Medici,
and his chief friends, to the sprouting of this Gourd, which as it ro^e
hastily, so did it (...) suddenly, and so did they all, Ariosto of his
expect^o^, the Pope and (...) his followers (...) their glove.
There was a Gourd or Mellon, long ago,
That (in a while shot up) so high did grow,
As it a Peare-tree (neighbor by) so couerd,
That with her leaves, his boughs were welny smotherd.
Now this same Peare-tree on a morning chaunst
To open his eyes, and round about him glaunst:
For he had slept a mighty sleep and long,
And seeing how this new fruit did him wrong,
Said unto it: What art thou, and what chance,
Makes thee so soon thy proud head to adu^unce?
Where were thou hid, when I fell first asleep,
That ore my head, thus proudly thou do peep?
The Gourd told him her name, and showed the Place,
Where on the ground below she planted was:
And that in three months space, it did attain,
Unto that height in which it did remain.
And I (replide the tree) with migh^ie fear,
Have hardly got this talenesse which I bear:
Although this thirty years I here have grown,
And have all seasons and all weathers known.
But thou which in the twinkling of an eye,
Have raised thy fair head even into the sky.
Assure thy self as thou art grown in have,
With self like speed, thy glories all shall wast.
Even so my hopes which made me posting come,
My vain fond hopes, which brought me first to Rome,
Might well have said, I came in fitter time,
Although the chief of the house of Medici, had but ill fortune, which were
Pope Leos brethren, yet Clement his kinseman, who within two years after
succeeded him in the Papacy, aised up again (although in a manner constrained
thereunto) his family in Florence; for he sent for his nephew Alexandre, out
of Flaunders, where he followed the Emperor Char^es the fifth, who coming to
Florence, proclai^ed himself absolute Duke of that City. He married the
Emperors base daughter, and carried himself very stoutly toward the people,
insomuch as in the end he was slain by a kinseman of his own, called
Laurence di Medices; who thereupon ^ed to Venice, and was afterward slain by
certain men, in hope of a reward which was proclaimed to be given to him that
could take the (...) either alive or dead. Alexander being thus dispatched,
Cosmo the son of John di Medices, was chosen Duke of the Florentins, who lived
some 23-years after his election. He married Don Diego di Tolledos daughter,
Viceroy of Naples, and had diverse children by her, of which Francesco succeeded
him, and after his death then Ferdinando his brother who was called Ferdinando
di Medices, gran Du^a di Tuscano. This Ferdinando married the daughter of the
Duke of Lorrain, grandchild and executrix to Katherine di Medices, late Queen
mother of France.
Even when the Medici were in their prime.
That I did help them when they did remain
Exiles, and sought to bring them home again:
And that to make the Lamb like Leo prove,
A Princely Lion I did thither move.
This So^na was a noble man of Romagna in Italy, allied to the Strozzi of
Florence, and therefore one that could not brook the greatness of the Medici.
He that had held Gharles So^nas brave spright,
Would then perhaps have said in open sight,
When Leo the tenth was Pope (as I said before) he unjustly expulst the Duke
of Vrbin out of his lawful estate, and placed his nephew Laurence in that
Dukedo^e, who had to wife through the favor of Francis the French King, Lady
Magdalena, nobly descended of the Duke of ^on, with a yearly re^enewe of ten
thousand crowns, during her life. But this marriage proved but fatal unto them
both, for after he had been a while in France where he consu^mated his
wedding, his wife died, and he within a while after followed her, leaving none
other heir of his body lawfully begotten, then one young daughter called
Katherine who as I said before, was married to the French King Henry the second:
she dyed in Anno 1588, about the same time that the Duke of Guise was slain in
the Castle of Bloise by her son Henry the third, king of France and Poland.
In this foresaid Katherine ended the direct and right line (speaking of those
which were lawfully begotten) of Cosmo di Medices, surnamed the great. The
aforenamed Laurence, was a man of great hope for his years, for his valor and
learning, and was a great Mecenas and favorer of the learned: he left a base
son behind him called Alexander first Duke of Florence, who, as I said but
even now, was afterward sla^ne by his own kin^man.
When he had heard Lorenzo to be named
By style of Duke, and with that title famed:
He means Don Julian, Pope Leo brother, who died of a consuming and
languishing disease in Florence, whose w^fe Philib^rta of Sauoy, although she
was but young, and with all passing (...), when her husband left her widow,
notwithstanding she had many great offers of diverse Priaces which then lived:
yet did she (to the wondering of every one) give over the world voluntarily,
retiring her self into a Nunnery, which she her self had built, where she
lived in devotion unto her dying day.
He to Duke Nemours would as much have said,
And not of scornful eyes have stood afraid
This was a noble man of Florence, a follower of the Medices, and by Leo made
Cardinal.
Unto the Cardinal of Rosi, and
He means Barnard Di^itio of Bibiena, who was a mighty man of wealth, and a
true friend unto the Medices in all their troubles, aiding them continually
with men and money. A man of that good conscience, that Don Iulio Duke of
Nemours made him his executor when he died, although as then he had two
brethren alive, which were Pope Leo, and Peter the eldest of the three.
To Bibiena (mighty rich in land)
Who had been better much if he had staid
Torsy was Bibienas chief house or place, not far from Casentino. The Poet
says, he had been better to have lived quietly at home, then to have been
Cardinal, because it cost him so much in assisting the Medices in their
troubles, and again^, because he did not long enjoy that honor, but dyed.
At Torsy, then a red hat to have swaid.
Contesina is the name of Leo the tenths mother.
He would have said unto Contesina,
This was the King of France kinswoman, and wife to Laurence the Popes nephew,
of whom we spoke before.
To Magdalena (beauteous at that day)
This was Alfonzina the Pope^ sister, and mother unto Laurence di Medices, unto
who^ Leo granted a donation of the profits, and exactions of the indulgences
in many places in Germany, upon which occasion Martin Luther began first to
take exception against the Pope for the same, and so consequently against the
popish religion.
Unto the daughter and the Mother in law,
The Co^onation of Leo was so sumptuous and costly, that many took exceptions
against the same, as in Guychardine more at large apeareth.
And all that house which every one then saw
Overcome with joy, even thus I say, he would
Talk to the world with courage strong and bold,
Thy similie most properly applide,
May be to them which do with greatness bide:
For as their ioies above all ioies did run,
So shall they quickly fade and be undone.
All that were at the coronation of Leo in their iollitie (I mean the greatest
persons) died within a while after, first Peter the elder brother was drowned,
^ulian the second consumed to death shortly after, Laurence their ^ephew died
of a languishing disease in France, and his wife a li^le before him, left her
life there also, so likewise Contesina the Popes mother, Alfonzina his sister,
the Cardinals of Rossi and Bib^na, yea and the Pope Leo himself, all these I
say dyed one after another in a short space, as namely in the space of eight
years and less.
All men must die, their time indures not ever,
And this strong fate can be eschewed never:
That Leo also shall his life resigue
Ere Troies first founder shall into the sign
Turn eight times: this as gospel is most true,
For so each thing did afterward ensue.
But to spend much idle talk herein,
I say, I first of all did then begin,
To give ore all my more then foolish hope,
When I got nothing of my best known Pope.
If Leo gave my fortunes nothing, then
It Is vain to hope for gain from other men.
(Dear Lord) thou must with other hooks and draught
Fish for me, if thou look I shall be caught:
But if perforce thou will have me to go,
Thy will be done, and I am pressed thereto:
Yet honor shall not move me, Riches less,
For neither of them both I would possess:
Honor I scorn, for it is mere vanity,
And riches mix not with my desteny.
He entreats (rather the to be troubled any more) to be rid first of his
liuetenancy of Graffignana, the country being so full of factions and
divisions, and such a number of rebels and Banditi swarming every where, as he
was in a manner weary of his life.
Say rather I shall leave this p^ace I keep,
Nor longer with these barbarous people sleep,
More rude then are the rocks wherein they dwell,
So rude their manners are, and wratl^ so fell,
Say, I shall not be troubled, some to fine,
Some to exile to kill or to confine:
Whilst I complain that force does ouersway
All reason, yet that force I must obey.
Tell me I shall have leisure and fit time
To talk unto the Muses in sweet rhyme,
And midst fair groaues and arbors to devise
The strength of verse and rarely poetize.
These are the names of certain learned men, then abiding in Rome, and
familiar friends and acquaintances with our Poet.
Tell me, with Sadolet, with Bembo, Iouio,
With Molza, Vida and with Blosio;
With Tibaldo and Pontanus, and the rest,
I may live at mine ease, most happy blessed,
Taking for guide, which of them best does please me:
Or altogether jointly fit and case me,
Whilst they to me old Romes antiquity,
Discribe at large with grave authority:
Circus was a place like our tik-yards, where the ancient Romans used to run
with Charriots and horses for certain games or prises.
Saying here Circus was, and here did stand
Forum Romanum, and here on this hand
Saburra was a street most of all frequented in Rome, by reason there dwelled
many Curtezans, for Vbi cadauer ibi Coru^ and therefore like enough to give
occasion of much quarrel and misrule amongst youths, as appears by Iuue^all
and Mortiall in these verses.

Fame, non nimium bone puelle,
Quales in media sedent Saburra.

Saburra stood, this Sacer (...) was,
And now by Vestaes Temple you do pass:
Tell me, I cannot any thing indite,
(Nor of what subject best shall please me write)
But I may counsel have and take advise,
If any doubt does in the Author rise:
That out of Latin, Tuscan, or of Greek,
I may translate, or any pleasure seek.
Besides the number great thou may me tell,
Of worthy ancient books which do excel:
One of the rarest libraries in the world, built in the Popes palace of Saint
Peter in Rome by Sistus Quartus, and much augmented by Sistus Quintus, it is
thought there are not so few as ten thousand books little and great within
the same.
All which Pope Sistus through the world of late,
Did gather for the good of public state,
Whilst this rare library each one may use,
And what him list may from it cul and choose.
Now when such proffers thou shall make to me,
Of noble worth, account and dignity,
And yet this Journey I refuse nere-lesse,
Thou then may say that frenzy does possess,
My troubled brain, and melancholy fits,
Has brought distemperature unto my wits.
But I, instead of answering thee, will play
This Emiliut was a noble Roman, who having married a ma^ailous fair and
beautiful young Lady, put her away, and being blamed of his friends for so
doing, held out his foot unto them, saying, see you this my shoe how fine it
is made, how well it sits upon my foot, and how handsome it is for me, and yet
none of you all knows in what part of my foot it wringeth and pincheth m^
eu^n so my wife, although as you say, she is fair, courteous, witty and well
spoken, yet none of you know in what sort she offends me.
As did Emillius once, who forth did lay
His foot unto his friend, saying you see
How clean my shoe is made, how neat, how curiously,
And yet for all this, little do thou know,
Where it does wring me, or does gall my toe.
He takes me from my self that does remove
My body from the native soil I love:
For being absent thence, I cannot live,
Yea, lay I in Jove's lap, I yet should grieve:
And should I not be daily one of those,
Who for their morning walks wi^h pleasure goes
He means the two statues in the market place of Ferrara as you go to the
Domo, (which is the Cathedral Church of the same City) the one of Lionel, and
the other of Bozre, two Princes of the house of Esta.
Between the Domo of Ferrara, and
Those famous statues which richly stand,
Of my two noble Marquesses, then I
Should die with grief, to want that liberty,
And leaner would my visage be then his,
Whose lips the water and the fruit does kiss:
Yet has no power either of both to taste,
But pines with hunger, and away does waste.
Francis the first French king that bare that name,
One day by fortune unto Paris came,
And by a wealthy Burgess feasted was,
Whose sumptuous cheer and bounty did surpass.
Now whilst the King amongst his minions sat,
And merrily discour'st of every state:
Each one began to tell some wondrous thing,
And among the rest one told unto the king,
That at that time within the City was
An old man living who by guess did pass
The age of fourscore years, yet nere was seen,
Out of the walls of Paris to have been.
The King admiring at this tale, straight sent
For this old man to come incontinent,
And of him did demand if true it was,
That he beyond those walls did never pass:
Or whether fear or love became the cause,
Which his affections to such straitnes draws?
The old man thus replide, So please your grace,
I was borne, bred, and brought up in this place,
And now I am fourscore and ten above,
In all which time my foot did never move
Out of the cities gates, though men of worth,
Have by entreaty sought to get me forth:
So that was not command, but mine own will,
Which in this town has thus confind me still:
Besides no motion in my mind has moved,
From whence the countries sight should be beloved.
Well then replide the King, since this long space
Thou freely with thy friends have held this place,
Henceforth I charge thee on the pain of death,
Thou not presum'st so long as thou have breath,
To look beyond these walls, for I intend,
As thou have lived, so thou shall make an end.
The poor old man, who never longed before
To go out of the town or out of door,
As long as it was in his liberty:
Now that he saw he to the contrary
Commanded was, with a most strange desire,
To see the country he is set on fire:
But seeing by constraint he thus was tide
Against his will, for very grief he did.
Noble Pistophilo, no such mind I hold
At this old man did, but I rather would
Live in Ferrara ever from my birth,
Then any foreign nation of the earth:
Yet should I be compeld to leave that place,
And go to Rome it would be less disgrace,
Then to continue in this hellish soil,
Where nothing is but trouble and turmoile:
But if my Lord intend me any favor,
O let him call me home, or send me rather
Argento and Bondend are Cities belonging to the Dukedom of Ferrara, to which
Ariosto was often sent by the Duke, and many times up and down about his
business, which he (...) ^ry much.
Unto Argento, Bondena, or where
He can devise, so I may not live here.
If needs I must be made a toiling beast,
I feign would have my burden with the least:
No packhorse, but a foot cloth would I be,
For they but one man carry easily.
To serve the Duke my soul did never grudge,
Only I grieve to be a common drudge.
But now if you demand the reason why,
I love mine own home thus exceedingly,
I will as willingly the same confess,
As I my grievous sins do more or less,
Plainly discharge to my Confessors ears,
When at the shrift he all mine errors hears.
And yet I know, that thus reply you can,
And say: lo here a perfect well stayed man,
Of fourscore nine years at the least, and yet,
Of youths worst loosnesse he must have a fit.
He frankly confesses that he cannot live except he enjoy the company of
his Mistress.
So much to pleasure he his mind does give,
That without wantonness he cannot live:
But it is well for me, that I can hide
My self within this valley where I bide,
And that an hundred miles thy purer eye,
Cannot extend to see my vanity:
Or whether pale or red, I chance to look,
When with escapes I suddenly am took.
For then thou should perceive, I blushed for shame,
Although my letter do not show the same:
The f^rst a notable old mother baud, and the other a fam^us Courtezan of
Ferrara, in those days.
And thou would think that neither old dame Amber,
Nor her young daughter (good stuff in a chamber)
For all their varnish, looked half so red:
Or that old father Canon lately dead,
When he let fall amidst the market place,
A bottle full of wine (with foul disgrace)
Which from a Frie^ he had but stolen before.
Besides (which were about him found) two more.
Were I but with thee now a while, I doubt
Thy love would with my folly have about:
And with a cudgel, thou would beat me well,
To hear these frantike reasons which I tell,
And do allege to live where as thou art,
For were I with thee, I would never part:
But nature and my duty bids me serve
My Prince and country, as they do deserve,
He means his Mistress, whom he says he had rather attendon, then upon any
Prince in the worl^
Although there is another whom I would
Rather attend on, if get leave I could.
Great Lord, thou art a Courtier by thy place,
And may command for thou have special grace:
The Dukes chieefe Secretary thou only art,
And make him blessed that lives within thy heart.
This Pistofilo, Secretary to Alphonso, Duke of Ferrara, was a man low of
stature, and little in body, but of so excellent a wit, and happy memory, that
none lived in those daias like unto him. Besides he was of a sweet
conversation, and an humble carriage toward all men, inso much as being of the
Dukes (...) Counsel, he was greatly favored and beloved, as well of his
Prince as of the people. Duke Alphonso, would merrily say, that what through
his little Pi^ce, the Bo^re and his strong Castle Barletto (alluding to the
name of his, Secretary, which was Bon^enter Po^ and his chief General of all
his forces, called Galeazo Barletto, a famous Soldier) he thought himself
st^ong enough to encounter with any of his neighbor Princes. This Secretary
was an inward friend and of great acquaintance with Nicholas (...), and Peter
A^tine who (...) in the (...) of Henry the eight, of famous memory King of
England. He died in Ferrara (...) his (...) with solemn pomp was conuaicd to
be buried at Modena, where he was (...) being interred in the Monastery of S.
Francis, there where his monument is at this day to be ^eene.
Although thou little in thy stature be,
The great'st in Court are glad to crouch to thee:
And truly worthy art thou of thy place,
Since to all virtues thou do give all grace.
Wisely thou do, for better it is the love
Of people, then their hatred to approve:
Chiefly where Princes as their fancies range,
Their favorites do often chop and change.
But yet for all these caps and bended knees,
Which done unto thee of all sorts thou see's:
Sir (by your leave) for all your gallant glory,
You sometimes feel what makes you sad and sorry.
Often do you wish, deny it if you can,
That you might live like to a private man.
Courts have their crosses, kingly crowns their cares
Who merriest lives, best of all men fares.
Unto no Embassy do me prefer,
But to my Mistress, I would go to her.
Pisto^lo performed this request of A^iosto, for within a while after, he had
liberty to come to Ferrara, where he lived quietly, and in great credit,
until his dying day.
Entreat the Duke I may come home again,
And that's the boon I crave of all thy pain:
Let him but me unto Ferrara call,
And thou shall have my thanks, life, soul and all.
FINIS.

