A WORTHY Communicant: OR, A TREATISE, Showing the Due Order of Receiving the
Sacrament of the LORDS Supper.

By IER. DYKE, Minister of Epping, in Essex.

Levit. 10. 3. I will be sanctified in them, that come nigh me. Cypr. de Can.
Dom. Nec se judicant, nec Sacramenta dijudicant. Petr. Bles. Epist. 40. Vide ne
Dominus dicat de te. Ecce manus tradentis me mecum in mensa, and, Dederunt in
escam meam fell. LONDON, Printed by R. B. for R. Dawlman, and L. Fawn, at the
Brazen Serpent in S. Paul's Churchyard.

1636.

TO the Right Honorable LORD, THOMAS, Earl of Winchilsea: And to the Right
Honorable, the Lady CECILL, Countess of Winchilsea, his most Pious Consort.
Right Honorable,
IT was a salt and a smart speech which one Melancthon spoke unto an Italian;
Vos Itali vnltis Deum habere in pane, quem non creditis esse in coelis. Melch.
Adam. in vit. Melanch.
You Italians will have God to be in the bread, in the Sacrament, whom ye
believe not to be in Heaven. It were to be wished that many amongst our selves
were not under the guilt of somewhat the like incongruity. It is an high
opinion that men generally have of the Sacrament, and reason good, it should be
had in precious esteem; but that which is sad to consider, they partake of
that Ordinance with such irreverence, carelessness, and profaneness of
spirit, as if they believed not there were a God, or as if in that Ordinance,
they had not to do with the God of Heaven. That which was once enjoined the
Dominican Priests, in memory Morn. mist. Iniq. prog. 56.
and hatred of that heinous act of one of their fraternity, in poisoning the
Emperor, Henry the seventh, in the Host, That they should communicate, only
with the left hand, may be feared to be the case of too many through their
own negligence, that they are no better than left handed Communicants. It
matters not before God with what hand the Sacrament be received, the right hand
or the left, so the heart be right, and the work done in a right order. But yet
in a spiritual sense to be left handed receivers, is a matter, not only of
disgrace, but of danger. It is all one in Scripture phrase, to be left, and to
be lame-handed. And to be sure, to be left handed in this work, is to be
lame-handed. The lame, and the blind, who knows not in what ill esteem they
were with God? The lame and the blind had no acceptance with God. And wherein
concerns it men to be more solicitous for acceptance, than in the solemn
service of receiving the Sacrament? No acceptance is to be had, but when it is
well done. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted, says the Lord to Cain?
It was good which Cain did in offering Sacrifice; but if thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? It must be a good thing, and a good thing well done,
which shall find acceptance. That speech of Aarons in his case, would be a very
seasonable thought for men before the Sacrament, Behold this day such Lev. 10.
19.
things have befallen me, and if I had eaten the sin-offering to day, should it
have been accepted in the sight of the Lord? Happy were it, that before the
Sacrament men would thus say with themselves; Behold this day, week, this
month, etc. such things have befallen me, and I have fallen into such sins
as have made my person guilty, mine heart hard and dead; and if I should in
such a case, before I have prepared my self by faith and repentance, eat the
Supper, Lord, should I be accepted in the sight of the Lord? They were crosses
and afflictions which (by Gods providence) befell Aaron in the death of his
Sons, and the sorrow and mourning that followed thereupon, that indisposed and
unfitted him for eating the flesh of the sin-offering. Sanctified things were
not to be eaten in a man's mourning. Deuteronomy. 26. 14.
They be sins that men through their own corruption fall into, that they live,
and lie in, and the want of sorrow, and mourning for them, that unfit men for
eating the Sacrament. With spiritual sorrow and mourning for sin, should these
sanctified things be eaten. And for want of this and other due dispositions, it
is, that this holy Ordinance that men seem to think so highly and reverently
of, is so much abused and profaned.

Conceiving it therefore a work of charity to direct people to a preparation,
and a performance suitable to the holiness, and excellency of the Ordinance, I
have published this small treatise. And such as it is, I present it to your
Honors, as a public testimony of that thankfulness, service, and due regard
I owe unto you, and your Noble Family: the which deserves so much the more
honor from men, by how much the more it is honored by God. They were ill Si
quis ex nobilibus ad Deum co^verti caeperitstatim honorem nobilitatis amittit
-- Religio ignobilem facit -- Si honoratior quispiam religioni se applicue^it
^llico honoratus esse disistit. Salv. de Provid. lib. 4.
times that Salvian lived, in and complained of; when religion and godliness
were thought stains and blemishes of Honor, as if Religion, made Noble
Persons vile, and ignobled Greatness. But that which GOD calls Glory and
Honor, let no man account shame and baseness. It is most true which S.
Bernard writes to Sophia a religious, Noble Woman, Thou art the more Insignior
plane, atque illustrior, quod de paucis facta es, quam quod orta de magnis.
Illud namque Dei munere tuum est. Hoc tuorum. Porro quod tuum est, tanto carius
cst, etc. Bernard. Ep. 113.
illustrious, that thou art made one of few, (aluding to that of Paul, Not many
Noble) than that thou art borne of Great Ones. That by Gods gift is thine own,
this, namely, her Birth and Noble Parentage, thou art beholding to thy Parents
for. That which is thine own, is so much the more dear, by how much the more
rare. Who shall find a virtuous woman, much more a virtuous and Noble one? God
indeed is no accepter of persons, yet I know not how it comes to pass, yet to
pass it comes, that virtue in a Noble person is more pleasing, peradventure,
because it is more shining. As light is more glorious in the Stars of greater,
than of lesser magnitude. It is a most sure thing, what ever the world may
judge, that nothing so enobles, as Christ, grace, and being in the Covenant. I
have blessed Ishmael, says the Lord, twelve Princes shall he beget, But my
Covenant will I establish with Isaac. Account it your greater Honor, Genesis 17.
20. 21.
to be in the Covenant, than to have Seed Royal issue out of your loins, or
to have Blood Royal run in your veins. Then are persons truly Honorable
indeed, when precious in Gods sight, Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou
have been honorable. So may You, and Yours, be ever more and more Honble; and
long may Your House flourish, in such and all other Honor. Experience lets us
see, that not only Nobles, but Nobility it self is mortal; and that not only
Great Men, but Great Houses dye. Yet there is a way to make Honors and Houses
longer lived than many times they be. David's prayer was this, Let 1 Chro. 17.
24, 27
the House of thy Servant be established before thee; let it please thee to
bless the House of thy Servant, that it may be before thee for ever, for thou
blessest, O Lord, and it shall be blessed for ever. But that is not all that
David did; as he prayed God to bless his House, so he himself also blessed
his House, And David returned to bless 1 Chronicles. 16. 43
his House. Needs must his house be established, when he not only desires God
to bless it, but withal he blesses it himself, by doing what ever it might
be that might bring a blessing upon his House. Then do Great Ones bless their
Houses, when among other things they be like the Nobles of Israel. Those Nobles
had their staves, which happily they bare in their hands as Ensigns of their
Nobility. Now they made those staves which were the Ensigns of their Honor,
the instruments also of common good: The Princes dug the well, the Nobles of
the people dug it with Number 21. 18.
their staves. With their staves of Honor they dug a Well for the common
good, and public benefit of the people. That is one special way to keep the
staff long in a Family; and long to continue the Honor, Nobility, Dignity,
and wealth of great Families; when they improve their Honors and Power, to
honor God, in being serviceable what they can to public good. It lies a black
blot upon the Nobles of Tekoah, that they put not their necks to the work of
Neh. 3. 5.
the Lord, in not being forward to promote a common good; which though a civil
work, yet because it conduced to common good, is called the work of the Lord.
As that thing blurs their Names, so who knows, but it might gradually moulder,
bring down, and lay their Houses in the dust. This is out of question, that
Doing worthily makes a man's name famous, and his House glorious. Do thou
worthily Ruth 4. 11, 12.
in Ephratah, say those Elders blessing Boaz, And be famous in Bethlehem, and
let thine House be like the House of Pharez. That which was their blessing upon
him, is, and shall be my prayer for you; that the GOD of Heaven, and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, will be pleased to make good that blessing upon your
Honors Persons and hopeful posterity, that with Abraham he would make you
blessed and blessings; that ye being heirs of blessing here, may be heirs of
blessedness hereafter in the Kingdom of Glory.

Your Honors to serve You, IER. DIKE.

A Table of the Heads of this Treatise.
The due Order of receiving the Sacrament of the Supper, and seeking God
therein, stands in three kinds of Duties:

1 Duties Antecedent, in doing such Duties as must go before the Sacrament. All
which come under the general Head of preparation. Preparation is twofold: 1
Habitual, having the soul furnished with such graces as may make a man a
worthy Communicant: They are these, Knowledge. Faith. Repentance. Charity.
Obedience.
2 Actual, which stands in these things: 1 Solemn sequestration of a man's
self. 2 Examination 1. of the Truth of Faith. Repentance. Love. Obedience.
2. of the Growth of Grace. 3. of our Wants.
3 Renewing and quickening our Habitual Graces. 4 Excitation and stirring up in
our selves strong desires after Christ. 5 Stirring up in our selves a strong
expectation of the benefits to be had in the Sacrament. 6 Earnest seeking of
GOD by Prayer.

2 Duties concomitant. In doing such Duties as accompany the action of
Receiving, where the general Duty is; The offering up of our selves to God, in
an holy and spiritual disposition in receiving the Sacrament. This stands in
five things: 1 Solemn and serious meditation. 2 An exercise of repentance,
standing in Godly sorrow for sin. A solemn renewing of our covenants with God.
3 The actuating of faith, upon Sacramental offers. Sacramental promises.
Sacramental representations.
4 The Duty of Thanksgiving. 5 An Exercise of Love and Mercy.
3 Duties subsequent. In doing such Duties as must follow after Receiving. And
they are two: 1 Examining a man's self how he has sped at the Supper. 1 If
sped ill. Then 1. find out the cause of miscarriage, and be humbled for it. 2
Labor by after-paines to quicken, and make the Sacrament effectual.
2 If sped well. Then 1. bless God for it. 2. labor to keep and maintain
the holy frame of heart gotten at the Sacrament.

2 A special care to keep our vows, and express the power of the Ordinance,
in our holiness of life, and obedience.

A Table of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
Chapter 1. That God must be sought in a right Order, as well as in a right
Ordinance. Chapter 2. The necessity of Preparation before the Sacrament. Chapt.
3. The danger of coming to the Sacrament without preparation. Chapt. 4. The
necessity of knowledge in a Communicant. Chapt. 5. The necessity of Faith in a
worthy Receiver. Chapt. 6. The necessity of Repentance in a prepared
Communicant. Chapt. 7. The necessity of charity, and love in an orderly
Cammunicant. Chapt. 8. The necessity of obedience in an orderly Communicant.
Chapt. 9. The solemn sequestring, and setting a man's self apart before the
Sacrament. Chapt. 10. Of examination. Chapt. 11. The examination of faith.
Chapt. 12. The examination of Repentance. Chapt. 13. The examination of love.
Chapt. 14. The examination of obedience. Chapt. 15. The growth of Grace, and
our wants examined. Chapt. 16. Habitual Graces to be quickened, and renewed
before the receiving of the Sacrament. Chapt. 17. Excitation of earnest desires
after Christ, and a strong expectation to receive him, and his benefits. Chapt.
18. God to be sought in special manner by prayer, before the Sacrament. Chapt.
19. Meditation, and an exercise of Repentance at the Sacrament. Chapt. 20.
Faith to be actuated and exercised in the Sacrament, and an exercise of
thankesgiving, love and mercy. Chapt. 21. Subsequent duties, such as must
follow the Sacrament Received.
Errata.
Page 30. li. ^. consent, read conceit.. 84. l. 10. disposing, r. despising.
p. 100. l. 24. John, r. Job. p. 222. l. 8. is, r. it. p. 167. l. 5. on, r. no.
p. 174. l. 1. dele, Lords Table. p. 231. l. 2. r. a duty. p. 265. l. 18. thus,
r. this. p, 283. l. 9. faith. r. truth. p. 288. l. 1. care, r. ear. p. 328. l.
24. faith, r. truth. p. 371. l. 17. add, only. p. 427. l. 1. employed, r.
employed. p. 433. l. 14. John, 1. Isaiah. p. 443. l. 20. dele the first it. p.
516. l. 1. for 16. r. is. p. 529. l. 26. duly, r. duty. p. 532. l. 23. will,
r. with. p. 555. l. 18. at, r. of. p. 586. l. 13. exacted, r. excited. p. 578.
l. 3. following, r. softning.

Perlegi hunc Librum, cui titulus, A worthy Communicant: in quo nihil reperio
sanae fidei, aut bonis moribus contrarium; quo minus cum utilitate publica
imprimatur.

Tho. Weeks R. P. Ep. Land. Cap. Domest.

THE INTRODVCTION TO THE FOLLOWING Treatise, grounded upon
1 CHRONICLES 15. 13. For because ye did it not at the first, the Lord our God made
a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.
CHAP. I. That GOD must be sought in a right Order, as well as in a right
Ordinance.
WE read Sam. 4. 3, 4. That the Israelites being beaten by the Philistims,
they send for the Ark of God from Shiloh to be brought into the Camp, that
it might save them out of the hands of their enemies. Such be the silly and the
poor confidences of carnal and superstitious hearts, to rest and rely more
upon outward signs of Gods presence, and to betrust their safety with them,
than to take care for the presence of God Himself. As if God had been so
chained to his Arc, that it coming, God himself must needs come into their
Camp. A far wiser course it had been, to have taken a course to have fetched
the Lord of Hosts himself, then the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord of Hosts.
GOD could, and would have helped them without the Arc; but alas, What could
the Ark do without God? They might have learned another thing from Moses, Number.
10. 36. And it came to pass when the Arc set forward, that Moses said, Rise
up O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered. He knew, and taught, That though
the Arc did rise, yet if God sat still, it would not make one enemy fly; but
let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: it is Gods rising that is the
enemies scattering. And suppose there had been somewhat in the outward
presence of the Arc, yet what hope of help could they have by it, as it came
attended? And the two Sons of Ely, says the Text, Hophni and Phinehas, were
there with the Arc of the Covenant of God. Little likelihood of Gods being
there, when they were there. Their presence in the Camp was likelier to do
them more mischief, than the Arkes presence was like to do them good. But
they so dote upon the Arc, and put such confidence in it, have it they must,
and have it they will, not taking care to bring God along with it, nor being in
any fear of miscarriage, though it comes upon the profane shoulders of Hophni
and Phinehas. Well, and when they have it, how speed they? That confidence of
theirs was miserably checked, not only by their own ruin and overthrow, but
by the captivity of the Arc. Even that which they hoped should have saved them
out of the hand of their enemies, was delivered into the enemies hands, He
delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemies hand,
Psalm. 78. 61. So righteous it is with God, to let men see the vanity of their
fond confidences, That the wind shall carry them all away, that vanity shall
take them, Isa. 57. 13. That he rejects such confidences, and that men shall
not prosper in them, Ier. 2. 37. Well, but now though Isreal's confidences be in
the dust; yet have the Philistims little reason to vaunt of their victory: The
Arc, though it saves not Israel, yet proves a plague to the Philistims: God
soon makes them weary of their booty, and make them glad to return it home
again, and that with flying colors, and in an honorable manner. And now the
Arc returning, is not seated as before at Shiloh, where it had been till its
captivity, ever since the days of Joshua, but was placed in the City of
Kiriath-Iearim, a City in Judah. There it remained separated from the
Tabernacle, unto the time of David's ferching it thence, which could not be
less than about the space of forty seven years. Samuel and Saul governed the
people forty years, and David reigned in Hebron seven years before he came to
Jerusalem. All this while were the Arc and Tabernacle separated: yea, the Ark
was not inquired at, all the days of Saul, 1 Chro. 14. 3. Out of all which by
the way we may note; That the want of some Ordinances of GOD does not annull a
Church of God. A Church may want some Ordinances, Ordinances of great weight,
and yet be a true Church; or else for these forty seven years there had been
no true Church, nor true worship in Israel; and so not in the world. The Arc,
and enquiring at it, was a matter of great weight in Gods Church, and worship.
It was one of the most special types of Christ, a symball of Gods gracious and
special presence: it was the place of Gods special residence; he dwelt
between the Cherubims, and from thence he gave answers. It was the first and
chiefest of all the holy things, for it principally, was the Tabernacle made,
Exodus 40. 18. 21. It sanctified the whole Tabernacle, The places are holy
whereinto the Ark of the Lord has come, 2 Chro. 8. 11. And yet this Arc out
of the Tabernacle, the place of worship and sacrifice, the space of forty seven
years. Yea more, during all David's time it continued separated from the
Tabernacle, it being pitched in a Tent by it self at Jerusalem, and the
Tabernacle being at the High-place in Cibeon, 1 Chronicles. 1. 4, 5, 6, 13. The Arc
and the Tabernacle never came together more, after it was once removed from
Shiloh; but when Solomon built the Temple, and the Tabernacle was dissolved,
then was the Arc placed in the Holy of Holies in the Temple. And yet all this
while who will say they had not true worship, and a true Church? wants
therefore, and defects in a Church, unchurch it not.

The Arc now having continued forty seven years at Kiriath-Iearim, David
being made King over all Israel, and come to Jerusalem; the first thing we
read he did, after his plenary possession of, and Inauguration into the
Kingdom, is to bring home the Arc from Kiriath-Iearim unto Jerusalem. In the
bringing it home they meet with a shrewd check, and a sore miscarriage in the
death of Vzzah; and that by reason of a miscarriage in the carriage of the Arc
upon a Cart, which should have been born upon the Priests shoulders. David
finding their former error, and their fail in a prescribed formality, does
now a second time set upon the work, and in this Chapter and place, direct the
Priests what course to take, and gives them to understand, that for want of
this observance, God gave them that former blow in Vzzahs death. Sanctify your
selves both ye and your brethren, that you may bring up the Ark of the Lord
God of Israel, namely upon your own shoulders, according to the Canon, Exodus
25. 14. as the fifteenth Verse of this Chapter explaines it. For because ye did
it not at first, V. 13. The Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we
sought him not after the due order. As if he had said, It was not only Vzzahs
error in touching the Ark contrary to that, Number. 4. 15. but it was all your
errors to carry it in a Cart, when it should have been borne upon your
shoulders. Indeed unto the Sons of Gershon, and to the Sons of Merari Moses
gave Wagons and Oxen, according to their service, but unto the Sons of Kohatb
(who were to bear the Ark, Number. 4. 5, 15.) he gave none, Because the service
of the Sanctuary belonging to them, was, that they should be are upon their
shoulders, Number. 7. 6, 7, 8, 9. A Gershonites or a Merarites burden might be
carted, but not a Kohatbites, they must put their shoulders to the burden. And
for this irregularity was the breach made. Indeed the Philistines sent home the
Ark in a Cart, but God brooks not the carting of the Arc in Israel: God will
bear with that in Heathens and Strangers, which he will not brook, nor winck
at in his own people, who must live by rule. He will be sanctified in all
those that draw near unto him. So precisely strict is God for the observation
of his Ordinances; and so jealous, and so quick a Judge in cases of the
smallest prevarication.

The thirteenth Verse then is a reason of that counsel given, V. 12. You must
sanctify your selves, and you must bring home the Ark. We went another way to
work before; and Gods displeasure brake out against us, because we sought him
not after the due order. The Point then we may learn, is this,

That it is not enough to seek God, but we must seek him after the due order
that he has appointed, and prescribed: And, That where God is not sought after
the due order, there men not only meet not with a blessing, but with a blow,
and with a breach.

To go and fetch the Arc, and to enquire of God at it, it was an Ordinance of
God, but to neglect the sanctification of themselves, that they might bring up
the Ark of the Lord, and to carry it in a Cart, this was not according to Gods
Order. His order was that they themselves should bear it, and that they should
sanctify themselves beforehand for the service. David and his people made
full account of it, when they went about that days work, to have had a good
and a comfortable day of it: but Gods order being neglected, instead of a
blessing, they meet with a blow, and a breach. It proved a sad day, they were
sent home with sad and sorrowful hearts. It is true indeed, that the carrying
of the Arc upon a Cart, was a fail but in point of outward order, the due
outward order was not observed. And if God be so severe in making a breach upon
them, for the breach of an outward order, How much more severe may it be
thought will he be in denying a blessing, and in making a breach for the
neglect and breach of that spiritual and inward order, with which he requires
holy services to be performed. God has prescribed not only holy Ordinances
and ways, in which he will be sought and found; but he has also prescribed an
holy Order, and a spiritual manner, after which, and in which, he will be
sought in the use of those his Ordinances. Gods Ordinance, and Gods Order must
ever go together. Let us suppose that which cannot be. Suppose that a man
could seek God in the right Order, in regard of inward disposition of spirit,
in a wrong Ordinance; yet God being sought in a wrong Ordinance though in a
right Order, no blessing, but a breach were to be expected. So contrarily,
Though a man seek God in a right Ordinance, yet if he seek him in a wrong
Order, for inward frame of heart, not a blessing, but a breach would follow. As
no blessing to be expected from a right Order in a wrong Ordinance, so no
blessing from a right Ordinance in a wrong Order. The blessing is derived from
God, through a right Ordinance used after a due Order. We shall see both going
therefore together. See Isa. 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works
righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways. Here is first, Gods
blessing, communion, and fellowship with God, Thou meetest him. When God meets
a man seeking him, there is a blessing: but mark in the next place how the
blessing is met withal. And that by doing two things. First there is a seeking
in Gods Ordinance. That remember thee in thy ways. They that will meet GOD
must seek him in his own ways. His Ordinances are his ways, and his walks.
If we make walks, and ways of our own, there can be no meeting of GOD in
them, because He will walk in no ways but His own.

Secondly, there is a seeking in Gods Order, that rejoices, that works
righteousness. There must be a seeking Him in that Spiritual manner, with
the heart set in due order, in all those gracious dispositions that GOD
requires, and then GOD meets a man. But now as a man that seeks GOD out of
His Ordinance meets not with Him, because he seeks Him not in His ways, so
though a man do seek Him in His ways, yet if he rejoice not, and work not
righteousness, but seeks God with an unholy, a dead, and a dull heart, though
he be in Gods ways, and seek God in a right Ordinance, yet he seeks not in
a right order, and therefore neither GOD nor His blessing met withal. GOD
meets with a man that seeks him in both jointly, Right Ordinance, and right
order. The like we have, Ier. 29. 12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye
shall go, and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you, and ye shall seek
me, and find me, when you shall search for me with all your heart. Here is a
promise of a blessing to them that seek God. But first they must seek God in
His Ordinance. Ye shall call upon me, and ye shall go, and pray unto me;
not go to Saints, Angels, Images, Idols, that is none of Gods Ordinance.
Secondly, they must seek God after His Order, when ye shall search for me
with all your heart. Thus Gods blessing attends seeking in His Ordinance, and
Order jointly. If they prayed with all their heart, that were His Order, but if
they prayed to an Image, that were not His ordinance, therefore in such a case
would he not be found. So again, if they prayed to Him, that were His
Ordinance, but if they prayed with dead, and dull hearts, that were not His
Order, therefore neither in such a case would He be found.

But this is not all. There is not only no blessing, but there is a breach
where God is not sought after the Due Order. We shall see it true in the
several Ordinances wherein God is sought.

1 In the Word. God is sought in the Ministry of the Word, 1 Samuel 9. 9. Before
time in Israel, when a man went to enquire of GOD, thus he spoke: Come let us
go to the Seer. Therefore when they went to the Seer they went to enquire of
God. That is one Ordinance wherein GOD is sought. But yet when GOD is not
sought in the due order in this Ordinance, it brings no blessing but a breach,
1 Cor. 1. 23. To the Jews a stumbling block, to the Gentiles foolishness, 2
Cor. 2. 16. A savor of death unto death, Is. 28. 13. And the Word of the Lord
was unto them -- that they might go, and fall backward, and be broken, and be
snared and taken. And be broken. There is a breach in stead of a blessing.

2 In prayer. GOD is sought in prayer, Zach. 8. 21, 22. Let us go speedily to
pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts, yea many people shall
come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord.
That is another Ordinance wherein the Lord is sought. But when God is sought in
prayer, and not sought in the due order, not a blessing but a breach follows.
Psalm. 109. 9. Let his prayer become sin. If our light become darkness, how
great is that darkness! If our duties become sin how great is that sin? A
prayer turned into sin is a curse, and brings a curse.

3 In sacrifices of the Old Testament. They were Ordinances in which God was
sought. Hose. 5. 6. They shall go with their flocks, and with their herds to
seek the Lord. But yet if God were not sought in them after the due order,
there was a breach in stead of a blessing, Prove. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination, how much more when he brings it in wickedness. when
he brings it with an heart out of order. Mal. 2. 3. I will spread your doung
upon your faces, even the doung of your sollemne feasts, and sacrifices.

4 In fasting. God is sought in it. Ezr. 8. 21. I proclaimed a fast* to seek
of him a right way for us. Isa. 58. 2, 3. Yet they seek mee-wherefore have we
fasted? Yet if GOD not sought in fasting after the due order, there follows a
breach, Ier. 14. 12. When they fast I will not hear their cry. There is no
blessing. But that is not all, there is a breach also, But I will consume them by
the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.

5 In Sacraments. God is sought in the use of them, 2 Chronicles. 30. 19. That
prepares his heart to seek GOD, namely in the use of the Sacrament of the
Passover. But yet if GOD be sought in the Sacrament, and not after the due
order, it will prove a breach; we see it in Tudas, he received the
Passover, the Sop was the close of it, and see what followed, John 13. 27. And
after the Soppe Satan entered into him. The Devil made a breach into his soul.
The Soppe proved poison to him, and when he receives it he receives the
Devil. Not because he received an evil thing, for the Nam and nos hodie
accipimus visibile^ cibum. Sed aliud est Sacramentum, aliud virtus Sacramenti.
Qua^ multi de Altari accipiunt and moriuntur, and accipiendo moriuntur? unde
dicit apostolus, Iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. Nonne buccella Dominica
venenu^ fuit Indae? Et tamen Accepit. Et cum Accepit, Inimicus in cum intravit:
non quia malum accepit sed quia bonum male malus accepit. Aug. Tract. in Ioh.
26.
Passover was Gods Ordinance, but because, as Augustine says, he being an
evil man received a good thing in an evil manner, in an undue order.

We see it in the Israelites. 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4, 5. All baptized, did all eat
the same Spiritual meat, did all drinkt he same Spiritual drink, But with
many of them God was not well pleased, there is the want of the blessing, for
they were overthrown in the wilderness. There is the breach. We may see it in
the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. 29, 30. He that eats, and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, for this cause many are weak and
sickly, and many sleep. He that eats, and drinks the Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament he uses a right Ordinance, but he that cates and drinks unworthily,
he uses it not in a right Order, and therefore not only no blessing but a breach
follows both upon soul and body.

The grounds of this Truth are these two.

First, All Gods Law is copulative, Iam. 2. 10. And therefore mark Deu. 5. 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. how those Commandments are laid down, Thou shall not kill,
And thou shall not commit Adultery, And thou shall not steal, And thou shall
not bear false witness, etc. He does not say as Exo. 20. Thou shall not Kill,
Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not steal, etc. But we see one of
these Commandments is knit to the other by the Copulative particle And. That
same particle And is amongst these Commandments as the Taches, and Loopes were
amongst the Curtains of the Tabernacle. The taches put into the loopes did
couple the Curtains of the Tent, and sew the tent together that it might be
one. Exodus 26. 10, 11. So does this particle couple these Commandments
together. Now as it is with those Commandments there specified, so it is with
all the rest, the first, second, third, etc. Thou shall have no other Gods
before me, And thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, And thou
shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. So that the breaking of
one is the breach of the whole Law, as he that had uncoupled but one Curteine
of the Tabernacle had uncoupled the whole Tent. Now then the same Law of God
that commands Ordinances, the same Law of GOD commandes Order. And he that
breaks the Commandment enjoining order whether outward or inward, makes a
breach upon the whole Law. And when we make a breach, what can we look for
but a breach? God commandes order, even outward order, and will have it
precisely observed. Levit. 1. 7, 8. The Priests shall lay the wood in order
upon the fire, and the Priests shall lay the parts, the head, and the fat in
order upon the wood. Not only wood laid upon the fire, but laid in order,
not only the parts, head and fat laid upon the wood, but laid in order. And
Abraham, Genesis 22. 9. Laid the wood in order.

Now GOD that commandes outward order, and stands so punctually upon the
outward order, how much more commandes He, and stands He upon inward order,
the right ordering, and disposing of the inward man? If God will have the wood
in order, the parts of the Beast, the fat, and the head in order in the
Sacrifice, how much more requires he to have the Heart and Soul of a man in
order in any holy service, and in the use of any holy Ordinance of His? As to
Hezekiah in that case, Is. 38. 1. Set thine house in order, for thou must dye.
So set thy Soul in order, for thou must pray, hear the Word, receive the
Sacrament. Let all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. That
is a Cannon, and a Commandment for outward order, and God that will have men
so Canonical for His outward order, how much more requires He that men be as
regular for inward order? Let all things be done holily, and in Spiritual
order. Let not only the Word be heard, Gods Name be called upon, the Sacrament
received, but let it be done after the due order, with an heart, and a spirit
so spiritually ordered as God commandes. So that God commanding inward order,
as well as an outward Ordinance, and His Law being Copulative, such must our
obedience be, or else we make a breach in His Law, in uncoupling what he has
coupled together. What God has joined together let no man put asunder, what
GOD has coupled together, let no man uncouple. He has coupled together the
second Commandment enjoining His Ordinance, and the third enjoining the inward
manner, and order of the use of His Ordinance. And therefore to use His
Ordinance without that order is a breach of what He has coupled. And if we
make a breach in His Law, what wonder if He make a breach in our service, in
our comfort!

2 That same, Levit. 22. 21. perfect shall it be to be accepted. God expects
Non est Actio bona simpliciter nisi omnes bonitates concurrant: quia quilibet
singularis defectus causat malum, bonum autem causatur ex Integra causa. Tho.
Aquin. 1a. 2ae. qu. 18. Art. 4. Bonum causatur ex Integra causa, malum autem ex
singularibus defectibus. Id. ibi. qu. 19. art. 6.
perfection, perfection of parts where man expects acceptance. Now as unto that
which is good so unto that whch is perfect there must be an entire concurrence
of all requisites. The defect or want of any one thing required may cause an
imperfection, but to the constitution of perfection, there must be a meeting of
all things required. It will appear in the case specified, Lev. 22. 21. The
sacrifices of Beeves, or Sheep there mentioned must be perfect. Now if the
beast had wanted but any one part, an eye, an ear, an horn, an hoof, any one
of these defects had caused an imperfection, and the sacrifice had been
imperfect, and so no acceptance of it. But now to have made it perfect to be
accepted, it must have all, and every one of the parts, every member of the
body in its number, and proportion. Now the equity holds in all duties of
worship. To what end is our worship, if not accepted, if we will have it
accepted we must have it perfect, there must be all these things in it that
God requires. Now God requires in worship, not only that we use his Ordinance,
but his order; as outward, so inward. Now when there is this perfection that
God requires, then may a blessing, and acceptance be expected. But if that
order, that Spiritual order which God calls for be wanting, if wanting in any
one part of it, there the duty is imperfect, there no acceptance can be looked
for, but rather a breach. We may see it exemplified in the Law of the peace
offerings, Levit. 7. First see the Ordinance of God, verse. 11, 12, 13. There is
the substance of the sacrifice prescribed. Then the order is prescribed. That
they be eaten in due time, v. 16. It shall be eaten the same day that he offers
his sacrifice. That the flesh be clean, v. 19. And the flesh that touches any
unclean thing shall not be eaten. That the persons that do eat it must be
clean, verse 19. And as for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof,
that is, all that eat thereof must be clean, as appears by that which
follows, verse 20. So Atque haec munera pure, a puris, pura percipi oportuit
ex p^aescripto Dei, Iun. Analis. in Levit. 7.
then as here is the Ordinance prescribed, so the order of eating, that they be
eaten purely, that pure things be eaten, that they be eaten of pure persons.
Their peace offerings thus eaten were accepted, because here was perfection
from the concurrence, and integrity of the causes constituting perfection: But
now if any one of these things were missing in point of order it made them
imperfect, and so unacceptable. If not purely in regard of time, though pure
flesh, and eaten by pure persons, yet no blessing, no acceptance, but a breach,
verse 18. It shall not be accepted, it shall be an abomination, and the soul
that eats of it shall be are his iniquity. If not pure flesh eaten, though in
due time, and so purely, though by pure persons, yet not accepted. If not eaten
by pure persons though in due time, and though pure things, yet not only no
acceptance, and blessing but an uncomfortable breach, even that soul shall be
cut off from his people, verse 20, 21. So then perfection being required unto
acceptance, and an universal concurrence of all things commanded by God
required unto perfection, and order being required of God as well as his
Ordinance, therefore it is not enough to seek God in an Ordinance, but he must
be sought after that due order which he has prescribed, or else we may not
only meet with no blessing, but with an heavy check, and such a breach as
may send us away from Gods Ordinances with a drooping, and a mourning heart.

This serves first to let us see what the reason is that many times after our
joyful in, and so to send us joyful away from his house of prayer, Isa. 56.
And he makes his people not only to feel joy, and gladness, but he makes
them hear it, Psalm. 51. 8. He infuses it by hearing the Word, and promises
opened. He promises to make us rise from His Table full of quikning, comfort,
joy, refreshment, and ravishment of spirit: Take eat this is my body, my body
which shall feed you, quicken, refresh and comfort you. Now it may be thou
have come many a Lord's Day to the house of God, to the Table of the Lord, and
have met with no such blessing, have found no such cheering, no such
comfortable refreshment: Nay thou have rather met with a blow, and a breach,
thou have gone away with a dead, a sad, a drooping, an uncomfortable spirit.
Thou have seen it may be some such spiritual token of Gods displeasure, as
might make thee call the Church, the Table of the Lord, Perez-uzzah, or
Perez-nephesh the breach of thy soul. And what think thou may the reason
be? Is Gods hand shortened? Is His fidelity weakend? Are His Ordinances deforced
or enfeebled? No, by no means. God is as powerful and as faithful as ever,
His Ordinances as energeticall, operative, and efficacious as ever: what then
may the reason be? An hundred to one, but the Lord has made this breach upon
thy soul because thou soughtest him not after the due order. Call thy self to
an account, was there that prayer, humiliation, renewing of thy repentance, and
quickening of thy faith before hand as there should have been? If thou have
made a breach in Gods order, it is not strange that God has made a breach in
thy conscience, and comfort. Certainly it seldom fares thus ill with any man
in the use of GODS Ordinances, but upon due search it will be found that there
has been a neglect of due order.

And let it teach us in the second place, not to rest contented in the but let
it be our great care, to seek God in it, after the due Order. Do not satisfy
thy self, and set up thy rest in praying, hearing; but have a special care to
do these duties after the due Order. But in more special manner be exhorted
to think upon this, when thou art to receive the Sacrament. Men have generally
an high conceit of the Sacrament, what ever esteem they have in the mean time
of other Ordinances. And true it is, that it is a very precious Ordinance of
God, and highly to be esteemed; but yet strange it is, to see what little
regard men have to come in due Order thereunto. In any case men must come; and
it were the greatest wrong that could be if they should not come: be they
adulterers, drunkards, swearers, be their lives and ways what they will, yet
because it is the custom to come at such a time, in any case they must come.
No question but many have the same idle and vain conceits that some had in
Saint Chrysostomes time, that if they came at such and such times, what Multos
video qui Christi corporis sunt participes inconsiderate, and temere, and magis
ex consuetudine, and lege quam ex cogitatione, et consideratione. Si advenerit,
inquit, tempus sanctae quadragesimae, qualiscunque fuerit quispiam, fit
particeps mysteriorum, si advenerit dies Epiphanioru^. Atqui tempus ad ea
accedendi, neque Epiphania, neque quadragesima, facit dignos qui accedunt,
(...). Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. hom. 3.
ever their lives were, yet it skilled not, the coming at such times was
disposition sufficient for the service. But hear how he cries down that vain
consent. I see many, says he, that are partakers of the Body of Christ,
inconsiderately, and rashly, more out of custom and law, than out of
consideration. If the time (says one) of holy Lent be come, or the day of
Epiphany be come, what kind of person soever the man be, he is made partaker
of the mysteries. But it is not the time of coming unto them, neither Epiphany
nor Lent, which makes them worthy that come, but the sincerity and purity of
the soul. Always come with that, never come without it. So that they looked
more at the time they came, than to come with sincerity and purity; as if the
time should impart that holiness to them which the Sacrament requires, and
they neglected to bring with them. And are not there too many in the world,
that nourish such secret conceits in their hearts, who think, that so long as
they come at such times as law and custom sets, all is well enough, there
needs no more to look after. But let men know, that at what time soever they
come, let it be ever so soleme a time, or how often soever they come, were it
monthly, or daily, yet if they come not after the due Order, they shall be so
far from receiving a blessing, that they shall receive a breach, yea, a very
curse upon their souls: let a man come as often as he will to the Sacrament, yet
if he come not after the due Order, God will deal with such a communicant as
with the wicked man in that case, Job 20. 23. When he is about to fill his
belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon
him whilst he is eating. So here, when a man comes to the Sacrament, and not
after the due Order, even whilst he is eating, GOD may rain down his wrath
upon him; and when he thinks to eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood,
that which he eats, may be sawced, and that which he drinks, may be spiced
with the bitter wrath of God. Such is the case oftentimes of many receivers,
who will be coming to the Sacrament without any regard to Gods due Order: as
it was with the Israelites at their Quails, Psa. 78. 29, 30, 31. So they did
eat and were filled, for he gave them their own desire: but whilst the meat
was yet in their mouths, the wrath of GOD came upon them. Quails were dainty
food, but wrath was ill sauce: flesh they must needs have, no remedy, and they
murmr that they have it not; flesh they have, and wrath they have. And the
wrath of God came upon the^ while their meat was yet in their mouths. Who
would have their meat to have had their sauce? So, many will needs come to the
Sacrament, by no means may they be persuaded to forbear till better fitted,
come they must, there is no remedy: and they have their desire: but while the
Sacramental meat is yet in their mouths, the wrath of God comes secretly and
insensibly upon their souls, because they come, and do not seek God after
the due Order. That same is an heavy curse, Psa. 69. 22. Let their Table
become a snare before them, and that which should have been for their
welfare, let it become a trap. It is very heavy, when our ordinary Table
becomes a snare unto us; but to have the Table of the Lord become a snare, and
the Sacrament which is appointed for our welfare, to become a trap; what
judgment can be imagined heavier? And yet this is the sad condition of such as
come not to the Lords Table after the due Order, even that holy Table becomes a
snare unto them. How wondrous jocund and jolly was Haman, that he must go with
the King to Esthers banquet? Esther 5. 9. Then went Haman forth, that day,
joyful, and with a glad heart. And he brags of it, Verse. 12. Yea, Est. her the
Queen did let no man come in with the King, unto the banquet she had prepared,
but my self; And to morrow I am invited unto her also with the King. But
little reason had the man to be so cranke; for not only at the banquet; but at
the banquet of wine, Esther 7. 7. which was the merriest banquet of all, he
meets with the Kings wrath, and thereupon with the sentence of death. How happy
were it, it were not the case of many Communicants; full brag and jolly they
be, that though they be most unfit, yet they may come, and none can keep them
back; and to the Sacrament they will go, that they will: but alas, at the very
banquet of wine they meet with the King of Heaven, his wrath upon their souls,
which there arrests them, and sentences them to death. As if God should say,
Lo, here is a company of people come to my Table, and amongst them, I spy a
great many that are not come after the due Order: and shall such as these that
thus unduly and disorderly seek me, meet with my blessing? Shall these have my
Christ? such as these, shall they eat my sons flesh, and drink his blood? No,
here is not for you. God will say to them, as Nabal to David's servants, 1 Samuel
15. 10, 11. Who is David? And who is the son of Iesse? Shall I take my bread,
and my water, and my flesh, that I have killed for my shearers, and give it
unto men, whom I know not whence they be? So will the Lord say to all such, Who
are ye? and whence are ye? shall I take my Sacramental bread, and my Sons
flesh and blood, which I have prepared for such as come after the due Order,
and give it unto a company of persons, I know not whence they are? Be gone, and
meddle not; or if you will needs be meddling, not only no blessing, but my curse
be upon your communicating. Therefore in the fear of GOD look we to it, to
come to this holy Ordinance in an holy Order. A great conscience is to be made
of coming. It is a grievous sin to neglect Gods Ordinance; and as great a
conscience is to be made of coming after the due Order. Be no less solicitous
to come in due Order, than to come to the Ordinance.

Chap. 2. Of preparation before the Sacrament, and the necessity of it.
due Order, and that holy and spiritual manner, after which God is to be
sought in the Sacrament.

This due Order therefore of seeking God in the Sacrament of the Supper, it
stands especially in three things, or three kinds of Duties.

In 1 Doing such Duties as must go before the Sacrament. Antecedaneous Duties.
2 Doing such Duties as accompany the Action of Receiving. Duties concomitant. 3
Doing such Duties as follow after the Action of Receiving. Duties Subsequent.

1 In doing such Duties as must go before the Sacrament. And they may all be
reduced to this one duty of Preparation.

The Duty then before the Sacrament, is Preparation. This is GODS Order, and
this is to seek God after the due Order, to begin with Preparation: and the
man that desires to seek God orderly, must first prepare himself. A man
coming to the Sacrament without preparation, comes not after the due Order.
Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest into the House of the Lord, Eccl. 5.
1. Now when we come to the Sacrament, we come to the Table of the Lord: and if
it concern a man to prepare himself, before he enter into the House of the
Lord; then much more when he comes to approach to the Table of the Lord. See
how David speaks here in this Text, Sanctify your selves and your brethren,
etc. for we sought him not after the due Order. Therefore they that will seek
God in due Order in the use of his Ordinances, must first sanctify and prepare
themselves. It holds good in the case of the Sacrament which Samuel spoke in
the case of Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 16. 5. Sanctify your selves, and come with me
to the Sacrifice. So, Sanctify your selves, and come to the Sacramt. Come, but
first sanctify your selves, Psalm. 26. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence,
and So, etc. 1 Cor. 11. Let a man examine himself, and So, etc. It was not
enough then to compass Gods Altar, but it was to be compassed So. It is not
enough to eat of this bread, to drink of this cup, but it must be eaten So,
drunken So. This same So, it notes unto us the due Order of seeking God in his
Ordinance. We seek God in due Order when we seek him So: we eat and drink in
the Sacrament in due Order when we eat and drink So. That is, when we do it So,
as S. Paul enjoynes, With due preparation going before. There ought to be no
less care in us coming to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, than was
required in the Jews to the eating of the Passover. And special care was
required of them for preparation, see 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. So kill the Passover,
and sanctify your selves, and prepare your brethren. And if they were in their
places to be careful to prepare others, how much more ought others to be
careful to prepare themselves? And that is to be observed, Exodus 12. 3. Speak
unto all the Congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month,
they shall take to them every man a Lamb, a Lamb for an house. And Verse. 6.
And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month. So that the
Lamb was taken and set apart, four days before it was killed. What might the
meaning of that ceremony be? what ever other meaning it had, this might be one
thing aimed at therein; to teach them what care they were to have, of preparing
themselves for eating the Passover: if the Lamb must be prepared, and be set
and kept apart from the rest of the flock, four whole days before; then how
much more were they in a solemn and an holy manner, to prepare themselves for
the eating of that Lamb? What was all that four days separation of the
Lamb, but a continual standing-Sermon, preaching preparation to them? It was
as if God had said unto them, Be ye also prepared. It questionless teaches
that there should be a preparation; and that not a sudden, but a solemn serious
preparation, some good space of time before men come to receive the Sacrament.

Therefore we read, John 19. 14. That the Jews had a day of preparation, and
it was the preparation of the Passover. And Verse. 31. Because it was the
preparation. And upon that ground was that Act of theirs, In abstaining from
coming that day into the Judgment Hall, John 18. 28. And they themselves went
not into the Iudgement-Hall, lest they should be defiled; but that they might
eat the Passover. It shows, that upon the day of their preparation, they were
to take heed of doing any thing that might defile them, and unfit them for the
eating of the Passover: though it be true, that they were not in that case so
careful to keep themselves from moral, as from ceremonial defilement. And
if such preparation were required for the eating of the Passover; why then
should not there be as great a care at least, if not greater, to come with due
preparation to the Lords Supper? Is our sacrament inferior to theirs, in
institution, excellency, efficacy, benefit, and comfort? Nay, is it not in many
regards above and beyond it? and shall our preparation be less than theirs?

When we are invited to our neighbors Tables to feast with them, how do we
spruce up our selves, in our comelier and cleanlier apparel, and how much
rather will we choose to be absent, then to come in undecent and homely attire?
When we come to the Sacrament, we come to the Lords Table, to a Feast of his
preparing: and therefore should be no less careful to dress, trim, and
spruce up our souls, then we are to trim our bodies when we go to the Tables
of men. It is a sad thing to consider, what little care and conscience men
generally have of this duty; and how rudely and rashly men thrust themselves
into Gods presence, and unto his Table. Many have the civility and the manners,
not to offer to sit down at a Noblemans Table, because they do not judge
themselves persons of that rank and quality, who are fit to sit down at such a
man's board. But who is it that does not think himself as fit, and as worthy,
to sit down at Gods Table as the holiest, and the best prepared person that
is? Our Savior put a question to those Disciples, Mat. 20. 22. Are ye able to
drink of the cup that I shall drink of? And we know how roundly, but yet
withal how rashly they answer, We are able. So, put the like question to most
men; Are ye able and ready fitted, and worthy to drink of the Cup of the Lords
Table? and you shall have as round and as rash answer, We are able, we are
fit and worthy; and yet the Lord he knows they never have bestowed one poor
hour in preparation: they are so far from four days, they have not four
hours preparation; so far from a preparation-day, that there is not so much
as a^ preparation-houre with the^. The preparation, specially of the younger
sort, is to put on their best dress, their finer apparel; and to be a little
braver when they come to the Sacrament than at other times. But for a
spiritual preparation of the heart, to fit it for so holy and solemn a
service, it is a thing that is never once looked after nor thought upon. To
quicken men then to this Duty, consider these things:

1 First, According to a man's preparation, such is his profit and benefit. God
proportions every man's profit by the Sacrament, according to his preparation to
the Sacrament. The more diligent and serious preparation before we come, the
greater benefit and profit when we come. Preparation is the seed time,
receiving is the harvest: every man reapes proportionably to what he sowes. He
that sowes nothing, reapes nothing. No preparation, no profit. He that sowes
little, reapes not much, reapes but little, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows
sparingly, shall reap sparingly. He that is sparing and slight in his
preparation, shall reap but slightly and sparingly in matter of benefit:
little preparation, little profit. But the more we prepare our selves, and the
more time, pains, and diligence, we spend therein, the greater benefit and
comfort we shall meet with in receiving: for he which sowes bountifully, shall
reap bountifully. It is in the duty of receiving, as in the duty of praying.
The more prepared the heart is to pray, the greater is a man's return from
heaven, Psalm. 10. 17. Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear
to hear. To have our heart prepared is the due order of seeking God in prayer.
And the more God gives a man an heart to prepare himself to pray, the more God
prepares his own ear to hear. So in the case of receiving; thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thine hand to give. God so enlarges his hand, as
we enlarge our hearts; and nothing furthers the enlargement of the heart more,
than solemn preparation. Then may a man expect a liberal and plentiful
blessing in the use of the Ordinance, when he comes with a sufficient
preparation and sanctification of himself. Hezekiah, his passover which he
appointed to be kept, could not be kept at the appointed time, but was put off
to the second month; and the reason is given of it, 2 Chronicles. 30. 3. For they
could not keep it at that time, because the Priests had not sanctified
themselves sufficiently: which implies, that when the Passover was to be
celebrated, the Priests were not only to sanctify themselves, but to sanctify
themselves sufficiently. And so it holds good for people also; that when they
come to the Sacrament, they must have a care not only to sanctify themselves,
but to sanctify themselves sufficiently. There may be an insufficient
preparation; and where the preparation is insufficient, there cannot be
expected such a sufficient measure of spiritual good, and blessings, as we
desire. The more sufficient our preparation is, the more effectual the
Sacrament shall be. The efficiency of the Sacrament, is ever suitable to the
sufficiency of our preparation.

Fill the men's sacks with food as much as they can carry, says Joseph to his
Steward, Genesis 44. 1. Look how they came prepared with sacks and Beasts, so they
were sent back with corn: the greater and the more sacks they had prepared,
the more Corn they carry away: if they had prepared but small sacks, and a
few, they had carried away the less. A prepared heart is a vessel that shall
be filled at the Sacrament, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.
10. Now the more or less the heart is prepared, the greater or lesser is the
Vessel. According to the size and capacity of the Vessel shall it be filled.
Fill such men's hearts with spiritual blessings, with virtue from Christ, with
the comforts of the Holy Ghost, says the Lord at the Sacrament, fill them with
spiritual food as full as they can hold, as much as they can carry. What a
sweet comfort is that? Who desires not to carry away from the Sacrament as much
as may be? Then be careful to prepare our hearts, and prepare Sacramenta sunt
fodinae gratiae. Dispositio est vasculum gratiae, pro majore dispositione, and
affectu tuo majorem reportabis. Eusebius. Ne^eml.
then to the purpose. The larger is our preparation, the larger is our Vessel;
the larger our Vessel, the larger is our largess and doale at the Sacrament.
If we carry not away as much as we would, it is our own fault, that by
preparation we did not furnish our selves with a more capacious vessel. The
poor pittances that many go from the Sacrament withal, make them droope when
they are gone. They may thank themselves: for if Joseph's brethren had brought
small sacks, they could not have carried away much corn out of Egypt. Let men
come with hearts so prepared as they should, and they shall be laden and filled
with as much as they can carry.

2 Secondly, when we come to the Sacrament, We come to meet God, and to serve
God. We come to meet God. Now it must be in cases of meeting God in mercy; as
it must be in cases of meeting him when he is displeased. Amos 4. 12. Prepare
to meet thy God, O Israel. In cases of justice and displeasure, God will meet
with men though they prepare not; yea, and because they prepare not; but in a
case of blessing in the use of an Ordinance, no preparation, no meeting. They
Iam. 4. Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. There must be a
mutual drawing near between God and us, if ever we will meet. If God draw
near to us, yet if we draw not near to him, we cannot meet him. Now unless
we first prepare our selves to an Ordinance, we cannot come near unto him: but
when prepared, then we are in a disposition and qualification to come near
unto him. Mark how Hezekiah speaks to the Levites, 2 Chronicles. 29. 31. Now ye
have consecrated your selves to the Lord, Come near, and bring Sacrifices, and
Thank-offerings into the house of the Lord. The preparation of a man's self is
the consecration of a man's self; and when by preparation a man is consecrated
and sanctified, then may a man come near and draw near, and so meet with God.
But if no preparation, no consecration; if no consecration, no drawing near;
if no drawing near, no meeting with God. To the same purpose is that, Exodus
12. 48. When a stranger shall sojourne with thee, and will keep the Passover
to the Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and
keep it. So that first there must be circumcision, before he must come near.
An unprepared person is uncircumcised, and such an one may not come near; and
how can he meet with God that may not come near? So when we come to the
Sacrament, we come to serve God: it is a special service of his Name. Now no
service can be done to God without preparation, 1 Samuel 7. 3. Prepare your
hearts unto the Lord, and serve him. So that if no preparation, no service.
Unprepared persons in coming to the Sacrament do God no service at all. The
very Heathens saw that by the light of Nature, that God was not to be served at
an adventure, or by the (...). Plut.
way; but that men should come on purpose to worship him, and come prepared
from their houses. If therefore we intend God a service in the receiving of the
Sacrament, Come we prepared. All Gods services require a precedent preparation.

Thirdly, it is a comfortable sign of uprightness and sincerity of heart, to
prepare our selves religiously for the receiving of the Sacrament: and the more
forwardness and readiness in preparation, the greater sign of uprightness
of heart. When the Sacrifices, and the rest of that service of God was to be
performed, 2 Chronicles. 29. we find that Verse. 34. The Priests were too few, and
the Levites were feign to help until the other Priests had sanctified, had
prepared themselves: but what was the reason the Levites were forwarder to
sanctify themselves than the Priests were? The reason is laid down in the end
of the Verse, Because they were more upright in heart: therefore by proportion
it follows, that they that are most forward and most careful to sanctify and
prepare themselves for the Sacrament, are the most sincere and upright in
heart. And as in all Ordinances, so especially in the Sacrament, it is good to
come with an upright heart. We come thither that it may do us good, and that
we may receive good from God in it: with the more sincerity we come, the more
may we look for good, Psalm. 125. 4. Do good, O Lord, unto those that be
good, and to them that are upright in their hearts. God will do good in the
Sacrament to all such as come to it with an upright heart. And they that come
duly prepared, come with upright hearts.

Fourthly, no man can come so worthily as he ought, nor so fit as he ought;
when we have prepared our selves the best that we can, yet alas, what a deal
of deadness and dullness of spirit, what a deal of hardness of heart will
come along with us? But here now is one singular encouragement to seek God in
this Order of preparation. Though a man may have many wants, may come much
short of that he should have, and be; yet if the Lord see that a man sets
himself seriously to prepare himself, and that he takes pains in the duty,
that he may seek God sincerely in the use of the Sacrament, he will winck at,
bear with, and pass by many failings, and they shall prove no hinderance at
all to his profitable and comfortable receiving. Consider that passage 2 Chronicles.
30. 18, 19, 20, 21. There were diverse of them that had eaten the Passover
otherwise than it was written; that is indeed a fault, for that was not to eat
the Passover after the due Order; and their fail was, That they had not
cleansed themselves: they failed in some legal and ceremonial purification:
but yet, though they failed in outward preparation, yet they were careful of
the inward and spiritual preparation of their hearts. That being done, though
the other were overslipped, Hezekiah prays for them on this manner, The good
Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his
Fathers, the he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary.
As if he had said, Lord though these men have not purified themselves with
outward purification, yet in as much as they have prepared and purified their
hearts, so long as the main and material thing is done, be pleased to pardon
this fail: impute not this want unto them, neither let it be any bar to thy
blessing, but that fail notwithstanding, let thine Ordinance be powerful and
effectual unto them. And see what the success was, V. 20. And the Lord
hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. And Verse. 21. There followed
great gladness of heart in the people, they kept the Feast of unleavened bread
with great gladness. See then how gracious God is to pass by all wants and
weaknesses, to heal them and hide them, when people are careful of the maine,
to prepare their hearts to seek God in an Ordinance. There follows gladness
and joy of spirit upon it, that was a sign of Gods being well pleased with
them. And that is ever the fruit of preparation; a prepared heart shall be a
joyful heart. See 2 Chronicles. 29. 35, 36. So the service of the house of the Lord
was set in Order. And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God had
prepared the people. Here was Gods service set in Order, and Gods servants set
in Order, their hearts prepared and set in Order; and Hezekiah and all the
people rejoiced.

Chap. 3. Of the great danger of coming to the Sacrament without preparation.
Rogo vos, fratres, diligenter attendite, si ad mensam cujusque pot^ntis
hominis n^mo presumit cum vestibu^ conscissis and inquinatis accedere, ^u^nto
m^^is, etc. Aug. De temp. Ser. 251.


1 First, it is a matter of shame. It were a matter of soul shame, for a man
to come and sit down at a great man's Table in rags and tatters, in his
nastinesse and filthiness: and in such a case how would we take and tucke up
such an one, Art thou not ashamed to come to such a man's Table in so base a
fashion? What an uncivil fellow art thou, in such a garb to come into such a
presence? And is it not then a matter of fouler shame, to come rudely,
unpreparedly, and unbeseemingly, Quid vero annon vides vasa abluta adeo nitida
and splendida? His long mundiores oportet esse animas, his sanctiores, and
splendidiores. Quare? Quoniam illa propter nos fiunt talia. Illa eum qui inest
non participant, non sentiunt. Nos autem participamus, and sentimus. Nunc autem
vase quidem sordido uti nolueris, sordida autem and immunda accedis anima?
(...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 1. hom. 3
unto the Lords Table? Consider that 2 Chronicles. 30. 15. The Priests and the
Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves. And why were they ashamed?
because they had so long deferred their sanctification and preparation, and
therefore at length for very shame did sanctify themselves. It was a matter of
shame then that they had so long put off their sanctification. They have cause
of shame that sanctify not themselves in due time for holy duties. And if it
be a matter of shame to defer it, though done at the last; then how much more
is it a shame to neglect it altogether, and not to do it at all? If a foul
cloth should be laid on the Communion Table, if the Napkin wherein the bread
is laid were not clean; if the Cup and Vessels in which the Wine is put, were
not made handsome and decent, men would cry shame of it, and would say that it
is an arrant shame that the linen and vessels be in such a case; that it is an
arrant shame that these things are not provided and prepared to be in more
decent and cleanly order. And a shame it were indeed: there ought to be an
outward decency in these things. Our Savior made no choice of any room at
adventure to eat the Passover in, but of a decent handsome furnished room,
Luke 22. 12. He shall show you a large upper room, furnished, there make
ready. Now then were it a shame that the vessels and linen should not in their
kind be fitted, and decently prepared: what a foul shame then not to have our
souls and hearts prepared? what is a foul cloth or a sullied vessel, to a
foul and an unprepared soul? Oh shame, that men will offer to come to Gods
Table with sluttish and unprepared spirits! should not we much more be prepared
than the vessels? They contain but the outward elements for our use; but we
come to receive the body and blood of Christ. Will we have the vessels
prepared, and can we for shame come with unprepared hearts?

2 Secondly, it is a matter of great danger to come unprepared to the Table of
the Lord: that eating of the Passover of theirs otherwise than it was written,
2 Chronicles. 30. 18. it was a dangerous thing: and Hezekiah was feign to make
special suite for mercy for them. And yet that want of theirs was but an
omission of some Legal Ceremony. How much more dangerous had it been if for
the inward substance of preparation they had done it otherwise than it was
written? To come to the Sacrament without such preparation is dangerous indeed.
The dangers are these.

1 First, that which the Apostle speaks of 1 Cor. 11. 27. Whosoever shall eat
this bread and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord. The end of the Sacrament and our coming to it, is
to show forth the Lords death. But now if we come unpreparedly to it, we make
our selves guilty of the Lords death. We come to the Sacrament to drink the
Lords blood, but if we come unpreparedly to it, we come to shed the Lords
blood, and so instead of drinkers prove shedders of Qua ratione reus fit
indigne assumens? perinde nimitum ac si ipse sanguinem Domini effundat. Vt n.
qui tum pupugerunt Christum non ut biberent effuderunt, veru^ ut effunderent,
sic indigne bibens nihilque inde commodi referens frustra ac temere profudie
sangumem. Theophil. in 1 Cor. 10. and Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 11. hom. 27.
Christ's blood. An unworthy receiver is guilty of Christ's blood: how so?
because he does so as if he shed his blood: he does so as the shedders of
Christ's blood did. For look as they that crucified and pierced Christ, powered
not forth his blod that they might drink it, but only that they might power
it forth and shed it. So he that does unworthily and unpreparedly drink his
blood, receiving thereby no profit nor benefit, he has rashly and in vain,
shed his blood. Now do but sit down and consider how fearful a thing it is to
be guilty of Christ's blood. It is a fearful thing to be guilty of any man's
blood, yea, to be guilty of a wicked man's blood, how much more then to be
guilty of the blood of the Son of God, of the blood of God? Deliver me, O
Lord, from bloud-guiltinesse, cries David, Psalm. 51. It is a very heavy thing,
to have an hand in man's blood. That same is a sad Text, 2 Samuel 3. 28, 29. I and
my kingdom, says David, are guiltless before the Lord for ever from the
blood of Abner the Son of Ner, let it rest on the head of Ioab, and on all his
Fathers house, and let there not fail from the House of Ioab, one that has an
issue, or that is a Leaper, or that leans on a staff, or that falls on the
sword, or that lacks bread. What an heavy Imprecation was this upon Ioab, and
that for the blood of Abner, who was none of the best neither? And if so heavy
a curse upon Ioab for being guilty of Abner's blood, how much more heavy will
the curse be upon him that shall be guilty of the blood of Christ? God will
require the blood of a man at the hands of a beast, Genesis 9. 5. The Ox that
killed a man must be stoned to death, and his flesh must not be eaten. Exodus
21. 28. Does God take care for Oxen (says Saint Paul) in another case, and
does God do justice, and require justice to be done upon Oxen? does he require
man's blood at a beasts hand? Then how much more will he do justice upon men
that are guilty of Christ's blood? and how much more will he require his Sons
blood at the hands of reasonable creatures, that by unprepared receiving the
Sacrament, make themselves guilty of it? Judas his great sin, for which, his
soul and his memory is everlastingly accursed, was the betraying of innocent
blood, the betraying of Christ's blood; his sin was, That he was guilty of the
blood of the Lord. The horrible sin of the Jews which we profess with so much
indignation to abhor and detest, it was the shedding of Christ's blood: and how
remarkable and dreadful a curse and vengeance, has lain upon their heads for
the space of above fifteen hundred years for that very blood, according to
their own wish, His blood be upon us, and upon our children? And does it not
then deeply concern men to take heed how they make themselves guilty of that
blood? Why then in the fear of GOD take heed of coming to the Sacrament
unpreparedly. If thou come unpreparedly, thou come unworthily; and if
thou come unworthily, instead of being a drinker, thou will be a shedder of
Christ's blood. Blood is a crying sin, take heed above al things of having blood
cry against thee; but especially take heed of having Christ's blood cry out
against thee. Christ's blood indeed applied by faith speaks better things than
the blood of Abel: but if we make our selves guilty of it, as we do, if we
come unpreparedly and unworthily to the Sacrament, it speaks no better things
than the blood of Abel: it then speaks Quod si ipse pellere non audes, mihi
dicas. Non permittam ista fi^eri. Animam prius tradam meam, quam dominicum
corpus alicui indigno: sanguinemque meum potius effundi patiar, quam
sacratissimum illum sanguinem praeterquam digno concedam. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom.
64.
and cries as Abels blood for justice and vengeance. Woe be to him for whom
Christ's blood speaks not; but woe a thousand times more to him against whom
Christ's blood cries. All which considered, were enough to make unworthy and
unprepared ones to resolve with themselves in the case of receiving the
Sacrament, as S. Chrysostom did in the case of giving it to unworthy ones. I
will rather, says he, give my life, than I will give the body of Christ to any
unworthy one, And I will rather suffer mine own blood to be shed, then I will
give that most holy blood to any but him that is worthy. So should this
consideration work men to those thoughts. Is it so dangerous to receive the
Sacrament unpreparedly? Shall I thereby make my self guilty of Christ's blood?
Then surely I will rather lose my blood, then by unprepared and unworthy
receiving make my self guilty of such blood.

2 The second danger is, That a man coming unpreparedly to the Sacrament, he
not only receives no good, but a great deal of hurt to his soul. Good he
receives none. God blasts his Ordinance to such a soul, so that it shall not
yield its fruit and its efficacy unto such an one, Isay 1. 13. Bring no more
vain oblations. Were not those oblations of Gods own appointment, and by his
own precept? Why then are they called vain oblations? because they were to
them in the use of them but vain. Then a thing may be said to be vain, when
there is no profit in it. Things are vain things which are unprofitable
things, 1 Samuel 12. 21. Vain things which cannot profit. That is a vain thing,
that yields not a man fruit answerable to his pains and endeavors. Levit. 26.
20. And your strength shall be spent in vain, for your Land shall not yield
her increase, neither shall the Trees of the Land yield their fruits: They
should use their strength in tilling and planting the Land; and yet all their
labor should be vain, because the land should not yield her increase, nor the
trees their fruits. So here, when a man shall use Ordinances, come to the
Sacrament, and they do not nor can profit him: when a man comes to the
Sacrament, and it does not yield its increase and its fruit, then is the
Sacrament vain to such a man: and then the Sacrament yields not fruit, when
men come unprepared unto it; for want of preparation was the thing that made
their oblations vain, as appears Isay 1. 16, 17, 18. For those whom he
forbids coming before, he bids them come upon their preparation. Come now,
namely, when you prepared your selves as is required, Verse 16. 17. To come to
the Sacrament, and not to partake of the benefit and fruit of it is an heavy
thing. And it is the case of every unworthy and unprepared communicant. The
same curse is upon him that was upon the Prince of Samaria, 2 Kings 7. 2.
Behold thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not eat thereof. They
see the plenty that God provides, but yet they eat not of that spiritual
provision with which God so richly furnishes his Table. They are spiritually in
this case under those curses, Hos. 4. 10. They shall eat, and not be satisfied.
Hag. 1. 6. Ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled.
There is a Law. Deuteronomy. 16. 16. That three times in a year they must appear
before God, in the three solemn Feasts: And they shall not, (says the Text)
appear before the Lord empty. So must it be with us when we appear before God
in this solemn feast at the Sacrament, we must not appear empty before the
Lord. He that is void of that disposition of spirit which God requires, he
that comes unprepared, he appears empty. And what will the danger be of
appearing empty? Surely as we come, so shall we go; God will send us away
empty. As in another sense, God sends away the rich and the full empty, Luke 1.
53. so in this sense he sends the empty away empty. Yea, the Ordinance of the
Sacrament which in Gods instituon comes to us as Paul to the Romans, Romans 15.
29. And I am sure that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of
the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, shall come empty handed to us, and shall
prove an empty Sacrament unto us. So that upon our receiving, it shall be no
better with us, than with those in that case, Isa. 29. 8. It shall even be as
when an hungry man dreams, and behold he eats, but he awakes and his soul is
empty: or as when a thirsty man dreams, and behold he drinks, but he awakes
and behold he is faint, and his soul has appetite. So shall it be with every
unprepared Communicant, he may eat and drink the outward elements, and may
think to eat Christ's flesh, and to drink Christ's blood, but he is but in a
dream, he is never the fatter nor the fuller for his dream, he came empty
without preparation, and he goes away empty without profit; his soul is empty.
It was a sad threat against those that refused to come to the Supper when they
were invited, Luke 14. 24. I say unto you that none of those that were bidden
shall taste of my Supper. They should not so much as taste of it. There be many
that come to the Supper in the Sacrament, and yet though they come, meet with
that judgment that was threatened against them which refused to come to that
Supper. They come and taste not of this Supper; taste not the sweetness,
fatness, and goodness of this Ordinance. And all because they come unprepared
thereunto. Sacramenta quidem, quantum in se est, sine propria virtute esse non
possunt: nec ullo modo se absentat divina majestas mysteriis, sed quamvis ab
indignis se sumi vel contingi Sacramenta permittant, non tamen possunt spiritus
esse participes quorum infidelitas vel indignitas tantae sanctitudini
contradicit. Cypr. de coen. Dom.
Not that Gods Ordinance in it self is forcelesse, and ineffectual, or that
Gods hand is shortened, that he cannot conveigh a blessing thereby, but
therefore the Sacrament proves a dry and an empty breast unto them, because they
come so unworthily, and unpreparedly to it.

But yet this is not all. It is bad enough to receive no spiritual good by
receiving the Sacrament, but there is a further danger in it, there is a great
deal of spiritual hurt received by it, when received unpreparedly. For that
is a sure thing, that when men receive not good by Ordinances, they always
withal receive a great deal of hurt, and when they are not the better, they
are the worse for them. So much that of the Apostle implies, 1 Cor. 11. 17.
That you come together, not for the better but for the worse. And he speaks
it of their coming together to the Sacrament, as appears V. 20. So the^ when
men come to the Sacrament and are not the better, they are the worse. Men
should come together to the Word and to the Sacrament for the better; to be the
better for it, to be quickened in their inner man; to have communion with Christ,
to receive efficacy and virtue from him, but when they do not come together for
the better; and be not the better by these holy duties, they are undoubtedly
the worse. They are the worse, for the Sacrament disorderly received without
preparation, spiritually the worse, and that in respect of a double spiritual
danger.

1 First, instead of receiving Christ, we receive Satan. We come indeed to
receive Christ, more quickening and grace from him; but coming unpreparedly, we
not only receive not Christ, but we receive Satan, and hardening from him in
sin, and more strength and greediness unto sin, Ioh. 13. 26. 27. And when he
had dipped the sop he gave it to Judas Iscariot the son of Simon, and after the
Sop Satan entered into him. Indeed it is said, Luke 22. 3. That Satan entered
into Judas before his going to the high Priests, and compacting with them, and
before his receiving this Sop. He entered then, that is, he began to enter, but
now at the receiving of the Sop he fully and wholly entered. His head was in
before, but now after the Sop he gat in his whole body. John 13. 2. The devil
had put it into his heart to betray him, but now as it is said of Ananias,
Nunquid Satana^ tamen ante cor ejus intraverat? Omnino fratre, ante buccella^
cor Iudae intraverat, sed affectu, and voluntate tantum: sed post bucc^lla^
intravit Satanas effectu, and opere, tamen bona fuit buccella. Aug. ad frat. in
erem. Ser. 28.
Acts 5. He had filled his heart. So that Satan now was more powerful and
efficacious in him, than before, hurries and headlongs him more violently then
before, brings him to a full and settled resolution to practice that perfidious
villainy in betraying his master. Satan's entry implies a most stiff and
obdurate resolution, without any further delay or deliberation, to go
thorow-stitch with this mischievous purpose, and therefore, V. 30. He went out
immediately. But now mark the time of Satan's entry, and the time when the
devil brought him to this through resolution of executing his treason, After
the Sop Satan entered into him. This Sop was the close of the Sacrament of the
Passover, which Sacrament Judas had received, and the substance of that
Sacrament the same with our Sacrament of the Supper now. Now one would have
thought that Judas not despising the ordinance but having been present at so
holy and religious an exercise, it should have Nam in Iudam post
co^municationem mensae diabolus intravit, non quia contemp^erat dominicum
corpus, sed quia impudentia Iudae and malignitas mentis, ut adversarius in eo
habitaret effecit: ut discas quod indigna and, fucata mente mysteriorum secreta
celebrantibus a diabolo praeparantur insidiae, and magis ac magis assimilantur
eis qui non aequo animo Communicate festinant: and haec dico, non ut vos
terream, sed ut cautiores efficiam. Nemo sit Judas in mensa. Chrysostom. de
proditione Judah. hom. 30.
been a means to have weakened Satan's power, and to have helped him with power
and strength against Satan. But Judas coming unprepared, he is so far from
getting strength against Satan, that Satan gets strength against him, and that
at the very time of the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of
the Lord and the cup of Devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and
of the table of Devils. But yet wicked men that are unworthy, and unprepared,
because they drink the cup of the Devil, therefore when they drink the cup of
the Lord, are so far from receiving the Lord that they rather receive him
whose cup they love. Because such delight in the table of Devils, therefore
when they come to the Lords Table, Christ enters not after the bread, but he
enters that enterd into Judas, he in whose table they do delight. And so an
unworthy receiver makes the Table of the Lord to be to him a Table of devils,
and his cup the cup of devils, because that after the unworthy and
unprepared receiving of the Sacrament, Satan enters. Sacraments unpreparedly
received, are so far from making a way for CHRIST to enter, that they do but
prepare and make a way for Satan's entrance. Satan enters when the Sacrament is
unworthily received; and brings men from the Sacrament with more hardness of
heart, with more power and strength in them to carry the^ to their old and
former sins. Now it is a very fearful thing to have Satan enter into us at
the Sacrament: it is fearful to have him enter into us at any time, in any
place; but to have him enter at the Sacrament, at the Lords Table, this is far
more fearful. To rise up from the Lords Table with greater greediness, and
more eagerness after our lusts; to rise from the Lords Table with more
strength and mind than before, to do the devil service, is wondrous
fearful. And does thine heart tremble at the thoughts of such going from the
Sacrament? then let thine heart tremble no less at the thoughts of such
coming to the Sacrament, of coming unpreparedly unto it. Loath thou would
be to have Satan enter but into thine house, be as loath to have him enter into
thine heart; especially in the use of the Sacrament: and as thou would be
careful to prevent N^m and Sacramentum sicut accip^t ad vit^m ^ignus, sic ad
judicium, and mo^^em prop^^^m indignu^ Sacramentum ^^ sine re Sacramenti, mors
est ^umen^^. Res vero Sacramenti praeter Sacramentum vita ae^^rna est
accip^en^^. Bern. in caen. Dom. Ser. 2.
so great a danger, so dismal a case; so look to it to come in due order, duly
prepared for the Sacrament.

2 Instead of receiving that which might further our salvation, we shall
receive Judgment, and damnation. We come to the Sacrament to further our
salvation, but coming unpreparedly further our damnation. 1 Cor. 11. 29. He
that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. The
Paschall Lamb might not be eaten raw, Exodus 12. 9. Eat not of it raw. To
teach that the Sacrament must not be eaten unpreparedly. He that receives
unpreparedly eats the Sacrament raw, because he comes rawly and eats it
rawly and unpreparedly. Now to have eaten the Pascall Lamb raw had been both
unwholesome, and dangerous. He that eats raw flesh never digests it kindly.
The eating of flesh that has not been so well prepared as it should, that has
bin somewhat too raw, has cost many a man his life. As dangerous as eating of
raw flesh is to the body, so dangerous to the soul is the eating of the
Sacrament rawly, and unpreparedly. It appears by 2 Samuel 6. 6. That Vzzah put
forth his hand to the Ark of God upon a good intention, to save the Arc from
a fall when the Oxen stumbled, or shook it. But his good intention
notwithstanding, there was an error, or a rashness in it. And for that error,
and rashness the anger of God was kindled against Vzzah, and for that error
and rashness God smote him there, and there he dyed by the Arc. What is the
Ark of God to the body, and blood of the Son of God? And if God punished him
so severely for his error, that he rashly laid hold on the Arc, which yet he
did out of a sudden fear of the Arkes coming to some hurt and miscarriage,
and without diliberation, there being no place for deliberation in so sudden a
chop; if yet God was so severe against him, how much more are they in danger to
be smitten for their error that will rashly put forth their hand to lay hold
on the body and blood of CHRIST? Especially not doing it rashly upon any
sudden occasion that puts them upon it, but having time, and liberty for
deliberation, yea and doing it against so many fair warnings as they
continually have? Every one that meddles with the Sacrament unpreparedly,
meddles with it rashly, and he that meddles rashly is in danger of Gods
stroke, of a worse stroke then Vzzahs was, of a stroke upon the soul, for
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation. So
strangely does our unpreparednes pervert Gods Ordinance, Ideoque alijs sunt
haec munera odor vitae in vitam, alijs odor mortis in mortem: quia omnino
justum est, ut tanto p^^ventur beneficio gratiae con emptores, nec in ^^dignis
(...) g^atiae pu^^^^ faci^^ ma^^^^nem. (...). de ^oen. dom.
and of an Ordinance of life makes it an Ordinance unto death. That as they
spoke in that case, 1 Reg. 4 40. Oh thou man of God, death is in the pot: So it
may be said unto an unprepared Communicant, oh thou unworthy receiver, Death
is in the cup. If thou drink unpreparedly thou drinkest thine own death. And
as God speaks of Jerusalem to the enemies of it. Zech. 12. 2. Behold I will
make Jerusalem a cup of poison or a cup of trembling unto all the people round
about, so may it be said of the cup in the Sacrament to an unprepared receiver.
Inte^^j^ nefarie necatus veneno per infectum panem sacrum, Beneconventi, a
Bernhardino Monacho^e familia fratrun^ pradicatorum qui ad hoca Florentio^^
e^at conductus Carrion. Chronic. lib 5.
Behold I will make the cup in the Sacrament a cup of poison, or a cup of
trembling to all unprepared Communicants.

The Emperor Henry the seventh was poisoned in the bread by a Monk, and Pope
Victor the second was poysond by his Subdeacon in his challice, and one of our
Bishops of York was poysond at the Sacrament, by poison put in the wine. Now
if poison were mingled with the Sacramental bread, or if poison were put into
the cup, would not men tremble to eat that bread? would not that cup be a cup
of trembling? would not the very fear and suspicion of poison make men tremble
to drink of it? Assuredly if thou be an unprepared receiver there is poison in
thy bread, in thy cup, and it will poison thy soul to death. And therefore it
should make men as much tremble to come unprepared, as Medicus enim non daret
venenum, salutem medicus dedit, sed indigne accipiendo, ad perniciem accepit.
August.
they would tremble to go away with their souls poisoned.

If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a Father, will he give him
a stone, says our Savior? Luke 11. 11. We profess when we come to the
Sacrament that we come to seek bread, and food for our souls. And bread,
the true living bread that came down from heaven is there to be had, but when
we come unprepared, it so falls out with us, that in stead of bread we have a
stone given us, a stone that will choke us. The Devil would have had our
Savior to have turned stones into bread, but contrarily men coming
unpreparedly turn the bread in the Sacrament into a stone, so that not only
no more nourishment by it then by a stone, but so much danger by it, as by
feeding on a stone, which is no less then death. I will, says David, Psalm.
116. 13. Take the cup of salvation. How many in taking the cup in the Sacrament
take the cup of damnation? Either take it a cup of salvation, or take it not at
all.

3 The third danger is bodily danger. Unprepared receiving brings bodily
judgments upon men, as sickness, weakness, yea and death it self. 1 Cor.
11. 30. For this cause many are weak, and sickely amongst you, and many
sleep. For what cause? For receiving the Sacrament unworthly, and coming
unpreparedly to it: yea and some think that it might be the Pestilence that
was amongst them for that sin, at least some mortality was at that time
amongst them. As for the neglect of his worship, and Ordinances, God falls upon
men with the Pestilence, Ex. 5. 3. So no less is he provoked for the undue
order of using his Ordinances to fall upon men either with pestilence, or other
sicknesses. There be many when they be sick will confess themselves to be
sinners, and that it is for their sins that GOD brings sickness upon them.
Custom, and fashion teaches men at the least to say so much. But if a man
should ask them wherein they be sinners, or for what sin Gods hand is upon
them, that they know not. I have dreamed a dream, says Nebuchadnezzar, Dan.
2. 3. but he knew not what his dream was. So, I have sinned, says many an one
in his sickness, but yet can scarce tell wherein, if he were put to it. I will
tell you therefore wherein you are sinners, and for what one sin amongst many
others God lays sicknesses, and that unto death upon you. For this cause, for
your unprepared and unworthy receiving the Sacrament. For this cause God takes
away your health, visits you with sore, sharp, long, mortal sicknesses. If we
would judge our selves we should not be judged, 1 Cor. 11, 31. Because men do
not by Judging themselves prepare themselves before they come, therefore God
does Judge them by punishing with sickness and untimely death after they come.
It may be there be some that greatly regard not the danger of their souls
that yet love their healths, and life's well enough. If Spiritual dangers will
not, yet let temporal dangers make men look about them. When God cast Adam
out of Paradise, he set an Angel with a flaming sword to keep him from
offering to make a re-entry. If Adam would have adventured, he had certainly
gone upon his own death. And so has God set all his threatenings against
unworthy receivers, as so many Angels with flaming swords, to keep off all
unprepared persons from the Sacrament. And because all this notwithstanding
they will adventure to come in their unpreparednes, therefore they smart for
it, God kills them with death for it. GODS Judgments have been very
remarkable upon such as have profaned, despised, and abused either the Table,
or Vessels belonging to the Sacrament, or the Elements themselves.

For the profaning of the Table, memorable is that divine vengeance Centuriat.
Magdeb. cent. 4. ca. 3. Theod. lib. 3. ca. 11, 12.
which was upon Julian uncle to Julian the Apostata. He coming into a Church at
Antiochia profaned the Lords Table by pissing upon it in contempt, and smote
Euzoias the Bishop who chode him, and sought to hinder him from such horrible
villainy. But not long after divine Justice found him out, for he dyed
miserably, being taken with a disease that rotted his bowels, so that his
excrements came from him not by the accustomed passages of nature, but came
through his wicked mouth, which had said to Euzoias endeavoring to hinder him
from that vile act, that the divine providence took no care at all of
Christians affairs.

For disposing the Communion vessels, Centuriat. Magdeb. ibid. and Theod.
or scorning at it that such precious vessels should be used at the Sacrament,
that Justice of God is remarkable upon Felix treasurer to Julian the Apostata,
and himself also an Apostata, for he beholding in the same Church those
vessels which Constantine, and Constance had given for that use, behold says
he in scorn, En qualibus vasis ministratur Mariae filio.
what vessels the Son of Mary is ministered unto withal. But suddenly the
stroke of God was upon him, and he perished miserably, bleeding day and night
at the mouth.

For abuse of the Elements: The Donatists that cast the holy Sacrament to the
Dogs were themselves after devoured of Dogs. The Reverend and learned Bishop
that now is of Durham, In his learned book of the Institution of the
Sacrament, li. 5. ca. 3. sect. 5
reports a story upon his own knowledge of one Sr Booth a batchelour of Arts
in S. John's College in Cambridge, who being Popishly affectted at the time of
the Commuion took the consecrated bread, and forbearing to eat it, conveyed,
and kept it closely for a time; and afterward threw it over the College wall:
but a short time after not enduring the torment of his guilty conscience, he
threw himself headlong over the battlements of the Chapel, and some few
hours after ended his life.

Now howsoever all these were sinners in another kind then unprepared
receivers be, yet thus far these examples may be of use to our present purpose,
to let us see that God is a Jealous God in the case of his Sacrament abused and
despised, that he will be a swift witness, and a severe Judge against such.
And though unpreparednesse, and unworthy receiving be not a sin so foul as
those gross prophanations, yet therein there is a profanation of GODS Name,
and Ordinance, and therefore very dangerous, because God will not bear nor
brook profanations of his Ordinance.

4 In the fourth and last place, consider this one thing. It is a very
dangerous thing not to come to the Sacrament, to neglect Gods Ordinance in an
infrequent use thereof, or utter disrespect of it. Genesis 17. 14. He that
neglected circumcision was to be cut off. And we see that God would have
killed Moses for neglecting his Child's circumcision. Exodus 4. 24. And see that
place. Numb. 9. 13. But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and
forbeares to keep the Passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from his
people, because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed
season, that man shall bear his sin. And we know the severity of their
punishment that neglected to come to that Supper of the King Matthew. 22. 5, 7.
They made light of it, and went their ways, etc. But when the King heard
thereof, he was wroth, and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those
murderers, and burnt up their City. Not to use the Sacrament, and to be
without it, is all one. And to be without the Sacrament, and without CHRIST,
and without God in the world, are joined together, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. whilst
they were called uncircumcision, at that time they were without CHRIST, and
without God in the world. And the necessity of the use of the Sacraments
appears by this, that before the Israelites must enter into Canaan, they must
be circumcised, and eat the Passover, John 5. 7, 10. To teach that all that
will enter into the heavenly Canaan must of necessity in obedience to GODS
Commandment be partakers of his Sacraments. It is therefore very dangerous to
be without the Sacrament, not to come to it when God invites to it. And yet as
dangerous as it is not to come to Etenim sic vivendum est ut panem illum semper
accipere valeamus, quia vae ei qui se alienum fecerit ab eo: Et multum vae illi
qui spurcus et immu^dus accesserit. Vtrobique grande periculum. Ideo magna
necessitas instat ne indigni Inveni^mur. Bern. de ordi. vitae. Non dixit, Cur
accubuisti? sed ante accubi^um and ingressum eum dicit esse indignum. Non enim
dixit, Cur accubuisti? sed cur intrasti? Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. ho. 3.
the Sacrament, yet it is no less dangerous to come, if we come unpreparedly.
Unprepared coming is as dangerous as not coming. It is with this Supper in
the Sacrament, as it was with that supper of the Kings, Mat. 22. They that
neglected to come, and absented themselves, they smarted. But v. 13. there was
one that came to the Supper, and yet he seems to be more severely punished then
those that came not. What shall men be punished for not coming, and be punished
for coming too? Yes surely, if they come not as they should, coming will not
serve the turn. Mark that question, v. 12. Friend how came thou in hither?
He does not say, Friend how satest thou down, but how came thou in? Thereby
implying that his sin was not, that some indisposition had overtaken him in
sitting down, but that he did not look to himself, and prepare himself
before he came in. So it is in the Supper of the LORD. A man may transgress as
well in an unprepared presence, as in a profane absence. And he may incur a
danger by coming, as well as by not coming. There is not a man comes to the
Sacrament but GOD has an eye upon him to take notice how he comes in, and if
he come not in prepared he is like to hear of it to his sorrow. We come to the
Sacrament to enquire of God, to seek his face, and to receive a gracious
answer from him. But if we come unprepared, in stead of an answer we shall
meet with a question, Friend how came thou in hither? Such a question as
will trouble us to answer; Such a question as will gag us, that we shall not
have a word to say for our selves. A great many cannot endure their Ministers
should question it with them to prepare them the better for that holy duty, but
let such know that God himself will question them, and put them such a
question as will smite them dumb, and speechless: such a question, to which
because they can make no answer, they must answer it in another kind, Take
him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Chap. 4. Of the necessity of knowledge in a Communicant.
what this preparation is, or wherein it stands. The preparation required before
the Sacrament, is twofold. Habitual and Actual: Habitual preparation stands
in the having of all such dispositions and graces, as qualify a man for the
work of receiving. Actual preparation stands in the exciting and awakening of
those graces and dispositions, and renewing of them when a man is to receive.
Both these must be done by him that will receive in due order. It is here as in
preaching. A man that will preach the Word, must first be habitually prepared
for the work, by having such gifts, graces, abilities, and ministerial
qualifications of learning and knowledge in the Scriptures, as are required to
accomplish and furnish a man for that work. He must be a man well read, well
studied. Now though a man be a furnished man, and have competent abilities, yet
he will not on a sudden without any study step up into the Pulpit, take a Text
at adventure and fall a preaching; but besides his habitual preparation in the
course of his studies, he will study afresh upon a particular Text, and for a
particular Sermon, and bestow special pains for that particular work; and
that is Actual preparation. Mat. 13. 52. Every Scribe which is instructed unto
the kingdom of heaven -- brings out of his treasure things new and old. He
is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, he has a treasure of things new and
old. There is his habitual preparation for preaching; he brings them out,
namely by study and meditation, he gathers together things apt and fit for the
present work; there is his actual preparation. And there is first an
habitual preparation before an actual. He first studies Arts, Tongues,
Divinity, and then after studies his Sermons: his first study is habitual, his
second is actual preparation. Though a man should study a Sermon and have an
actual preparation, yet if he had not studied Divinity and other things
needful, but wanted habitual preparation, it would prove poor, lank, empty
stuff: and though a man had studied Divinity, and had habitual preparation,
yet if without study and premeditation, without actual preparation he should
offer to do the work, he might be guilty of tempting God, might make but
wild and confused work of it, and might come off with a check. Neither of
these thus preaching should preach after the due Order: and both these might be
as those Prophets, Zech. 13. 4. It shall come to pass in that day, that the
Prophets shall be ashamed every one of his vision, when he has prophesied.
The first might well be ashamed, because he wanted habitual, the second,
because he wanted actual preparation. He is not fit to preach that wants
habitual preparation: he may say (if called to preach) as Zech. 13. 5. I am no
Prophet, I am an Husbandman; for man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.
I am not habitually prepared; I have not been trained up in the Schools, and
amongst the Sons of the Prophets, but I am a Tradesman, I have been brought
up in the shop in a Trade from my youth: and though he be fit to preach that
has habitual preparation, yet if he want actual preparation he is not ready
to preach, not provided for it at such a time. And therefore mark how the
Rulers of the Synagogue speak to S. Paul and his companions, Acts 13. 15. Ye
men and brethren, if ye have any words of exhortation for the people, say on:
as if he had said, If ye be provided for a Sermon, if you have any meditations
ready, bestow them upon the people. He did not desire they should adventure
into the Pulpit with their extemporary effusions, to power out what Ad
nu^^itionem spiritualem requiritur non tantum habitus and dispositio fidei, sed
actus etiam ejus exercitus, and exercit^tus, ita ut non omnes fideles semper
digni sint convivae in hac coena, nisi fidem quam habent, excitent and
exerceant pro ratione hujus instituti. Ames. Cat. p. 152.
ever came next hand, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God,
a workman that needs not to be ashamed. Timothy was a studied man, a man of
rare and singular gifts and endowments; and yet for all that, if he would be
an approved workman, S. Paul would have him study to do it: he would not have
him rest on his habitual preparations, but would have him actually fit himself
for his work, when he was to work. Now thus is the case in the Sacrament,
there must be an habitual and an actual preparation to it. A man that will
receive the Sacrament, must first be furnished with such graces and
dispositions, as a Communicant ought to have: and though he have such graces as
are requisite to habitual preparation, yet may he not therefore all on a
sudden rush to the Lords Table, and without any more ado receive the
Sacrament: but first there must be an actual preparing and fitting of himself
for the work. Both must be had, or else no due order in the work, or else no
fruit from the duty. There be, that in their fashion do actually prepare
themselves that yet are void of those graces that are required to habitual
preparation. And there be that are habitually prepared, and yet fail in an
actual fitting of themselves. To both these the Sacrament proves as Jobs
brooks to the Travelers, Job 6. 19. 20. The troops of Tema looked, and the
companies of Sheba waited for them, as hoping by the waters of those brooks to
have been refreshed, but they were confounded because they had hoped, they
came thither and were ashamed; because they came with an hope to have found
water in those brooks: but they being dried up with the heat of Summer, their
hope was disappointed, and so they went away ashamed of their lost labor. So
both those sorts of people come to the Sacrament, there they look and wait for
some spiritual refreshment by it; but they may go away ashamed, because they
hoped, and their hope is frustrate; they meet with no such thing as they hoped
for. And the reason of their disappointment is that which is spoken in another
case, Matthew. 22. 8. The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not
worthy. The wedding was ready, but the guests were not ready. So the Sacrament
is ready, and God ready in the Sacrament to do his part, but these kind of
Communicants are not ready, either not ready by an habitual, or not ready by
an actual preparation, and because not ready, not worthy; and because not
worthy, therefore their hopes disappointed. Now though both these be required,
yet habitual preparation must be in the first place; for no man can indeed
actually fit himself, till he be habitually prepared; and in vain is all
actual preparation where habitual goes not before it.

This habitual preparation therefore, stands in having the soul furnished with
all such graces and dispositions as may make a man worthy, that is, fit for the
Sacrament. And those graces and dispositions are these, 1 Knowledge. 2 Faith. 3
Repentance. 4 Charity. 5 Obedience.


All these must a Communicant be qualified with, that in the Sacrament seeks
God in due Order, and the want of any of these makes him guilty of not seeking
God after the due Order.

1 The first thing then that is required, is knowledge. The Apostle makes this
a great fault in receiving the Sacrament, so to receive it, as not to discern
the Lords body, 1 Cor. 11. 29. Not discerning the Lords body. Therefore that
should be a man's care, so to come, as to discern the Lords body. This
Discerning stands in knowledge, understanding and judgment, of the nature,
use, and necessity of the Sacrament; the which, because they cannot be known
without the knowledge of the fundamental principles of religion, therefore
under this discerning the Lords body, is included and comprehended a convenient
and competent measure of knowledge of all the grounds of Religion: and that
such knowledge is necessary for every one that desires to come after the due
Order, will appear by these following reasons.

1 First, God prizes knowledge more than the outward acts and performances of
his service. Yea, so highly prizes knowledge above outward performances, that
if it should needs be that one must be wanting, the knowledge of God (without
public performances) is more acceptable than public performances, Hos. 6. 6.
I desired the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings. Possibly the case
might be so that a man could not offer sacrifice, as it was with David in his
exile, yet having the knowledge of God he might be saved. But if a man did
Sacrifice and offer Burnt-Offerings, yet if he had not the knowledge of God he
could not be saved. There may be cases in which a man cannot come to receive
the Sacrament, but yet a man having the knowledge of God he may be saved. John
17. 3. This is life eternal to know Thee, etc. But let a man receive the
Sacrament ever so often, yet if he be void of the knowledge of God, he cannot
be saved; For God will have all men to be saved, and come, he says not to the
Sacrament, but to the knowledge of the truth. 1 Timothy 2. 4. So that as in that
case, so in this I desired knowledge of God more than receiving of the Sacramt.
Men commonly desire the receiving of the Sacrament more than the knowledge of
God. But our desires should be suitable to Gods desires. As he desires so
should we desire, and he desires the knowledge of God more than burnt
offerings, and so by proportion more than Sacraments.

2 Secondly, a man should so prepare himself for the Sacrament, as he would
prepare himself for his death, look how he would be loath to go to his grave,
so should he be loath to go to the Lords Table. A man that would die comfortaby,
would die with the knowledge of God; and a man that would receive comfortably,
would receive with knowledge. It is a dreadful thing to die without knowledge.
If a man die without knowledge, I know but one way with him. It is threatened as
an heavy judgment, Ioh. 36. 12. They shall die without knowledge. And that is
an heavy saying. Ioh. 8. 21 Ye shall die in your sins, that is, ye shall die
in a damned condition. Now to die without knowledge, is all one as to die in
our sins, for questionless he that dies in ignorance dies in his sins, and so
dying without knowledge, dies in a state of damnation. And if so fearful to
die without knowledge, how fearful to come to the Sacrament without
knowledge? For what makes a man unfit to die, makes him unfit to receive; and
what condition is dangerous to die in, that condition is dangerous to receive
in. A man is not fit to receive, that is not in a state of salvation, as no man
is fit to dye that is not in such a state: we are not in a state of salvation,
but so far forth as we have the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. Who would
have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. Therefore
no salvation but where there is the knowledge of the truth. No knowledge then,
and not yet in the state of salvation; and what have we to do with the
Sacrament that not in the state of salvation? That man that is fit for the
Sacrament, and duly prepared for it, is fit and prepared for Heaven; and that
man that is unfit for Heaven, is unfit for the Sacrament, and that man is unfit
for Heaven that is without the knowledge of God.

3 Thirdly consider what is the end of our coming to the Sacrament. The end of
our coming is to have Communion with God in his Ordinance. And therefore there
is a necessity of coming with knowledge. He only comes comfortably and
profitably to the Sacrament, who therein has communion with God: and one
special way to have communion with him, is to have the knowledge of him, I^^
^4 7. I will give them an heart to know me that I am the Lord, And they shall
be my people, and I will be their God: when we are his people, and he our
God, then we have communion with him; and this cannot be that he should be our
God and we his people till we know him. We have nothing to do with the
Sacrament, nor with fellowship with God therein, till we be his people, and his
people we cannot be, till we have an heart to know him. A man will not have
communion with any with whom he has not acquaintance, with such as are
strangers to him. We do decline familiarity with strangers: where the
knowledge of God is not, there men are strangers to God. Ephesians. 4. 18. being
alienated estranged through the ignorance that is in them. And so, no knowledge
of God, no fellowship with God: no knowledge, no communion. And to what end is
it to come to the Communion without communion with God? A Communion without
Communion with God, is but a comfortless Communion. As therefore we desire to
have Communion with God when we come to the Communion, so come with knowledge.
Knowledge it is true that a man may have, and yet have no communion with God,
but Communion with God can no man have unless he have knowledge. A man is not
fit to partake of the Sacrament till he be fit to partake of the Covenant; and
that which is required to make a man fit for the participation of the covenant,
is no less required to make a man fit for the participation of the Sacrament.
Now knowledge is necessarily required for the participation of the covenant,
Heb. 8. 10, 11. For this is the covenant I will make -- for all shall know me
from the least to the greatest. That which is required to make us partakers of
the covenant, is required to make us fit for communion with God; and that which
is required to make us partakers of the covenant, must needs be as much
required to make us partakers of the seal of the Covenant. Such a necessity of
knowledge there is in him that receives the Sacrament.

4 Fourthly, consider, how utterly unfit a man is, whilst he is in ignorance.
That appears in these particulars.

1 First, No man is fit to be a partaker of the seal of the covenant, who is
not in the covenant of grace, neither can say that he is so. Ignorant persons
cannot say that they are in the covenant of grace; for such as are in the
covenant of grace have received an anointing, which teaches them of all things.
1 John 2. 27. And they that be effectually called are taught of God, John 6.
45. And they that are in covenant with God they all know him from the least of
them to the greatest of them, Ier. 31. 33, 34. Therefore they that know not
God, that are not taught of God, they that are not anointed, are not in
covenant with God. Such are all ignorant persons; they be persons unanointed,
they be persons untaught of God, they know not God, therefore are they not in
covenant with God, and being not in covenant have nothing to do with the
Sacrament: for in the use of the Sacrament there is a sealing of the covenant
unto us. Now a man can have no right to have the covenant sealed unto him, till
he be in the covenant; and ignorant persons are not in covenant with God: so
that the ignorant man's receiving, is but the having of a seal to a blanke. And
what is a man the better for that? What is a man the better for having the
Kings broad-Seale to a Parchment that has nothing written in it? He has
nothing but a piece of Parchment and wax, he has neither land nor living,
sealed and conveyed to him thereby. Just so it is in this case.

2 Secondly, none have any benefit by the Sacrament, but such as are real and
actual members of Christ's body. The Sacrament is spiritual food, and all the
members of Christ's body receive nourishment, and growth by the use of this
food, but yet they must be members of the body, or else no nourishment,
growth, or life. Ignorant persons are not actual members of Christ's body. They
are captives of Satan, fast in the Devils clutches and possession. 2 Timothy 2.
25, 26. They that know not the truth are in the snare of the devil, and are
taken captive by him at his will. Ignorance is the very power of the devil.
Acts 26. 18. To turn them from darkness to light, from the power of Satan
unto God. That which is called darkness in the first, is called the power of
Satan in the latter clause; so that the devil having, and holding a man in
ignorance, has, and holds him in his power. And are such the members of
Christ's body that are wholly in the power and possession of the devil? Have
they any thing to do to participate of Christ's body in the Sacrament, that are
no members of his mystical body? Are such as are Satan's slaves, vassals, and
captives, fit to come to the Lords Table, and have fellowship with the God of
heaven?

3 Thirdly, an ignorant person is utterly unfit for the Lords Table. God forbad
to offer the blind; the blind was an abomination to him. And what difference
between a blind offering, and the offering of the blind. A blind offerer
that has the eyes of his mind out is worse, and more abominable then a blind
offering. The Law denied a Leaper the benefit of civil Society, therefore much
more of holy Communion in public services and sacrifices. Now an ignorant
person is a kind of leaper, he has one perilous symptom of leaprosie,
namely that same, Levit. 13. 44. The Priest shall pronounce him utterly
unclean, his plague is in his head. Therefore when a man has a plague in his
head he is utterly unclean, and therefore to be shut out of the camp. verse
46. Much more therefore from holy society. An unclean man is not fit to come
to the Lords Table, and every ignorant person having a plague in his head is
unclean, and therefore unfit for the Lords Table. There be two things that
show an ignorant person unfit for the Sacrament.

1 We judge fools and children unfit for the Sacrament, and that upon that
ground, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself. Because they cannot examine
themselves; for by the Apostles rules whosoever cannot examine, and try
himself ought not to come to the Sacrament. Now therefore an ignorant person
ought not to come because it is impossible that an ignorant person, should
examine himself. Yea if fools and children ought not to come, then neither
may ignorant persons, for they are children and fools both. They be children,
Heb. 5. 13. For every one that uses milk is unskilful in the word of
righteousness, for he is a babe, 1 Cor. 14. 20. Be not children in
understanding, but in understanding be men. And fools they be also, Iere. 4.
22 For my people is foolish. And why so? They have not known me, they are
sottish children, they have no understanding, Prove. 14. 7. Go from the
presence of a foolish man. But how shall I know him (...) foolish man? When
thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. Are babes, children, fools
and sots fit for the Sacrament?

2 We all confess that he is not fit to come to the Sacrament that comes with
an ill mind, Prove. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, how
much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? At the best it is
loathsome, but when brought with a wicked mind it is worse by far. Ignorant
persons use to plead for themselves that they have not the knowledge, and
understanding which others have, and cannot answer as others do, yet they hope
they have as good meanings, and come with as good minds as the best. Thus
silly creatures delude they themselves, and their own souls. Alas what talk
you of your good meanings, and your good minds? Are not your minds ignorant?
Have ye not ignorant minds? Why then be it known unto you that your minds
are naught, stark naught. Will ye believe God? Hear what he says, Prove. 19.
2. Without knowledge the mind is not good. That man's mind then is not good
that wants knowledge. And so he comes with an evil mind to the Sacrament that
comes with an ignorant mind thereunto. Though I be ignorant, says one, yet I
thank God I have a good mind. How sillily is this spoken? as if one should
say, though I have a blind eye, yet I have as good an eye as he that can see
farthest. Wherein lies the goodness of the eye but in the sight, and the
goodness, of the mind but in the knowledge of God? He cannot have a good
mind that wants goodness. An ignorant person wants goodness. See Romans 15.
14. Ye are full of goodness. How came they so to be? filled with all
knowledge. They must be first full of knowledge, that will be full of
goodness. Full of knowledge, full of goodness, void of knowledge, void of
goodness. And what then do thou talk of thy good mind that have as little
goodness as thou have knowledge in thee?

Therefore let all ignorant people be advised to take heed what they do. It
is woeful to consider the gross ignorance of many Communicants, it would pity
a man's heart, and make his spirit bleed to see how many come to the Sacrament,
and yet are utterly to seek in the very grounds of Religion. They hear of
Christ, and they see a Sacrament, but what, or who CHRIST is, what is the end
and use of a Sacrament, they know no more then such as have scarce heard of
CHRIST'S Name. In the fear of God look to your souls, and get some competent
measure of the knowledge of God, and CHRIST, before you offer to meddle with so
holy an Ordinance. Especially let such look to themseles as may be taught, and
instructed, and yet in a wilfulness, and rebellion of spirit will not be
taught, nor instructed that they may be fitted for the Sacrament, but will
continue in their ignorance, and wilfully come to the Sacrament therein. As
the LORD speaks to such persons concerning the taking of the Covenant in their
mouth, so it may be said of taking the seal of the Covenant into their
mouths, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. What have thou to do that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, so in this case, what
have thou to do that thou should take the seal of my covenant into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and refusest, and scornest to be taught,
and be helped out of thine ignorance. The worst I wish to such rebellious
spirits is, that the time may never come, in which with weeping and howling,
and wringing of hands they do not curse the time wherein they scorned to be
taught, and instructed before they came to the Sacrament.

Chap. 5. Of the necessity of faith in him that will be a worthy Receiver.
second thing requisite in Habitual preparation is the grace of faith. He that
will come and receive after the due order must come with faith. It is in the
case of the Sacrament as it was in the case of the sacrifices. The Jews were
very careful, and precise to perform the outward rites of Gods worship, to
bring their oblations, sacrifices and the like. And yet God was offended at
them, and solemnly contests with them. Isa. 1. 11* 15. To what purpose is the
multitude of your sacrifices? Who has required this at your hand to tread in
my courts? Bring no more oblations. I cannot away with your new Moons,
Sabbaths, and the calling of assemblies, etc. Now these may seem strange
speeches. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? Why? did not God
Himself command them, and enjoyne them? And does God use to enjoyne things to
no purpose? Who has required this at your hand, etc? Who but God Himself? Did
not he require it, and charge them to do it? Is God weary of his own worship?
Does he hate his own Ordinances, and are his own services burdens to
himself? It cannot be denied but all these services were of his own
appointment, he himself required them of them, he commanded sacrifices,
incense, oblations, but he withal commanded them to be performed after the due
order. He never required these things to be done in that order and manner they
did them. It was to no purpose to offer multitudes of sacrifices in that order
they offered them, he hated their services done in that order they did them.
Why after what order did they perform them? Not after the due order, for they
did these things without faith, and came to God in their unbelief, and
therefore it is that God thus contests with them. But now consider verse. 16,
18. wash you, make you clean, come now, and then we see that he that before
forbad them, now commandes them to come, but yet withal how he commandes their
coming, come now, that is, now that ye have washed your selves by faith in
Christ's blood, now come, come after this order, and welcome. So that all that
came to these sacrifices, and services without faith washing themselves in
CHRIST'S blood came not in due order. So it is in the case of the Sacrament.
Come without faith and God will say unto you, To what purpose is your frequent
receiving of the Sacrament? To what purpose is the multitude of your
Communions? Who has required this at your hands to sit down at my Table? Come
no more at the Sacrament, ye trouble me, I am weary of your Communions, and
your receiving, it is iniquity. But let us get faith, and wash and sprinkle our
selves with Christ's blood, and then will God say, come now. This is to come
after the due order: Now that you come after the due order, come, and welcome.
No man ought to come till he come in due order, and no man can come in due
order till he come washed in CHRIST'S blood, and there is no being washed in
CHRIST'S blood but by faith. Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in
full assurance of faith having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and our bodies washed with pure water.

We saw before that Gods Ordinance, and order must go together. We must come
to the Sacrament, that is, Gods Ordinance, but we must come with faith, that
is Gods order. As it is an heinous sin to neglect Gods Ordinance, so it is no
less heinous and dangerous to neglect, and contemn Gods order, and Gods due
order is, that every Communicant come prepared with faith. So that it is no
less sin nor danger to come without faith then not to come at all. He sins
dangerously that comes not at all. He sins as dangerously that comes, and yet
comes without faith. Consider again that same passage, Matthew. 22. 4, 5. There
were some invited to that feast that came not. They made light of it, what tell
you them of CHRIST, of the excellencies to be had in CHRIST, to be had in the
Word, or ministry of the Gospel, or in the Sacrament? They made light of it,
but was this a light sin? They found it an heavy sin to them in the end,
verse 7. Well after this there is a second and a fresh invitation, and the
wedding was furnished with guests, ver. 9, 10. The feast being furnished the
King comes in to see and view his guests, and one he spies that had not a
wedding garment. The man was come, he was not guilty of the contempt of the
Ordinance, but yet was guilty of the neglect of Gods order. In he was come, but
not after the due order. Well, but what is his entertainment? Friend, how
came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment, verse 12. that is, how
haps it that thou art come in, and not after the due order? That was a question
that silenced him, smote him stark dumb. But yet that is not all. See v. 13.
Take him, bind him, etc. and do but compare that with the seventh v. and do
but consider which of the two verses sound sadliest. And see that it is no
less dangerous to neglect Gods order then his Ordinance. But wherein was his
neglect of the due order? Not having a wedding garment, that is, not having
faith, or the righteousness of faith. He that coms to the Sacrament without
his wedding garment, comes not after the due order, and he that comes to the
Sacrament without faith comes without his wedding garment. Do but consider
four specialties in that parable, that will serve to our purpose.

1 When the ghuests were come in, the King comes in to see them. So does the
Lord with all that come to the Sacrament. Take notice of that, all ye that come
to the Sacrament; When you are come together unto the Table of the Lord you
have one that comes in to overlooke you, and to view you, that comes with an
examining searching eye, Let a man, says the Apostle, examine himself, and so
let him eat, etc. And there is great reason why a man should so do, for when
we come to the Lords Table, the Lord will come in to see, to search, to examine
his ghuests. God is not satisfied that men come to his Ordinance, but God will
examine, and see whether they be come after the due order. If indeed God
should not come in to see his ghuests, then might they be the more remiss, and
careless, but believe it he will come in and see them and look narrowly on
them too, and therefore I think it nearly concerns men to look to
themselves, and to see to it before they come, that they come after the due
order.

2 The whole house was full of ghuests, and there was amongst them all but
only one man that wanted a wedding garment. In such a crowd, and company one
would think that happily one might have skulked, and have lain hid, and not
have been spied out, and yet that one man was not hid, but was found out. So if
but one man come to the Sacrament, and come not after the due order, God will
find him out. The crowd and multitude cannot hide him from Gods eye.

And if one could not be hid in a multitude, how much less shall twenty,
forty, or more be hidden from him?

3 That his fault was the want of due order in coming, and his want of due
order was his want of faith. So not a man comes to the Sacrament without faith
but God spies him, and singles him out with this question, friend how came
thou in hither, not having the grace of faith?

4 That this man not coming after the due order with faith to that feast meets
with a breach, and a blow, verse 13. Such will the case be of all such as come
to the Sacrament without faith. Is is nothing to be examined by God? To be
smitten dumb? Is it nothing to be bound hand and foot, and be cast into utter
darkness? If this be any thing then it is some thing to come to Gods supper
without a wedding garment. He that comes in without a wedding garment on his
back shall not go out without chains and fetters on his feet. So that all
this considered, we see how necessary it is that he that will come to the
Sacrament in due order must come with faith. And that we may yet be further
convinced of the necessity of bringing faith with us, consider these things
following.

1 First, a man's greatest care should be so to come to the Sacrament, that his
coming and his performance of the duty should be acceptable. As good absent as
present without acceptance: who cares to come to his neighbors table, unless
he may be welcome? Who had not rather be absent than be lowred upon, and to be
entertained with sour and dark cloudy looks? now it is not possible to find
acceptance without faith. No man's performance of any service is acceptable till
his person be accepted, Mal. 1. 10. I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord
of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand: Why would he not
accept their offering? because he had no pleasure in them. He was not pleased
with their persons, and therefore not pleased with their offerings; he had no
pleasure in their persons, therefore no pleasure in their performances. It is
the acceptance of the person, that makes the performance acceptable, Genesis 4. 4.
God had respect to Abel and his offering: first to Abel, and then to the
offering for Abels sake. If God had not had respect to Abel, he would not have
had respect to his offering; as in Cains case, Verse. 5. But unto Cain and his
offering he had no respect. But because God likes Abel, therefore he likes his
offering. But what is it now that will bring our persons into acceptance, that
God may take pleasure in us? That very thing that brought Abels person into
acceptance, Heb. 11. 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent
sacrifice than Cain: so that the way to bring our persons into acceptance, is
to bring faith: faith is it which makes the person acceptable; leave that
behind, and our case will be theirs, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. They did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and they did all drink the same spiritual drink, but
with many of them God was not well pleased. So we may eat and drink the outward
elements in the Sacrament, but if we do it not with faith, God is not well
pleased with us; and being not well pleased with us, neither will he be well
pleased with our service. It was speedy acceptance that Daniel had in his
prayers, Dan. 9. 23. At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment
came forth, etc. And what was the ground of his acceptance, and that so speedy?
for thou art greatly beloved. When a man's person is in favor and beloved of
God, then follows acceptance. The way to get acceptance, is to get our persons
beloved: the way to get our persons beloved is to get them into Christ, the way
to get them into Christ, is by faith. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. God is well pleased with no man till he be in Christ; no man is
beloved but in his beloved Son. And when once we are in Christ, purged, and
purified by his blood, then our services are performed in righteousness, and
when so performed, then accepted, Mal. 3. 3, 4. He shall purify the Sons of
Levi; namely Christ by his blood, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering
in righteousness, Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant
unto the Lord. And what is it that will bring us into Christ, but the grace of
faith? As therefore we would have acceptance at the Sacrament, so come in due
Order, Come with faith.

2 Secondly, for what end come we to the Sacrament? Is it not that we may be
partakers of Christ's body and blood? The Apostle speaks 1 Cor. 10. 17. Of
being partakers of one bread, and Verse. 21. Of being partakers of the Lords
Table. Now, will this serve our turn, and satisfy us to be partakers of the
Bread, of the Wine, of the Table; or do we not aim at an higher matter,
namely to be partakers of Christ himself? Heb. 3. 14. We may partake of the
bread and the wine, we may be partakers of the Table, though not a dram of
faith in us. But that which privileges us to be partakers of Christ, of his
body and blood, is faith. We come to the Sacrament to be made partakers of
Christ's body and blood, but this we cannot do, nor may do till we have faith.

First, we cannot do it; for he that will receive Christ's body and blood, must
have an eye to see Christ and his worth, must have a foot to come to Christ,
must have an hand to receive, and lay hold upon him, must have a mouth to feed
on him; without all these there is no partaking of Christ. Now faith is all
these. It is the eye of the soul, Isay 17. 7. At that day shall a man look to
his maker, and his eyes shall have respect to the Holy one of Israel. Isay 45.
22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth. It is the foot by
which we come to Christ, John 6. 35. He that comes to me shall never hunger,
and he that believes on me shall never thirst. Coming and believing are the
same, faith being that by which we come to Christ. It is the hand by which we
receive him, John 1. 12. To as many as received him, that is, to as many as
believed in him. Believing and receiving the same, because by faith we receive
Christ. It is the mouth by which we feed on him, John 6. 53. Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, that is, except ye believe in
Christ. Now, can a man see without an eye? come without a foot? receive without
a hand? feed without a mouth? GOD he looks that when he offers CHRIST, men
should receive him, and takes it ill when it is not done. Take, eat, this is my
Body: Christ therefore would have us eat him in the Sacrament. God is never
better pleased, than when he sees men fall hungerly and heartily upon Christ:
nothing displeases Him more, than when the Bread of Life, the flesh of Christ
shall be set before us, and we sit and look another way, and feed not and fall
not to. When a man makes a feast, if he sees his guests fall too, and feed
hard, how highly well it contents him; but if he sees them sit looking about
them, and not to feed upon those dishes he has bin Quomodo igitur corpus
Christi edent, and ejus sanguinem bibent, cum and illud non habeant quo solo
haec edi and bibi possunt? Gualib. in 1 Cor. 11. 27.
at so much cost and care to provide, it troubles and frets him. Therefore if a
man would please God in the Sacrament, he must feed and partake of Christ. Now
therefore a man must bring faith: he cannot feed that has no mouth, he has no
mouth that has no faith. Christ is a treasury of rich commodities, there is
any thing to be had in him we want, Apoc. 3. 18. There is gold to be had tried
in the fire, there is white raiment, there is eye salve to be had. But now, how
may these be had, what is the way to get them? There Christ tells us, I counsel
thee to buy of me gold, white raiment, eye salve. The way to get them then, is
to buy them. But what is that which will buy them? Not money, not silver, Isay
55. 1. Buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price: no money of the
worldlings, no price of the merit-monger will purchase these commodities. And
yet there is a money we must trade withal if we will buy them, and without
which they cannot be had; and that coin is faith: faith is that alone which
buys those riches of gold, white raiment, etc. faith is it that makes us
partakers of Christ's benefits. He that goes to mercate and carries no money in
his purse, cannot buy commodities that he wants. To come to the Sacrament, or
Christ in the Sacrament, and bring no faith with us; is to come without a penny
in our purses; and if we come without money, we shall be sent back without
commodity. So that without faith we cannot be partakers of Christ in the
Sacrament.

Secondly, we may not do it. We may not do it till we have right to eat of
Christ's flesh, and drink his blood; and right we have none till we have faith.
None had right to eat of the flesh of the sin-Offering, but the Priests; only
they might eat it, Levit. 2. 26. The Priests only had right to eat the
shewbread, Lev. 24. 9. It shall be Aarons and his sons, and they shall eat it
in the holy place, Mark 2. 26. Which is not lawful to eat but for the
Priests. It is so here. None may eat the flesh of Christ who is our true
sin-offering but they that be Priests; till we be Priests we have no right to
it, we must be Priests before we can have this privilege. But what is the way
to be made Priests? To be washed in Christ's blood, as the Priests were
consecrated by being washed in water, Levit. 8. 6. By washing also are we made
Priests, Rev. 1, 5, 6. He has loved us, and washed us in his own blood, and
made us Priests. But how come we to be washed in Christ's blood? That is done
by faith, faith takes Christ's blood, and sprinkles and washes the conscience
therewith, Heb. 10. 22. and being washed by faith in Christ's blood we are made
Priests. And therefore we are said to be made Priests by faith, 1 Pet. 2, 4,
5. To whom ye coming ye are also an holy Priesthood, that is, you believing
are made Priests, for to believe is to come, and to come is to believe. And so
faith making us Priests does give us right to eat of these holy things, and
privileges us to be partakers of Christ. Since therefore we cannot eat and
partake of Christ till we have a right, and we have no right till Priests, and
no Priests but by faith; therefore no right to partake of Christ till we have
faith. And therefore if we would come to the Sacrament after the due Order, so
as to eat of Christ, and be partakers of him, we must come with faith. It is
not after the due Order for any but a Priest to eat the flesh of the
sin-offering, or the shewbread. It was a case extraordinary that the
shewbread was given to David, and the men with him to eat.

We may not eat Christ's flesh, and drink his blood till we have a right to it;
we have no right to it, till we be of Gods family and household. The Sacrament
and Christ's flesh and blood therein, is the bread and food which God provides
for those of his own household, and not for strangers and foreiners: for we
find mention, Ephesians. 2. 19. of the household of God, and they there stand in
opposition unto foreiners and strangers. And Gal. 6. 10. there is mention of
the household of faith. When we are of the household of faith, we are of the
household of God; and when we are of Gods household, we may eat his household
provisions; when we are of Gods family, we may eat his bread. But till we be of
his family we have no right to his provisions. We had need therefore have
faith, to make us of the family of faith, that so we may be of Gods family,
and may have right to his provisions.

They that will have right to Christ in the Sacrament, they must be first Gods
children; It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and give it unto dogs,
Mat. 15. It is not a good Order in a family that dogs should eat the the bread
that is provided for his children; offall and scraps are good enough to feed
dogs withal; if they get upon the Table, and meddle with childrens bread, they
shall be set down again with a whip or a cudgel. So here, the flesh of Christ
is childrens bread, and we have no right to it till we be children, and
children we are made by faith, John 1. 12. To as many as believed he gave them
this privilege to become the Sons of God. Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the children
of God by faith in Christ Jesus: And so by faith being children, have a right
given us to partake of this bread of life. So that to come without faith is not
to come after the due Order: which is, that none eat Christ, and be made
partakers of him, but such as by faith are made the children of God* Give not
holy things to dogs, that is not the due Order, that is a disorder. Therefore
till we have faith God forbids to meddle with the Sacrament; and if in this
undue Order we will be meddling, look for a check. God will say to such in this
case, as he did to Adam after he had eaten the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3. 17.
Because thou have eaten of the Tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou
shall not eat of it, cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou
eat of it, etc. So because thou eatest the Sacrament of which God has
commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it till thou bring faith,
therefore in sorrow shall thou eat, it is small comfort thou shall have in
thine eating.

3 Thirdly, consider the evils that follow upon coming without faith, and in
our unbeleefe. And they are these.

1 First, such as come without faith, are not welcome to God: for such as come
to the Lords Table with their persons, and consciences defiled cannot be
welcome. We see Number. 9. 6. that there were certain men who were defiled by the
dead body of a man that they could not keep the Passover. What if they had in
that defilement come to the Passover? They had to themselves defiled the
Passover. For holy Ordinances do not sanctify defiled persons, but defiled
persons defile holy Ordinances, as appears by the resolution of that case,
Hag. 2. 11, 12, 13. An unclean person by a dead body, touching the bread or
wine, makes them unclean. It is not safe to defile Gods Ordinances. We know
what was the voice from heaven to Peter in his vision, Acts 10. 15. What God
has cleansed, call thou not, and so make thou not common. A defiled person
coming to the Sacrament, makes a cleansed thing common. Now an unbeleeving
person is a person defiled, Tit. 1. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but
unto them that are defiled nothing is pure; no, not the pure Ordinances of God.
Every word of God is pure, Prove. 30. 6. And so his Sacraments are pure. But to
a defiled person, neither of these pure. Well then, who are they now that are
defiled ones? See the words of the Text, to them that are defiled and
unbelieving. Therefore an unbelieving person is a desiled, and an unclean
person. Faith purifies the heart, Acts 15. 9. and so fits for pure Ordinances,
but unbelief defiles the heart, and a defiled heart defiles Gods Ordinance to
it self. And how can that man be welcome to an Ordinance, welcome to a
Sacrament, that defiles it?

2 To come without faith makes our coming an abomination. To come without
faith is to come out of Christ, and to perform the service which a man does,
out of CHRIST. Now all service performed out of Christ, is abominable to GOD.
See Lev. 17. 3, 4. What man soever there be of the house of Israel that kills
an Ox and a Lamb, etc. And brings it not to the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation to offer an offering to the LORD, etc. blood shall be imputed
to that man: he has shed blood, and that man shall be cut off from among his
people. And again verse. 6, 7. And the Priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the
Altar of the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle, etc. And they shall no more
offer their sacrifices unto devils. Sacrifices then not brought to God to the
door of the Tabernacle were as murder and bloodshed, were as the service of
the Devil. And what more abominable before God? The door of the Tabernacle
was a Type of Christ. John 10. I am the door. And the drift of that Law is to
teach that they should perform all their services to GOD in CHRIST, and to
show how loathsome to GOD all services are that are not done in him. Now he
that is in his unbeleefe, that wants the grace of faith is not in Christ
neither can he do any thing in Christ. And therefore such a man's coming
cannot but be an abomination. God abhors, and abominates that man, and his
coming that wants faith. The end of coming to the Sacrament is to seek, and
see Gods face, and to have fellowship and communion with him. Now if we come
without faith God will not let us see his face, GOD will turn away and hide
his face from us, Deu. 32. 19. 20. And when the Lord saw it he abhorred them,
because of the provoking, etc. And he said, I will hide my face from them. But
why will God do so? He gives his reason for it, for they are children in whom
is no faith. So that when a man has not faith he shall not see GODS face in
the use of his Ordinance, for how can a man see an hidden face? But that is not
all, GOD not only hides his face, but he abhorred them. He abhorred them
because of their provoking him. How did they provoke him? Not only by that
spoken of in the verses going before, but by that also in the verse following,
because they were children in whom was no faith. Such then as have no faith
have no communion with GOD, and do provoke God so as he abhors them. There can
be no communion with GOD where a man is cut off from God, and fellowship with
him. And where a man is cut off from covenant he is cut off from communion. Now
where there is no faith there is an excision, a cutting a man off from God, and
covenant with him, Romans 11. 20. Through unbeleife they are cut off. And besides
it is a provoking sin. An unbeleever lives in a sin that continually provokes
God. Numb. 14. 11. How long will this people provoke me? And how long will it
be yer they believe me? And Psalm. 78. 21, 22. The Lord was wroth, so a fire was
kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel, because they
believed not in God. And what wonder then that a man coming to the Sacrament
without faith is abomination to GOD, when his unbeleife angers and provokes the
Lord.

3 The state of unbelief is a state of spiritual death. I live by the faith
of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. A believer is a living man, an unbeleever a
dead one, spiritually dead. The want of faith in the soul is the death of the
Vnde mors in anima? quia no^ est fides; undemors in corpore? quia non est ibi
anima* ergo animae tuae anima fides est. August. in Ioh tract. Placuit ut
corporibus defunctorum Eucharistia no^ detur. Dictum n. est ^ Domino, Accipite,
and edite. Cadavera aut^ nec accipere posiunt, nec edere. Council Carthag. 3.
can. 6.
soul, as the absence of the soul from the body, is the death of the body. It
was an ancient abuse of the Sacrament to give it to dead bodies, an abuse
condemned and cast out by a Council upon this reason: Because CHRIST; says
Take, Eat: But carcases, and dead bodies can neither eat, nor drink. It was
a good reason to deny it to dead bodies. The very same reason excluds
unbeleevers. Unbelievers are dead, unbeleevers can neither eat nor drink, for
believing is eating and drinking, Ioh. 6. 53. What should a man do at the
Sacrament that can neither eat nor drink CHRIST'S flesh and blood? An
unbeleever can do neither, because he is a dead man, because he wants faith,
the life and teeth by which Christ is to be eaten.

4 Unbelief evacuates, enervates, and de-sorces the Sacrament of its efficacy,
and virtue, or powerful operation. The Sacrament in Gods Institution, is an
Ordinance that has a fullness of spiritual blessing in it, full of efficacy,
and spiritual power, and offers to empty it self with a rich, and plentiful
blessing upon the soul of the receiver. But yet provided, that he come to
receive it after the due order, that he come prepared with a believing heart.
And Christ says to every receiver, as he said to the Centurion, Matthew. 8. 13.
As thou have believed so be it done unto thee, and as to the blind man, Matthew.
9. 29. According to your faith be it unto you. So in this case, as you
believe, and according to your faith when you come to the Sacrament, so be it
done unto you. According to your preparation with faith so shall mine Ordinance
work, and be effectual, and empty out it self unto you. And as every man
brings faith, so he carries away an answerable portion of blessing, and
spiritual good from the Sacrament. But now when a man comes to the Sacrament
in unbelief, void of the grace of faith, the Sacrament proves but a dead
Ordinance, utterly ineffectuall, utterly empty of any spiritual good. That
look as the Apostle speaks of CHRIST to them in case of circumcision, and
justification by the works of the Law, Gal. 5. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you
that if you be circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing, and verse 4, Christ
is become of no effect unto you who ever of you are justified by the Law. So it
may be said of the Sacrament, and CHRIST in the Sacrament, behold, the Lord
himself says it unto you that if you come to the Sacrament, and to CHRIST in
the Sacrament and come in your unbelief: Without faith that Christ and the
Sacrament shall profit you nothing, CHRIST and the Sacrament becoms of no
effect unto you who ever of you come in the state of unbelief. Unbelief
freezes up, binds, and locks up the virtue of the Sacrament, and CHRIST
therein. It is still with Christ in the Sacrament, as it was with him in that
case, Mark 6. 5, 6. He could there do no mighty work, and the reason is
rendered in the next verse, He marvelled because of their unbelief. So that
their unbelief did in a manner bind CHRIST'S hands. It is said verse 2. that
the astonished people said, What wisdom is this which is given unto him, that
even such mighty works are wrought by his hands. And yet it is said that he
could there do no mighty work. CHRIST was a CHRIST that could do mighty
works, and yet there could do no mighty work, because of their unbelief. He
could not do any mighty thing; why? can any thing limit the mighty power of
CHRIST? Not so; but he could not, because this is the order according to which
alone he has tied himself to work, and be efficacious by, namely that he
will exert, and put forth his mighty power in, and unto those that believe, 1.
Pet. 2. 7. Unto you that believe he is precious. Christ is precious in
himself, but not precious, and efficacious to us, but so far forth as we
believe, Ephesians. 1. 19. The exceeding greatness of his power, and the working
of the might of his power is toward them that believe. So that if no faith on
our part, no exerting nor putting forth of his power on Christ's part. So it is
here. The Sacrament, and CHRIST in the Sacrament does mighty works. There is a
mighty efficacy in the Sacrament. And yet it can do no mighty work in many,
it can do no work at all in many for their good, because of men's unbelief
which enervates the Sacrament, and deads the force and operation of it to
unbelieving hearts. The Sacrament is precious, powerful, and efficacious to
them that believe, but the Sacrament received without faith is received without
force, and without fruit. A faithless is a fruitless receiver. Look how it
is with the Word, so is it with the Sacrament. Great things are spoken in the
Scriptures of the power, and efficacy of the Word. No where more then Heb. 4.
12, 13. The Word of God is quick and powerful, etc. And yet in the second
verse of the same Chapter the Apostle tells us that it was powerless to some,
and wrought not with them. But what was the matter? For unto us was the Gospel
preached as well as unto them, but the word preached did not profit them, not
being mixed with faith in them that heard it. Though the Word in its own
nature were powerful, yet their unbelief made it powerless. Just so in the
Sacrament, though it be a powerful Ordinance to do great things in the soul,
yet the Sacrament administered does not profit many because it is not received
with faith, and men's own unbelief makes it powerless unto them. It is said,
Luke 5. 17. That as Christ was teaching, there were Pharisees, and Doctors of
the Law sitting by: And the power of the Lord was present to heal them. It is
ever so, that when any of Gods Ordinances are on foot, that then there is a
power of God present to heal. As in the Word, so also in the Sacrament. Now if
men come to the Sacrament with faith, that faith of theirs draws forth that
power, and sets that power on work, and so makes the Sacrament powerful. But
if men come in their unbelief, then they dead that power to themselves, and so
make the Sacrament powerless. Moses has a speech, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. He made him
to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty Rock. Give me
leave to allude to this speech. The Sacrament is a Rock, and it is a Rock in
which is much sweetness, and fatness, honey, and oil. But how may a man get
this honey, and this oil, out of this Rock. He made him suck honey out of the
Rock. There is neither honey, nor oil, to be had without sucking, he that
has faith can suck, and so fetch out this honey and oil. But now though this
Rock have honey and oil, if a man suck not, he has neither. Now he that
comes in his unbelief, he suckes not, nor cannot suck, and so he has but a
dry Sacrament of it, because he has neither honey, nor oil. Unbelievers they
only lick the Rock, do not suck it, Ve^um hi qui verbo tenus co^de (...),
and mente a^^di sacris intersunt, vel etiam participant ^onis lamb^nt quidem
(...), sed ^^de nec mel ^ugunt, nec oleum. Cyprian. de Caen. Dom.
and so fetch not the honey, and oil out of the Rock, for it is sucking and
not licking that must do that. A child may lick the mothers breast and yet if
it suck it not, gets no milk. A thirsty man may lick the outside of the cup,
but that will never satifie his thirst. He that comes to the Sacrament without
faith, and rests upon the use of the outward sign, is like a man, as Mr
Tyndall speaks in the like case, that thinks to quench his thirst by sucking
the Alepoole. By all this then we may see of what necessity it is that every
one that will come after the due order to the Sacrament come prepared with
faith. Like enough there be too many in the world that think there is no such
necessity of faith. So long as they be in charity with their brethren, and owe
no man any ill will, they hope all will be well enough. And this men ought to
do indeed, but must take heed how they neglect the other. Some Papists indeed
have affirmed that faith is not necessary Cajetan at the conference at Augusta
with Luther said, Fides non est necessaria accessaro ad Eucharistiam. Iuel.
def. Apol. 283.
for a man that is to come to the Sacrament, but upon what has been in this
Chapter premised, let us be advised in this case above all things, Ephesians. 6. to
have a care to come with faith, if we have any care to come after the due order.

Chap. 6. Of the necessity of Repentance in him that will be a prepared
Communicant.
Habitual preparation to the Sacrament, and that is Repentance. He that will
come to the Sacrament after the due Order, must come with repentance, must be a
man that has repented of his sins. It is with the Sacrament of the Supper as
with the Sacrament of Baptism, when administered to men of years: the
Sacrament of Baptism may not be received of men of years without solemn
repentance, Mat. 3. John did baptize the people that came unto him, but he
first preaches repentance to them, Verse. 2. and they profess repentance unto
him before they be baptized, Verse. 6. They were baptized of him confessing
their sins. And so Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized: first repent, and then
come to the Sacrament of Baptism. It is so also with the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, repent and receive the Lords Supper: first repent, and then come
to the Lords Supper. And therefore 1 Cor. 11. 31. he wishes us to judge our
selves before we come to the Sacrament, which is a special work of
repentance. In the Sacrament we draw nigh to God, and we desire to have the
Lord draw nigh to us. If therefore we would draw near to God, or have him draw
near to us, we must come after the due Order. If we draw near to God, and do
it disorderly, he will not draw near to us, nor have any fellowship with us.
Now what is Gods Order, and the due Order wherein he would have us draw near
unto him, we find James 4. 8, 9. 10. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you. But after what Order must we draw nigh to him? Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purify This is the Order after which we must draw near to God,
namely, prepared and fitted for fellowship with him by unfeigned repentance.

Hezekiah proclaimed a solemn Passover to be kept at Jerusalem; and the Order
after which they kept it, is worth the observing, and is for our imitation
before we come to the Sacrament. First the Priests they cleanse the Temple, and
brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the Temple of the Lord,
into the court of the House of the Lord: and the Levites took it to carry it
out abroad into the brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles. 29. 16. And as the Priests and
Levites do their parts in purging uncleanness out of the Temple, so the
people do theirs in purging the City, They arise, and take away the Altars
that were in Jerusalem, and all the Altars for incense took they away and cast
them into the brook Kidron 2 Chronicles. 30. 14. And mark what follows, Verse. 15.
Then they killed the Passover, namely, when all uncleanness was fetched out of
the Temple, and all the Altars knocked down in the City, and were thrown into
the brook Kidron, as it were into the Towne-ditch, Then they killed the
Passover. First, there was a purging, a cleansing out of filthiness: first,
all the baggage and unclean stuff thrown into Kidron, and then a killing of
the Passover. This must be our Order in coming to the Sacrament: first,
purge our hearts and lives of al manner of uncleanness that may be found in
them, by repentance, and by repentance throw it all into the brook Kidron, and
then come to the Sacrament, then receive the Lords Supper. So must men come to
the Lords Table, as the Priests came to the services of the Tabernacle. When
the Priests came to perform holy services in the Tabernacle, see in what Order
they must come, Exodus 30. 18, 21. They must wash their hands and their feet at
the brazen laver when they went into the Tabernacle, or when to the Altar to
minister there. The equity of it reached farther than to the Priests. David was
no Priest, yet Psalm. 26. I will wash mine hands in innocence, so will I
compass thine Altar. He alludes to the ceremony of the Priests washing at the
brazen Laver, before they ministered at the Altar; to let us see, that though
this ceremony belonged only to the Priests, yet the morality belongs to all,
and that there is a washing that concerns all before they meddle with holy
services, and so with the Sacrament. As the Priests were to wash themselves, so
some parts of the Sacrifices also were to be washed, Levit. 1. 9. But the
inwards and his legs he shall wash in water. The same Order must be observed in
coming to the Sacrament: every sinner is an unclean person, and unclean ones
must be washed before they offer to have fellowship with the GOD of Purity.
There is a double washing with which we must be washed before we can come in
due Order. First the washing of our selves in Christ's blood by faith. And
secondly the washing of our selves by repentance. He that will come in due
Order, must wash by repentance as well as by faith: yea, he must wash both his
inwards and his feet. His inwards must be washed, Ier. 14. 4. Wash thine heart,
O Jerusalem, how long shall thy wicked thoughts lodge within thee? All inward
and secret lusts must be washed out by repentance. And the feet must be washed
also. John 13. 10. As we walk in our daily ways; we gather a great deal of
soil, and this same soil of our outward actions, must also be washed away by
repentance. Why must the inwards and the feet or legs of the Sacrifices be
washed, above all the rest? The reason is given, because the inwards or
intrailes, are the vessels that contain the filth and excrements of the Beast;
and therefore were they to be washed. And the legs Even he that is washed
already, still and daily needs to have his feet washed, John 13. 10. Now then
for us to come to the Lords Table, with such inwards, with such feet, is not to
take heed to our feet, nor to come in due Order. It were disorderly to sit
down at a man's Table in so slovenly a fashion, as with unwashen hands;
therefore more disorderly to sit down at the Lords Table with unwashen hearts.
The Pharisees quarrelled with our Saviors Disciples, Matthew. 15. 2. Why (say
they) do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders? for they wash
not their hands when they eat bread. But to such Communicants as come to the
Lords Table without repentance, it may be said upon better ground, Why do ye
transgress the commandment of the Lord? For ye wash not your hands, nor your
hearts, when ye eat bread at the Lords Table.

Quest. But what is that repentance wherewith a man must come? How must a man
repent before he comes?

Ans. This is indeed a thing worth the inquiring after, because many that come
to the Sacrament that yield to it that there must be a preparation before they
come, yet foully deceive themselves in their repentance. Repentance it stands in
a sorrow for sin, and an actual renouncing and forsaking of sin, so as to have
no further communion with it. And here is that wherewith many gull themselves,
do mock God and their own souls. like a bulrush, will confess their sins
to God, and make a shift to be sad and demure for a while: and all this is but
to stop the mouth of conscience. But yet all this repentance is not worth a
bulrush, because there is no abdication, no forsaking and putting away those
sins, but the duty once over and past, and the Sacrament a little forgotten,
upon the next occasion offered, they are as ready for their sins as ever
before. They do with their sins when they come to the Sacrament, as Abraham
with his servants when he went to Sacrifice Isaac, Genesis 22. 5. And Abraham
said to his young men, abide you here with the Ass, and I and the Lad will go
yonder and worship, and come again to you. So say many in effect in this case
to their sins and their lusts: Stand you awhile aside, I must go to the
Sacrament, and receive the communion, do but stand by a while, and when the
Sacrament is over, or at furthest as soon as the Sacrament-day Soror in Christo
amabilis, rogo ut audias prudentiam Serpentis. Serpens enim cum coeperit ire ad
bibendum, antequam veniat ad fontem, evomit omne venenum. Imitare and tu
charissima hunc serpentem in hac part, ut antequam venias ad fontem, id est,
communionem corporis and sanguinis Domini, evomas omne venenum, scilicet,
odium, iram, malitiam, invidiam, malam voluntatem, and noxias cogitationes ex
cord tuo. Bern. de modo benevivendi. c. 28.
is over, I will come again to you. But this is mere mockery; in that
repentance which must duly prepare a man for the Sacrament, there must be an
utter departure from, and a forsaking of our evil ways. Before we come to the
Sacrament to eat, and drink there, we should do as the Serpent is said to do,
and in this case should be wise as Serpents. The Serpent before he goes to
drink at the Fountain, first vomits up all his poison: so should we before we
come to eat and drink at the Lords Table, vomit up and cast out all the poison
of our lusts, and so vomit them up, as never with the dog to return to our
Chron. 30. 14, 15. Then they killed the Passover; Then? when? When that was
first done, in the 14. Verse. They arose and took away the Altars, etc. and
cast them into the brook Kidron. It had been but a folly to have killed and
have eaten the Passover, those abominations standing and remaining; therefore
they do not only profess a sorrow for those abominations, as it is like
enough they did profess a sorrow, but before they come to the Passover, they
take them away first, and make sure work with them, they cast them into the
brook Kidron. So must our repentance be before we come to the Sacrament; not
only a repentance that sorrows for sin, and yet keeps sin in the bosom
still; but such a repentance that casts them quite out, even into the brook
Kidron. Ezra. 6. 21, 22. Mark there who did eat the Passover: not all, not
every man that would, but only such as had repented, and so had prepared
themselves for it. How did their repentance appear? by their actual
separation of their sins from them, All such as had separated themselves from
the filthiness of the Heathen of the Land. It had been an heinous and
horrible thing for them to have come to the Passover in the filthiness of the
Heathen. But they only that did separate themselves from that filthiness of
the heathen did eat. Thus must it be also with a man that will eat at the
Sacrament; it is not enough for him to confess his sins, to shed some tears
and blubber for them, but he must separate himself from the filthiness of the
heathen. What is swearing, whoring, drunkenness, profanation of the Lord's Day
and other Holy Days but the filthiness of Heathens? What are these but
heathenish filthinesses? Therefore whosoever is polluted with any such
filthiness, or the filthiness of any other sin, must first separate himself
from that filthiness before he come to the Lords Table. Let a man separate
himself from his filthiness, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of
this cup. And the way to separate our selves from our filthiness and sins, it
is by repentance. Sin separates us from God, but repentance separates sin
from us, and so fits us for fellowship with GOD in his Ordinance.

And this is that thing which was typified in purging out of leaven before the
Passover, Exodus 12. 15. They are forbid to cat leavened bread: nay, that
would not serve the turn, but Exodus 12. 19. There must be no leaven found in
their Houses. They must not only have no leaven in their mouths, but there
must be no leaven in their houses, seven days shall there no leaven be found
in your houses: not only no leaven to be eaten, but no leaven to be seen,
Exo. 3. 7. And there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall
there be leaven seen with thee in all thy quarters. No leaven in the mouth, in
the house, in all their quarters. And the Jews were exceeding precise in
purging out leaven. We read John 19. 14. of the preparation of the Passover,
which was the day before the Passover. Now on that day the father of the
family, with other men lighted waxcandles, searched all corners to purge out
all remnants and crumbs of leaven. And their Scribes taught, that a man was to
search after leaven in secret places and in corners, and to search it out by
the light of a candle out of all holes and corners. So that a Jew before the
Passover would not have left a crum of leaven in a crany, or blind corner of
his house. Leaven typified sin and wickedness, 1 Cor. 5. 8. And all this
teaches us that exact care we should have to purge out, and cast out all our
sins before we come to the Sacrament. There was no Jews house had so many
dark holes, blind corners, and crannies, as have our hearts, and therefore
we should take the light, and candle of the Word, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is
a light, a Lamp; And by the light of this candle search and ranscke the blind
corners and secret crannies of our hearts, and out with all the very crumbs of
leaven. So that as the Apostle speaks in that case, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. Purge out
therefore the old leaven. Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old
leaven, etc. So let us do in this case of coming to the Sacrament. This is to
keep our Passover after the due Order. If we will eat of the Lamb, we must
have no leaven: if Lamb no leaven, if leaven no Lamb: if Christ in the
Sacrament, no sins and lusts favored; if sins and lusts favored, no Christ.
There be that expound that Text, Cant. 7. 2. of the two Sacraments, Thy navell
is like a round goblet which wants not liquor, thy belly is like an heap of
wheat, set about with Lilies. By the navell they understand the Sacrament of
Baptism: the navell serves for the nourishment of the babe in the womb, and
baptism nourishes infants and newborn babes in the Churches womb. By the
belly like an heap of wheat, they understand the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, for the abundance and store of excellent spiritual nourishment
therein: and mark with what this heap of wheat is set about, set about with
Lilies, signifying Christians of holy and godly life. To be sure, such they
should be by repentance that come to this Sacrament, they should be Lilies
pure and white; Lilie-white, that are set about this heap of wheat. It is not
after the due Order when stinking weeds, hemlock, nettles, and such trash are
set about this heap of wheat, when scandalous and profane persons, common
swearers, customary drunkards, etc. thrust in, and set themselves down at the
Lords Table.

It is a case much to be lamented to see the desperate boldness of many in
coming to the Sacrament; swearers, habitual drunkards, unclean persons, make
no more bones of coming to the Table of the Lord, than of sitting down at
their own ordinary Tables: swear this day, receive the next, be drunk on the
eve, and receive the Sacrament on the morrow. Herein dealing as the Harlot in
that case, Prove. 30. 20. She eats and wipes her mouth, and says, I have done
no wickedness, I am as honest a woman as the best of my neighbors. So these
eat and drink at the Sacrament, and wipe their mouths, and who has any
thing to say to them, they hope they are as orderly fair Communicants as the
best. That therefore men may be awakened to be more considerate, and may be
provoked to come prepared with repentance, let them a little think seriously
on these following particulars.

First, he that comes to the Sacrament, and not after this order, prepared
with Repentance, shall be sure to meet with no blessing, benefit, or comfort.
There is a great deal of comfort and joy to be had in the use of the
Sacrament, provided a man so come to it as he ought, provided that a man come
prepared with repentance. Mark that passage, Ezra. 6, 22. They kept the Feast
of unleavened bread seven days with joy. What are civil Feasts without joy?
and what are holy Feasts without joy? A Feast is made for laughter, and wine
makes merry, Eccl. 10. 19. Little comfort in this Feast, and Wine in the
Sacrament, unless it make a man's heart merry and joyful. Joy is that which
GOD promises to the right users of his Ordinances, Isay 56. 7. I will make them
joyful in mine house of prayer. So God makes men joyful in the house of
preaching, and joyful at the Table of his house. They kept the Feast with joy.
How so? For, (says the Text) the Lord had made them joyful. But observe who
they were whom God made joyful at that Feast, and Passover: namely, those who
had separated themselves from the filthiness of the heathen of the land. Such
as come with true Repentance, God makes joyful in the use of his Ordinance. A
man may be bold to challenge impenitent persons that come in their sins, and
to charge them with it, that they have no joy in their receiving: God joys
them not, makes them not welcome.

As in the Gospel, so at the Sacrament God makes a Feast, such a Feast as the
Feast of the Gospel is, Isay 25. 6. A Feast of fat and sweet things, a Feast
of Wine, a Feast of things full of marrow. But who must eat of that Feast, who
must be feasted with that wine and marrow? How must they be prepared that eat
of this Feast? They must come in due Order that come to that Feast; and that
due Order is to come with repentance: for mark what God subjoynes there, Verse.
7. And I will destroy the face of the covering, and the veil that is spread,
etc. So that they that will be partakers of that Feast, must first have the
veil and the covering taken away; they that come veiled and covered come not
after the due Order, and therefore shall not taste of the sweetes of this Feast.
But what is that veil then that must be taken away, before they shall eat of
that Feast? We may see what it is by that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16.
The veil is the hardness of men's hearts, and that veil is taken away when
men turn to the Lord. Repentance takes away that veil: when men are humbled
for their sins, and do truly repent, then is the veil taken away. And when
the veil is taken away, then are men prepared to come to that Feast of fat
things. The Sacrament is a Feast of fat things also, and they that will come to
this Feast in the Sacrament, must come with their hearts unveiled. It is a
Feast of fat things, but they that will eat of this Feast of fat things, must
not come with fat hearts. They that come with fat hearts will find it a Feast
of lean things; will find neither sweet nor comfort in the use of the
Sacrament; Go make the heart of this people fat, Isay 6. that is, Go make
their hearts hard, and impenitent; Psalm. 119. 70. Their heart is fat as
greasse; fat hearts shall not be feasted with these sweet things. A lean heart
that mournes, that pines, that grieves for sin, that heart shall eat of these
fat things. Psalm. 22. 26. The poor shall eat, and shall be satisfied. The
man that is humbled and abased, he shall eat unto satisfaction: so that they
only have benefit (taste the sweet and the marrow in this Feast, that come
prepared with repentance. But let a man come without repentance and
humiliation, and he receives no benefit at all at the Sacrament, but finds a
lean and a dry Feast of it. It is in this case with a man, as it was with the
Prodigal, when once he came to himself, and was soundly humbled for his
folly, and falls to confession, Father I have sinned against thee, and against
heaven, then see what follows, Luke 15. 22, 23. bring hither the fatted
Calfe, let us eat and be merry. Now that he repents, he is fed, and feasted
with fat things; the fat Calfe must be killed and prepared. But look upon him
in his impenitency, whilst he is in his sins, and how fares he then? alas,
he then eats husks, feeds with the Swine, and his belly not filled neither:
whilst he was in a Swinish condition, he was fitter to feed at a Swines
trough, than to feed at his Fathers Table; and then he is fed with nothing but
with empty husks. It is just so here. If men come to God and to his Table with
confession and contrition of spirit, with true and sound repentance; then God
says, Come bring the fatted Calfe, make a Feast, give this repenting sinner my
Sons flesh and blood, his spirit; let him eat marrow, glut his heart with the
comforts of my spirit, with the sweetness and goodness of Christ. But when
men come in their swinish and brutish lusts, come no better than Swine without
repentance for their sins, then GOD sends them to the trough: What do you a
company of swinish adulterers, and drunkards, at my Table? get you to the
trough; the trough is fitter for you than the Communion Table. And though such
persons in their impenitency will thrust and crowd in to the Lords Table, yet
they shall be fed but with husks. Impenitent persons find their food in the
issue no better: they receive but the husk of the Sacrament, bare Bread and
Wine, the naked Elements, they never taste a whit of the fatted Calfe, they
eat not a whit of CHRIST'S flesh and blood. God feeds Swine only with husks,
husks are good enough for Hogs. And what are impenitent persons better than
Hogs to whom Pearls must not be given. Observe how the Prodigals father
speaks to him after his rerepentance, Come bring the fatted Calfe, let us eat
and be merry. A man can never so eat at the Sacrament as to be merry, till
he eat of the fat, Nehemiah 8. 10. Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, neither be ye sorry, that is, be you merry and joyful; eating the
fat, and drinking the sweet, cheeres and makes the heart merry. But when says
his father, let us eat and be merry? Now after he saw his Son to be sorry,
when he saw his soul humbled and afflicted with sorrow for his sins, he saw
him truly penitent; Now let us eat and be merry. It is to little purpose, to
eat at the LORDS Table, unless we may so eat that we may be merry, that
we may be cheered, refreshed, rejoiced. Now he that would eat and be merry
at the LORDS Table, Lords Table must weep and be sorry in his own private
Chamber, and Closset. And when we have made our selves sorry God will make us
merry, when we have sadded our souls by repentance, God will glad them with
the comforts of his Spirit dispersed to us in the Sacrament. And the greater
our sorrow is before we come, the greater will our mirth be when we be come.

But contrarily when we come to the Lords Table, and have not been sorry, have
not been humbled, have not repented, then may we come and eat, but we cannot
eat, and be merry; we can have no comfort, no joy in our receiving, because
GOD feeds us in such a case with nothing but husks. Huskie food will never
make the heart merry, and where repentance is wanting it makes the Sacrament
prove to a man no better then an husky banquet.

Where repentance is wanting a man in receiving receives nothing but bare
bread, and bare wine, neither is it any more with God then if a man did eat
common bread, and drink ordinary wine at his own Table. It is in Sacraments
as it was with sacrifices. When men came to the sacrifices, and offerings
without repentance see how God esteemed of them; Hos. 9. 4. For their bread for
their soul shall not come into the house of the Lord. Zanch. in Locum.
The bread for their soul, that is, the bread for their life, their daily
bread for the sustinance of their bodily life. He speaks of that meat
offering, Levit. 2. 5. That meat offering was appointed of God for a
spiritual use, and yet it is called the bread for their life, or livelihood.
Because they using those Ordinances without Repentance, though the meat
offering were appointed for a spiritual use, God esteemed no other then common
meat, as their ordinary bodily bread they fed upon to sustain bodily life. In
the same sense it is that Iere. 7. 21. the Lord in a kind of scorn calls
their sacrifices flesh; Put your burnt offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat
flesh. There wanted repentance in the offerers, and therefore God reckons them
but as other ordinary flesh in the Shambles. And being so, what had they more
at their meat offerings then at their own Tables? what at their sacrifices
more then might have been had at the Shambles?

And no wonder, for God intends not his Ordinance to such; God calls not,
invites not such, and he will not welcome those whom he invites not. Consider
those Canons which were for eating the Passover. Exodus 12. 43, 44, 45. This is
the Ordinance of the Passover, there shall no stranger eat thereof. But every
man's servant that is bought for money when thou have circumcised him, then
shall he eat thereof. A forreyner, and an hired servant shall not eat thereof.
Here be three Canons. First no stranger must eat thereof. Suppose he had, yet
surely should he have had no Communion with God, God would have been a
stranger to him. Secondly no hired servant must eat thereof, suppose he had,
certainly God would not have accepted his service. Thirdly no uncircumcised one
must eat thereof. If an uncircumcised person had eaten thereof could he have
looked for a blessing? Now all these three Canons make against an impenitent
sinners coming to the Sacrament. For an impenitent sinner is all these. He is
a stranger to God, Psalm. 58. 3. The wicked are estranged from the womb. And
Psalm. 54. 3. David calls the Ziphims who were notwithstanding of Israel,
strangers, for what so estranges a man from God as does sin? He is an hired
servant, a servant to Satan, and his lusts, John 8. 34. Whosoever commiteth
sin is the servant of sin, 2 Pet. 2. 18. They themselves are servants to
corruption, for of whom a man is overcome, of the same he is brought in
bondage. And who will set his servant at his Table with him? The servant abides
not in the house for ever, John 8. 35. and therefore sits not down at Table at
any time. He is an uncircumcised person, Iere. 4. 3, 4, Break up the fallow
ground, circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore skine of
your heart. What is the circumcision of the heart, but the breaking up of the
fallow ground, verse 3. So that a repenting heart is a circumcised heart, and
contrarily an impenitent is an uncircumcised heart, Acts 7. 51. Ye stifnecked,
and uncircumcised in heart. So that an impenitent person is an uncircumcised
person. And what wonder then that an impenitent person meets with no blessing
at the Sacrament, when he comes to eat against the Canon, being a stranger, a
servant, an uncircumcised person?

The Israelites Manna was Sacramental, and there is Manna in the Lords Supper,
and in the use of the Sacrament the Lord gives that hidden Manna, Apoc. 2. 17.
But it is to be observed that the Israelites did not eat Manna presently so
soon as they were out of Egypt, but first of all Sicut populus Israel ante
transitum maris nonpotuit manna comedere, sic nemo valet ante baptismu^ corpus
redemtoris accipere. Anselm. in 1 Cor. 10. Nondum baptizati, vel eriam adhuc
excommunicati, etc. arcebantur a communione. Centuriat. Magdeb. Cent. 10. cap.
6.
they passed through the red Sea, and that passage was a Baptism. See therefore
Saint Paul's order, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. Our fathers all passed through the Sea,
And were all baptized in the Sea, And did all eat the same spiritual meat.
So that before they did eat that spiritual meat, they were first baptized in
the red Sea. There must be a baptism before the Manna may be eaten. None ought
to receive the Lords Supper till he be first baptized. It were utterly against
Gods own order to have a man receive the Communion before he be baptized. That
very order teaches that there must be repentance before we come to the Lords
Table. For baptism is the baptism of repentance, Luke 3. 3. John came
preaching the baptism of repentance. So that where no repentnace, there the
Sacrament belongs not to men, and they can have no benefit by it, to whom it
belongs not. As in that case Bethsheba speaks, Pro. 31. 6, 7. Give strong
drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those that be of heavy
hearts, or bitter of soul, let him drink, and forget his poverty, and
remember his misery no more. So it holds good here, God would not have this
wine to be given to every man, it is not for profane, and impenitent sinners to
drink this wine, but when men are by repentance in poverty of spirit,
bitterness of soul, heavy in heart, then the Lord would have this wine given
them; and such as come to drink it with such hearts, they shall have their
hearts cheered, refreshed and sweetly comforted against the sense of their
poverty, and misery. Repenting sinners go away with the sweetness, and
comfort of the Sacrament. The Prophet speaks of a cup of consolation that was
wont to be given to some, Iere. 16. 7. That cup of consolation was not given to
every one. But when any had buried some dear friend, and was in heaviness and
sorrow, mourning and in bitterness as Zechariah speaks, Zech. 12. Then their
friends did invite them to their houses, and give them a cup of consolation. So
that that cup of consolation was for sad, and sorrowful persons only, only for
mourners. The cup in the Sacrament is a cup of consolation, but this cup is
prepared for mourners for sin, and when men receive it prepared with
repentance, then it is indeed unto them a cup of consolation. But no cup of
consolation at al to such as in impenitency of spirit come to the Sacrament.

2 He that comes to the Sacrament, and not after this order prepared with
repentance, he not only meets with no blessing, but with a blow and a breach.
And that in a double respect.

First, Such an one shall not only not be the better, but far the worse for
his receiving in his sins, and impenitency. Some have a conceit that though
they be such sinners as they are, yet the coming to the Sacrament will mende
and heal them, and may do them good. But such are deceived, they shall be so
far from being the better, that they shall be worse. That as our Savior
speaks of a Pharisees Proselyte, Mat. 23. 15. that when he was made, he was
made twofold more the child of hell then themselves, so is it with impenitent
receivers, by their receiving they make themselves twofold more the children of
hell, and the Devil then they were before, as having added both to the guilt
of their impenitency the fresh guilt of the profanation of Gods Ordinance, and
having doubled their hardness, and increased their strength to follow sin
with the more greediness.

Such an one meets with an heavy curse, a spiritual curse upon his soul, so
as the receiving of the Sacrament shall do his soul mischief. Sacraments
work according to that disposition wherein they find such as receive them.
Such as are the Receivers, so prove the Sacraments unto them. It is in this
case as it was with the woman under Iealousy, and suspicion of uncleanness,
drinking the cursed waters, Numb. 5. 27, 28. And when he has made her to
drink the water, then it shall come to pass that if she be defiled, and have
done trespass against her husband, that the water that causes the curse shall
enter into her, and become bitter, and her belly shall swell, and her thigh
shall rot, and the woman shall be a curse amongst her people. And if the woman
be not defiled, but be clean, then she shall be free, and shall conceive
seed. Look then as the woman was, such was the work of the water. If she
were clean the water did her no hurt, nay it did her good, she conceived
seed, she became fruitful: but if she were defiled, and unclean it wrought
with a mischief, her belly did swell, her thigh did rot, and she became a
curse. It is so in receiving the Sacrament. As men Quicquid recipitur recipitur
ad modum recipientis.
are that receive it, so is the work and efficacy of it, either for good or
hurt, either for bane, or blessing. If a man be prepared with repentance, and
so be clean, then the Sacrament brings a blessing, it makes a man fruitful.
But if a man be defiled, and unclean, Ideo nemo malo prodest, quia quicquid ad
illum pervenit id pravo usu corrumpitur. Quemadmodum stomachus morbo vi^iatus
quoscunque accepit cibos mutat, and omne alimentum in causam dolo^is trahit,
ita animus caecus quicquid illi commiss^ris id onus suum et perniciem, et
occasionem miseriae facit. Senec. de benef. lib. 5. c. 12.
as every impenitent sinner is, then it banes, and mischiefs him, it proves as
cursed water, it rots his soul, he proves a more rotten, and wretched sinner
then before. An unwholesome, and diseased stomach what ever food it receives it
alters, and rather nourishes the disease then the body, and turns wholesome
nourishment to matter of grief, and vexation. So an impenitent soul coming
to Gods Ordinance in its sins and defilement does but turn the wholesome
nutriment of the Sacrament to the feeding of its diseases, and the increasing
of its own sorrow and mischief, as the water that made the clean woman
fruitful made the unclean woman swell and rot. God curses the Sacrament to an
impenitent defiled person, and so makes a sad breach upon him in stead of a
blessing.

Secondly, such an one as comes in his impenitency shall meet with a breach in
another kind, with Gods heavy wrath falling upon him at the Sacrament. That
same is a terrible Text, and worthy to be well thought upon by every man before
he comes to the Sacrament, Lev. 7. 20, 21. But the soul that eats of the flesh
of the peace offerings that pertain to the Lord having his uncleanness upon
him, even that soul shall be cut off from his people: Moreover the soul that
shall touch any unclean thing, as the uncleanness of man, or any unclean
beast, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice
of peace offerings, even that soul shall be cut off from his people. Their
peace offerings were eucharisticall offerings. Now suppose a man had defiled
himself, and should have come, and with that uncleanness upon him have eaten
of the flesh of those offerings, what had the issue been? surely it had been
better for that man to have been a bed, and asleep, for that soul shall be
cut off from his people, that man shall be destroyed, destroyed by GODS hand,
and from before his face, as Lev. 22. 3 That soul shall be cut off from my
presence. Nay mark yet further, ver. 21. That if a man did but touch any
unclean thing; uncleanness of man, or beast, or any abominable unclean
thing, and then in that case after such a touch, before he be cleansed shall
offer to eat of the flesh of the peace offering, he should be cut off from his
people. What? If no more uncleanness upon him then came by a touch must he yet
be cut off? Must he be cut off that eats but with a touch of uncleannes? What
then will become of him that not touches but wallowes and tumbles in
uncleanness? In the uncleanness of whordom, drunkenness? If he must be cut off
that touches the uncleannes of a man, what will become of him that wallowes in
the uncleanness of the Devil? If he must be cut off that touches but the
uncleanness of a beast, then what will become of him that is an unclean
beast, an unclean adulterer, an unclean drunkard, or any other unclean
sinner? See how our Savior speaks, Matthew. 10. 12, 13. When you come into a
house, salute it, And if the house be worthy; let your peace come upon it, but
if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. If the Apostles came to an
house that was worthy, then upon their salutation the blessing they prayed for
came upon that house, but if an unworthy house, the blessing fell not upon it,
but returned to them again. So is it in the receipt of the Sacrament. When it
is received, if he be worthy that receives it, then comes a blessing from GOD
upon a man, but if the person be unworthy then comes neither blessing, nor
peace. Now who is worthy? Judge in your own consciences, are impenitent
sinners that live, and lie in their sins? Are customary profaners of Gods Name?
Are habitual drunkards? Are loathsome Adulterers, covetous earth-wormes, are
these worthy? If these be worthy who then is unworthy? Either these, or none
are unworthy. Therefore no peace, nor blessing can come upon them. Nay that is
not all, not only no blessing, but a curse shall come upon them. If he will
show himself a worthy man says Solomon of Adonijah, there shall not an hair
of him fall to the earth, 1 King. 1. 52. but when after he carried himself
unworthily, it cost him his life. If men come worthily to the Sacrament, so
prepared by repentance as they ought, they meet with no hurt, but with a great
deal of good. But if wickedness be found Mutet ergo vitam qui vult accipere
vitam. Nam si non mutet vitam, ad judicium accipiet vitam, and magis ex ipsa
corrumpitur quam san^tur, magis occiditur, quam vivificatur. Aug. Ser. de Temp.
1.
in men, as Solomon there speaks, and so men come unworthily, God will curse
them for so coming. He that eats, and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
his own damnation. And who does it unworthily, but he that does it
impenitently? And what can such unworthy impenitent persons expect but a breach
with a witness? The Israelites had a wondrous strange mind to flesh, Numb.
11. 4. They wept and said, who shall give us flesh to eat? And as great a mind
have many to come to the Sacrament, but yet it fares no better with them at the
Sacrament, than it did with Israel at their Quails, Psalm. 78. 30, 31. Whilst
the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew
the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel.

And so whilst many have the bread and wine in their mouths, the wrath of God
comes upon them. But why so? Because it is with them at eating the Sacrament,
as it was with Israel in another case, Verse 30. They were not estranged from
their lusts, but whilst the meat was in their mouths, the wrath of God, etc.
So many come to the Sacrament, but are not estranged from their lusts, their
whoring, drunkenness, worldliness, etc. but come in impenitency, without
sorrow, and reformation, and therefore whilst the Sacramental elements are in
their mouths, the wrath of God comes upon them; and so instead of eating
Christ they eat wrath. And all because they coming in their impenitency,
provoke GOD to wrath. It may be thou feel no wrath for the present, but yet
wrath may be inflicted insensibly on thy soul. And though thou feel it not,
yet thou may heap and treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. A man
that brings every day but a faggot or two to the stack, may in time make a great
heap: every day a stick to the pile, may make such a pile, as being fired at
once, will make a dreadful fire. Thou feel no wrath for the present, but
every Sacrament thou receivest, thou bring a faggot to the heap, and make
such an heap, as at last will make the fire so much the greater, and so much
the hotter at the day of wrath. And then shall thou feel that wrath which now
thou heapest up. Thou greatenst thine heap now, and the greater the heap, the
greater the fire. Now the reasons why God thus sadly makes a breach upon
impenitent sinners are specially two.

1 Because every impenitent sinner defiles the Lords Table, and the Sacrament.
Holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, and so no less, holiness becomes thy
Table, O Lord. As God himself is holy, so his word Sicut sanctum Canes non
sanctificat, nec margaritae porcos nutriunt, sed contra Canes coinquinant
sanctum, and porci margaritas, confringunt. Sic si hom inibus caninos, vel
porcinos mores habentibus sanctum dederis, nec sanctum illos sanctificat, sed
contra, ipsi sanctum coinquinant. Chrysostom. hom. 17. oper. imper.
and Sacraments are holy, and therefore an horrible thing to polute and defile
the Sacrament. Now every impenitent sinner does so. An impenitent sinner is a
filthy person, and he befilths every thing he meddles withal. He is an
unclean person. Now to the unclean all things are unclean, holy things
sanctify not them, but they pollute holy things: under the Law, an unclean
person defiled the Camp, Number. 5. 2, 3. Put out of the Camp whosoever is
defiled, that they defile not their Camps. He defiled every bed he lay on, and
every thing he sat on, Levit. 15. 4. He defiled every man he touched, Lev. 15.
7. His very Saddle he rode upon was unclean, Lev. 15. 9. He defiled the
Tabernacle of the Lord. Number. 19. 13. He defiled bread, potage, wine, oil, etc.
Hag. 2. 13. Thus an unclean sinners pitch touches nothing which it defiles
not. He defiles Word and Sacraments, the Lords Tabernacle and his Table. Is it
any wonder then that coming to the Sacrament, he meets with a breach and a
curse? If any man defile the Temple of the Lord, him shall God destroy, 1 Cor.
3. 17. Put Table in stead of Temple, and it is as true; if any man defile the
Table of the Lord, him shall God destroy, He that defiles the Tabernacle of the
Lord, shall be cut off from Israel, Number. 19. 13. And whosoever defiles the
Table of the Lord as well as the Tabernacle of the Lord, shall God cut off from
his people. Their sin was foul and heinous, Mal. 2. 12. that said, the Table
of the Lord was polluted; what is their sin then that do not say the Table of
the Lord is polluted, but do pollute and defile it? GOD sorely complains of
it, that their common Tables in their houses at which they did eat and drink,
and take their common repast, that they were defiled with drunkenness and
gluttony, Isa. 28. 8. All Tables are full of vomit, and filthiness, so that
there is no place clean. An horrible thing to defile a man's own Table with
the vomit and filthiness of drunkenness? what an horrible thing then to
pollute Gods Table with such filth? And what does that man better, that when he
has defiled himself with drunkenness, and with the vomit and filth of it,
yet before he has humbled himself with sorrow for it, and before he has
utterly forsaken and renounced it, does presume in that filthy case to come to
Gods Table? How horrible a thing were it to defile the Lords Table with the
vomit of drunkenness, now let all that defile themselves with drunkenness
bethink themselves, how they can before God free themselves from it. And so
all that live in other foul sins, let them consider how they can wash their
hands from the guilt of this sin. Therefore when God sees his Ordinance defiled
by them, his wrath is kindled, and he smites them with a curse. Incense from
foul hands is an abomination, Isa. 1. 13, 15. not only no sweetness in it,
but a filthy Incensi odor de immundorum manibus reputatus est profaetore, and
i^am non gratiam praesumptio meruit. Cyp. de caen. Dom.
stench in it, yea, such an offensive savor from it, as provokes God to wrath.
If a beast touch the Mountain, it must be stoned or thrust through with a
dart, Heb. 12. 20. If such severity against a Beast, how much more shall it be
against a Man, that by his base and brutish lusts makes himself a Beast, and
yet will dare, not only to touch the Mountain, but to go up into the
Mountain? Any beast that had touched the mountain, must have died for it,
though it had been a clean beast, how much more if it had been an unclean
beast? That man that by his base and brutish courses becomes a beast, he is not
only a beast, but an unclean beast. If a sheep had touched the mountain, it
must have been stoned or thrust through with a dart, much more then should a
Dog or an Hog, if they had touched the Mountain.

O that they would seriously consider this who in the guilt of their sins,
smoking and reeking, thrust in themselves unto the Table of the Lord, and that
their hearts would tremble to think how dreadful a thing it is to pollute
Gods Ordinance. Is it a small thing in your eyes to defile Gods Table? Is it
nothing with you to pollute holy things? It was a smart and piercing speech of
Ambrose to Theodosius, offering to come in the guilt of that slaughter at
Thessalonica, Istasne adhue stillantes injustae caedis cruore manus extendes,
and iis sanctissimum Domini corpus prehendes? Vel tu pretiosum sanguinem Domini
admovebis ori tuo? Magdeb. Cent. 4 cap. 6.
What? will thou reach forth those hands of thine yet dropping with the blood
of unjust slaughter, and with them lay hold upon the most holy body of the
Lord? or will thou offer to put that precious blood to thy mouth? So may it be
said to many coming to the Sacrament: What? will you reach forth those hands
of yours defiled with blood, with the blood of oppression? These fingers of
yours defiled with iniquity, Isay, 59. 3. and with these hands and fingers
touch these holy mysteries? with these lips of yours that have spoken lies,
that daily drivell forth such a deal of obscene filth; that with so many foul
oaths and bloody blasphemies have dishonored God; with these mouths with
which you have so often swine-like swilled unto drunkenness, and with which
you have drunk of the cup of devils; with these lips and mouths will ye offer
to drink the precious blood of Christ? Is it not sin and guilt enough, that
with your sins you have already defiled your hands, fingers, lips, mouths,
but that now also you will needs come, and defile the Lords Table? it is more
than you can answer that you have thus defiled your selves, why will you double
your sin and your damnation in defiling also these sacred Mysteries? Consider
this with trembling-hearts all impenitent persons, and you especially that dare
impudently crowd into the Sacrament, when you come piping hot out of your
sins and provocations.

2 Secondly, because a man coming in his impenitency he brings his sins
along with him, and they put God in mind to do justice upon him. There is a
prayer for their King, Psalm. 20. 3. The Lord remember all thine offerings, and
accept thy burnt sacrifice. That is a special thing we should aim at in all
our services, that God would remember them, that they may come up in
remembrance before God. Now when a man lies in his sins, and brings them with
him to any holy service they will rise up in remembrance against him at that
very instant, and so not his services but his sins being remembered, a man shall
not only miss of acceptance, but meet with a breach and a curse: see Hos. 8.
13. They sacrifice flesh for the Sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat it, but
the Lord accepts them not. But why did not God accept them? the next words
show the reason, now will he remember their iniquity: no marvel he remembers
not their Sacrifices, when he remembers their iniquity. And yet this is not
all: he will not only not accept, but he will visit their sins. When iniquity
comes up in remembrance, God will visit their sin. And when will he visit? now
will he remember their iniquity and visit their sin. Now will he remember their
iniquity, now, even just now, as they be sacrificing, and now will he visit
their sins, even then plague and smite them spiritually, when in their
Sacrifices. God remembers wicked men's sins at all times, especially when they
come to him in holy duties; even then when they come to the Sacrament he
remembers them then; freshly remembers them then. When GOD sees a wicked man
come with his sins to the Sacrament, he does (as it were) on this manner speak
in heaven: Behold here is a man come to the Sacrament without repentance, and
he thinks to do me a goodly piece of service, but by no means do I accept him,
nay, I abhor him, and am angry at his coming. I remember that at such a time
he was drunk, I remember that he is an adulterer, a covetous worldling; I
remember at such a time how he griped, pinched, and defrauded his brother; I
remember he is a common neglecter of the duties of my worship; and now without
repentance for these sins, he is come to my Table, therefore now, all these his
sins come up a fresh in my remembrance, and he shall be so far from being
accepted, that I will now at this very time of his receiving smite him with my
wrath, my curse be upon him and his receiving, instead of a blessing; let Satan
enter into him, and carry him on still to all ungodlines. It is a heavy
judgment to have God remember and avenge our sins in the Sacrament. Thus God
does with impenitent persons, because they bring their sins thither with
them. Sins brought along to the spiritual banquet of the Sacrament, they will
do by men as Esther did by Haman at the banquet of wine, Esther 7. 2, 6.
whilst he is at the banquet of Wine, she petitions against him, and she
accuses him; the adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman: and Verse. 7. the
Kings wrath is up at the banquet of wine, and he presently gives sentence
against him. So all the sins that a man repents him not of, when he comes to
the Sacrament to come with him, and they being present, do pick out that very
time to accuse him, and to say, This man is a drunkard, and unclean person, a
common swearer, an adversary, an enemy to religion; even thus at the Banquet of
Wine, sin unrepented of puts in accusations against men. And therefore no
wonder that Gods wrath is kindled against such even at the banquet of Wine,
when they bring along those with them that accuse them, and clamor against
them at that very time.

So that these things considered, let us be awakened and stirred up in the
fear of God to look to it that we presume not to come to Gods Table in our
sins and impenitency; unless we have mourned for our sins, the Sacramental
bread will be unto us as bread of mourners, Hos. 9. 4. unclean bread that will
defile us; unless we do by repentance wash away our filthiness, we shall
pollute Gods Ordinance, and bring accusers with us, that will put God in
remembrance to curse us. And were it not better for us before we come, to
remember our sins our selves, and to be humbled for them and renounce them?
Christ's body was laid in a new Sepulcher, where never any had been laid, and
he will give his body to none but such as come with a new heart. This new wine
must not be put into old vessels, but new Wine must be put into new vessels. Be
new vessels therefore by repentance, that the new wine of the comforts of Gods
spirit may be powered Rogo vos fratres, number est aliquis qui in arca sordibus
plena velit mittere vestem suam? Et si in arca sordibus plena non mittitur
vestis pretiosa, qua front in anima quae peccatorum sordibus inquinatur
Christi Eucharistia suscipitur. Non puto esse aliquem hominem qui in arca sua
ubi pretiosas vestes habet repositas, acquiescat aut carbonem vivum aut qualem
cunque scintillam includere. Quare hoc fratres? quia timet ne comburantur
vestimenta quibus in festivitate induitur. Rogo vos fratres, qui in arca sua
non vult scintillam ignis includere, quare in anima sua flammam iracundiae non
timet accendere. Aug. ser. de Temp. 252.
into us at the Sacrament. I will close this point with S. Augustines words, If
a man will not put a fair and precious garment into a foul Chest, with what
face can he take the Sacrament of the Eucharist into a filthy soul? There is
no man that will put live coals into the chest where he puts his best
apparel. Why so brethren? because he fears his garments may be burned with
which he clothes himself on Festivals. I beseech you brethren, he that will
not put fire into his chest, why is he not afraid to kindle the flame of wrath
in his own soul?

Chap. 7. Of the Necessity of Charity and Love in him that will be an Orderly
Communicant.
NOw follows the fourth thing required in habitual preparation to the
Sacrament, and that is charity and love toward our brethren. This is a thing
necessarily required. This is a truth confessed on all hands, that men should
be in charity that come to the Sacrament. And many that have no great care, nor
make any great conscience of coming with knowledge, faith or repentance, yet
will seem to make some scruple of coming without charity. Yea though many
will not abstain for their drunkenness, oaths, etc. yet if there be a
breach, and a falling out between them, and others they will by no means
meddle; though without breach of charity a man may judge of them that they are
reasonably well contented that they have so fair an excuse to stop the mouths
of their consciences that are ready to check them, and quarrel with them for
their neglect of GODS Ordinance. For if out of conscience they scruple coming
to the Sacrament without charity, why then scruple they not living without it?
But yet this shows that men generally acknowledge that love is a necessary
preparative to the Sacrament. It is that which indeed is necessary in all our
services of God, and duties of his worship. It is required in all that will
pray aright, 1 Timothy 2. 8. I will that men pray every where lifting up pure
hands without wrath. Every Christians care should be to have his prayer like
Jobs, Job 16. 17. Also my prayer is pure. The way to have our prayer pure, is
to lift up pure hands without wrath. Love is that which makes heart, and hands,
and so prayer pure from the defilement of wrath. It is required in all that
will hear the Word aright, James 1. 19. They that will be swift to hear,
must be slow to wrath, and verse 21. all superfluity of maliciousness must be
laid apart to fit for the receiving of the Word. So 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Wherefore
laying aside all malice, as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word. And so likewise no less requisite in all such as will come to the
Sacrament in due order. Every sacrifice was to be salted with salt, Levit. 2.
13. And every oblation of thy meat offering shall thou season with salt. Thou
shall not suffer the salt of the Covenant of thy God to be lacking, etc. with
all thine offerings thou shall offer salt. Unseasoned services are unsavory
services. Services without salt are services without savor. And here is a salt
with which all our duties are to be sprinkled, Mark 9. 50. Have salt in your
selves, and have peace one with another. And as at all times, so especially is
it required before we come to the Sacrament. If without love, we are neither
fit to pray nor hear, then not fit to receive the Sacrament; for he is not fit
to receive the Sacrament, that is neither fit to pray, nor hear the Word. The
necessity of it will appear by these things.

1 By that so well known a place, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If thou bring thy Nun quam
mihi contingat turbatum ad pacis accedere sacrificium, cu^ ita and
disceptatione contingere Sacramentum-Certe non recipitur munus quodcunque meum
quod defero ad altar, nisi ante placato fratre, que^ me forte laesisse
meminero, quanto minus si meipsum non placavero prius. Bern. de precept. and
dispens.
gift to the Altar, and there remember that thy brother has ought against
thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. It may seem to
be somewhat an odd thing, an incongruous carriage, and to carry some show of
irreverence with it, that a man being come into the Temple, having brought his
offering before the Altar, should all on a sudden turn his back upon the
Altar, and go his ways out of the Temple. Might not a man therefore in such a
case better have stayed there still, so that in his heart he were sorry for the
wrong done to his neighbor, and be fully resolved so soon as the sacrifice is
ended, to reconcile himself to him? No, it will not serve the turn, but how
od, and undecent it may seem to be, yet go thy way; and first be reconciled,
and then come and offer thy gift. Not offer thy gift, and then go and be
reconciled. This must be done first; it is a preparative duty, and preparative
duties must be done before the services themselves be done. Now as in
Sacrifices so is it in Sacraments, Et tum veniens offeres munus tuum. Vae mihi
misero, ne dicam and tibi, qui tanto tempore aut non obtuli munus, aut ira
permanente, sine causa obtuli. Hieronym. Ep. ad Castorin. Matert.
GOD will have love, and reconciliation before men come to His Table. Go first
and be reconciled before thou go to receive the Sacrament. He that will go to
the Sacrament without charity, can look for no better then to return without
fruit. Uncharitable receiving can be no better then unprofitable receiving.

2 That same, 1 Cor. 12. 13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
and [by one spirit] have been all made to drink into one spirit. The Apostle
had shown before, v. 8, 9, 10. that though some men do receive personal
peculiar gifts, yet they are given by the spirit for the good of the whole
Church. The reason in brief is because all the whole Church is but one body,
and one soube: and every believer being a member of that body, whatsoever he
has, he has it not for himsefe, but for the common good of the body. But now
the question might be whether all believers be one body, and one spirit or
soul. Now therefore the Apostle shows, and proves this unity of the Church,
that all believers are one body and soul, from the end, and effect of the
Sacrament, which is to seal this unity. That they be one body it appears by
the Sacrament of baptism, for by one Spirit we are baptized into one body.
That they be one spirit, or soul it appears by the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, for by one spirit we are made to drink into one Spirit, or soul. Thus
by both the Sacraments is this unity sealed. Observe then that a main end, and
use of the Supper is, that we may be made to drink into one spirit, into the
Sacrament in love and charity, of one spirit, that come to be made drinkers
into one spirit. It is love that makes men of one spirit, and so fits them to
be made in the Sacrament to drink into one spirit: love makes men of one
spirit, the Sacrament seals this unity of spirit. There cannot be an unity of
spirit sealed, till there be an unity of spirit made. Now because it is love
that makes this unity, and this unity must be sealed at the Sacrament, therefore
necessarily must a man come with love that will come aright to the Sacrament,
or else he frustrates a maine end of the Sacrament.

3 Thirdly, as the Sacrament of Baptism is the Sacrament of our new birth, so
the Sacrament of the Supper is the Sacrament of our new life, and spiritual
nutrition and growth. And unto it should a man come, that in the right and
religious use of it he may be spiritually nourished, and may thrive and grow in
grace and goodness. Now no man can grow, thrive, or be nourished by the use of
the Sacrament, that comes to it without love. The whole Church is a body, every
Christian is a member of that body; now a member that will grow in the body,
and thrive, must necessarily be united to and conjoined with the body. If a
member be separated from the body it cannot be nourished, nor grow: an hand or
an arm rent or cut off from the body, cannot be nourished, nor grow. Nay,
though a part of the body be not separated from the rest, yet if there be but
a dislocation of a part, so that it be only out of joint, it cannot thrive and
prosper till it be set in joint again. So it is here in the body Mystical; it
is a growing body, every member thereof grows and increases, Col. 2. 19. It
increases with the increase of God. But how comes it to increase? All the body
by joints and bonds having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases
with the increase of God. So that unless the body be knit together by joints
and bands, it cannot increase by the ministration of nourishment. But now what
are these joints and bands, and what is it that knits the parts of the body so
together as that it increases? That the Apostle lays down somewhat more
fully, Ephesians. 4. 16. From whom the whole body fitly joined together, and
compacted by that which every joint supplies, makes increase of the body unto
the edifying of it self in love. These words are taken and translated from the
natural body, and the Apostle shows that it is in the Church, the mystical
body of Christ, as in a natural body. Now in a natural body; first, there be
diverse and small members which go to the making of it up: secondly, these
members are fitly joined and compacted together: thirdly, there is a
conjunction of them after an excellent manner, and that thus: all the several
parts they have their bones, the solid parts of those members. Now these bones
are coupled by the joints, so as the end and the round part of one bone goes
into the hallow end of another; This is an (...), or (...), Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2.
19. But this is not all, but as the joints are fitted and suited each to other,
so as the round part of one joins to the hallow part of the other; so also
that there may be a sure coarticulation, there be certain ligaments and bonds
that grow fast to the end of each bone in the joint, that fasten bone to bone,
this is (...), Col. 2. 19. There is not only a fitness by which one bone
suites with another in the joint, but there a fastness also by virtue of that
bond that knits bone to bone. This is a compaction by that which both the bones
in the joint mutually minister: fourthly, the parts of the body thus sweetly
fitted and suited together, and thus firmly fastened, they all by their
nourishment received, thrive, and grow, and so the body increases, which it
could not do if there were a disunion, or a dislocation, or ^ luxation of
those parts. Now thus it is in the Church the body of Christ: 2. There be many
and sundry members to make up this body. 2. They are all joined and compact
together. 3. Their conjunction is after the same manner. The minds and spirits
of believers are so coupled together, as that one man's spirit does as it were
insinuate it self into another: and that this conjunction and joint may be
the surer, there be certain bonds and ligaments that knit these members
together: and these bonds are two: first, The Spirit of God, they have all one
and the same spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4. One body, one spirit: and by this one spirit
Christians are knit in this one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Secondly, The bond of
love, and peace; and every joint or member supplies and ministers this bond
each to other whereby they are knit each to other, Ephesians. 4. 3. Endeavoring to
keep the unity of the Spirit; that is, endeavoring to be of one spirit and
mind, as two bones meeting at a joint are coupled in the unity of the joint:
there is the (...) or (...), that spoken of, Romans 12. 10. (...). There is a fit
joining together, and this is added in the bond of peace. There is the
compaction of both, by that which each joint supplies, each Christian supplying
and ministering the bond of peace and love, do thus knit and join together
themselves members in the same body: this is the (...). So (...).
Col. 2. 19. there is mention not only of joints, but of bonds. And Col. 3. 14.
love is called The bond of perfection; that is, a bond which does perfectly
bind together the members of the mystical body, each ministering and supplying
love to another; as the ligaments that knit bones together are mutually
ministered from both the bones: so that the compaction of the members is by the
ligament of love, as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 4. 16. Fourthly, the body
of the Church thus compacted increases it self, and is edified and grows up,
Epes. 4. 16. Makes increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love.
The body increases and edifies when the several parts do, and they do
increase and grow when joined together and knit together in love. So that all
this serves to show the necessity of love in such as come to the Sacrament; we
come to the Sacrament to be nourished, to grow, to increase: none of these can
be done without love. A man coming to the Sacrament out of charity, is a
member out of joint, yea, as a member disunited. It is not possible such a
member should be nourished and thrive. As therefore a man would find
nourishment and increase with the rest of the body, so it concerns him to come
prepared with love.

4 God requires that men should eat their bodily food with love and mutual
charity. There is little contentment in bodily Feasts, when men sit down at one
Table with divided hearts and affections: we may see Acts 2. 46. how the
Primitive Christians did eat their common bread at their common Tables,
Breaking bread from house to house, did eat their bread with gladness and
singleness of heart: the which they could not have done if they had not met at
their Houses and Tables, as they did in the Temple, in the same Verse, with one
accord, or unanimously. They could not have eaten with gladness and
singleness of heart, if they had not eaten together in love. For there can be
neither gladness nor singlenes of heart where love is wanting. And if they
came together with such love and affection to their common tables to take their
bodily repast, how much more think we did they come with love, and all good
mutual affection one to another to the Lords Table. Therefore it was that
before the Sacrament they had their love feasts to testify with what affection
they came to the Lords Supper. The sweet and sauce of common repast, is love;
Prove. 15. 17. Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, than a stalled
Ox with hatred: love makes a few green herbs far better cheer, than the
greatest fare that is eaten with hatred and malice. If love therefore be
required at our own Tables, that when we eat together we should eat in
love, how much more then will God require it in those that come to sit down at
his Table? Saint Augustine would not endure any at his Quisquis amat dictis
absentum rodere fam^m, Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi. Posid. de vita.
Aug. cap. 22.
Table that should show any malice against others in backbitings or
detractions, and had two Verses written on his Table, to be Monitours to such
as sat thereat, that in such cases that Table was not for them. And how much
less will the Lord endure any at his Table that come thither with malice and
hatred against their brethren. Such must know that they are utterly unworthy to
come to the Lords Table.

To come to the Sacrament in malice, and to eat it in distemper of spirit is
not to eat the Lords Supper: that is, such as so come do not so receive it in
regard of the benefit and blessing, as if they received so holy an Ordinance as
the Lords Supper: see 1 Cor. 11. 20. When ye come together therefore into one
place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. The particle, Therefore, carries
the words to some thing before, to that Verse. 18. When you come together in the
Church, I here there be divisions amongst you; when ye come together therefore
in one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper. Therefore when men come
together, and there be divisions amongst them, this is not to eat the Lords
Supper; for such persons eat not the Lords Supper in regard of the benefits and
blessings that are received at the Lords Supper because they eat not after the
due order. This is not to eat the Lords Supper says the Apostle, for verse
21. in eating every one takes before other his own Supper, and one is hungry,
and another is drunken. So it may be said in this case, to come in malice to
the Lords Table, this is not to eat the Lords Supper, which is a Supper of
love, for how do they eat the Lords Supper, when in eating, one man's heart
swells against another, one man is sick with envy, another is filled with
malice and hatred. They eat my people as they eat bread, Psalm. 14. 4. Ye bite
and devour one another, Gal. 5. 15. Think we when men eat up one another
and devour one another that they be fit to eat at the LORDS Table, or to eat
the LORDS Body? or if they do eat the Sacrament think we that they do eat
the LORDS Supper? That they suppe with CHRIST and have any fellowship with him?
It is a good disposition in one sense to eat the Supper of the LORD in
bitterness, with bitterness of sorrow for sin, but to come in bitterness
of spirit in regard of hatred and malice, this is that which will so imbitter
the Ordinance unto us, that we shall have little comfort in the action. The
Sacrament is a seal, and in the right use of it the spirit seals up a man's
redemption to him. Now he that would at any time be sealed by the Spirit of
God, especially in the use of the seal of the Sacrament must take heed that
he grieve not the Spirit of GOD; And grieve not the holy Spirit of God whereby
ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. If we grieve him how
shall we look to have him seal us? Specially when we come to the Sacrament? I
but what is it that grieves him so that he will not seal? Judge by that which
immediately follows, verse 31. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all malice. Therefore
bitterness, wrath, and malice, they grieve the sealing Spirit of God. We loose
our errand when we come to the Sacrament, and go away unsealed; we go away
unsealed when we grieve the Spirit; we grieve the Spirit when we come to the
Sacrament with a malicious, and an imbittered Spirit. Therefore as at all times
it is good counsel to put away bitterness, and malice, so it is especially
when men come to the Sacrament. There is a leaven of malice, and the feast must
not be kept with that leaven, 1 Cor. 5. 8. This must be purged out as old
leaven. That same of the Apostle 1 Co. 14. 20. may serve for a rule for coming
to the Sacrament; Brethren be not children in understanding, how be it in
malice be ye children. How many come to the Sacrament as children in one
sense, and not as children in another? As children in an ill sense, and not as
children in a good sense; for knowledge as very children, to come thus like
children is a dangerous thing. But to come as children in regard of malice, as
free, as void of it as children, thus to come like children is an happy thing.
And as our Savior speaks in another case of receiving the Kingdom of GOD, so
in this sense it is true of receiving the Sacrament, Luke 18. 17. Verily I say
unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of GOD as a little child
shall in no wise enter therein. So whosoever shall not receive the Sacrament as
a little child, in regard of freedom from malice, he shall reap no fruit by
his receiving. Therefore as Saint Paul speaks of charity in the general, so I
close this point concerning charity in this particular to fit a man for the
Sacrament, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 3. Though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand
all mysteries, etc. and have no charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all
my goods to feed the poor, etc. and have not charity it profits me nothing.
So in this case, though thou often, and frequently receive these holy
mysteries, and yet have not charity thou art nothing, and thy receiving is
nothing. Though thou receivest the Sacrament every day in the week, and give
liberally at the Sacrament to the poor, and yet have not charity, it profits
thee nothing. So much wrong they do themselves that come not in due Order to
the Sacrament, with that Love and Charity which GOD requires.

Chap. 8. The Necessity of obedience in an Orderly Communicant.
Habitual preparation to the Sacrament, and that is obedience to GOD, and his
Commandments. He that will come after the due order must be such an one as
Psalm. 50. 23. That orders his conversation aright. That he does, that walks
orderly according to the rule of Gods Word, and in obedience thereto. Such an
orderly man must he be that will be an orderly Communicant. It is impossible
for him to be an orderly Communicant who is a disorderly man. He walks
disorderly that walks disobediently, 2 These. 3. 7. That walks disorderly. Who
is he that does so? verse 14. If any man obey not our word. And if it were
possible to have all the former things without this, yet the want of this would
mar all. For John 2. 3, 4. Hereby we know that we know him if we keep his
Commandments, He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments is
a liar, and the truth is not in him. There be that see many things, and yet are
blind, Isa. 42. 19, 20. and that because obedience is wanting. And how welcome
ignorant, and blind persons be to the Sacrament we saw before. And what
evidence is there of the truth of faith where obedience is wanting? Thou say
thou have faith when thou come to the Sacrament, show me thy faith by thy
works, by thine obedience. As faith is the principal of all true obedience, so
obedience is the evidence of true faith. He that is wanting in obedience must
needs be wanting in faith, and he that coms to the Sacrament without faith sin,
who is not yet in the ways of obedience. There is no man repents but he brings
forth fruits worthy of repentance. The fruits of obedience are the fruits
beseeming repentance. And how is there love without obedience, when love is the
fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 8. How can the Law be fulfilled without
obedience. So needful is obedience to qualify a man for the Sacrament. A man's
care must be to eat, and drink worthily. He that will do so, must have a
care to do that, Col. 1. 10. To walk worthy of the Lord. He that is an
unworthy walker can never be a worthy receiver. But how may a man walk
worthily, or what is it to walk worthy of GOD? The Apostle teaches us what it
is in the same place, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing
being fruitful in every good work. So that to walk obediently is to walk
worthily. And such a worthy walking fits for a worthy receiving.

It is that which GOD regards more then all outward performances, then the
services of his worship. It is a common error in many men to think that if
they perform the outward duties of worship they do enough, and that these
alone are highly well pleasing to God though no more be done. They think, so
long as they pray, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament all is wondrous well,
though they make no conscience of obedience to Gods will otherwise; Though they
obey not yet because they do duties of worship that they do God very
acceptable service, whereas the truth is that when we give not God obedience,
all services have poor acceptance. Profession of Religion, and godliness a
good thing it is, but yet a vain thing without obedience. Excellent speech
becomes not a fool, Pro. 17. 7. And what though Israel cry, my God we know
thee, what is this to the purpose so long as Israel has cast off the thing
that is good, Hos. 8. 2, 3. Disobedient profession is abominable and a kind of
Athisme denying GOD, Tit. 1. 16. And as profession, so performances vain.
Their sacrifices without obedience as acceptable as a Dogs head, or as Swines
blood, Isa. 66. 3. Hearing without obedience as good as nothing, Ezekiel. 33. 31,
32. no more then hearing a song, or a Musician. GOD is highly well pleased with
prayer, and yet he that prays to God and yields him not obedience will find
poor speed, Prove. 28. 9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law,
even his prayer shall be abomination. Yea the receiving of Sacraments is to as
little purpose as all the rest, Romans 2. 25, 26. Circumcision profits with
obedience. Circumcision is made uncircumcision without obedience, and
uncircumcision with obedience preferred before circumcision without.
Circumcision profits if thou keep the Law, so receiving the Communion profits,
and thou shall find benefit and good by it, if thou be one that walk in
obedience to GOD. But if thou be a breaker of the Law thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision. So if thou be not obedient to GOD and his Law thy receiving is
no better then not receiving. It is a good thing to come to the Sacrament, but
it is a better thing to give God obedience, and it is the best of all, when
first giving GOD obedience we then come to receive the Sacrament. That which
Samuel speaks to Saul is true in this case, 1 Samuel 15. 22. Behold, to obey is
better then sacrifice. Sacrifice was a solemn service. Saul thought sacrifice
was a goodly thing, and so it was when performed with obedience, but he thought
if God had sacrifice, it was no matter for obedience. Therefore Samuel teaches
him another lesson, that his obedience without a sacrifice had been better
then a sacrifice without obedience. And so behold, to obey is better then to
receive Sacraments. There were diverse reasons why obedience was better then
sacrifice. 1. Because obedience was more spiritual then sacrifice. 2. Sacrifice
was only at set, and solemn times, obedience was to be daily, hourly. 3.
Sacrifice wicked men might and did offer, Cain sacrificed as well as Abel;
obedience only could a good man perform, a wicked man obeyed not God. 4.
Sacrifice was nothing if separated from obedience, obedience separated from,
and performed without sacrifice might be acceptable. 5. Obedience qualified,
and fitted a man for sacrifice, and prepared him to be an acceptable
sacrificer. But sacrifice fitted not a disobedient person unto obedience.
Therefore to obey was better then to sacrifice. Upon the same grounds to obey
is also better then to receive Sacraments. It is a more spiritual service then
bare receiving, it is a continual and a more daily duty; it is duty which many
do not, cannot do, that yet receive the Sacraments: it may be accepted when
the Sacrament is not received, not the receiving of the Sacrament accepted
without it; and it is that which qualifies and prepares a receiver for the
Sacrament. And how needful it is for a Communicant to be prepared thus, will
appear by these things:

1 First, when we come to the Sacrament, we come to eat the flesh and blood of
Christ, we come to eat Christ. It is but a folly to hope to eat Christ, when
we yield not God obedience, My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink
indeed, John 6. But for whom is it meat and drink? For such as when they come
to the Sacrament are found such as our Savior was, John 4. 34. My meat is to
do the will of him that sent me; Take, eat, this is my body: he therefore
offers his body to be eaten. But may any one eat it? Is it meat for all sorts
to eat? No, see who they are that eat and drink, Cant. 5. 1. Eat, O friends,
yea, drink abundantly, O beloved: He calls upon his friends, and his beloved,
and cheeres them up to eat and drink; we must then be his friends and his
beloved if we will eat and drink. And who then are his friends? who are his
beloved? Such as yield him obedience, such are his friends; John 15. 14. Ye are
my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. Such are his beloved, John 14.
21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him; he shall
be my beloved. Such are his best beloved friends, his brother, sister, and
mother, Mat. 12. 49, 50. Such friends shall be sure to eat and drink, and to
drink abundantly; and obedience making us such friends, makes us fit to eat
and drink at his Table. Look how the Prophet speaks of eating the good
things of the Land; so it is in eating the good things of the Sacrament, Isay
1. 19. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good things of the Land.
There were good things in the Land of Canaan, it was a Land flowing with milk
and honey; they were good things. There were precious fruits brought forth by
the Sun, and precious things thrust forth by the Moon, Deuteronomy. 33. 14. Now God
promises them to make them partakers of these good things, that they should eat
of these precious fruits of the Land; but mark upon what condition, If ye be
obedient ye shall eat the good things of the Land. The case is the same here.
In the Sacrament there be good things, there be precious things put forth by
the Son of Righteousness, thrust forth by the Spirit of God. Now these
things are there to be eaten; take, eat, this is my body, but yet they are to
be eaten with the same condition, If ye be obedient, ye shall eat the good
things of the Sacrament. If then we come without obedience we miss eating
the good things of the Sacrament; and as good not eat the Sacrament, as not
eat the good things of it. Any man may eat the Sacrament, but only such as be
obedient, eat the good things of it: judge then how much it concerns to come
to the Sacrament prepared with obedience.

2 Secondly, when we come to the Sacrament, we come thither to have communion
with Christ. They must first be obedient to Christ that will have communion
with Christ, Revel. 3. 20. There is a promise of communion that Christ will
have with us, and that we shall have with him, I will come in to him and will
sup with him, and he with me; we will have mutual communion together. But yet
mark upon what terms that communion is promised, Behold, I stand at the door
and knock, if any man will open unto me, I will come in, etc. Christ He
knocks at the door of men's hearts, by the gracious motions of his Spirit; by
the ministry of his word he calls for this and for that duty: now when we
yield obedience to his voice and calls, then we open the door, and when the
door is opened he enters, and there follows mutual fellowship between him
and us: if the door be kept barred and bolted, then neither entrance, nor
supper; but when the door is unlockt and set open, then he enters, and the
mutual Supper follows. To teach us, that then Christ will have communion with
us when we are obedient to his voice; but no obedience to him, no communion
with him; even from the Lords Supper will he send them away supperlesse, that
have not opened to him and yielded obedience before their coming to the Table.
There is a promise Ioh. 14. 21, 23. that Christ will come unto us, that he will
manifest himself unto us: now Christ never makes good this promise more than
in the use of the Sacrament; there he comes to a man, and there he manifests
and makes known himself to a man, that look as it is said in that case, Luke
24. 30, 31. That as he sat at meat with them, and took bread and blessed it,
and brake, and gave them, their eyes were opened and they knew him, and Verse.
35. He was known of them in breaking of bread; so it is in this case in the
breaking and giving the Sacramental bread, the faithful have their eyes
opened, and they know him, he is made known to them in breaking of
Sacramental bread; in the use of the Supper he specially manifests himself to
them. But now observe the condition on which Christ makes this promise, Verse
21. He that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and
he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and I
will manifest my self to him: and so Verse. 23. If any man love me, he will
keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and
make our abode with him: so that both these promises run with the condition of
obedience; upon a man's obedience will Christ come, upon a man's obedience will
he manifest himself to him. As good not come to the Sacrament, unless Christ
also come in it to a man: as good never come, unless Christ manifest himself
to him. If then we would have Christ come and manifest himself to us in the
Sacrament, so must it be our care to come with, and to manifest our obedience.
A man may ask that question that Judas does, John 14. 22. Lord how is it that
thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? So, how is it
that Christ's manifests himself to some in the Sacrament, and not to other
some? To which the same answer in effect may be given that there Christ gives;
because some are obedient to God, they love him and keep his Commandments;
therefore he shows himself to them in the Sacrament, and they therein have
communion with him, but others live not, walk not in obedience: therefore he
neither comes to them when they come to the Sacrament, nor shows or manifests
himself to them, they go as they come.

The Apostle, 2 Cor. 13, 14. speaks of the communion of the Holy Ghost, The
communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all. That which he wishes them should
be the thing we should especially aim at in coming to the Communion, namely,
that the communion of the Holy Ghost should be with us. And it is a clear case
that the Holy Ghost is to be received in the Sacraments, Act^ 2. 38. Be
baptized and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, and he is no less to
be received in the Supper, than in Baptism. And when we receive him his
communion will be with us. Now how may he be received? Do all that receive the
Sacrament, receive him? No, The world cannot receive him, John 14. 17. But who
are they then to whom God gives the Holy Ghost? See Acts 5. 32. The Holy Ghost
whom God has given to them that obey him. So that upon obedience we have the
Holy Ghost, and upon it his communion is with us, as otherwise, so also in the
Sacrament. What is it that a man should desire in coming to the Sacrament, but
that; Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss we with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love
is better than wine. Communion with Christ, and the expressions of his favor
and love, these are the things should be desired and looked after. What is the
receiving of bread and wine, if a man meet not with expressions of Christ's
love; if Christ kiss him not with the kisses of his mouth? What may be the
means to get Christ to kiss a man in the Sacrament? That same Psalm. 2. Kiss
the Son, namely, with a kiss of obedience and subjection, for so kissing
sometime betokned, Genesis 41. 40. let us give him the kiss of obedience and
subjection, and he will give us the kiss of his love, (...) other times, so
especially in the use of the Sacrament. By both these things then we see, how
needful it is for a Communicant to be prepared with obedience. And by this
also we see how many deceive themselves in their coming to the Sacrament, who
mind nothing less than an obedient walking in a godly course to fit them for
the Sacrament. How many that give no regard at all to Gods word, that indeed
slight it, and obedience to it, and yet would seem to make an high account of
the Sacrament? Make men what account they will of the Sacrament, yet if they
slight the Word and obedience to it, they shall find as little comfort or
benefit in the Sacrament, as they give respect and obedience to the Word. See
how the Lord speaks, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. What have thou to do, that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth seeing thou castest my words behind
thee. So God will also say, what have thou to do to take the Seal of the
covenant into thy mouth, the Sacrament into thy mouth, seeing thou castest my
words behind thee, and refusest to Quid est autem dementius quam Sacramentis
Domini communicare, and verbis Domini non communicare? Aug. de Bapt. cont.
Donat. lib. 2. cap. 55.
likelihood that God will vouchsafe communion with that man in the Sacrament,
that regards not to have any communion with him in his word? It is a madness
to pretend a desire of communion with God in the Sacrament, and to refuse
communion with him in his Word: for so they do that yield not obedience to Gods
Word. There is communion with God in obedience, Ier. 7. 23. Obey my voice, and
I will be your God, and you shall be my people. And therefore a refusal of
communion with God, in refusing obedience and respect to his Word. And
certainly he can have no communion with God in one Ordinance, that refuses to
have communion with him in another.

Chap. 9. Of the solemn sequestring and setting a man's self apart before the
Sacrament.
THus we see how a Communicant is habitually prepared, and wherein his habitual
preparation stands. It follows now to speak of that actual preparation,
which is required in every one that would be a worthy and a welcome guest at
the Lords Table, and would come after that due Order that is required: for
though a man have all these forenamed qualifications, yet he must not here set
up his rest: but there is yet a further work to be done, as we partly before
saw in the fourth Chapter. This actual preparation stands in the fitting of
himself in special manner for that work, and service of receiving, by doing
those things, and performing such duties, which are requisite not only for a
good Christian, but for a good and profitable Communicant. Knowledge, Faith,
Repentance, Charity, and Obedience, are required in every one that will be a
good Christian. A good Christian a man must be before he can be a good
Communicant: but yet a good Christian is not enough in the general, there must
be something in special done in reference to this duty. Indeed some Papists
think that actual devotion is not necessary to the receiving of the
Sacrament; because as the Sacrament was of ancient given to children, so now it
may be given to madmen, and frantic persons who have no actual devotion at
all. But it suffices that this conceit is disallowed of their own men: for to
give persons without actual devotion no more right to the Sacrament then to
children and madmen, is to give them no right at all. There is no question but
they may come as orderly to the Sacrament, as children and madmen may do. But
whosoever it is that will come orderly, must have actual devotion, and actual
preparation, yea, though he be already habitually prepared. The five wise
Virgins took oil in their Vessels with their lamps, Mat. 25. 4. and their
lamps were burning, but yet when they hear the Bridegroom was coming they
presently arise and trim their lamps, and so prepare to go and meet him. They
prepared to meet him when they took their lamps, and when they lighted them,
and when they took oil in their vessels: all this was preparation to meet the
Bridegroom; but when they hear the Bridegroom was coming, then they fall to
a fresh preparation, in trimming their lamps to make them burn brighter and
cleerer. So it is in this case; habitual preparation is like the taking and
lighting the lamps, and carrying oil in the vessels: actual preparation is
like the fresh trimming of them when they burnt dimly. The geting of knowledge,
faith, repentance, love, and obedience, this is the taking and the lighting of
the lamps, and taking oil in the Vessels, but the renewing, exciting of
these, and the doing of other things in actual preparation, is the trimming of
the lamps. A Musician has skill and cunning on his instrument, but yet if his
Instrument be out of tune, and his hands cold, and his fingers number; he will
first tune his Instrument, and warm and rub his hands and fingers to make them
active and nimble, to play on his Instrument. An Artificer has the skill of
his trade, and knows the mystery of it thoroughly well; but yet when he goes to
build a house, or do some such work, he first grindes, whets, and sharpens
his tools. If a Musician shall play upon an untuned Instrument, or with his
benumbed fingers, he will make but harsh and unpleasing music. If the
Carpenter though ever so expert in his faculty, shall work with blunt and gapt
tools, he will make but bungling and clouterly work of it. And though a man
may have knowledge, faith, etc. yet if he rest contented with that habitual
preparation, and do not besides actually prepare and fit himself, he is like
to meet with little comfort and content in the duty, in regard of the cold and
dead manner of performance: he will but fumble and bungle in the work. So that
besides this habitual there is an actual preparation necessary. Now this
actual preparation stands in these things:

1 In a solemn sequestration of a man's self. 2 In examination. 3 In renewing
and quickening these former graces in us. 4 In raising and stirring up in our
selves strong desires after Christ. 5 In stirring up in our selves a strong
expectation of the benefits of the Sacrament. 6 In seeking God in special and
more than ordinary manner by prayer.
1 For the first. In this actual preparation there must be an abstraction and
a solemn sequestration of the soul from all other avocations whatsoever. There
may be, and must be some fitting of a man's self for the duty, from the time
that a man has notice of the Sacrament to be admiinstred; but now on the day
before, when the time of receiving approaches, a man should at least toward
the end of the foregoing day separate himself from all other thoughts and
occasions, and mind wholly the work of preparation to the Sacrament. And this
sequestration of a man's self stands in two things.

1 In setting aside all lawful thoughts, occasions, and businesses of our
callings. Set by all such cares and thoughts, and wholly suspend them. Do as
Abraham did when he went to sacrifice Isaac at Mount Moriah, Genesis 22. 4, 5.
When he saw the place afar off, he said unto them abide you here with the Ass,
and I and the Lad will go worship. It was wisely and well done of Abraham. He
saw and knew that if they had gone with him they would have distracted him,
they would have bin troublesome to him, and have hindered him in the Sacrifice,
they would have cried out, and have made such clamours, that with no quietness
and freedom of spirit he could have done the service. Therefore when he saw the
place a far off, he bids them stay behind, it was a preparation afar off,
when he saw the place afar off. The like should our care be when we see the
time afar off, but specially when we see the time near and at hand, the Even
before, we should then set aside all our thoughts and businesses, and bid them
wholly stand aside, and not suffer them, not only not to go to the Mount with
us, but not to go into our closets, and secret chamber with us. It may be
such a business will be calling upon thee to attend, and think upon it, It
is a matter of some consequence and concernment, it is not good to slight it.
It may be there is such an occasion of weight that calls upon thee to be
remembered; but in such a case say to all secular occasions, and avocations as
Nehemiah did to Sanballat and Geshem when they sent to him, Nehemiah 6. 2. Come
(say they) let us meet together in some of the Villages, etc. But mark how he
answers them, Verse. 3. And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a
great work so that I cannot come down; why should the work cease whilst I
leave it and come down to you?

And though these fellows had so round and resolute an answer, yet they were
importuning him still, Verse 4. Yet they sent unto me four times after this
sort, and as often as they sent, so often he gave them that answer, And I
answered the^ after the same manner. So when a man begins to sequester
himself, and to set himself apart for his actual preparation, this and the
other business will be calling upon a man, come let us think upon this thing,
and let us consider that; but then should a man answer, I am doing a great
work, I am preparing my self for the Sacrament, I cannot attend upon you, why
should the work of preparation cease whilst I leave it and attend upon you?
And though they haunt and importune thee, even unto four times after this sort,
yet still answer them after the same manner. We find in their fasts, Zech. 7.
3. the phrase of separating themselves, should I weep separating my self. Now
as in fasting, so in our preparation to this holy Feast, there should be a
separating of a man's self. And this is a maine part of this separation, when a
man separates himself from all his secular thoughts and businesses, and sets
them wholly aside to fit himself the better for this work. It must be here as
in the case of prayer, Matthew 6. 6. When thou prayest enter into thy closet,
and when thou have shut thy door, pray, etc. I know our Savior means it in
another sense, that in regard of privacy and secrecy, a man should shut his
door when he prays; but yet also in another sense should a man first shut his
door, and then pray, that is, shut his door against all such thoughts, as may
distract him in the duty, he should shut out of doors all distracting
thoughts, and cause them to stand without doors that he may do the duty with
the more freedom. And so in this duty of preparation, enter into thy closet,
and when thou have shut thy door prepare thy self; when thou have shut out of
doors all secular cares and thoughts of other business, set upon the work of
preparation.

In receiving the Sacrament there is a service to be done to God. Now we must
serve God in that order that a servant does his master. See how our Savior
speaks of a servant to do his master service, Luke 17. 8. Girde thy self,
and serve me. It was the fashion in those Eastern parts, for men to go in
long garments down to their feet. And therefore when men were to go about
any work, they used to gird, and tuck up their garments that they might not
trouble them in their work, by hanging loose about their heels. So it must be
with us when we go about any service to GOD; we must first gird up our selves,
and then serve him. A loose, discinct, and a diffluent mind is not fit to do
God any service. Therefore we are called upon to gird up our loins, Luke 12.
35. Let your loins be girded about, 1 Pet. 1. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins
of your minds. Two things are required in a good servant. 1. Readiness, and
preparedness to do his masters commands so soon as he calls. 2. Nimblenesse,
handinesse, and handsomeness in doing what he is enjoined. Now this girding
implies both. 1. A prepared readiness before hand to do his masters will. A
servant that is girded and has his garments trust up about him, let his master
bid him do such a service, he is ready, and prepared to do it so soon as he
speaks, Luke 12. 35. 36. Let your loins be girded, and ye your selves like men
that wait for their Lord, that when he comes and knockes they may open unto
him immediately. Let a servant be ungirt, and he is not so ready to do what
his master commands, because first he must have a time to gird himself, and
his masters work must stay till he be girded, and he must be girding, when he
should be working. 2. It implies dexterity, and handsomeness in his work. An
ungirt servant if he served his master and did his work enjoined, yet he could
not do it cleaverly, because his garment hanging loose about him would so
puzzle, and cumber him: an ungirt servant would be but a fumbling puzzle in his
work. And therefore the master bids his servant first gird himself, and then
serve him. It is just so in all Gods services, and so in this service of
receiving the Sacrament. God requires a preparedness to, and an handinesse in
the work. And therefore this girding up of our loins is exceeding necessary
before our coming to the Sacrament. First, because God looks that when we
come to the Sacrament we should be ready to do the work he there requires. If
the loins of our minds be ungirt, and we come to the Sacrament with loose
spirits, distracted with a company of earthly cares, we shall be unready to do
the work of receiving CHRIST which he there commandes. He will command us
there to take, and receive CHRIST. Now if we come with loose hearts, and
minds, we must make God stay our leisure before we can do it; we must first
have some time to gird up our loins, and to tucke up this tatter, and that
ragge, and the other danglement that hangs about our heels, before we can
take, and receive CHRIST. And so we must be girding, and tucking when we
should be receiving. Secondly, because if we come with ungirt loins, with
loose spirits, and do Gods work so, we shall do it puzlingly, and
fumblingly. Our long garments hanging loose about our sides and heels, we
shall make but poor work of it. If a master had commanded a Jewish servant
with his loins ungirt to have gone to plow, or to have dug in his vineyard,
how awkely would he have done these works? He could not have followed his
Plough but he would ever, and anon have been treading upon his loose garment,
and have been ready to have fallen upon his face, he could not have set his
foot upon his spade, but he would have been treading upon the loose skirt of
his garment which would have exceedingly hindered, and troubled him in his
work, he could not have been expedite in his business, so long as his
garments hang about his feet. It will be no better with us coming to the
Sacrament with ungirt hearts, and minds, our loose thoughts will be so
troublesome that it will be impossible for us ever to make good work of it.
And therefore look how God would have that first Passover eaten, so must it
be in eating the Sacrament, Exodus 12. 11. And thus shall ye eat it, that is,
after this order, with your loins girded. And thus shall you eat the Lords
Supper, with your loins girded. And this is one maine part of girding our
loins, the setting aside, and putting by all our secular thoughts, and
employments.

We shall find two cases that made a man unfit for eating the Passover. Numb.
9. 10, 13. Uncleanness by a dead body, and being in journey a far off. If a
man had touched a dead body it made him unclean, and so unfit for the
Passover. It was not fit an unclean person should meddle with so holy an
Ordinance. But observe, that not only a man unclean by a dead body was unfit
for the Passover, but a man that was in a journie a far off. Why was such a
man unfit? Like enough being in a journey his mind, and thoughts would be so
taken up with the business of his journey, or being in a journey a far off,
his mind would be so upon home, and he would be so taken up with such cares,
and fears as usually men are filled withal when they are far from home,
that he by reason of those thoughts, and distractions would be utterly unfit
for the Passover. Many are in the mind that if they be free from a dead body,
that if they have not defiled themselves with some gross sin, of
drunkenness, uncleanness and the like, that they are very fit for the
Sacrament, but in the mean time come to the Sacrament whilst they are in
their journies, with hearts undischarged of earthly business, and cares, and
having their hearts in journies, traveling up and down after one worldly
business or other, even when they are at the LORDS Table. Therefore let men
take notice, that a journey may unfit for the Lords Table, as well as a dead
body. That he is unfit to come to the Sacrament, that has a company of earthly
cares, and thoughts pestering his mind, as well as he that has defiled
himself with some gross sin. It is lamentable to consider how many men
bring their servants, and the Ass, even to the very mount, how many are called
away from the Lords work to meet with their Sanballats, and Geshems, how many
are in their journies when they are coming, and when they are come to the
Sacrament. When our Savior CHRIST overtook the two Disciples going to Emmaus,
he asked them this question, Luke 24. 17. What manner of communications are
these that ye have one to another as ye walk? So let one but ask men, What
manner of thoughts are they that you have in your hearts over night before the
Sacrament? What manner of conferences, and communications be they that they
have one with another, the night before, nay the very morning as they walk
together to the public assemblies to receive the Sacrament? How happy were it
that they could answer as the two Disciples did there, verse 19. Concerning
Jesus of Nazareth, concerning the benefits and the ends of the Sacrament, and
the preparation required to it. But it is nothing so. If their communications,
and conferences be not vain, foolish and froathy, yet at the best they are but
mercate communications, conferences about Sheep, Oxen, about the prices of
grain, etc. and with these conferences come they to the very Church doors
when they come to receive the Sacrament. Is not this worse then to have
received the Sacrament of the Passover a man being in a journey? Is not this a
pitiful preparation to this holy service? When men come to the Sacrament
piping hot out of the world, out of their worldly conferences, and from their
worldly thoughts, and have not some convenient time before discharged, and
disburdened their hearts of them, must not that frame of heart, and bent of
spirit needs come along with them to the Lords Table? And must they not needs
be tumultuous and troublesome? Must they not needs make such a noise and such a
dinne as must cause distraction in this holy service? And how can such a frame
of spirit agree with the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 7. 35. That you may attend upon
the Lord without distraction? Which is a rule as well for receiving the
Sacrament, as for all other services of God. What do such men bring upon
themselves, but the Egyptian plague of the flies? The flies came into Pharaohs
house, and the houses of his servants, so as the Land was corrupted by reason
of the flies. Exodus 8. 24. But in the Land of Goshen where Gods people were,
there were no swarms of flies, verse 22. It should be with the Lords people at
the Sacrament, as in Goshen; there should be no flies there to trouble them
with their buzing importunity. It must be with a godly man at the Sacrament as
it is said to have been in the Temple. There was abundance of flesh sacrificed
in the Temple, and yet they say there was never any fly seen in the Temple.
So should it be with us at the Sacrament, not a fly to be seen, or heard
buzzing there. The way to have it so is, beforehand, to drive away these flies,
these buzzing thoughts, by setting them aside the day before, and then labor
so to remove them as at last the Egyptian flies were removed, Exodus 8. 31. He
removed the swarms of flies, there remained not one. And when they are thus
removed before, then shall not a man be troubled with them at the Sacrament. It
should be a man's wisdom to deal with his lawful and honest cares, and the
thoughts of his calling before he comes to the Sacrament, as Nehemiah did with
those Merchants before the Sabbath. Nehe. 13. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. When the
gates of Jerusalem began to be dark, before the Sabbath, I commanded that the
gates should ^e shut, and charged, they should not be opened till after the
Sabbath, and some of my servants I set at the gate, etc. So the merchants
lodged without Jerusalem once or twice. Then I testified against them, and said
unto them, why lodge ye about the wall? If you do so again I will lay hold on
you. From that time forth they came no more on the Sabbath. Do so with the
honest, and lawful cares of thy calling before the Sacrament. Shut up the gate
of thine heart against them, and let it not be opened till all the duties of the
Sacrament-day be ended. It may be they will be hankring, and hanging about for
entrance, but set a watch at the gate of thine heart, testify against them,
rebuke them, threaten them, let thy spirit rise against them in an holy
indignation, and this will be a good means to help to a gracious liberty from
Cessa ab inquietudine tua, non si^ tumultus quidam in cord tuo per
corruptionem volitantibus phantasmatibus, and compungentibus te -- Cimphe,
natae sunt in terra Aegypti de ^^mo, mascae quaedam, sunt min^tissimae,
inquietissimae, inordinate volitantes, in oculos i^^uentes, non permitte^^es
hominem quiesc^^e, dum a^^g^^tur iterum i^ruunt, dum abactae fuerint ru^su
redeunt, s^c^^ omnia vana ^hanta^mata co^d^^, Aug. in fragm. sermon. de De. alog.
their annoyance. But for want of this preparation duty how many, even when
they are at the Sacrament, are no less pestered with their cares, and earthly
thoughts, then the Egyptians with the bitings, and burrings of their flies?
Those flies miserably pestred the Egyptians, and plauged them exceedingly;
what ever they were a doing they were about them, very unquiet, flying in the
eyes of them, not suffering them to be quiet. If they drove them away they came
upon them again, if they chased them away they still returned. This was a vile
vexation. And this is the case of many coming to the Sacrament, just so are
they pestered with their cares, and thoughts that these flies even corrupt the
duty, as the Egyptian flies did the Land And all is from the neglect of its
duty.

What acceptance a man is like to find in such a service, judge by that Law,
Exodus 22. 31. Ye shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the
field, ye shall cast it to the Dogs. Torn flesh it was neither fit for
service of men, nor of GOD. Not for service of man, for they must not eat it.
Ye shall cast it to the Dogs. Torn flesh must not be man's meat, but Dogs
meat. It was not fit for the service of GOD. For if torn flesh must be cast
to the Dogs, it had been an heinous thing to have offered that to GOD, which
was to be given to Dogs. And if a man had brought a torn, rent beast for
Sacrifice, GOD by no means would have accepted it, Mal. 1. 13. Ye brought
that which was torn, should I accept this at your hands? GOD then will accept
no torn Sacrifices. Distracted communicating, it is torn flesh. A man that
receives the Sacrament with his head and his heart full of worldly thoughts,
does as highly offend, as a Jew should have done that had eaten of a torn
beast which should have been cast to the Dogs. He offends as highly as he,
that should have sacrificed torn flesh (dogs meat) to GOD. When thou come
to the Sacrament, and have not first separated thy self from these worldly
thoughts, and so likewise much more from all vain, idle, lustful thoughts,
and have not first discharged thy self beforehand of all disturbing,
distracting, distempering thoughts, this is a torn sacrifice, and should God
accept it at thine hands? God loathes rather such torn services. And thus is
the first thing to be done in this sequestration of our selves, this setting
aside, and putting away all, even our honest and lawful thoughts of our
callings, and therefore much more all other sinful and foolish thoughts.
Abstraction of the mind from whatsoever may cause Distraction.

2 The second thing to be done in this sequestring, and setting our selves
Sicut enim Domina volens aliquod unguentum conficere pre^iolum suscitat famulas
suas, atque ad semetipsam congregat, imperat aliae tenere libram, aliae ^e^e^e
injungit, aliam jube: miscere, etc. Ita and anima quae pretiosissimum ^stud
unguentum componere, ac serv^^e d^siderat* omnes corporis su^sensus ad seipsam
congreget, segnitiemque ipsorum, ac negligentiam deturbans, tota solicitudine
vigilare and in hoc tantum quod proposu^ cogat intendere. Chrysostom. de compunct.
^^rd. l. ^.
apart, is to summon and call in, and to collect together all the powers and
faculties of the soul, to attend upon the business now in hand. As David,
when he was to praise God, he calls upon all that is within him to set upon the
service, Psalm. 103. 1. My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me
bless his holy name. So when we now go about to prepare our selves for the
Sacrament, call upon all that is within us, all the powers of our soul to be
ready to attend this business; that now all other businesses being hushed and
ceased, they bend all their strength to do the present work in hand. So fit we
our selves for receiving, as David fits himself for singing and giving praise,
Psalm. 57. 7, 8. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and
give praise. Awake up my glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake
early. When he would sing and give praise to God, first he has his heart
fixed, or firmly prepared; he doubles it, my heart is fixed, O God, my heart
is fixed. The first may imply the fi^^^ duty, a setting apart of all other
thoughts. An heart taken up with worldly thoughts, when a man goes about Gods
service; is not a fixed heart, but a wandering, straggling heart, a kind of
planetary spirit. As there be fixed stars and planets, wandering stars, so
there be wandering spirits, and fixed hearts in Gods service. Now David's heart
was a fixed heart, an heart firmly prepared, not taken up, nor wandering after
any by-businesse, when he prepared himself to that service. The second may
imply this second duty; my heart is fixed and bent with all its power to do the
duty, and therefore he awakens his glory, his tongue, his Psaltery, his Harp,
himself to the work. So should a man's heart be doubly fixed when he fits
himself for receiving the Sacrament: fixed as not drawn away, and drawn about
other business, and fixed, as bent wholly with all the powers of it to do the
work of preparation. So fixed upon the business, as he should summon, and
awaken, all the powers of the soul to attend it. Awake my understanding, and
mine affections, awake my affections, and all that is within me, awake and
stir up your selves, to attend this great work in hand.

Chap. 10. Of Examination.
examination, to that duty which the Apostle prescribes, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. Unto orderly receiving, is required, a precedent examination of a man's
self. A duty, though to be done at other times, yet never more seasonable
then before our coming to the Sacrament; and yet a duty to which above al
others we are naturally extremely backward. Might some slight formalities serve
the turn, we could be contented withal, but if men be pinched and pressed to
a solemn examination of, and a strict inquiry into themselves, they are ready
to snuff at it, and to say of this duty as they speak in that case, Mal. 1.
13. Behold what a weariness is it? It is a duty so

1 This is an undoubted and a sure truth, that a man's comfort depends as well
upon his knowledge of his fitness, as upon his fitness it self. It is not
enough to be fit and worthy, but a man must know it. So long as the conscience
questions a man's fitness, and is in doubt whether a man be fit or no, though
he be fit and well prepared, yet the doubts of the conscience, and the fears
it is in, will not only allay, but quite forestall all the comforts that would
arise from his fitness. To a man's comfortable receiving, it is as needful to
know his fitness, as to have it. There is no grace or good thing that a
Christian has, but it may be known to him that he has it. What is a rich man
better than a poor man, if he be not privy to his wealth, if he have treasure
and know it not? Wherein are his wants, fears, cares, distractions, and
disquiets of spirit less than a poor man's? It was Laodiceas ill condition,
Apoc. 3. 17. Thou say I am rich, and know not that thou art poor. And it
is many a man's condition, He says I am poor, and knows not that he is rich.
This is the safer condition indeed of the two, but yet for the present, it is
but a drooping and uncheerefull estate. Therefore as our safety lies in having
Christ and his graces, so our comfort lies in knowing that we have them. And
know our wealth we may. A Christian not only knows God, but he knows that
he knows him, 1 John 2. 3. And hereby we know that we know him. A Christian
not only is in God, but he may know that he is in God, 1 John 2. 5. Hereby
know we that we are in him. And 1 John. 4. 13. Hereby know we that we dwell
in him. A Christian may know that he believes, 1 John He that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself. A Christian may know that God
loves him, 1 John 4. 16. And we have known and believed the love that God has
to us. A Christian may know that he loves Gods children, 1 John 5. 1. By this
we know that we love the children of God. A Christian may know that he is of
the truth, 1 John 4. 19. And hereby we know that we are of the truth. A
Christian may know that God abides in him, 1 John 3. 24. And hereby we know
that he abides in us. A Christian may know that he has eternal life, 1 John.
5. 13. That ye may know that ye have eternal life. But now how comes a
Christian to know all these things? The way by which a man gets the knowledge
of all these things, is the examination of himself. A man first tries and
examines himself in all these, and by examination comes to the knowledge of
them, and from the knowledge of them arises his comfort in them. So it is in
the case of fitness for the Sacrament. It is abundance of comfort the heart
has in the knowledge of its own fitness; and this knowledge arises from the
examination of a man's self. A man that examines not himself, for ought he
knows, may come an unworthy guest, he knows not whether he be worthy or no;
but this he knows, that he that is unworthy is unwelcome, and so cannot come
but with a tremulous and an hesitant heart, fearing lest instead of a blessing
he may meet with a breach. It is impossible in such a case that a man should
receive comfortably. I dare not say of eating the Sacrament, as S. Paul speaks
in the case of eating some meats, Romans 14. 23. And he that doubts is damned if
he eat; a man may come with doubts and fears to the Sacrament, and come
acceptably: but this I may say, That he that doubts of the lawfulness of his
coming, he exceedingly hinders his own comfort if he eat doubtingly,
doubting whether he be fit to eat, doubting whether he may come, yea, or no;
eating with such doubtings must needs be prejudicial to a man's comfortable
eating. Now the way to prevent such doubtings, is to live by that rule the
Apostle gives in that case of eating, Romans 14. 5. Let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind. Be careful beforehand to take such a course, as
may assoile and clear up such doubts: take such a course as may assure, and
persuade your hearts, that you are fit in an acceptable measure to come to the
Sacrament. But what course may be taken to this purpose? Let a man examine
himself. The way to put all out of doubt, and to prevent such troublesome
doubtings when we are come, is self examination. For when a man has seriously
examined himself, he shall thereby be enabled to give a true judgment of
his own fitness; and an examined heart, that upon examination has found it
self fit, is able to charm all troublesome doubts, and can say to them, Be
still, and trouble me not, for I have thoroughly examined my self, and upon
serious and sincere examination, I know that I am a fit and a worthy
Communicant. Doubts, they trouble the heart, examination prevents doubts, and
settles the heart, and puts things out of doubt. When Christ after his
resurrection appeared to his Disciples; they were terrified and affrighted,
Luke 24. 37. but see how Christ answers them, Verse. 38. Why are ye troubled,
and why do doubts, (...), arise in your hearts. They should with all gladness
have received and embraced Christ, but contrarily, they were troubled. And
whence came the trouble of their spirits? Why do doubts arise in your hearts?
Mark then, that doubts trouble the heart, and unfit it for the receiving of
Christ. They doubted whether he were Christ or not, and were so troubled with
these doubts, that as yet they received him not. But afterward their doubts
are turned into joy, V. 41. They rejoice at the sight and presence of Christ,
but how came these doubts to be removed, and to be changed into joy? Christ
puts them to the examination and trial of himself, Verse. 39. to put them out
of doubt, Behold my hands, and my feet, that it is I my self; and when he had
thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. As if he had said, I see
you are much troubled with doubtings, whether I be Christ, or not; examine and
try me, view me, feel me, handle me, and you shall find by examination, that I
am not as you think, a spirit. And so in probability they examining him with
their eyes, and with their hands found him to be no spirit; found him to be
Christ, and had their doubts removed, and joyfully received him for Christ
indeed. Thus, as this examination removed and cleared their doubts that
troubled them; so examination of our selves would prevent the doubtings that
are ready to trouble us in receiving the Sacrament. If we would behold and see,
if we would look into our hearts, and feel and handle our own hearts, yea,
search and dive into them by examination, how should we prevent our troublesome
doubtings, and how should we meet with joy and comfort instead of doubtings? We
come to Christ in the Sacrament; In one sense, in regard of that awful respect
we should have unto his blessed Majesty, we should come to Christ as that
woman did, Mark 5. 33. The woman fearing and trembling, came and fell down
before him: but in another sense, namely when it rises from an ignorance of our
own estate, whether we be fit to come to his ordinance, or not, and from the
doubtings of conscience, that we are not prepared as we should be; thus to come
with fear and trembling is not good: examination would prevent fear. By
examination we should find out the truth of our condition, we should find out
whether we be fit or not. And upon examination finding our selves fit, we
should come with an holy boldness and confidence of spirit, to Christ in his
Ordinance. As therefore we desire to have our hearts discharged of troubles,
and doubts, when we are drawing near to the Lords Table; as we would not have
conscience pester us with disquieting scruples, and unseasonable disputes, and
reasonings whether we may come or no; so beforehand bestow some time and pains
in a private scrutiny, and search of our selves: examination will prevent all
these, and we shall be able to hush and still them all, if we can say, I have
examined mine heart, I have sincerely tried my self, and I find upon good
examination, that I have good leave to come to the Lords Ordinance.

2 Secondly, it is better a great deal to examine our selves before we come,
then to be examined by God. God will examine such to the purpose, that will not
be at the pains and trouble to examine themselves. It was a sharp kind of
examination by which Saint Paul should have been examined, Acts 22. 24. The
chief Captain commanded that he should be examined by scourging. Certainly,
when men neglect selfe-examination, God will himself examine them, but it will
be an examination with scourging. Every interrogatory and question that God
puts to us, shall be as a smarting lash with a scourge, yea, as a stinging lash
with a Scorpion. The man that came to the Feast without his wedding garment,
never examined himself before he came, whether he had a nuptial garment to
go in or not; God therefore examines him, but it is with a scourging question
that made his heart smart, Friend, how carnest thou in hither, not having a
wedding garment? It was a scourging question, that drew blood on his
conscience. When a man comes to the Sacrament, and has not examined himself,
and God comes to him, and says, as to Eliah, 1 Kings. 19. 13. What do thou
here Eliah? So, what do thou here at my Table? How will such a question
pinch the conscience, what a girding lash will it be to a man's heart? Those are
lashing interrogatories, Isa. 1. 12. Who required these things at your hands,
to tread in my Courts? Isay 58. 5. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? Psalm.
50. 16. What have thou to do, that thou should take my covenant in thy
mouth? Ier. 7. 9, 10. Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, etc. and
come and stand before me in this house? These be scourging examinations, that
fetch blood at every stroke: with such kind of questions and such kind of
interrogatories, will God examine men that come unself-examined to the
Sacrament. Now when God shall come to such examinations, who may abide the day
of his coming? and who shall stand when he appears? as Malachi speaks in
another case, Mal. 3. 2. How terrible a thing will it be to be thus examined:
were it not good for every one to take a course to prevent so sharp an
examination? There is a way to do it, and that is, before we come to the
Sacrament, let a man examine himself; for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, namely, of the Lord: so
if we would examine our selves, we should not be examined of the Lord. But if
we examine not our selves, then shall we be both examined and judged of the
Lord. When a man has examined himself, he needs not fear Gods examination;
nay, a man may then be willing to come under Gods examination. David puts
himself upon Gods examination, Psa. 139. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know
mine heart, try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way
in me. Certainly, David never durst have been so bold, as to have put himself
upon Gods examination, if he had not first examined himself. But having first
examined himself, and thereupon knowing his own conscience thoroughly well, now
he dares be tried by God himself. Oh, with what sweet confidence might we put
our selves upon Gods own trial when we come to the Sacrament, if we our
selves had had our selves upon trial first? But how dreadful will Gods
examination be to such, who neither use, nor list, nor care, before they come
to the Sacrament, to examine themselves?

Chap. 11. Of the examination of Faith.
THat this duty of examination must be done, we have seen. Let us now consider
what it is on which we must examine our selves. And the things upon which we
must examine our selves, are these three.

1 The ^^^th of our graces. 2 The growth of them. 3 Our wants.
The graces that must be tried and examined, must be specially those before
named, required to be habitually in a Communicant, Faith, Repentance, Love,
and Obedience. The truth, growth, and wants of them, all must be examined. A
man should examine grace as he does gold. Gold may be counterfeit, may show
fair, and yet be base metal; in such a case, a man examines it by the
Touchstone, and brings it to the Test: gold may weight; it may be good gold,
but too light: in such a case, a man brings it to the scales, and to the
weight, and so either weight or want is discovered. So must grace be examined.
There is a great deal of counterfeit grace in the world. All is not gold that
glisters; and all is not grace that makes a show. There is a great deal of
copper grace, copper faith, repentance, etc. in the world* What did Moses for a
time, but the Egyptian Sorcerers did the same? Moses turns the waters into
blood, so do they, Exodus 7. 22. Moses brings Frogs upon the Land, so do they,
Exodus 8. 6. 7. And their blood and Frogs seemed as true blood and Frogs, as
those brought by Moses. Those things they did, seemed as great miracles as what
Moses did; yet Moses wrought realities, all theirs were but juglings and
sorceries. There is nothing that a true Christian can have, or do, but an
hypocrite may have and do, for the outward semblance as much as he. Therefore
since a man's graces may be counterfeit, they must be brought to the touchstone,
and be examined there for their truth. Again, there is much true grace, that
is grace indeed, faith, and repentance indeed, which yet have not that growth,
that their time and means they have been under requires, and so want of their
weight. How often does CHRIST rebuke his Disciples with this, O ye of little
faith. Therefore in such a case, a man must bring his graces to be examined by
the balance of the Sanctuary, which may make known to every man, what is the
weight, and what is the want of his graces.

1 First then try and examine the truth of Grace, whether these graces be truly
in us, or no.

The first grace to be tried is the grace of faith. That which the Apostle puts
Christians upon at all times is specially of use before the Sacrament, 2 Cor.
13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves.
The Corinthians were very busy about examining S. Paul, and his ministry,
verse 3. Since ye seek a proof of CHRIST speaking in me, and so we are very
ready to be busy in the examination of other men, and their faith, but says
Saint Paul, examine your selves: so it is good for us at all times, but
specially before the Sacrament, to examine our own faith. As Philip, before he
administered the Sacrament of baptism to the Eunuch, Acts 8. 37. did examine
him of his faith: so should every man before the receiving of the Sacrament of
the Supper examine himself of his faith. These reasons that pinch us to
examination of our faith at all times, have strength in them to do it
specially at this time. as,

First without this trial, and examination a man may be cheated, gulled, and
cosened in the point of faith. It is good therefore to try before we trust, Job
34. 3. The ear tryes words as the mouth tastes meat. To the eye many meats
seem pleasant, and dainty, but the mouth tasting them knows justly what they
be. So the ear hears words. We should get a good spiritual ear, that we may
be able judiciously to discern the fair, and flattering words of Satan, and
our own hearts. These will give a man as good words as may be. Do not, say
they, disquiet thine heart with needless fears, cheer up thine heart man,
thou need not question the truth of thy faith, These are good words. But
now, as the mouth tastes meat, and by tasting takes a trial of it, so must we
labor to have such an ear as may try these words whether they be true or not.
A good musician had need to have a good ear, and a good Christian has need
of a good care too, by which he may be able to judge of the false, and
flattering music the Devil, and his own heart make him. Try the spirits, 1
Ioh. 4. 1. As forreyne spirits without, so it is good to try the secret spirits
within us. For there be two spirits, the Spirit of God, and the spirit of
Satan; and Satan's spirit does often counterfeit the voice of Gods Spirit, and
tells us that we have faith, excellent measures of faith, when there is no such
matter: therefore try the spirits. That was a vile thing in the people, Acts
12. after Herod's Oration, to cry out, The voice of God. It is much more vile in
us, when Satan and our own heart shall flatter us, with false conceits of
faith, to cry out, The voice of God, and the voice of the Spirit. Try therefore
before you trust.

2 Secondly, it is a very hopeful and comfortable evidence of the truth of
faith, when it is willing to be tried, and desirous to be examined. It is a
suspicion that that man's gold is not good, that is unwilling to have it touched;
that a man's cause is naught, when he is unwilling to have it tried; that a man
is no Scholar, that shuns examination. It is a sign that a man's gold is good,
that is willing and desirous to have it brought to the touch. A good cause
desires a fair trial. A good Scholar that has it in him, is willing to
undergo examination, which a dunce and a non-proficient has no liking to. A
faith that is a true faith, will be willing to undergo any trial and
examination.

3 Thirdly, the trial and examination of faith, is the strengthening and
increasing of it. Faith examined and tried, proves a faith increased and
strengthened. Some things sometimes prove the worse, and suffer loss by trial;
but the more faith is tried, the more faith is increased. Gold is not the
worse, but the better, the purer for trial. As the fiery trial of faith
betters it, and makes it the more precious, and makes it to be found unto
praise, and honor and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7. So
does selfe-triall make it more precious, and more glorious. Examination and
trial of a good Scholar hurts him not, either in his learning or his credit;
nay, it advances him much in both: his very examination rubs up his learning,
it brings much to mind that would have been forgotten, yea, it puts much
learning into a Scholar: and besides, it conduces much to his praise, and
honor, it sends him away with the credit of an approved learned man. It is so
in the examination of faith. In trying faith there is an exercise of faith, and
by exercise it is but increased and manifested.

4 Fourthly, who knows but his faith may come to a fiery trial, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
and 4. 12. Bilney first tried his finger by himself in the Candle, before he
tried his whole body in the fire at the stake. How shall our faith abide the
fiery trial by others, if it have never been put to this trial by our
selves? When fiery trials come, how many men's faith which was thought more
precious than gold, proves more vile than dross? And what is the reason?
Therefore fails their faith in fiery trials, because it was never put to, nor
would abide selfe-triall, Ier. 12. 5. If thou have run with the Footmen, and
they have wearied thee, then how can thou match thy self with Horses? How
shall that faith try a match with Horsemen, that never tried a match with
Footmen? How shall he abide a fiery trial, that has ever shunned and been
shy of a closet trial? How will thou abide to be tried at a bar, at a stake,
that art loath to be tried in thy chamber, in thy closet? Examine your selves
upon your beds, Psalm. 4. He will never abide to be examined at a bar that
will not abide to examine himself upon his bed. Yea, selfe-triall is it that
prepares, and fits, and trains up a man to do service in the fiery trial.
David could not go in Saul's armor, because he was not accustomed to it, he is
likely to undergo a fiery trial of his faith, that has accustomed himself
to the duty of selfe-triall. Abraham was likely to do good on it, when he
carries not forth a company of raw fellows from the plough, but arms his
trained servants, Genesis 14. 14. They will never be fit for fighting, that
have not been used to training. Selfe-triall is training, the fiery-triall is
fighting. They are like, and fit to fight that have been trained up to it.

5 Fifthly, is our faith so low prized by us, and of so little esteem with us,
that we care not of all other things we have, how it proves? Men will not have
Oxen, but will put them to trial, Luke 14. 19. I have bought five yoke of
Oxen, and am going to prove them. Men will try whether their Oxen be good and
useful; and care we not what our faith proves, useful or useless? what a
monstrous wretchedness of spirit is this? Therefore as at all other times, so
specially be careful to examine your faith, when to come to the Sacrament. How
often have men tried it, that their coming to the Sacrament has been
fruitless; their own hearts seriously dealt withal, will witness to them that
their receiving has been to little, or no purpose. And what has been the
cause of it, but because there was no examination of faith? How can they
receive any benefit by the Sacrament, that go at an adventure, not knowing
whether they bring that with them, that must make the Sacrament effectual to
them?

Quest. How then may a man so try and examine his faith, as that he may know
the truth thereof, that it is true faith?

Answ. The Apostles phrase of faith unfeigned, twice used by him to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and 2 Timothy 1. 5. Faith without hypocrisy, as the word is, implies
that there is a faith feined, an hypocritical faith. Therefore it is not a
needless question to make inquiry, how truth of faith may be discerned. Our
times are happy in the abundance of helps they have in this kind; and this
point being so largely and fully handled in many learned Treatises that are
extant, and in every man's hand; I will give but a touch upon it, and so pass
on. True faith then may be known by the effects and fruits of it. Every Tree
is known by the fruits. When the Spies returned from searching the Land of
Canaan, they brought with them a cluster of Grapes, and Pomgranates, and Figs,
Number. 13. 23. And they report and evidence it to be a good land, by these
fruits, Verse. 27. It flows with milk and honey, and this is the fruit of it,
holding forth and showing those fruits they brought thence. By the fruits of
it, it appeared that it was a good Land. And so the way to search and find out
the goodness of our faith, is to bring forth of the Figs, Pomgranates, and
clusters; that by showing them to our consciences, we may be able to say,
Surely our faith is a good, and a true faith, and these be the fruits of it.
Now the fruits and effects by which faith may be examined, are three:

1 Such as respect God, and Christ. 2 Such as respect our selves. 3 Such as
respect our brethren.
1 First, the effects of faith, as it respects God, are these.

1 First, Obedience to God and his word, and fruitfulness in all good works.
True faith is no droane, no loiterer, but it is an active and a working grace,
Gal. 5. 6. Faith which works. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Your work of faith. 2 Thessalonians. 1.
11. The work of faith with power. A workman may be tried by his work. What
is the work of faith? It works with power. It makes a man with power to yield
GOD obedience, and to endeavor the doing of Gods will, to the which no man
has any power at all. Hence called the obedience of faith, Heb. 11. 8. Romans
16. 26. Because faith works obedience, and no man can give God the obedience
of his heart, that has not faith in his heart. On the contrary, unbeleeving
and disobedient persons are joined together, Tit. 1. 15, 16. They who are
called unbeleeving, Verse. 15. are called disobedient, Verse. 16. It is an hard
duty to forgive an offending brother upon his repentance, a difficult point of
obedience. But yet it must be done, Luke 17. 4. If thy brother turn again
unto thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. But how shall we be able
to do it? See Verse. 5. And the Apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our
faith. Faith then where it is, inables to duties of obedience, and facilitates
hard works. The children of Abraham do the works of Abraham, John 8. and
Abraham's works were works of obedience. We must be Abraham's children, before
we can do the works of Abraham. And Gal. 3. 7. They which are of faith, are
the children of Abraham. They that have the faith of Abraham, do his works.
Now then hereby let a man examine his faith. Put that question to thy
conscience which Saint James puts, Iam. 2. Show me thy faith by thy works.
Show the coats and garments which this Dorcas has made. And so many works of
obedience as thou can show, so many witnesses shall thou produce of the truth
of thy faith. But if thy faith be idle, slothful to do service, a faith that
works not, suspect the truth of it, and know that such a faith will not serve
to admit thee to the eating of the Sacrament. For the Apostles injunction in
that case, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. That if any would not work, neither should he eat,
holds as true in this case of an idle faith, as in that case of an idle man.

2 Secondly, true faith believes God, and depends upon him in all things, and
at all times. It believes him not only in some things, but in all, not only at
some times, but at all. It believes Gods promises for spiritual things, Gal.
3. 22. for temporal things, Psalm. 37. 3. It believes Gods Commandments to be
his Commandments, to be just, holy, and good, Psalm. 119. 66. I have believed
thy commandments. It believes Gods threatenings, Ion. 3. 4, 5. Yet forty days,
etc. So the people of Nineveh believed God. It believes God not only in time of
peace, but in times of distress, affliction, and tentation, Psalm. 73. 1. Yet
God is good to Israel. Yea, even then when all things go against it, Job 13.
15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Psalm. 46. 2. Hab. 3. 17, 18.
faith it believes All things, Luke 24. 25. O slow of heart to believe all that
the Prophets have spoken. Faith believes God in all. Examine thy faith by this:
put these interrogatories to thy conscience. Beleevest thou God in his promises
for this life, as well as for a better? For thy daily bread, as well as for thy
salvation? Beleevest thou all Gods Commandments, without questioning any
whether it be his or no? Beleevest thou his threatenings as well as his
promises? Do thou hang upon him and his promise, and live upon that in all
thy pinches, straights, and exigents? As thou can answer these, so may
thou answer for thy faith. But this will convince many, not to be faithful,
but faithless. Oh, they do believe Gods promises with all their hearts: but
what promises? for life and salvation. But how believe they Gods promises for
the things of this life? Let that be judged by their covetousness,
worldliness, their carking immoderate cares, He that believes makes not haste.
Isay 28. Therefore he that makes haste does not believe. Such haste to be rich,
such haste after the world, such carking, caring, such pining and whining; what
does it but proclaim their gross distrust in Gods providence, and promises?
Thou that beleevest not God for thy body, beleevest him less for thy soul.
Thou that beleevest not God for a crust, beleevest him less for a Crown. Try
men in Gods Commandments, pinch and press them with the very letter of the
Law. Tush they will never believe that God requires such strictness. Try them
with threatenings, and thunder them ever so against them, yet they have not so
much faith as the devils, who believe and tremble. Let means be wanting, or
means be against them, and they are of Thomas his profession, Except I see and
feel, I will not believe. Whilst all is with men as they would have it, they
are full of faith; but let God pinch them, and bring them into a strait, and
where is their faith then?

3 Thirdly, A sweet and holy boldness of access unto the Throne of Grace,
with confidence in Gods goodness, and his gracious acceptance of us. Why are
ye afraid, O ye of little faith! It was spoken in another case; But yet the
more faith, the less fear in any case. A guilty conscience, (...). 5. 7.
if awake, has no great list to come before GODS face; but when once by true
faith in CHRIST'S blood, guilt is taken off, and by faith a man is made friends
with GOD, James 2. 23. Then shall a man have the boldness of a friend to come
to the LORD in prayer. Many that have not a dram of faith are bold enough,
For who so bold as blind Bayard, as ignorant and silly ones are. But yet there
is a great difference between the boldness of a friend, and the boldness of
a stranger. For Strangers may be bold with a kind of sauciness and
intrusion, but they are not so welcome as bold; neither has a stranger that
ground for, nor that contentment in his boldness that a friend may have; his
heart will secretly check him, though he face it out for the present, and be
ready to tell him, that he goes further than civility, and good manners can
warrant him. But a friends boldness is out of that sweetness of interest, and
acquaintance, and intimate communion each with other. So that boldness which
faith breeds, is from that knowledge of God, that peace, communion, and
acquaintance it has with God in Christ. This is that boldness spoken of,
Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness, and access with confidence through
the faith of him. Heb. 4 16. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of
grace. But how shall we do to come boldly? See Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near
with a true heart in a full assurance of faith. A man may therefore try his
faith, by the carriage of his heart in prayer. If with a friendlike boldness,
and with a confidence of his gracious acceptance we can come unto God, and with
such a boldness can power out our hearts unto him, it is a comfortable
evidence of the truth of faith. The contrary shows how far most men are from
faith. Deal truly with thy self; speak thou not to God in prayer, as to a
stranger, as to one with whom thou have no entire familiarity or acquaintance?
Certainly true faith is better acquainted with God than so.

4 Fourthly, a desire of Christ's appearance, and his second coming to
judgment. We walk here by faith and not by sight. But where faith is, it
longs to be turned into sight, and to have the immediate fruition of the Lord
Jesus. Therefore the voice of faith is that, Cant. 8. 14. Make haste my
beloved, and be like unto the Roe. And that Apoc. 22. Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, not only come, but quickly; that is, make haste with that speed that
the Roe runs withal. Hence believers are said, not only to look for the
blessed hope and appearing of our Savior Christ, but also to hasten the
appearing of him, 2 Pet. 3. 12. Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the
day of God. For though in another case it is true which the Prophet speaks,
Isay 28. He that believes makes not haste, yet in this case, he that believes
most, makes most haste, and cannot but make haste, and therefore makes haste,
because he believes. And no wonder that faith in her desires hastens the
appearance of CHRIST, when as it is the believing souls solemn marriage day.
What espoused Bride longs not for the marriage day, when she shall enjoy her
Bridegroom? Faith unites Christ and the believer, and contracts them together.
Now when once the contract is past, there follows a longing for the
mariage-day. And this longing after the mariage-day, is a sign of a contract
made by faith. Does thy soul then long for those blessed nuptials with the
Lord Christ, when thy soul shall have the fill of his Love? Does the Spirit in
thee cry, Come Lord Jesus, make haste my beloved? Oh happy signs of true
faith. But now enter into thy soul, O thou covetous worldling, and thou
voluptuous epicure, etc. Deal seriously and honestly, and tell the plain
truth. Is there any one thing in the world thou think less upon, wishest
less, or dreadest more, than the coming of Christ? When S. Paul disputed of
Righteousness, and the judgment to come, before Foelix, he trembled. How many
boast of righteousness, even of the righteousness of faith, but how
troublesome are the thoughts of the judgment, and Christ, to come unto them?
How heartily could they wish, oh that that day might never come. Let such as
cannot rejoice in the thoughts of that day in some measure, and desire it as
the day of their refreshing, question, if not the truth, yet the strength of
their faith

2 Secondly, The effects of faith in regard of our selves. And they are these:

1 First, the Operation and effectual working of the Word upon our hearts:
faith is that which makes all Gods Ordinances effectual, and so the word, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. The word of God which effectually works in you that believe.
Indeed, the word works on those that believe not; works their hearts to rage
and rebellion, works to their hardening and damnation. But it works no good
thing, when faith is not to set it on work, Heb. 4. 2. The word which they
heard profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith. The Gospel is
the power of God to every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. Faith is as the vital
and natural heat of the soul. If the body be dead, and without natural heat,
give a man the most stirring and working Physic that is, and yet it works
not, because there wants a principle of life and heat, to set it on work.
Just so is it here. The word dispensed in the most powerful manner that can
be, works not upon an unbeleeving heart, because the heart is dead without
faith: but if any faith in the heart, it makes the Word work effectually. Try
thy self by this: works the Word upon thy soul? works it thee to a
conformity to it self, so as thou art cast into the mould of it. Such efficacy
of the Word argues a presence of faith in thine heart. But how many discovers
this to be void of faith? How many have lived all their days, and are even
grown gray under the Gospel, and yet what grace or goodness have all the
Sermons that ever they have heard wrought in them, more than in such as scarce
in all their days ever heard Sermon? Nay, what is wrought in many, but scorn,
rebellion, resolution of disobedience, wrath, swelling, and hellish boiling of
the heart, both against Minister and doctrine? Are these the works of faith?
or is it rather a sign that he works in their hearts, that effectually works
in the children of disobedience. This is a fearful sign that a man is in the
state of unbeleefe.

2 Secondly, Sanctification, and holiness of heart and life, Acts 15. 9. their
hearts were purified by faith. Pharisisme may wash thy hands, but faith washes
hand and Heart. Pharisisme washes clean the outside of the cup, and platter,
but Faith makes clean the inward part also; yea, there faith begins the work.
Faith is not only an holy, but an hallowing grace. Acts 26. 18. Amongst them
which are sanctified by faith. We find a woman in the Gospel that had been
troubled twelve years with a bloody issue, who was healed: but how came she
to be healed? She touches the garment of Christ, touches but the hem, and yet
straightway the Fountain of her blood was dried up, Mark 5. 29. It is true
that it was Christ that healed her, It was virtue that went out of Christ that
healed her, Verse. 30. and yet Verse. 34. Thy faith has made thee whole. Faith
then fetches healing virtue from Christ, and heales diseases. The faith that is
true faith, fetches healing virtue from Christ. Every man's heart naturally has
such a spiritual disease, as she had a bodily. That disease which the woman
had, did typifie under the Law, the natural filthiness of our hearts. Prove.
4. 24. Observe the heart, from thence are the issues of life. Every action
issues from the heart, the Fountain of all our actions. This Fountain is a
Fountain of blood: and all the issues from this Fountain, in our thoughts,
words, actions, all these issues are bloody issues, and very filthy and
loathsome before God, Mat. 15. 18, 19, 20. Hence hands defiled with blood, Isay
59. 3. Bloody filth, Isay 4. 4. Their way was before me, as the uncleanness of
a removed woman, Ezekiel. 36. 17. and Hos. 4. 2. Blood touches blood. Many bloody
issues out of the heart, one issue meets with another, and so blood touches
blood. Now when faith is once wrought in the heart, it works strange cures
both in heart and life. There were wont to be filthy issues out of the heart,
in vile loathsome noisome thoughts of uncleanness, wantonness, covetousnes,
worldliness. There was wont to be a filthy issue at the mouth, a deal of
vain filthy rotten communication, bloody oaths and curses. There was wont to
be issues in all the several actions and passages of the life. But now when
faith comes into the heart, that presently carries a man unto Christ, touches
him, fetches healing virtue from him, that dries up this Fountain of blood in
some good measure, and so heales all those loathsome bloody issues. It is true,
that where faith is, there may be still some ouzings of this Fountain, but yet
the flux of it is nothing so abundant, and so continual as formerly. A man's
heart naturally is like the Sea, Psalm. 104. 25, 26. This great and wide sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts: There go
the Ships, there is that Leviathan whom thou have made to play therein. In the
sea, there be vast Whales, huge Leviathans that sport themselves, and play in
the deepes thereof; but besides those huge Whales, what a world of creeping and
crawling small creatures are there to be found therein. Such is the heart of a
natural man; there be therein, not only some Leviathans, some special
unclean and foul lusts, some special Seamonsters, but there are also
creeping things innumerable, a world of crawling bugs and baggage vermin. That
look as is said of Gods Angels, Dan. 7. 10. Thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. So may it be said of
the lusts and corruptions of an unbeleeving heart, that thousand thousands
minister unto Satan, and ten thousand times ten thousand corruptions are
crawling and creeping there. But faith once come into the heart* not only those
Leviathans, but those creeping things are strangely ferretted out of the heart.
That as Genesis 1. 26. God spoke of man in his creation, Let us make man in our
image after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
etc. and over every creeping thing, etc. So in the new creation, when God
stamps his image upon a man, and gives him faith, he gives it dominion over
every creeping thing; so that in a gracious measure it frees the heart, from
these creeping, crawling corruptions and lusts, that so abundantly swarmed in
the heart. It is true, that after faith, some Serpent may creep into the
paradise of a believing heart; but yet, first there is not a quarter of those
creeping things that were there before in multitudes innumerable, and those
that be there are not there without loathsomenesse and vexation. A cleanly
person may get some vermin creeping about him, but yet they swarm not, as in
rogues, neither are they about him without vexation, indignation, and loathing
of them, contrary to what they are in a nasty beggarly rogue, that takes no
offense at them at all. Now then try thy faith by the holiness it has
wrought, by the holiness, and purification of thine heart. If these old bloody
issues be staunched, if this puddle, my ry Fountain dried up; that now on the
contrary thou can say with David, Psalm. 104. 34. My meditation of him shall
be sweet: if the thoughts of thine heart be sweet and savoury, if thou find
thy heart in a gracious measure freed from these creeping things, thou have
cause to rejoice in thy faith. But contrarily, here is that which convinces men
still to be in their unbeleefe, because they have still their bloody issues.
As a Fountain casts out her waters, so their hearts cast out their
wickedness, Ier. 6. 7. What soul abominations, and secret loathsome lusts,
are harbored and lodged within their hearts? What covetous, proud, malicious,
loose and adulterous thoughts, with a continual flux, issue out of their
souls? yea, and that with delight, following, and contentfully pursuing them
in their speculations. God speaks of detestable things he will save his people
from, Ezekiel. 37. 23. But now those men's detestable things are their delectable
things. A sign no faith in their hearts. What litters and legions of creeping
things in their hearts, yea, and that without any control, yea, with much
pleasure and contentment? A sign of a faithless heart.

3 Thirdly, A strife and struggling against, with a victory and conquest over
sin and Satan, corruptions, and tentations. Where faith once comes into the
heart, there follows that conflict and combat, Gal. 5. 17. Flesh against
spirit, and spirit against flesh. All was jolly quiet at Ephesus, before S.
Paul came thither, but when Saint Paul was once gotten in, and had some footing
there, see what followed, Acts 19. 23. And the same time there arose no small
stir about that way; namely, that way of God that S. Paul taught, or as some
coppies have it, Against that way; and we see in the story, what hurly-burlies
Demetrius raised in Ephesus. When the strong man armed, keeps his Palace, his
goods are in peace: all pretty quiet and fair, whilst a man in the state of
unbeleefe; but when a stronger than he shall come upon him, when faith comes,
and shall set upon the dispossession of Satan, and corruption, and they
perceive that by faiths entrance, their trading, and Diana, shall down; then
there is to do, then there follows no small stir. It is with a man then, as
with S. Paul, 2. Cor. 7. 5. We had no rest, but we were troubled on every
side, without were fightings, within were fears. When once faith comes into
the heart, a Christians heart is a Rebeccas womb: there is an Esau and a Jacob
struggling and spurning each at other. There is an Ephraim against a Manasseh,
and a Manasseh against Ephraim.

But yet in this combat and conflict, faith makes a man victorious, gets the
better of tentations, subdues, mortifies, and vanquishes, rebellious lusts and
corruptions. Esau and Jacob struggle, but the elder must serve the younger.
Though corruption be the elder, as being borne into the world with a man, yet
it must be made a servant when faith comes. Faith is another Rachel, Genesis 30.
8. With the wrestlings of God have I wrestled, and I have prevailed. It is
between faith and lusts, as it was between the house of Saul and David, 2 Samuel 3. 1. Now there was long war between the house of Saul, and the house
of David, but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed
weaker and weaker. There is a continual trucelesse war beweene faith and
lusts, corruptions, tentations, but faith waxes stronger and stronger, and
corruption and lust waxes weaker and weaker. Faith is the master of the field,
though there be enemies up in arms. Faith is a victorious grace, like him that
rode on the white Horse, Apocalypse 6. 2. It goes forth conquering, and to
conquer. 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our
faith. It overcomes the men of the world, the lusts of the world, and so all
other lusts. It conquers the devil himself, James 4. 7. Resist the devil and
he will fly from you. When the enemy flies there is a victory. Whence is this
victory? from resistance. But whence comes power to resist? that comes from
faith, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Whom resist steadfast in the faith. The shield of faith has
a rare excellency above other shields, Ephesians. 6. 16. Taking the shield of
faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.
It is not only a fencing, but a quenching shield: it not only keeps off, but
puts out the fire. And so it mortifies and crucifies, all our lusts, and
subdues and brings them under. As in that case, Heb. 11. 33, 34. Through faith
they subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of
Aliens. So does faith work the same spiritual effects still. In whose heart
once it is, it subdues therein the kingdom of lust, and the dominion of
corruption, it unthrones them; it makes a man valiant to fight against, and
puts to flight his lusts. That faith that lays hold on Christ crucified, does
fetch crucifying virtue from him, whereby it weakens and infeebles the body of
corruption. By this try we our faith. If we find those wrestlings and
struglings against, and power, and victory, over our lusts, conclude thereupon
the presence of a lively and powerful faith: but the want of these argue a
want of faith. There is indeed a strife between the judgment and affections
of an unbeleever; between his mind, judging such an action to be against
credit, profit, and his sensuality headstrongly headlonging him upon its
satisfaction, but yet not between will and will, affection and affection, mind
and mind, no strife in the same faculty, as in a believer. And there may be a
victory that an unbeleevers mind and his judgment may have over his
sensuality, pleading to him his loss of credit, profit, friends, etc. which is
but a bare restraining of corruption in some one particular; but this is far
from a victory, subduing and mortifying, the power and body of sin, to bring it
into a languishing consumption, which is the work of faith. Sin may live, yea,
and rebel in a believing heart; for it is with lusts in a believers heart, as
with those beasts, Dan. 7. 12. As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had
their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season and a
time. They had their lives for a time prolonged, but their dominion was taken
away. So in a believer, his lusts have their lives prolonged for a time, but
yet their dominion is taken away; they live, but they live slaves, and they dye
gradually, both they, and their rebellions.

4 Fourthly, True faith grows and increases, 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: yea, it grows
exceedingly, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Your faith grows exceedingly: and Romans 1. 17. The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith. Grains of mustard seed
grow to the procerity, and spread of trees, in which the fowls of heaven may
nestle. Men may try themselves by this. So much growth, so much truth of faith.
But how would it puzzle the most to find any such growth. They have believed
ever since they can remember, and yet what believe they more now, than at the
first. The faith that grows not, lives not; the faith that lives not, is dead.
Most men's faith therefore is fit for the grave. Lord, says Martha of Lazarus,
He by this time stinketh, for he has been dead four days. And what is
theirs then but a carrion faith, that has been dead more than so many years?
for what more spiritual strength have they, then at first? what more
experience of Gods dealing? what nearer acquaintance with Christ? or what
sweeter communion with him? Not a jot, therefore not a jot of true faith.

3 Thirdly, Effects respecting our brethren; and they are these:

1 First, Mercy, Love, Compassion, and beneficence, to the members of Christ in
necessity, Gal. 5. 6. Faith works by love, as by love to God, so also to our
brethren. Therefore so often joined together, as an individual pair, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 3. Psalm. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 5. And therefore when Tyrus should be converted to the
faith, she should leave hoarding and heaping up her wealth, and should find
another manner of employment for it, namely, to feed and cloth Gods Saints,
Isay 23. 18. Her merchandise shall not be treasured nor laid up, for her
merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently,
and for durable clothing. When Tyrus should once believe she should trade in a
new kind of merchandise, she should trade in works of mercy and bounty in
releeving and refreshing the necessities of Gods Saints. Faith is full of
bowels, tenderhearted, and open-handed to Christ's members in want. She is a
right Dorcas, Acts 9. 39. that makes coats and garments, to cloth and keep
warm the backs and loins of Christ's servants in want. If we find such
compassionate bowels in us, hands ready to the good works of mercy, to do
poor Christians good for Christ's sake, in those bowels there lies faith. If we
do love a Saint because a Saint, that love is of faiths working. How does this
one thing damn the common faith of the world? They believe in Christ, that
they do; but how love they a godly man? Is there any whom they more disaffect,
distaste, or against whom they show more imbittered malice? This malicious
spiteful faith, is not the faith of Christians. Thus devils believe, they
believe, and are malicious. This is a divelish faith; the devils so believe as
that they tremble, and yet tremble not to be malicious against those that do
believe. And what is their bounty and mercy? Alas, they are not only close
fisted, but with the man in the Gospel, they have a withered hand, not able to
stretch out their hand in any work of compassion. Such a creeple, and
same-handed faith, is not the faith that will pass with God.

2 Secondly, a desire, and an endeavor to bring others to the faith. It having
once tasted, and found the sweetness and goodness that is in Christ, and in
the ways of God, it cannot rest, but it must seek others, to bring them to
participate of the same goodness with it self Phil. 6. That the communication
of thy faith. Faith is a communicative grace, and a generative grace. S. Paul
once come to the faith has Timothy his own son in the faith, 1 Timothy 1. 2. When
Andrew has found Christ he calls Peter; when Philip has met with, he must
bring Nathaniel. Faith indeed in one sense does impropriat Christ, and speaks
as Thomas, My Lord and my God: but yet though in its application it make Christ
her own, yet not so as it would exclude others; but knowing the allsufficiency
of Christ does desire to make him common, to as many as it can, and in that
regard says, Our Lord and our God. So far forth then, as thou endeavourest to
bring on others to faith in Christ, so much evidence have thou of faith in thy
self. But if others specially such as near unto thee may be what they will,
for any care or endeavor of thine, it is an evil sign, that thou thy self
want that, to which thou have no care to bring others. Many other trials
might be added for the discerning of our faith, but these shall suffice,
referring the Reader to the larger treatises, of such as have bestowed their
profitable pains in this argument.

Chap. 12. The examination of Repentance.
repentance may be discerned, we may know by that speech of John Baptist, Mat.
3. 8. Bring forth fruits therefore worthy of repentance, fruits meet for
repentance, such as become, and evidence repentance: where true repentance is,
there be ever such fruits. And those fruits are these:

1 First, shame for sin. True repentance is ever accompanied with shame, Ier.
31. 19. I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, etc. Ezekiel. 16. 61. Then shall thou
remember thy ways, and be ashamed; yea, it so individually goes with
repentance, that it is put for repentance it self, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. That they
may be ashamed; that is, that they may repent and reform their evil course.
The Heathens said, That blushing was the color of Virtue: meaning, that it was
a good sign to see a man blush and be ashamed when he had done amiss. And we
may truly say, that blushing is the color of Repentance, Ezra 9. 6. I am
ashamed, and blush to lift up my face. It is true indeed, that men may be and
are ashamed, that are far enough from repentance. There is a shame of the face,
and a shame of the heart: they have the shame of face, but not the shame of
heart. And if they have the shame of heart, yet there is a double kind of that
shame. 1. First, the shame of a thief, Ier. 2. 26. As the thief is ashamed
when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed. And so there is the shame
of any infamous sinner, which arises from the disgrace and discredit of his
action, that he has done such a thing by which he has cracked his credit, or
may bring himself to some shameful punishment, the whip, stocks, or the
gallows. So wicked men may be ashamed of their sins in their heart and
conscience, because of that shame their sin will bring them unto in hell. 2.
Secondly, there is a shame of a son or child, a filial gracious shame of
heart and conscience; and that is, when a man's shame rises not from the
shameful consequents that follow sin; but out of a sight of the filthiness,
and loathsome baseness of their sins, they see them so nasty and so filthy,
that it makes them ashamed that they have defiled themselves with such filth.
And this is the shame that is in the cheeks of true repentance. There is a
great deal of difference between the shame of a thief when he is taken, and
the shame of a man that falls into a puddle, into the kennell, or the mire: a
thief is ashamed, because some disgrace will light upon him, or some
punishment of shame. A man that is fallen into the mire, or kennell, he is
ashamed; but his shame is from the filthy, nasty, unsavory pickle that he is
in. So a wicked man has shame of conscience, because his conscience tells him
he shall come to shame in hell: but a true penitent man has shame of
conscience, because his conscience tells him, that he has defiled and
besmeared himself with loathsome filth. And such a shame as this, may prove a
surer sign of repentance then sometimes sorrow may do. There may be a grief
and a sorrow for sin, that may come from the sense and apprehension of wrath,
and such a grief will not evidence true repentance: but a shame for sin, out
of the sense of the filthiness and vileness of sin, is an unfailing
evidence of the faith of repentance. If upon examination we can find such a
shame in our souls, if with Ezra we are ashamed, and blush to lift up our
face, not because our shameful punishments are increased over our heads, not
because our trespasses will sink us down into hell, but because Our
iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up to the
heavens: such shame yields comfort. But few are thus ashamed of sin; now how
many glory in their shame, in their sin, which should be, and is their shame.
The Prophet Isaiah complains of a brow of brass, Isaiah 48. 4. The Prophet
Jeremy, of an Whores forehead, Ierem. 3. 3. And Zephany, Of sinners that know
no shame, Zeph. 3. 5. Sinners have lost those few remaining sparks of modesty
they were wont to have, and are so far from being ashamed of their sins, that
they rather count it a shame not to sin. May not the Lord say of many now, as
he twice complains, Ier. 6. 15. 8. 12. Were they ashamed when they had
committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they
blush. And are not men grown to that height of Sodomes impudency, Isay 3. 9.
The show of their countenance does witness against them, and they declare their
sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Is the drunkard ashamed of his drunkenness?
They that are drunk, are drunk in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Drunkenness then
had some shame, it sought to mantle it self with the darkness of the night.
But are men now ashamed of drunkenness in the open day, in the open streets?
So for swearers, adulterers, and others. Such impudency proclaims men's
impenitency in an high degree: such persons are as far from repentance, as they
are from shame.

2 Secondly, deep sorrow, and hearty grief for sin. Where consider two
things: 1. first, The object of repenting sorrow. 2. secondly, The depth and
greatness of it. Both will try truth of repentance.

1 First, the object of repenting sorrow, is sin. It is sin that specially
afflicts and disquiets a repenting soul, that is the thing that wrings and
pinches it. Where was it that the prodigals shoe did specially wring him? Luke
15. 21. Father I have sinned against heaven; that is, against God in heaven: he
does not say, Father I am in a depth of misery, ready to perish with hunger, in
that pinching distress that I would be glad to eat husks with Hogs. But,
Father I have sinned. This is the grief of a repenting soul, that Gods
Majesty has been offended in and by his sins. This was that which lay
heaviest upon, and sat closest to David's heart. He neither cries out of his
discredit and shame in the world, nor yet speaks a syllable of wrath, or hell;
but Psalm. 51. 3, 4. My sin is ever before me, against thee only have I sinned,
and have done this evil in thy sight. My sin is ever before me, not Hell and
damnation is ever before me; not the shame and reproach of the world, but my
sin is ever before me. It is this, Lord that pinches and disquiets me, that I
have sinned and done this evil in thy sight. A good heart fears more the
committing of sin, than the suffering of punishment following it, Prove. 30. 9.
Give me not poverty, lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God
in vain. He does not say, lest I be poor, and steal, and bring my self
under the Magistrates sword, or thy wrath; but he looks only at the sin, lest
I steal, and take thy Name in vain. He fears the profaning of GODS Name
more, than the bringing of his own name and person in question. And to this
purpose is that which Elihu charges Job withal, Job 36. 21. Regard not
iniquity, for this thou have chosen rather than affliction; that is, thou have
rather chosen sin and iniquity, than poverty and affliction: as if he had said,
inasmuch as thou have vainly, and rashly, expostulated with God, V. 20.
desiring death, rather than to bear this affliction: thou art guilty of
iniquity, and sinnest in this thy choice. This therefore implies, that a good
heart would rather choose affliction, than iniquity; to suffer affliction, than
to do iniquity. Now, as a good heart is more afraid of sin, than affliction and
punishment; so likewise a repenting heart is more grieved for sin committed,
then for sorrow to be suffered. We shall find David in great anguish and
distress of spirit, Psalm. 25. 17. 18. The troubles of mine heart are enlarged,
oh bring thou me out of my distresses; wringing, pressing anguishes look upon
my affliction and my pain. Here be troubles of heart, distresses of spirit,
affliction, and pain. But what is it now, that thus wrings, distresses, and
pains David? See the last words, And forgive all my sins, not forgive all my
punishments; David's sin, not his punishment, was his pain. We shall see the
like in him, 2 Samuel 24. 10. I have sinned greatly, I beseech thee take away the
iniquity of thy servant: he mentions not the taking away of any smart: nay,
Verse. 17. He is willing to bear it, I have sinned, let thine hand be against
me. He begs that the punishment may be laid upon him, but begs that his
iniquity may be taken away. Let God be pleased to take away his iniquity, and
he is nothing solicitous for the punishment: the offense of GOD troubled him,
more than his personal smart. So that Gods heart were but toward him in the
pardon of his sin, he did not care though Gods hand were against him in
smiting him with temporal chastisement. And this will better appear, if we
do but compare Pharaoh with David, Ex. 8. 8. Entreat the Lord that he may
take away the Frogs from me: the Frogs troubled him more than his sin against
God, Take away the Frogs, but no mention at all of taking away his sin. And
when afterward, a confession of sin is extorted from him, yet was it not his
sin that disquieted him, Exodus 9. 27, 28. not take away my sin, but take away
the thunderings and the hail. Lord, says David, Take away the iniquity of thy
servant: oh, says Pharaoh, take away these filthy Frogs, and this dreadful
thunder. A repenting heart is more troubled at sin, then at thunder and Frogs.
It sees more filthiness in sin, than in Frogs or Toads, or what ever else can
be presented more ugly to it.

A repenting sinner has his eye upon God, and upon his Law. He sees the
holiness of God, that he is a God of pure eyes that cannot behold iniquity,
Hab. 1. 13. He sees him a good, gracious, patient Father, and so it cuts him
to the heart to have offended such a Father, and God. He looks upon the Law,
and sees it to be Holy, just, and good; and this gals him to the heart, to have
violated so holy and so pure a Law. Now wicked men, they look wholly at the
justice and wrath of GOD, at the curse of the Law, and so nothing troubles them
but the fear of hell and death. If these might be avoided, the offending of an
holy and good God, the violating of an holy and a good Law, would not a whit
afflict or disquiet them. Nay, it is remarkable in David, that though he had
upon Nathans message to him confessed his sin, and Nathan upon his confession
had pronounced the pardon of it; yet after this he cries out, My sin is ever
before me, against thee only have I sinned. Mark then, that even pardoned
sin, forgiven sin, vexes and disquiets a true repenting heart. It pinches
him, and disquiets him, though it be forgiven; it grieves him that he has so
played the fool, and that ever he was such a beast to offend so gracious a
God. When the Prodigals Father sees him coming a far off, he runs to meet him,
shows compassion to him, falls upon him, and kisses him. That kiss was the
seal of his pardon, as if he had said, Behold, I forgive thee all thy sin, as
when David kissed Absalom, and Esau kissed Jacob, they both did it in token of
full reconciliation. And yet for all this, see how the Prodigal speaks: he
says not, O Father, from the ground of my heart I unfainedly thank thee, oh
how great is my Fathers goodness thus to pardon me, etc. but Father I have
sinned against thee. I, but his Father had kissed him, and thereby testified
that he had freely forgiven him, what need he confess his pardoned sin? Why
is he not rather in the confession of praise, than in the confession of sin? Oh
no: A repenting sinner is so affected and grieved with the offense of God in
his sin, that though God have pardoned and forgiven it, yet he cannot but
mourn for it, and be afflicted with it, that so holy a Law has been broken
by him, that so good a God has been offended by him, Psalm. 25. 6, 7.
Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies, remember not the sins of my youth. If
God remember mercy, he forgets and forgives sin. If God forget it, why does
David remember the sins of his youth? Yes, so will a true repenting heart do;
it will remember the sin that God forgets, it will mourn for the sin which God
has forgiven.

Now hereby may men try the truth of their repentance. Pharaoh can say, I have
sinned, yet was he not to be trusted: and Saul can say so too, as well as he,
I have sinned: and Judas can say, I have sinned, as well as them both, and yet
not a true penitentiary of them all. We may say as much, and make large
confessions before the Sacrament too, and yet be far from true repentance.
Deal honestly: if thou be grieved indeed, what is it that grives thee? sin,
or smart. Such as is the object of thy grief, such is thy repentance. As in
the case of fear of sin, so is it in the Qui Gehennas meluit, non peccare
metuit, sed ardere. Ille autem peccare metuit, qui peccatum ipsum sic ut
Gehennas odit. August. ^ep. 144.
case of grief for sin. In the case of fear, Augustines saying is true, He
that fears hell* fears not to sin, but to burn. But he fears to sin, who so
hates sin it self, as hell. To fear hell, is to fear burning, not sinning;
he fears sinning, that dreads sinning as he dreads burning. It is so in case
of grief: he that is sorry because of hell, is not sorry because he has
sinned, but because he shall burn. He is truly sorry for sin, that is more
grieved for sinning than he is afraid of burning. If then sin, mere sin,
without relation to hell, be that which does disquiet us, and this be the thing
that mainly troubles us, that we have been such beasts to offend God, there is
a cause of great joy in such sorrow, it is an evidence of thy true repentance.
But if dread of hell, and the fear of being damned, be the thing that works
this sorrow and grief in us, there is little cause of comfort in such
repentance. So may our repentance be tried by the object of our sorrow.

2 Secondly, the depth and greatness of this sorrow, will serve to try the
truth of our repentance. The sorrow of repentance is not a slight, overly,
superficial grief, but a deep and an hearty sorrow. That as David speaks of
in that case, Ps. 73. 21. Thus was mine heart grieved, or thus was mine heart
leavened; that is, his grief was so great, that his heart was leavened with
it. A little leaven leavens the whole lump, therefore much leaven does it much
more; his whole heart was sowred with the leaven of sorrow. Such is the grief
and sorrow of repentance; it is a leavening grief that leavens the whole lump
of the heart, it seasons and affects all the whole heart. Therefore the
mourning of repentance is called a great mourning, Zach. 12. 11. In that day
there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem. How great? as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo. As great as was the mourning for the
untimely loss of Josiah. How great that was, see 2 Chro. 35. 24, 25. So deep
is the sorrow, and so great is the sorrow for sin in repentance. Yea, it is a
bitter mourning, Zech. 12. 10. And they shall mourn for him, as one mournes
for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn. A man that looses his firstborn, and his
only son, how bitterly mournes that man? Repentance mournes so bitterly,
Peter went out, and wept bitterly; they be waters of Marah that flow from the
eyes of repentance. Nay, though it be a bitter sorrow, which is for the loss
of an only son, and the loss of dear friends; yet in repentance God looks
for a geeater sorrow than that is, which is for the death of dearest friends:
therefore Isay 22. 12. The Lord called to weeping, mourning, and baldness. God
in special manner prohibited baldness in their mournings for the dead, Deuteronomy.
14. 1. Ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness between your
eyes, for the dead: and yet God that forbad it in mourning for the dead, calls
for it in mourning for sin. To teach how great our sorrow for sin should be;
that there ought to be a greater sorrow in repentance for sin, than of natural
affection for the loss of our dearest friends by death. It was a great sorrow
that of David's for Amnons death, 2 Samuel 13. 36, 37. The King wept very sore, or
with a great weeping greatly: and David mourned for his son every day. He wept:
He wept with a great weeping, and with a great weeping greatly: And he mourned
daily. Such is the sorrow of repentance, a deep and a daily sorrow, till God
allay it with some answers of peace. Hence it is that it manifests it self
with such outward expressions. The Publican smites upon his breast, Luke 18.
And Ephraim smites upon his thigh, Ier. 31. 19. And Ezra rends his garment,
plucks the hair off his head and beard, Ezra 9. 3. All but to testify the
deep and hearty sorrow for sin. By this may men take a trial of their
repentance. If thou have had a leavened spirit, an imbittered spirit, and have
lamented after the Lord, 1 Samuel 7. 2. whom thou had lost by thy sin, as thou
would have lamented after a dear lost friend; if thou have been in the
waters of Marah, the greater thy grief has been, the greater cause of
comfort have thou in the truth of repentance. But so formal, so slight, is the
sorrow of many hearts for sin, that it is a clear case they are strangers to
repentance.

3 Thirdly, A forsaking, an utter Post luctum poenitentiae non redeas ad
peccatum, non iterum facias quod iterum plangas. Non est paenitens sed irrisor,
qui adhuc agit unde paenitent. Bern. de modo been vivendi.
ejection, and rejection of all our former sinful lusts and ways, Prove. 28.
He that confesses and forsakes. Repentance not only confesses, but forsakes
the confessed sin, Job 34 32. If I have done iniquity, I will do no more. That
is the language and the resolution of true repentance, Ephesians. 4 28. Let him
that stole steal no more. True repentance makes men do as God did when he
repented him, Genesis 6. 6, 7. And it repented the Lord that he had made man on
earth, and it grieved him at his heart: but that was not all, And the Lord said
I will destroy man, whom I have created from the face of the earth, both man
and beast, etc. for it repents me that I have made them. Nay, repentance in man
goes further, one Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, and he was spared
from the common destruction; but here, not one lust or sin finds grace in the
eyes of a man, that truly repents, but all must be drowned in the flood of the
tears of repentance. It is with a man that has the grief of true repentance,
as it was with Nehemiah, Neh. 13. 7, 8. I came to Jerusalem, and understood of
the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobia, in preparing him a chamber in the
courts of the house of God, and it grieved me sore: but he rests not there,
but goes further, therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out
of the chamber. What should Tobiah do with a chamber there? Therefore he not
only outs Tobiah, but out goes all his stuff too. So does repentance, when it
considers all the evil that Satan and corruption have done, and how they have
taken up chambers in the heart, that should be the house of God, it is grieved
sore, and thereupon it outs Satan and all his stuff; neither Satan, nor his
stuff, shall be chamberd there any longer. So does repentance dispossess
Satan of the soul, as Christ dispossessed his body of him, Mark 9. 25. Thou
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee to come out of him, and enter no more
into him: so repentance casts Satan and filthy abominations out of a man, that
they enter no more, they are cast out for ever. Tears of repentance are not
only wetting but washing tears, Isay 1. 16. Wash you, make you clean. David's
tears washed his couch, Psalm. 6. and so much more washed himself. Baptism is
called the Baptism of Repentance, Luke 3. 3. In baptism there is a washing
away of sin. And how is baptism the baptism of repentance, if in repentance
there were not the doing away of sin. If a man could shed a sea of tears,
yet if he do not drown his sin in that sea, what were he the better? If a man
should weep his eyes out, yet if he weep not his sins out, to what purpose
were it? Wheresoever repentance is, there must necessarily follow this
forsaking, and casting off our sins, because with true repentance these two
things ever go: first, an abomination and loathing of sin; the man that
repents horribly, loathes his sins by which he has offended, Job 42. 6. I
abhor my self, and repent. Ezekiel. 20. 43. Ye shall loath your selves in your
own sight for all your evils that ye have committed. Secondly, an indignation
against sin, 2 Cor. 7. What indignation? Hosea 14. 8. Ephraim shall say, what
have I to do any more with Idols? Now that which a man loathes, and that
against which a man has an indignation, he must needs put it and cast it away
from him, see Isay 30. 22. Thou shall cast them away, namely, their Idols; and
why so? Because they loathed them, they were as a menstruous cloth; and
because they had indignation against them, Thou shall say unto it, Get thee
hence. So that let there once be abomination and indignation, and there will be
a casting away. Try thy repentance by this; consider what have thy sins, thy
beloved sins been; is thy drunkenness with loathing and indignation forsaken?
are thine oaths, uncleanness, covetous courses, etc with loathing and
indignation Nam qui plangit peccatum and iterum facit peccatum, quasi si quis
lavet laterem crudum qui qui quanto amplius laverit tam amplius faciet lutum.
Bern. de modo been vivendi.
abandoned? it is a good sign. But how idely talk they of repentance, who
because they have blubbered out a few tears, think all is well, when yet they
still live and lie in their sins, and hold them as fast as ever. The Mariners
when they found out Jonas, yet feign they would have saved him, wondrous loath
to cast him overboard. Many see their sins, and know them to be dangerous
sins, but yet exceeding loath to shake hands with them, loath to throw them into
the sea, but will rather adventure their own casting away, than cast them
overboard. Never deceive thy self; though thou have sighed, cried, prayed,
begged mercy, yet if still thou live and go on in thy sinful courses, there is
no truth of repentance in thee.

4 Fourthly, A walking in holiness and obedience, and bringing forth the
fruits thereof. Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. There is mention, Romans
6. Of fruits in holiness, and Phil. 1. 11. Of fruits of righteousness, and
Col. 1. 5. Of fruits of obedience: Now such fruits are meet for repentance.
Bring forth fruits, says S. John, meet for repentance. It is a metaphor taken
from trees transplanted, or grafted into other stocks. Before their grafting
they bring forth fruit, but it is bitter and sour fruit, wildings and crabs;
but new siances grafted upon those stocks, there is new fruit brought forth. A
Pepon being grafted upon a Crab stock, the stock brings forth no more Crabs,
but Pepons, a new and a good fruit. Such a change and renovation is there in
repentance, it makes a man a new man, walking in newness of life, Ephesians. 4.
23, 24. Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man. How
shall it appear that this is done? Amongst other things by that, Verse. 28. Let
him that stole steal no more, there is the former thing in the forsaking of
sin. But that is not all, there is yet more to be done, But rather let him
labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give
to him that needs. So that repentance not only binds the hands from theeving,
but opens them to giving. It makes a thief become a merciful man. It was the
Churches sin, Cant. 5. 3. that when Christ knocked, and would have had her
opened unto him, she neglects him, and puts him off with excuses. But
afterward V. 4. Her bowels were moved for him, or in her, her bowels made a
troubled noise, sounded, and rumbled, that is, she was exceedingly grieved and
disquieted, that she had done so foolishly. But that does not serve her turn,
to grieve for her fault, but she will mend it too, and falls to doing of duty,
Verse. 5. I rose up to open to my beloved. Many have their bowels move within
them, but yet it will not move them out of their beds; they lie still, but I
rose up and opened, says the Church, and makes after CHRIST whom she had
foolishly neglected. Try thy repentance by it. Son, go work to day in my
Vineyard, says the Father in the Parable to his Son, he answered and said, I
will not, but afterward he repented, and went, Mat. 21. 28, 29. He repented,
because he was not only grieved for his former disobedience, but also because
he went, and did his Fathers work in the Vineyard. If thou do the like, if
thou so grieve for former disobediences, as that now thou fallest to thy
Fathers work, and fallest hard and close to it, then thou repentest. The
contrary convinces men of impenitency. It is not weeping, but working, that
must evidence repentance; we may see many weep, but we cannot see them work;
and all that repent must turn to God, and do works meet for repentance, Acts
26. 20. Where no such works of holiness and obedience, there is no turning to
God, nor truth of repentance.

Chap. 13. The Examination of Love.
COme we now in the next place to the Examination of Love. There is deceit and
hypocrisy in love as well as in faith, Let love, says the Apostle, be
without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. or without hypocrisy, (...). 1 Pet. 1. 22.
Unto unfeigned love of the brethren, (...), Unto a love of the brethren without
hypocrisy. So that there may be hypocrisy in love, and a man may play the
hypocrite in his love, as well as in the profession of his faith. God hates
hypocrisy wheresoever, as well in the second Table, as the first. And
therefore requires sincerity in our love to our brethren, 1 John. 3. 18. My
little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed, and
in truth. Men must have love in their tongues, and love in their words, but
James 2. 15, ^6. There we find love in words, a loving tongue, but where (...)
deeds? There is no loving hand, Notwithstanding ye give them not those things,
etc. Love that has a smoth and a kind tongue, and yet has a withered hand,
shows it self in no good deeds and works, it is but a fained and a
dissembling love. It is no more than an hypocrite may do. Nay, a man may have
a loving tongue, and be like Nepthali, Genesis 49. 21. Give goodly words, yea, and
may do goodly deeds, not be wanting in outward actions and expressions; and
yet for all this may play the hypocrite, and his love not be without
dissimulation. Therefore the Apostle yet adds one thing more, Let us love in
deed and in truth. Therefore there may be words, and tongue, and deeds, and yet
not truth. And so long as that is wanting, be there else what there will, all
is but hypocrisy; words, tongue, and deeds, may be without truth (...)uth
will never be without them (...)ve will creep where it cannot go. That
therefore the Apostle gives in cha(...) to elder men, belongs to all, Tit. 2.
2. That the aged men be sound in faith and charity. It is not enough to be
sound in faith, but we must be sound in love. As faith must be without
hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 1. 5. so must love, Romans 12. 9. It is dangerous to be
rotten in the faith, it is also dangerous to be rotten in our love. It
therefore concerns a man as well to examine the truth of his love, as of other
graces. Men may do much and go far in the love of Gods people, and yet not
love them as they ought to be loved.

First, they may hold an outward correspondency with them in outward peace and
neighborhood, they may live quietly by them, and with them, be free from
quarrels, suits, contentions, vexations, and oppositions against them, and in
these respects may keep fair quarter with them, and yet for all this not love
them as godly people are to be loved. Abimelech and Phicol, Genesis 26. 28, 29.
desire to live peaceably and quietly with Isaac, that there may be an oath,
and a covenant between them: But yet these being heathens, could not love
Isaac as a godly man should be loved. They departed from him in peace, Verse.
31. Peace is one thing, and love is another.

2 Secondly, they may prefer, dignifie, advance, and honor them, and yet not
love them as godly men should be loved. Besides Gods sanctifying graces, there
are oftentimes in Gods children other gifts of wisdom, prudence, learning,
fidelity, skill and activity in secular employments. All which may gain them
great respect in other men's hearts. So Pharaoh honored Joseph, and we see his
ground, Genesis 41. 38, 39, 40. So Nebuchadnezzar preferred Daniel, and we see his
ground, Dan. 2. 47, 48. So Laban set Jacob over his flocks, and we see his
ground, Genesis 30. 27. So many a Master loves a godly servant, not because he is
a good man, but because he is a good servant. This is self-love, they love
them, because they love themselves: such men are for their ends of profit,
advantage, etc. and for their turns; and therefore out of a self-love, and
selfe-respect, love and respect them. That their love of them is not for their
godliness, appears by this, because though there were not one dram of grace
and godliness in them, yet for their other abilities should they be no less
dear unto them, then now they are with all their graces.

3 Thirdly, they may magnify them, highly commend and reverence them for good
men, and yet not love them as godly men should be loved. Abimelech called
Isaac, The blessed of the Lord, Genesis 26. Herod observed and reverenced John,
Mark 6. The people magnified the believers, Acts 5. 13. There were a great
many that hated, opposed, and vilefied them; but yet among the Jews there were
some that were of a more tolerable and equal temper; and though they durst not
go so far, as to join themselves with them, yet thus far they went, that
when others reproached, scorned, and calumniated them, they were ready to
commend and plead for them. They would happily thus speak, Well, you may say
this and that, and speak your pleasure of them, but when you have said all
that ever you can, yet we see they be very good people, very conscionable and
godly men, they are (...) other but what you and we should ^^. Here was
magnifying of them, but yet not loving them as they should have been loved,
because as the Text says, Of these no man durst join himself to them. All
this arises not from love, but from the conviction of conscience, upon the
sight of the luster and beauty of their shining graces, and upon the experience
of the integrity of their ways. Conscience convinced cannot but open the mouth
to give godly men an honorable testimonial, in magnifying and reverencing
them.

4 Fourthly, they may do them many kind offices, courtesies, and favors, and
yet for all this not love them as godly men are to be loved. Ierobo^m may
invite a Prophet to dinner. The very Barbarians did show courtesy to them,
Acts 28. 2. and yet were far enough from this love. Humanity, civility, good
nature, and good nurture, may carry men far in this kind.

5 Fifthly, they may as honor their lives, so desire their deaths, and yet not
love them as godly men should be loved. Balaam desires the death of the
righteous, and that his latter end may be like unto his; and yet Balaam that
feign would have cursed Israel, was far enough from the love of a Saint. Many
when they see a godly man's end, may speak honorably of him, and wish, Oh that
my soul might rest with his, oh that my soul might speed as his, for I am
persuaded he is in heaven; and yet all this while not love a godly man as a
godly man should be loved.

6 Sixthly, they may honor the memory of them when dead and gone, and upon all
occasions give them honorable testimonialls for their piety, godliness, etc.
and yet not love them as godly men should be loved. The Pharisees, Matthew. 23.
built up the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and seemed to show great love to their
memorials; and yet if they had been alive, they would have dealt no better by
them than their Fathers did. Thus much may be done, and yet love wanting; that
love wanting wherewith a Saint is to be loved. For with such a love must a man
come to the Sacrament, in which there is so special an exercise of the
communion of Saints. Since therefore all this is not enough, let us see then
what it is that is required more, that our love may be such, as will qualify
us for the orderly receiving of the Sacrament. True love then to the members of
Christ, to godly and gracious persons, may be thus known.

1 First, it loves them as Saints under the relation of brethren, because they
be brethren, because they be sons of God the same Father, sons of the Church
the same common mother, and members of Christ our elder Brother. When a man
loves godly men, not because they be great, rich, learned, wise, because they
may do or have done him a pleasure; but merely because they have Gods Image
upon them, in grace and holiness, he loves them, as godly persons should be
loved. When Gods grace in them is the ground, and Gods Image upon them is the
Loadstone of our love, when we love them not because we love our gain,
respect, etc. but because we love God, and see them to be his, then is our love
right, 1 John 5. 2. Hereby we know that we love the children of God, and love
them as the children of God, bearing Gods Image upon them, when we love God.
That is true love of godly men when our love to them is grounded upon, and
flows from our love to God. On the contrary may it be said of many, that they
love not the children of God. No, not love the children of God? Why, I love
such and such a man, and you will not say but they are the dear children of
God. I but by this we know that men love not the children of God, when men
love themselves, and seek their own base ends. It is one thing in some sort to
love a man that is a child of God, and another to love him because he is a
child of God. It is one thing to love a godly man, and another because he is a
godly man. A man may love one who is a Scholar and a Preacher, but yet not
love him because he is a Scholar or a Preacher; nay, it may be he could love
him a great deal better if he were neither. The Apostle speaks of love out of
a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. And S. Peter of loving the brethren with a pure
heart, 1 Pet. 1. 22. When love is pure, it is true. Then it is pure love, when
it springs from none other Fountain but the loveliness of Gods grace and
Image, in those whom we love.

2 Secondly, true love to the children of God, and to Saints; it loves such
above all others, the best of all others, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor all men, love
the brotherhood. There is a love, and a respect to be given to all men,
according to their relations, worth, quality, etc. but yet true Christian love
bestows its Beniamins portion, the specialty, and choice of its affection upon
godly ones. It loves a godly religious man better than a learned man; and the
more godly a man is, it loves him the more. Do good to all, but specially to
the household of faith, Gal. 6. So love all men in their order and degree, but
let your brotherly love, your heartiest and sweet affection, be toward such as
are brethren. Love the brotherhood. A love of the brotherhood must be a
brotherly love, a love as to brethren. In a Family, a man loves all the
servants, but yet he bears a more special neerenesse and deerenesse of
affection to his brethren, than to servants, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Love as brethren. We
read of a young man, Mark. 10. that came running to Christ, and enquiring how
he might inherit eternal life. And we read of Lazarus whom Christ raised from
the dead, Ioh. 11. It is said of both, that Christ loved them: of the rich
young man, Mark 10. 21. Then Jesus beholding him, loved him: of Lazarus, John
11. 3. Lord, he whom thou love is sick. Now the young man was a Pharisee,
only he had some candor and ingenuity in him, more than usually was in
Pharisaicall spirits, and so far Christ loved him, showed loving respect and
carriage toward him. But now Lazarus was a godly and an holy man, and
therefore Christ loved him with a more specialty of affection. He loved the one
as a moral fair conditioned man, that had some good desires and inclination
toward good; but he loved Lazarus dearly, and intimately, as a godly and a
good man, with such specialty of affection, that it was enough to know him
without his Name, by Christ's love to him; The man whom thou love. By this try
the truth of thy love: Whom love thou best? Have the best men the best of
thine affection? Are those dearest to thee, who are dearest to God? the best
evidence that can be of the truth of thy love. But this proves many to want
this love, and that they love not the godly as godly men should be loved, what
ever their professions and protestations of love be. For let it be granted that
they love them, yet let it be enquired whom they love best, to whom their
hearts and affections are closest knit. Look upon those that are deepest in
their affections, and judge whether they be at the best, more than moral and
civil; and whether those that be godly and religious have half that affection
and love that mere civil persons have. Thou do not love godly men best,
therefore thy love is hypocritical; thou love a moral man better than one
that is religious, therefore thy love is with dissimulation.

3 Thirdly, true love loves as the Colossians did, Gol. 1. 4. It loves all the
Saints. Where grace is the ground of love, where ever grace is, there is love,
as fire still follows the fuel. Grace has the same beauty in all; and if
grace be the attractive of affection, it draws affection to all in whom it is.
The love that is amongst Gods Saints is compared to the ointment that was
powered upon Aarons head, Psalm. 133. 2. It was powered upon his head, but it
rested not there, it ran also down upon his beard, nay, it ran down to the
skirts of his garments. So the love that is among the Saints, it diffuses it
self to all the members of Christ, it runs not only upon the head and beard,
but upon the skirts of the garments to the very lowest and meanest of Gods
people in whom there is grace. It excludes not any whom God has received, Romans
14. 3. despises not any whom God has chosen, James 2. 5, 6. Love the
brotherhood, says S. Peter. He does not say, love a brother, or such of the
brethren, but love the brotherhood, the whole fraternity, society, and company
of the Saints, the whole brood and brotherhood of Gods people. Try thy love by
this. He that loves a godly man for his grace, that has no other thing to
commend him, neither friends, nor riches, nor credit, nor profit, that can love
poor godliness, as well as rich godliness, that can love grace in rags, as
well as in robes, in russet and leather, as well as in silks and velvets; such
a love to all Saints is a good evidence of truth of love. But when men love
only some great and rich ones that have grace, and regard not meaner ones
though gracious, it is a sign that it is not true love. Yea, it is a blameable
error in many, that though their love be indeed to the godly, yet it is with a
kind of confinement only to some as worthy of their communion and affection.
It is not to be denied, but that a man may love some godly men more than
othersome. Christ himself had his beloved Disciple, and we shall find that
thrice Christ showed some speciality of favor and affection to three of them
above the rest, Luke 8. 51. He suffered none to go in, save Peter, James, and
John. Luke 9. 28. in his transfiguration he took up with him only Peter,
James and John. And in his agony when he sequestered himself from the rest of
his Disciples, yet he takes these three along with him, Mat. 26. 37. But yet
such a confinement of our affection to some choice ones, as goes with a
contempt or plain neglect, and exclusion of others of meaner abilities and
graces, is an unwarrantable thing, such as will not be allowed by this sign of
love now instanced in.

4 Fourthly, true love loves and delights in the fellowship and society of the
godly. Love the brotherhood says S. Peter. He does not say, love the
brethren, but love the brotherhood, that is, as some expound it, the
fellowship of the brethren, and so our former translation reads it, Love
brotherly fellowship. Brotherhood implies sometimes fellowship, as Zech. 11.
14. I will break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel. The natural
relation between them could not be broken, but their mutual society and
fellowship should be broken, they should be divided and dispersed each from
other. So then, they that love the godly, love their brotherhood, their
company, their conference and communion with them. This evidence^ t^^ truth of
David's love, Psalm. 1^. 3. All my delight is in the Saints on earth, my delight
is in their company and conference. Many in the world magnify the Saints in
heaven; yea, some over*magnifie them, whilst they would give divine worship to
them; but in the mean time make little account of the Saints on earth, nay,
hate them, imprison, kill, and burn them, Apoc. 13. 7. but David delights in
the Saints on earth. Psalm. 119. 63. I am a companion of all them that fear
thee, and of them that keep thy precepts. Try then, where lies thy delight?
What is the company and society thou affectest? If it be the society of the
godly, thy love is to them. But this discovers the hypocrisy of many men's
love. They do love godly men with all their hearts. But yet examine who be
their companions, and mark who they be in whose society they delight, and are
they such as are godly and religious? Take they not more delight in the
fellowship of drunkards, vain and ^^^thy persons? Is not godly company the
most irksome, wearisome thing in the world to them? What can clear it more,
that men love not the godly. It may be thou commendest them, and speak all
good of them; but if thou join not in society with them, thou do but as
those before spoken of, Acts 5. 13. They gave the believers good words, but
they durst not join themselves unto them. It may be thou speak not against
them, not because thou love them, but because thou love thy self, that
they may not speak against thee. It may be thou speak well of them, and all
because with good words thou would buy good words again. This is love in
word, in tongue, but not in deed and in truth. Look where thy delight and
company is, there is thy love.

5 True love is hardly angered, easily pleased. Hardly angered, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
Charity suffers long. Verse. 5. It is not easily provoked. It will suffer long,
and bear much, ere it will break. It may be provoked, but not easily. Easily
pleased, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity is kind, James 3. 17. The wisdom that is from
above, is gentle, easily to be entreated. God is love (says the Apostle, 1
John 4. 8. And God is slow to anger, Ps. 103. 8. He suffers long, Exodus 34. 6.
He is not easily provoked. And he is easily reconciled. Psalm. 103. 9. Neither
will he keep his anger for ever. Nay, not easily to be entreated, but he
intreates and beseeches us, the offending parties, to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.
20. Now what makes God so slow to anger, so quick, so easy to be appeased?
Because God is love. It is the nature of love so to be, and love is his nature.
The Apostle presses Christians to two special things, Col. 3. 13. For bearing
one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any.
I but these be hard things to be done, how shall a man come to be able to do
these things? Therefore the Apostle teaches us a way how to do it in the very
next verse and words, And above all things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness. The way to do these things, is to get charity and love. Mark then
the nature of love. It is not easily provoked, it is hardly angered, it is a
forbearing grace. It is easy to be pleased. It is a forgiving grace. It is
hardly angered, because it forbeares. It is easily pleased, because it forgives.
Love is a forbearer, and a forgiver. Try thy self by this. If thou art
exceeding loath to be provoked, suffer much, and suffer long, and art
willing to bear, till the number and weight of the burdens grow so heavy and
unsupportable, that thy back is ready to break before thou complain. If thou
art willing to swallow injuries and wrongs one in the neck of another, so long
as they are swallowable, that they would not choke or poison thee if thou
should offer to swallow any more (for no charity binds a man openly to
wrong himself) such forbearance argues that thou have put on charity. If
offenses be given thee, and wrong, gross wrong done thee, yet if thou can
readily, cheerfully, willingly, and cordially forgive, it is a good sign of
true love. But how far are many from the truth of this grace in their hearts,
who are easily off the hooks, and presently provoked, and all to pieces upon a
small offense given; nay, it may be upon no offense given at all, only upon an
accidental slip, or a fail in a formality and complement. No forbearance
argues small charity. As far are they from love that are of implacable,
irreconcilable spirits; once lost, and lost for ever, whom no kindnesses can
overcome, whom no satisfactions can appease, nor no wisdom can set in joint
again.

Quest. But what if a man have done me wrong, and diverse ways injured me by
offensive carriages; whether am I bound to forgive him or no, he seeking no
reconciliation with me. Am I bound to forgive, where forgiveness is not
sought, and must I stay from the Sacrament because I have not forgiven one that
wrongs me, and seeks not peace.

Answ. In forgiving of an offender there be three things:

1 The letting fall of al wrath, malice, and desire of revenge.

2 The testification of forgiveness. A solemn profession of remission.

3 The re-acceptance, and readmission of an offendour into former society,
communion, and familiar converse.

For the first. A man is bound to forgive in that respect whether the party
offending ask forgiveness, or ask it not. A man must so forgive as that he
must bear no malice, nor nourish any thoughts of revenge. For though mine
adversary sin in his obstinacy, yet his sin will not warrant me to sin in
malice, and thoughts of revenge. If mine enemy will not do that which belongs
to him, yet I may not do that which belongs to God. Therefore for matter of
revenge, and malice, we must always forgive: and unless a man do so forgive
as to let fall all malice and thoughts of revenge, he sins in coming to the
Sacrament.

For the second. Our Savior gives a rule, Luke 17. 4. If he trespass against
thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again unto thee,
saying, It repents me, or I repent, thou shall forgive him. He does not say, If
thy brother offend against thee seven times, thou shall forgive him seven
times: but if he say, I repent. Whether he say so, or not, I must forgive him
in regard of malicious and vindictive thoughts. But I am not bound to testify
my forgiving him, and to say to him, I forgive thee, unless he say, I repent.
To forgive is one thing, and to say I forgive and make a solemn profession of
remission is another.

For the third. A man is not bound in that particular to forgive till just
satisfaction be given. Satisfaction being duly given, I must forgive so far,
but satisfaction obstinately denied, I may refuse society and fellowship with
him. Religion binds not to receive an enemy into bosom communion: now so long
as he stands out in his enmity, he can be interpreted to be none other, so long
as he says not, It repents him: yea, and though a man do not forgive in
these two cases, yet may he with a good conscience come to the Sacrament. And
therefore mark how our Savior speaks, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. If there thou
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, go thy ways and be first
reconciled, etc. He does not say, If there thou remembrest that thou have ought
against thy brother. Thereby showing that the bar is against the party
delinquent, and that a person receiving injury and wrong, so he come without
malice, and forgive in the first respect, is not debarred Gods ordinance,
though he remit not in both the last, just satisfaction not being tendered upon
wrong done.

6 Sixthly, true love loves fervently: fervent love, and unfeigned love are
joined together, 1 Pet. 1. 22. True love will abound and increase more and
more, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 10. Ye love all the brethren, but we beseech you that ye
increase more and more. It sets it self no sint nor bounds, it is ready and
willing to give and take all occasions, for increase and confirmation. As fire
is not only ready to kindle, when blown, but ready to catch of it self any
combustible matter being ministered. True love hates all hypocritical
reservations, and lets out it self to the giving and embracing of all
opportunities that may prove incentives to it. Thereby try and examine the
truth of thy love. A spark will kindle to a flame if it be true. But this one
thing discovers a great deal of hallow-hearted hypocritical love in the
world. There be that for their turns and ends can do more, and dispense
further than they will for God and his Commandment: if God and his
Commandment, and coals heaped upon their heads, call for the letting fall of
their stomachs, they cannot stoop to it, nay, with scorn and pride of spirit,
reject tenders and offers of love. But if some end of their own to be
compassed, or turn of their own to be served, then they can make a shift to
make some shows of love and desire of friendship; but yet with resolutions to
keep a fair distance, that there shall never be an entire knitting, and
mutual closing of affections; and therefore set themselves bounds, and a
stint, beyond which they are resolved never to pass. They will not be wanting
in common courtesies, civil correspondencies, but yet for entireness, and
intimate familiarity, will be sure to block up the way thereto, by affected
distances, and reservations of themselves. They will be pardoned for
familiarity, that is more than needs. A carriage fair to the worlds eye, that
the world shall not see but all is well, they will frame to, but further they
resolve never to go. Surely they were as good say, they will play the
hypocrites with men, and that their love shall be with dissimulation. For love
which sets it self bounds and bars, beyond which it will not step, that love
steps not beyond hypocrisy. That love which will not kindle, which will
neither be blown to a flame, nor take flame, it is love dissembled. True
fire, though it be ever so little a spark, may be blown and be brought to a
flame; but all the blowing in the world will never make painted fire burn.
Such persons are but like Salomons silverd potsheard, Prove. 26. 23. Burning
lips and a wicked heart, are a potsheard covered with silver dross. What ever
fair silverly shows they make, they are potsheards slubbered over with
dross. Such love as is not fervent, is fained. So much for the examination of
love.

Chap. 14. The Examination of Obedience.
Obedience. There is deceit in obedience, and much hypocrisy may be in it.
Saul glories in his obedience, 1 Samuel 15. 13. I have performed the commandment
of the Lord. Behold, I have obeyed God. Yea, after Samuel had pinched him with
so close an answer, he still stands to it, Verse. 20. Yea, I have obeyed the
voice of the Lord, and have gone the way which the Lord sent me. And yet Samuel
charges him still with rebellion and disobedience, and leaves him not till he
makes him confess his sin. So ready are men to deceive themselves in their
obedience to God, as if their obedience were good and acceptable, when there is
no such matter. Men will not be borne down but that they are obedient people
to God, I have performed the commandment of the Lord, Behold I have obeyed
God, says Saul, and so say many as well as he, as far from it as was he. But
as Samuel there convinced Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 14. so may men be convinced of
disobedience. What means then, says Samuel, this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear. There was not an Ox that
Iowed, not a Sheep that bleated, but openly, and loudly, proclaimed Saul a
disobedient person. So men say they do obey God, and they are wronged to be
charged with disobedience. But what then means the bleating and the lowing of
their oaths? What means then the neglect of God, in the public ordinances,
in their private families? what mean their Lord's Day profanations? what mean
their whoredoms, drunkenness, and other not bleating, not lowing, but crying,
loud crying sins, in the ears of God and man?

It is needful therefore that men examine their obedience, whether it be such
as is required in him that will be an orderly Communicant. True obedience then
may be known by these things:

1 The Grounds of it. 2 The End of it. 3 The Properties of it.
The Grounds of obedience are 3.

1 First, the ground of true obedience is the authority and will of God. Gods
will is, that such a thing be done, and his power is sovereign and absolute
to command, so as whatsoever he commands it must be done, because he
commands. Therefore we shall find, Levit. 19. that in that one Chapter this
one reason, I am the Lord, is used thirteen several times. The meaning
whereof is this; such and such commandments I enjoyne you, if you will know
the ground why you should obey the^, this is the ground, I am the Lord, a God of
sovereign power and authority, and my will it is that such things be done. And
therefore it is that Gods will is brought in Scripture, as the reason of the
obedience that is required. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. For this is the will of God even
your sanctification. So 1 These. 5. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 15. The ground therefore of
all obedience must be the will and Commandment; that if a man be asked a
reason of his obedience, why he does this or that, he may be able to say, I see
it is Gods will and commandment it should be done, and because it is his will,
therefore I do it. This was the ground of David's obedience, Psalm. 119. 4. 5.
Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently, Oh that my ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes. His desires were exceeding strong to give God
obedience in keeping his statutes, and the ground of it was, Thou have
commanded. That only and properly is obedience, which is done Intuitu
voluntatis, by looking at Gods will, by having a respect or an eye to Gods
commandment, Psalm. 119. 6. and doing it because it is his will. Look as it is
in the case of faith, so is it in the case of obedience. Then a man believes,
when the ground of his faith is only the Word of God; he believes only
because it is the Word and will of God he should believe. If a man believe such
a truth because he has good arguments and reasons for it, by which he is led
to believe it, this is science, but not faith. Thus is it in obedience, to do
things commanded upon other grounds then the commandment, is not obedience.
Suppose a man do the same same thing that God commands, and yet know not that
God commands it, this is no obedience: or if a man do know that it is
commanded, but does it not, because it is commanded, neither is this obedience
to God; for as where there is no Law, there is no transgression, so where there
is no knowledge of a Law, there is no obedience. In all true obedience there
must be a knowledge of, and an eye to the will of God, Romans 12. 2. Proving what
is the will of God, that is, searching and trying, and so allowing the good and
acceptable will of the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 17. Understanding what the will of the
Lord is. Both which places imply thus much, that that only is obedience
indeed, which is done upon the knowledge and conscience of being Gods will. To
do that which is Gods will, and not to do it because it is his will, is not
obedience. By this may a man try his obedience. If thine heart can sincerely
witness that the ground of thy obedience and all thine actions therein, is
Gods will, that thou see it is his will to have it done, and because it is
his will thou do it, such obedience is upon the right ground. But by this
may the unsoundnesse of many a man's obedience be discovered. Some men come duly
to public duties of Gods worship and service; but what is the ground? Is it
the will of God, or the law of Man, or the talk of the World, that brings them
thereunto. Many a man is diligent in his calling, follows it close, and it is
a thing commanded of God so to do. But if a man do it, not because God wills
it, but because desire of gain carries him on, or necessity of maintenance
forces him thereto, this is no obedience to God, but obedience to his
covetousness, or obedience to his necessities, which call upon him for
diligence and painfulnesse.

2 Second ground of obedience, The grace of faith. True obedience must spring
and flow from faith. S. Paul speaks, Romans 16. 26. Of the obedience of faith,
that is, that obedience which in believing we give to God. But yet in a larger
sense, all obedience may be called the obedience of faith, because by it we
give God that obedience we give him, Heb. 11. 8. By faith Abraham obeyed God.
Faith quickens and enables to obedience, so as without it we can give God no
obedience. Therefore Romans 3. 3^ Faith stablishes the Law; because it is faith
that helps a man to perform all the obedience he performs to it. Faith is
the ground of obedience thus.

1 First, a man must first believe what the will of God is, before he will go
about to yield it any obedience.

2 Secondly, all obedience flows from a man's laying hold on the covenant of
grace. In that covenant God articles with us, and binds himself to enable to
obedience, Ezekiel. 36. 27. Now this covenant must be laid hold on for ability and
strength to obedience, before a man can obey God. It is true in obedience to
every Commandment which is spoken of the fourth, Isay 56. 4. That keep my
Sabbath, and take hold of my Covenant. In the Covenant there is promised
strength unto obedience; and this covenant being taken hold on, strength to
obedience is given. Now that which lays hold upon the covenant is faith, which
from the covenant fetches ability to obedience.

3 Thirdly, CHRIST is the principle of all spiritual life and activity, John
15. 5. Phil 4. 13. Christ must first dwell in a man before he has strength in
the inner man, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. Now all virtue to be fetched from Christ, must
be drawn out of him by faith. And he by faith dwells in us, Ephesians. 3. 17. No
obedience, till we have Christ effectually working in us, and quickening us by
his spirit; and no Christ but by faith. By this then a man may try the truth of
his obedience. If it be fruit coming from a root of faith, it is good fruit. I
believed, therefore I spoke, Psalm. 116. So if thou can say, I believe,
therefore I pray, and do God service, John 9. 38. He said, Lord I believe, and
he worshipped him. I believe, therefore I sanctify the Lord's Day, I believe,
and therefore I do duties of obedience; then is thine obedience true fruit of
Paradise, because it grows upon the tree of life. But if thine obedience arise
from a root only of morality, it is but hedge fruit.

3 Third ground of obedience, is the true love of God and Christ. Indeed
obedience must not be upon constraint; but in one sense it is by constraint,
yet by the constraint of Love, 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of Christ constrains
us. Love has such an active power that it constraines us to obedience, not
only that love which Christ bears to us, but which we bear to him. Obedience
to God must be filial obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 14. As obedient children. Now the
obedience of a son to his Father flows from love. The love of his Father sets
him on work, to do what his father commands. The good son in the Vineyard,
Mat. 21. When his Father bid him go work in his Vineyard, he at first said, I
will not, but afterward he repented, and went and wrought in the Vineyard. Now
what was it that made him obey his Father: his Father promised no wages if he
would go work, nor threatened him any evil if he did not work, but there was
only a bare command, Mat. 21. 28. Son go work to day in my Vineyard: here are
neither wages promised, nor anger threatened, and yet he went. It was neither
hope of wages, nor fear of punishment, that carried him; but merely a sonlike
love, and the dutiful affection he owed to his Father, that wrought upon his
heart, and constrained him to go, though at first he refused it. And such is
true obedience unto God. Love unto God is the weight that sets the wheels on
going, John 14. If ye love me, keep my commandments. 1 John 5. 3. This is the
love of God, that we keep his commandments. Try we our obedience by this.
What is it that moves to obedience? If thou can plainly say, as the servant,
Exodus 21. 5. I love my Master, I will not go out free; so, I love my God, I
will not swear, etc. I love my God, therefore I will yield him all careful
obedience. If love be the weight and the oil that makes the wheels run, thine
obedience is such as it ought to be. But this discovers a great deal of false
obedience. Some men yield obedience for the love of themselves, the love of
their credit. Such was the Pharisees obedience, in their alms, prayers, and
fastings, only to purchase credit with men. Such is a civil man's obedience,
whose obedience is only to such commandments, and only to such branches of
those commandments, the breach whereof would blemish his reputation, and
blurre his credit in the world. Some yield obedience, and work in the Vineyard
for their penny, such as do all they do with a conceit of binding God to
them; and bringing him into their debt. Some again yield some obedience
neither for love, nor wages, but for mere fear; for fear either of the
penal laws of men which fence any commandment of God, or for fear of a
greater measure of wrath in Hell. None of all these is filial obedience rising
from love: These are obedient workmen, obedient slaves, that dread the whip,
but not obedient children. It is love to the Father, not wages from the Father,
that is the ground of a childs obedience. The son of a poor man that has
not a penny to give, or leave him, yields his father obedience as cheerfully as
the son of a rich man, that looks for a great inheritance. If there were no
heaven, Gods children would obey him, and though no hell, yet would they do
their duty. So powerfully does the love of their Father constrain them.

2 Secondly, the end of obedience that is obedience indeed, is the honor and
glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. Whatsoever ye do, let all be done to the glory of
God. John 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit. The
maine end that true obedience propounds, is the glory of him that commands.
When Christ's people give him obedience, it is the setting of the crown upon
his head, what makes him more a King than obedience, Cant. 3. 11. Behold King
Solomon with the Crown wherewith his mother crowned him. Now this is the main
end of right obedience, that the Crown may be set on Christ's head, that it may
bring him in the honor of the King, the crowned King of the Church, Phil. 1.
11. Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are unto the glory and praise
of God. Let every man examine his own heart, what his end is in his obedience.
If we have any other maine end but Gods glory, it makes it obedience to our
end, and not to God. How many yield that obedience they do, not to set the
Crown on Christ's head, but to set the crown upon their own heads. So do
hypocrites that seek their own praise, and credit, or profit; so do all
specially that do any thing with a conceit of meriting at Gods hand. Such
obedience as has squint respects at base and by ends, is in Gods sight as base
as the ends it looks at.

3 Thirdly, the properties of obedience. And they are these:

1 First, true obedience to God must be universal. And that in a threefold
respect.

1 In regard of the subject or person that yields obedience, he must do it with
the strength of his whole man, and all the faculties thereof, Ps. 119. 4. To
be kept exceedingly. Psalm. 103. 1. All that is within me. And thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.

2 In regard of the object, and of the commandments to be obeyed. They must be
all obeyed, Deuteronomy. 6. 25. Psalm. 119. 128. The obedience to be given to God, is
a filial obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 14. Now filial obedience must be universal,
Col. 3. 20. Children obey your parents in all things, for this is well pleasing
unto the Lord. It is not well pleasing to God, when children will obey their
parents only in what they think good. That is to yield obedience upon
courtesy, and not upon duty. See what a filial obedience the sons of Ionadab
gave their father, Ier. 35. 8, 10. In all that he has charged us. According to
all our father commanded. It was but an homely business that Kish sent Saul
about all considered. Kish, a man of great substance, A mighty man of power, 1 Samuel 9. 1. And Saul his son, a choice young man, and a goodly, not a goodlier
man amongst all the children of Israel, and yet his father sends him with one
of his servants to seek the Asses. And though it were but a mean service, yet
Saul yields him obedience. Our obedience to God must be a child-like obedience;
a childe-like obedience is universal to all commandments without exceptions,
dispensations, and reservations. Here Saul failed, 1 Samuel 15.

3 In regard of all time. Obedience must not be for some times, nor for a time.
Not for sometimes, to be sometimes on, and sometimes off, but it must be a
constant, settled, even course of obedience, that God looks for. Some men have
their fits of goodness, and have their good days, as men in an ague, but are
fickle and loose hearted, hold not their hearts close to God and good duties.
Thus is that obedience which the Scripture calls walking with God. Some take a
turn or two with him, go with him three or four steps; but that is not
walking with him. Walking with God, implies a settled even course of obedience
to him. Neither must obedience be for a time, but it must be continual to our
lives end, Luke 1. 75. All the days of our lives. 2 King. 17. 37. He shall
observe to do for ever more. Phil. 2. 8. Christ became obedient unto death:
that is, as Beza expounds it, Unto his dying day: not only obedient in his
death: but Christ's obedience as it begun at his incarnation, so it continued to
his dying day on the cross.

2 Secondly, true obedience is prompt and present; ready and speedy, without
shucking and hucking, without delays and consults, Psalm. 119. 60. I made have,
and delayed not. Mar. 1. 18. And immediately they forsook their nets, and
followed him. Zech. 5. 9. They had the wind in their wings. Wings, and wind in
their wings, to note, as Iunius observes, their readiness in their obedience.
Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. The Angels in heaven are
exceeding ready, and speedy in their obedience, and therefore mention also is
made of their wings. It was Lots fault to linger, Genesis 19. 16. There be that
say they will repent, and they will reform their ways. Obedience makes haste,
delays not. Where there be delays, where there is lead in the heels, or the
wings be plucked, or clipped, where men put off obedience to the time to come,
they may justly question the truth of their obedience.

3 Thirdly, true obedience is free, willing, unconstrained, Psalm. 110. 3. Thy
people shall come willingly. Psalm. 40. 8. Then I said, lo I come to do thy
will. Obedience is not (...), 2 Cor. 9. 7. nor (...), not grudgingly, or of
necessity, not sad, nor forced; but Col. 3. 23. (...), and Romans 6. 17. (...),
from the soul and the heart. His commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3.
To wicked men, the word of the Lord is a burden, Ier. 23. 33. Cords and bonds,
Psalm. 2. 3. Yokes and bonds, Ier. 5. 5. Now according to all these things frame
Articles, and Interrogatories, and put thy conscience to examination. This in
brief may suffice for the trial of the truth of grace.

Chap. 15. The growth of grace, and our wants, examined.
growth of our Graces. It is a point that concerns a man at all times to look
to the growth of his Grace, as that which must evidence the truth of it: for
where there is no growth of Grace, there is no truth of Grace. True Grace is
growing grace. There is a growing in knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18. A growing in
wisdom, Luke 2. 40. A growing in faith, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. All true grace grows.
There be counterfeit and false graces; and this is a maine thing that
differences true and counterfeit ones: True grace grows, counterfeit grace
grows not. There is a great deal of difference between a true Tree, and a
pictured Tree, between a true child, and the statue or Image of a child. A
true child grows, but the Image grows not, it is no taller nor bigger at an
hundred years end, than it was the first day it was made. Where there is truth
of grace, there is life of grace, and life will put forth it self and cause a
growth, as we see in living Trees, and living men that are not yet come to the
fullness of their growth, they grow because they live. And to show that true
grace grows, we shall find in Scripture several ages of Christianity and
religion, which are the several degrees of spiritual growth, the several
degrees of the growth of a Christian: ye have,

1 His conception, and the forming of him in the womb, Gal. 4. 19.

2 His birth, 1 Peter 1. 23. 1 Peter 2. 2.

3 His childe-hood, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. Heb. 3. 13. 1 John 2. 13. His infancy.

4 His well-growne age, or youth, when he is past the spoone, 1 John 2. 13.
Young men.

5 His full grown age, Ephesians. 4. 13. when he comes to man's estat, Heb. 5.

6 His old age. Mnason, an old Disciple, Acts 21. 16. when a man is grown a
gray headed experienced Christian, 1 John 2. 13. when men be grown Fathers.
Such as Psa. 92. 12, 13, 14. All to show, that where there is grace in truth,
there will be growth. And therefore it concerns us at all times to try the
growth of our grace. But though at all times it concerns us to examine the
growth of grace, yet in special manner does it concern us before we come to
the Sacrament. As the Sacrament of Baptism is the Sacrament of our new birth,
so is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the Sacrament of our spiritual
nutrition and growth. And therefore is this a reason why baptism is but once;
but the Supper is often administered and received, because a man is born but
once, but after he is borne, he stands in need to be fed often for his
nourishment and growth. And spiritual growth is a maine end and fruit of this
Ordinance. What makes the body grow more, than the use of food, in eating and
drinking? In the Supper there is provision of spiritual food to make us grow.
So that in this respect I may allude to that, Zech. 9. 17. How great is his
goodness, and how great is his beauty? corn shall make the young Man grow, etc.
Gods goodness is great in the Sacrament; he gives bread and wine, and with
them, to every faithful receiver, the Body and Blood of his Son; that by the
bread of his flesh, and the wine of his blood, he may cause Christians to
grow. So that it concerns us much to examine our growth, that we may know what
good our former receiving has done us. It is a great help to our profit in
receiving the Sacrament, to examine our selves how we have profited formerly.
Then may we know whether we have profited, when we know whether we have
grown. Such, and so much as is our growth, such and so much is our profit. And
when we find that we have profited, then may we comfortably still expect the
like blessing upon our use of the Ordinance. A man must needs go with little
cheerfulness to the Lords Table, when he knows not whether he shall get any
good by going, or not. That man that knows not whether ever he have received
any good or no, by his former receiving, can have little hope of receiving any
good by his future receiving. But when a man sees he is grown by the use of
the Ordinance, then he must needs go full of hope to the Ordinance. The way to
know a man's growth, is examination, and that by the signs of growth. And they
be these:

1 First, spiritual strength. The more growth, the more strength in spiritual
things. In nature, strength follows growth. Trees in their first beginings are
weak, will bend and bow every way, but as they grow, they grow stronger, and
grow to that strength, that they are fit for Timber, and the strongest
services. When a Man is newborn, and a Babe, how weak and feeble a creature
is he? but as he grows up, so he is stronger and stronger, and is at last fit
for man-like services. So it is in spiritual growth. A man at first is weak,
Romans 14. 1. but growth brings strength. The man that grows in grace grows so
strong, that he can wrestle with a spiritual enemy. A babe or a child cannot
wrestle with a Man, much less with a strong Man; but a grown Man, he can
wrestle with a strong Man, and happily can make his part good with him, foil
him, and lay him on his back. So a grown Christian can wrestle with Powers
and Principalities, Ephesians. 6. with lusts and corruptions, and can get mastery
and victory over them. Yea, a Christian that is grown can wrestle with GOD
himself, as Jacob did. Now when a man is so strong, that he can wrestle with
strong ones, it is a sign that he has growth in grace. The man that grows in
grace, grows so strong, that he can bear burdens, the heavy burdens of
afflictions, and of the cross. An heavy burden laid on a childs back, would
break his back, but a grown man has the strength to bear a great weight.
Sampson could carry the Gates of Gaza upon his shoulders when he was a grown
man, that would have crushed him to pieces when he was a child. He that can
bear Christ's cross in any kind, has a proportionable measure of growth. It
is then with spiritual growth and strength, as it was with Christ's natural and
spiritual strength, Luke 2. 40. The child grew and waxed strong in spirit. So
if we grow we wax strong in spirit, Pro. 24. 10. If thou faint in the day of
adversity, thy strength is but small. Small is their strength that cannot bear
a scorn, a lash with the tongue, that shrink and sink at a sour look. As the
man is, so is his strength, say they to Gideon. And as a man's strength is, so
is a man; if but small strength, small growth, little strength, as little
growth.

2 Secondly, a man's growth may be judged by his stomach, by his appetite to his
spiritual food. So we see it is in nature. Young men have far better
stomachs to their meat than old men have, and the reason is, because they are
growing: for where there is growth, there is a more speedy expense of the
nourishment that is concocted; and therefore hunger in young bodies, is counted
a sign of growth. Men that have done growing are hungry also; but nothing so
soon hungry, nor so sharp as younger stomachs; because where nature is growing,
it calls faster and sooner for a supply than where it has done. So it is here.
The man that grows in grace, has an hungry soul, a sharp appetite; he is
never well but when he is feeding, he takes all occasions to be eating: though
he have had a good meal, and have been well satisfied, yet he is quickly
hungry again. Though he have bin well fed on the Sunday, yet he can have a
stomach to a Sermon again, before the week go about. Though he have had
sweet satisfaction and refreshment at the Sacrament, yet he has a good stomach
to the Sacrament again, before the month come about again. Growers are
hungry, and great feeders. If it be thus with us, we have an happy evidence of
our growth. But this shows how few grow, because so little hunger after their
spiritual food in the Word and Sacrament. You have many can go fasting a long
while together; one meal in half a year, nay, in an whole year can serve
their turn, and it is enough, richly enough in conscience; what needs such
ado? It is easy to judge such a man's growth, what it is. Their birth is
rather to be questioned than their growth.

3 Thirdly, growth in grace is visible and sensible to others. Where grace
grows, it so grows that others may discern it and see it. It is true here,
as Mark 4. 26, 27. The seed should spring and grow up, he knows not how. We
cannot see corn grow, but we can discern when it is grown. For when it is come
from sprouting to the blade, from the blade to the full corn in the ear, by
these several degrees it is discerned that it is grown, though we could not
see how it grew. So though we cannot discern the growing of grace, yet we may
discern when it is grown. So Luke 2. 52. It is said that our Savior increased
in wisdom before men, for it is referred to both things there specified, 1 Timothy 4. 15. That thy profiting may appear to all. If corn be sown and speere
in the ground; yet if it come not up and appear above ground, we do not
reckon that it grows. There is no man that grows in grace, but his grace will
be sensible in one kind or other. A Tree that is stinted and grows not, and a
Tree that grows and thrives, may be discerned each from other by their very
bark and rind, a man may distinguish them by their looks. By a man's looks and
complexion it may be discerned that a man is growing. A man's growth is
discerned by his visage and by his voice. A man that has had a sickness, that
has kept under his growth, so long was ill colored ill complexioned, but if
once his disease be cured, and a man's growth mends, there follows an
alteration of his complexion. So is spiritual growth discerned; when a man
grows in grace, there will be an alteration of the visage, an amendment of
the complexion. The visage of a man that grows, continues not the same it did
before, Eccl. 8. 1. A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness
of his face shall be changed. As when we have not seen some persons a long
time, they grow out of our knowledge, there is such an alteration in their
visage we scarce know them, they are so altered by their growth, that they
look nothing like the men they were wont to do: so in this case, a man's
visage and outward carriage, strangely alters where the soul grows in grace:
the outward behavior of a man's life so changes, that a man knows him not by
his former looks. It may be a man's behavior was covetous, earthly, carnal,
but if a man once grow in grace, he is grown clean to another kind of
behavior. That look as it is said of Christ, Luke 9. 53. They saw what he was
by his face; so may a growing Christian be discerned by his face: the life of
such a man has another kind of face, and of looks with it, so as his old
acquaintance wonder at it, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Thus also is growth in grace sensible
by the alteration of the voice. When one grows toward man's estate, his voice
alters and changes, he speaks no longer like a child, but he begins to have a
big and a man-like voice, 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I was a child, I spoke as a
child, but when I became as a man, I spoke as a man; which is true, not only
of the subject, but of the sound of a man's speech. So the growth of a Christian
in grace, is sensible by the alteration and change of his voice. Even in this
sense it is true, though spoken in another, that they that believe shall speak
with new tongues, Mark 16. 17. The vain, frothy, earthly tongue is gone: he
speaks not vainly, foolishly, so children do; but he speaks profitably, to
edification, John 3. 31. He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and he
speaks of the earth. 1 John 4. 5. They are of the world, therefore speak they
of the world. Here is an old tongue. But Psalm. 37. 30. The mouth of the
righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment. Prove. 31. 26.
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of grace. Col.
4. 6. Let your speech be always with grace. Ephesians. 4. 29. That it may minister
grace to the hearers. Here is a new tongue: here is a change of the voice, and
a sign of growth. Look then upon thine own complexion, thou shall see by it,
whether thou have grown in grace by thy former receiving the Sacrament, Dan. 1.
12, 13, 15. Give thy servants pulse to eat, and water to drink. Then let our
countenances be looked upon, -- And their countenances appeared fairer and
fatter in flesh than all the children, etc. By the looking upon Daniels
countenance and the rest, it appeared that they thrived and prospered with
their pulse and water. So much more by men's countenances, carriages, and
behaviors, if they be looked upon, whether they thrive, and grow with their
Sacramental food formerly received. But men's old visages, and ill-favored
complexions, are ill signs how little growth there is. With too many it is as
with Pharaohs seven ill-favored Kine, they ate up the well-favoured, and the
fat, but were still as ill-favored as before. Many come to the Sacrament after
Sacrament, and eat and drink at the Lords Table, but what alteration in their
lives? Are not their lives as ill-favored still as before. Listen to their
voices, and as little change shall you find there, as in their lives. Thus may
we examine the growth of grace in general. But besides this, there must be a
special examination of the growth of the grace of faith: and that may briefly
be thus discerned. A grown faith is a great faith, O Woman, great is thy
faith, Mat. 15. Great faith is seen:

1 First, not only in obedience, but in great obedience. Great faith does great
works of obedience. It was a great work of Abraham, to sacrifice his son. No
wonder he did it, who was a man of so great faith as he has the honor to be
the father of the faithful, I am. 2. 5. Rich in faith. 1 Timothy 6. 18. Rich in
good works. It is a sign that a man is Rich in faith, when rich in good
works. A poverty or beggary in good works cannot stand with a riches in faith.

2 Secondly, in great victories and conquests over great lusts, where
corruptions and lusts are strong, and get head, faith is little, Mat. 6. 30,
31. Mat. 16. 8. O ye of little faith. But where faith grows great, it fetches
down the greatest lust, the most radicated corruptions. As faith of miracles,
a grain of it removes Mountains, Mat. 17. 19, 20. Plucks up trees by the
roots, Luke 17. 6. So much more does justifying faith, when grown and great.
Many talk of a great faith, yet cannot remove Molehils, nor pluck up small
twigs. Many will swear by their faith; how swearing and believing will stand
together, I leave it to them to scanne. I but this is (they will say) a small
matter, a matter of nothing to swear by a man's faith. The smaller a matter it
is, the greater evidence that such have not a great faith; because that would
get great victories over great evils, therefore much more over small ones. It
is no great faith that cannot remove so small a Molehill, that cannot pluck up
so small a twig.

3 Thirdly, In this, that it can and will believe on God, as a man may say with
reverence, whether God will or no. It will believe in an angry God, in a
killing God, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. It will believe in a
forsaking God, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why have thou
forsaken me, and yet my God. It will not be beaten off, not damped, nor
discouraged with silence, nor with sad answers, Matthew. 15. 28. O woman, great
is thy faith. A sign it was great, or else such great discouragements had
overcome it.

4 Fourthly, great confidence and strength of heart in the midst of dangers and
fears, Psalm. 112. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, why so? His
heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. A fixed heart in such a case a sign of
great faith. Much fear is an argument of little faith, Mat. 8. 26. Why are ye
so fearful, O ye of little faith? Had they not reason to be fearful? It was
a great danger they were in, Verse. 24, 25. True, but yet if they had had great
faith, they would have had great courage and confidence in that great danger.
For faith foresees dangers, has a quick eye to discern a storm before it
comes, and so gives a man the liberty of himself to provide against the worst,
and so that error is taken off which suddenness brings with it. And besides,
when a danger is come, faith does as the blood of the body does in time of
fear, it gets to the heart, and succors and strengthens it, John 14. 1. Let
not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. Great
faith is full of great quiet, great comfort, great courage, and confidence in
the midst of great fears and dangers. Thus in brief may a man know the
growth of faith. But if a man cannot find his faith so grown, yet is it no
bar to his access to the Ordinance. If a man find his faith weak, yet may he
come, yet must he come that he may help it hereby in its growth. But the more
our faith is grown, the more comfort shall we have in coming, and the more
benefit shall we carry away with us Optima dispositio ad Sacramentum
Eucharistiae est, non nisi ea qua pessime es dispositus, and e contra tunc
pessime es dispositus, quando aptissime. Quod sic intelligitur, quod quando
sentis te miserrimum and egenum gratia, jam co ipso capax es gratiae, and
idoneus maxim. Luther.
from the Sacrament.

3 The third thing, wherein our examination must be, is our wants. A special
end of our coming to the Sacrament, is to have our spiritual wants supplied.
If we will have our wants supplied, we must come purposely with that intention.
We cannot do that unless we know distinctly and directly what our wants are.
We cannot know what our wants of grace are, unless we look into our souls by
examination. We should do in this case, as we see such do as go or send to
market: at the market there is a supply to be had of all the wants of the
family; if there want bread, if there want food, if any other household
necessaries be wanting, they are to be had at the market; therefore when any is
to be sent or to go to the market, there is an inquiry what is wanting in the
house. Is there bread or bread-corne enough in the house? Is there not such and
such a necessary wanting? do you not need such a provision into the house? So
when we are to go to the Lords Table should we do with our selves. The wants
of the soul are not a few. There is nothing that the soul can want or wish,
but it may be had abundantly in Christ, and in him in his Ordinance. Now
therefore should the soul before the Sacrament be inquisitive into its own
wants. Say to thy soul, I am now going to the Sacrament, there is abundance of
spiritual commodity to be had, now then what is it that thou want? Do
thou not want assurance of thy pardon? Do thou not want strength of faith?
Do thou not want power against such a special lust that has haunted thee,
and pestered thee a great while? Do thou not want some healing virtue to
staunch some bloody issue? Do thou not need some quickening in thy spirit?
Thus labor to search and find out what be the wants of thy soul, and what be
thy particular necessities.

In the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we go to CHRIST JESUS to have him help
us in our wants and necessities. Now CHRIST JESUS will first have us know our
wants, and be particularly sensible of them, before he will supply them. He
councels the Church of Laodicea, to buy of him gold, raiment, eye salve,
Apocal. 3. 18. But first he convinces her of her wants, of her poverty,
nakedness, and blindness, that she coming to him in a particular sense of
those wants, and making that her errand to him, she may have them supplied. It
was, one would think, a strange question, that our Savior put to that man,
John 5. 6. Will thou be made whole? was there any question to be made of it,
whether that a man that had been sick eight and thirty years would be
willing to be made whole? It is sure he desired nothing more: why then does
Christ ask him that question? purposely to affect him with the sense of his
want, to make him the more sensible of his necessity. So will Christ have men
affected with the sense of their wants, that would have a supply of their wants
from him. It will not serve a man's turn in the general, to know he wants
benefit from Christ, but he will have a man in particular be sensible of that
special want wherein he would have his help. That is a remarkable place to
this purpose, Luke 18. 35, 36. The blind man hearing that Christ past by, he
cries out, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, and he cries so
again, Verse. 39. At last Christ calls him to him, Verse. 40, 41. and said, What
will thou that I shall do unto thee? Did not Christ see he was blind, and did
not he know what mercy it was he begged? Yes questionless. But yet he would
first have him particularize his wants, and in what particular it was he would
have him show him mercy, before he would do it. Have mercy on me, was a
general suit; many ways might mercy be showed: therefore Christ presses him to
instance in his particular want, What will thou that I shall do unto thee? what
is the particular mercy thou stand in need of, that thou would have me
help thee withal? and then follows his answer, Lord that I may receive my
sight; Lord, I am blind in this particular, I have need of thee to open mine
eyes. And then Christ says, Receive thy sight. And he received his sight. They
then that come to Christ to receive any thing from him with a sense of the want
of that they would receive, they are they that are like to speed in their
receiving, what they desire to have from Christ. I doubt whether he should
have had that mercy, if he had only still begged for mercy in general; but when
once he comes with a particular sense of his want, then he finds Christ ready
to help him. It must be thus with us when we come to the Sacrament, if ever we
will have good by it. Many they come that they may receive good by it, but do
not pitch upon such particular good as they need, and all because they know not
what particular good from Christ they want: and that is not known for want of
examination. There is nothing more prejudicial to men's benefit by the
Sacrament than this one thing, that men before they come do not find out
their wants, and so in the sense of them seek to Christ in his Ordinance. They
coming without the sense of any particular want, they come without the desire
of any particular grace or benefit from Christ. And coming without desire, go
as they come. As our Savior speaks to his Disciples, Luke 22. 35. When I sent
you without purse, etc. lacked ye any thing? And they said, nothing. So if a
man should ask many, When ye went to the Sacrament, lacked ye any thing? did
you want any thing in your own particular feeling? they may answer, nothing.
And what received they then? just as much as they lacked, just nothing.
Therefore it should be a man's wisdom, so to examine his own wants, that if
Christ should say to him when he is come to the Sacrament, what is it that thou
would I should do for thee? thou might be able out of a privity to thine
own wants, upon examination to answer, Lord that my pardon might be sealed,
Lord, that I may receive the virtue of thy death, that such a rebellious lust
might be mortified, Lord, that I may receive thy Spirit, that mine unclean
heart might be sanctified, that I might be enabled with more strength to
perform such a duty, etc. And Lord, upon this very errand, and for this end
do I come now to thee in thine Ordinance, to have help in this or that
particular from thee. If once we could come thus with the sight of our wants to
receive, then would Christ answer, and say, Receive the mercies thou feel
the want of, receive my Spirit, receive power against thy lusts, receive
strength to obedience. They that come for they know not what, go even away
with they know not what.

Chap. 16. Habitual graces to be quickened and renewed, before the receiving of
the Sacrament.
actual preparation stands, namely, examination. The third thing follows, and
that is the quickening and renewing of our habitual graces. That which S. Paul
wishes Timothy to do, and which is needful for Christians to do at all times,
is of special use, and needful to be done before the Sacrament, namely that 2 Timothy 1. 6. I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift, or grace of
God that is in thee, that thou blow up, and cause to kindle, the grace of God.
Fire that lies raked up in the ashes, here and there a coal, will not on a
sudden kindle and burn out into a flame, but if a man beforehand gather the
coals together, and lay on some small sticks, and blow those coals, and
kindle those sticks, then when a man will, he adding more fuel, he may have
it burn and flame out as he please. At the Sacrament a man would be willing to
have all his graces up in a burning flame; now that will not be done on a
sudden, but if before the Sacrament we lay these coals together, and be
blowing them, and kindling them with some fuel in private, then when we come
at the Sacrament, they will the easier and sooner flame out. Now the graces
specially to be quickened, and renewed, are faith and repentance.

1 First, it is not enough for a man that he have faith, but if a man will come
in due order, he must before his coming, quicken, awaken, and stir up, and
renew his faith. Though a man have faith, yet if he come with his faith half
asleep, he comes not in due Order. A man that is sleepy and drowsy, is a true
man, but yet he is an unfit man to be employed in a business of weight, wherein
he had need to have his wits about him, in a business that will require the
activity of all his parts and faculties. A faith that is drowsy, and half
asleep, is happily a true faith, but yet is not a fit faith to come to the
Sacrament, it being a business that requires all the liveliness and activity
that possibly faith can have. A man that would have a good stomach to his meat,
and have his meat do him good, will a little before his meat use some exercise
which may awaken his spirits, and stir up his natural heat: he has life in
his body before, and heat in his body before, but yet if a little stirring and
exercise be used before meat, it raises a man's spirits, prepares for, and
helps digestion, and a man's meat does him a great deal the more good. So in
this case some exercising of faith, and setting it on work before the
Sacrament, would bring warmth and heat into it, and would sweetly prepare it
to work the more kindly at the Sacrament, and so would the Sacrament do a
man's soul much the more good. The Physicians say, that a breakfast moderately
and Seasonably taken, gets a man the better stomach to his dinner, because
thereby a man's natural heat is awakened, and the spirits raised, and so the
better way prepared for concoction. Do so here, take a breakfast before this
feast, set Faith a feeding on some promise or other, and so whet and provoke
the appetite of thy faith. A man that is to run a Race, will not put off all to
the very point of running, then would he be so pursie and breathless that he
would run to little purpose, but because he would be sure to have his wind and
legs at command in his Race, he will for many days together be exercising
himself before the day of his Race, he will run so much one day, so long
another, and so will be every day breathing himself, that when he comes to
run, he may have wind at will, and neither legs nor lungs may fail him. So,
before the Sacrament, it is good to be exercising our faith, that it may be in
breath, and fit to perform its office when at the Sacrament. A faith
unexercised before, will prove pursey and short winded, when it should do the
main business at the Sacrament.

Quest. But how should a man thus exercise and quicken his faith, before he
comes to the Sacrament.

Ans. Take some of the promises and set thy faith on work upon them. Thou
come to the Sacrament to eat Christ. Before thou come to eat him at his
Table, first labor to taste him in chewing some promise; and that taste gotten
of him in the chewing of a promise, would sweetly prepare faith to the eating
of him in the Supper: we shall conceive it the better by some instance. God
commands us to come to Christ, Come, for Luke 14. 17.
al things are ready. We have not only a commandment which yet might have
sufficed, but we have a promise, Ioh. 6. 37. Him that comes to me I will in no
wise cast out, that is, I will with all hearty welcome, embrace, and receive
him that comes unto me, that believes in me. Why then I see, that come and
welcome. He that bids me, if I come at his bidding, he will bid me welcome.
Does my soul doubt of it? Why then do but consider what Christ is now, by
what he was when on earth. I find in the Gospel that the poorest and meanest
that were might come unto him. I see Matthew. 21. 14. That the lame and the
blind came unto him; they came, and they were welcome, They came unto him, and
he healed them. I see then if I come to him, I shall find him an healing
Christ. And how much does my soul need healing? I see, Mat. 8. 2, 3. that a
Leper comes, a foul unclean Leper, and yet he is not loathed for his
leaprosie, neither does Christ check him, and bid him keep off, but he was
welcome to, and had his leprosy cleansed. I never find Christ displeased with
any for coming to him, never find him complaining of any for coming. I see
none refused or forbidden coming unto him. I hear him complaining, that men
did not, would not come unto him, John 5. 40. And ye will not come unto me. I
find him displeased with his Disciples, for forbidding little ones to come
unto him, Mark 10. 13, 14. and V. 16. Suffer little children to come, yea and
he embraces and blesses them. Then I see Christ bars none from coming. My
conscience discourages me, and tells me, If I were so holy as such a man, etc.
then I might come. But what will thou that have been such a sinner do going?
Well, but I see the lame, the blind, yea, the Lepers were admitted with
welcome. What then though I be a Leper; yet since he bids me come, and
promises to bid me welcome, I will go to him, Lord Christ I will come to thee.
What ever I have been, I have been but a prodigal, and I see prodigals shall
be welcome if they come. The Prodigal leaves his Fathers house, runs riot,
wastes all, and being pincht with hunger, bethinkes himself of his Fathers
house, I will, says he, go unto my Father, etc. Go to his Father: alas, what
should such an one that has run his race do going to his Father? with what
heart or hope, with what face and forehead, could he come into his Fathers
fight? but yet he arose and came to his Father, Luke 15. 20. And what followed,
But when he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion,
and ran and fell on his neck, and kissed him. Behold, O my soul, the
unconceiveable readiness and uncredible forwardness of the Lord to welcome
and receive a coming, a believing sinner.

1 First, I see that his Father sees him first, yea, before he sees his Father.
No sooner does a man think upon looking toward God, but God looks toward
him. How great is the Fathers desire toward his son! It is said, that after
Absoloms three years exile, that Ioab perceived that the Kings heart was
toward Absalom, 2 Kings 14. 1. Thus seems this Fathers heart to be toward
his son, yea, that his desire such, as if he sat in some higher place,
watching to see when he should come, that he might no sooner be within ken,
but he might spy him, according to that, John 30. 18. The Lord will wait,
that he may be gracious unto you. I see then the Lord stands waiting and
watching, that we can no sooner be upon our way to come, but he sees and spies
us to bid us welcome.

2 Secondly, I see that he saw him whilst he was yet a great way off. He was
but yet in the beginning of his way in coming. His Father might have let him
alone till he had been come quite home to his house, and it had been singular
mercy to have welcomed him then. But it is done whilst he is yet a great way
off. Is the Lord thus ready to welcome me, when yet a great way off, what will
he be if I be come near to him. Certainly, the Lord that will draw nigh to
such, as yet, a great way off, will much more draw nigh to those that draw nigh
to him.

3 Thirdly, I see his Father had compassion on him, I see his bowels yerne,
work, and stir within him at the sight of his son, at the sight of him
afar off. Gods bowels yerne within him, toward a believing repenting sinner.
It is said of that Harlot, 1 Kings 3. 26. That her bowels yearned, or were hot
upon her son. So when the Lord sees a sinner come to him, his bowels wax hot,
and yerne within him, Ier. 31. 18. 20. Therefore my bowels are troubled for
him, I will surely have mercy upon him. God has not only mercy, but bowels of
mercy, Luke 1. 78. And these bowels be sounding bowels, or a multitude of
bowels, Isay 63. 15. He delights in loving kindness, Ier. 9. 24. And he
pardons sin, because mercy pleases him, Mic. 7. 18.

4 Fourthly, I see that his Father ran. How rich and abundant mercy had it
been in his Father, to have stood still till he had come at him; but what
mercy is this that he will go toward him, and give him a meeting. Oh mercy,
that his Father ran not from him; but what mercy call you this, that his Father
runs to him? If he would needs go meet him, why might it not have served the
turn, to have walked toward him with a softly and grave pace! No, no: I see
that serves not the Lords turn. When a sinner comes to the Lord, mercy not
only comes, and goes a foot-pace, but mercy runs. Mercy comes upon the wings.
Gods rolling bowels sets his feet on running. That as David speaks of Gods
readiness to help him, when he called upon him in his danger, Psalm. 18. 6. 9.
10. He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly, yea, he did fly upon the wings of the
wind. So when a sinner comes to God, mercy comes to him; not walking, but
running, not on foot, but riding, riding on the wings of the wind. That look
as Gabriel came with an answer to Daniels prayers, Dan. 9. 21. He being caused
to fly swiftly, or with weariness of flight; he not only came, but came
flying; not only flying, but flying swiftly; yea, so swiftly, as he had
wearied himself with the swiftness of his flight to make haste. So comes
mercy to a man coming to Christ; it is caused to fly swiftly, with weariness
of flight. The Father ran: mercy comes full speed. Nay, what a difference do I
see, between the offending son, and the offended Father! The sons pace is, He
arose, and came; he came walking on toward his Father. The Fathers pace is,
And he ran. The son most needed to have run, his belly was pincht with hunger;
yet he only walks, but the Father runs. Bowels troubled with mercy,
out-pace bowels pinched with hunger. God, I see then, makes more haste to show
mercy, than we make to receive mercy. Whilst we do but go toward him, he
runs toward us. Whilst misery goes but a walking, mercy comes a running pace.
God, who is slow to anger, Psalm. 103. 8. is swift to mercy. He ran. And why
then, O my soul, should thou be slow of heart to believe? up, and run to
him, that will come running with his mercy, and his Christ to thee.

5 Fifthly, I see him falling upon his neck: And fell on his neck; that is, he
hugged, and embraced him. How! Fell upon his neck, and embraced him! Who would
not have been loath to have touched him? yea, to have come near him? Is he not
in his loathsome stinking rags? Smells he not of the Swine he kept? Could a man
come near him, without stopping his nose? Would not a man be ready to lay up
his stomach, upon such an imbracement? Certainly, a sinner is a loathsome
verminous person, not only clothed in rags, but in stinking and vile rags,
Isay 64. 6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. What then are our
unrighteousnesses? What loathsome rags are they? And yet let a sinner come to
the Lord, and the Lord will fall upon his neck, will hug him, and embrace him.
Isaac smelt the savor of Jacobs raiment, and he blessed him, Genesis 27. 27. That
was a sweet savor. The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the
Lord has blessed: no wonder that Isaac blesses him. But here is one in such an
unsavory pickle, that when his Father should smell the savor of his garments,
one would have thought he should have cursed him, because his smell was as the
smell of a Swine, as the smell of a Jail. But yet for all that his Father
claspes him in his arms, and blesses him with an hearty welcome. Mercy then, I
see, is not squeamish, is not nice, and dainty, but let a sinner have been
what he will, let him be as filthy, as unsavory as he can; yet if once he loath
himself, God will not loath him; if he once come to God, God will claspe him
with the arms of mercy. The Prodigal comes to his Father, with the savor,
and in the habit of a loathsome rogue, and yet his Father falls upon his neck. O
the stupendous and astonishing mercies, and goodness of God, to a sinner that
comes unto him. And will God thus embrace a Prodigal in his loathsome rags,
and will he not embrace him much more afterward, when he has put the best
robe upon him? Oh the welcome then that they shall find with God, that have
put on Christ, and are clothed with the sweet smelling garment of their elder
brother, that have the whole raiment of Christ's righteousness upon them!

6 Sixthly, but yet behold a greater wonder than all the rest. I see him
kissing his son. And he kissed him. Who could have brooked to have embraced a
person in so filthy a pickle; much more, who could have brooked to have kissed
such an one? What! kiss those lips that had been lately lapping in the Hogs
trough! Kiss those lips that had so often kissed those base and baggage
Harlots of his! Kiss him! A man would have thought he should rather have kicked
him, than have kissed him: and yet his Father kisses him. There is a passage
somewhat like this, Genesis 33. 4. Esau ran to meet Jacob, and embraced him, and
fell upon his neck, and kissed him. A strange, and a wonderful thing, that he
that had threatened to kill him, and came now upon that errand, to kill him and
all his, that his heart should so strangely be altered by God, that killing
should be turned into kissing. It was very strange that Esau should kiss
Jacob; but it is more strange here, that this Father should kiss this
Prodigal. It is an observable thing in that place, Genesis 33. 4. That over that
word kissed, in the Hebrew Text, there be set three extraordinary pricks, or
marks, to put the Reader in mind, that he should observe this matter well, as
a very strange thing. Now how much more might three such pricks, nay three times
three such marks be set over this word here, He kissed him! Here is a matter
of greater wonder, worthy greater observation, that such a Father should kiss
such a son, in such a filthy pickle. It had been much if he might have kissed
his Fathers hand, but he gives him not his hand, but his mouth to kiss. Was it
not much that Christ would suffer that sinful woman, Luke 7. who had defiled
her lips with many an adulterous kiss, to kiss his feet; but Christ gives not
his feet, but his mouth, his lips, to be kissed by believing, repenting
sinners, Cant. 1. 1. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. Behold
then the ineffable goodness of God to all that come to him. Though this son a
Prodigal, yet his Father kisses him, gives him a kiss, the seal and pledge
of his pardon and remission. See then, oh my soul, what here is to excite and
stir up thy faith, and to quicken it mightily. Behold, God has an eye of
mercy, he sees a far off. He has bowels of mercy; He had compassion. He
has feet of mercy; He ran to him. He has arms of mercy; He fell upon him,
and embraced him. He has lips of mercy; And he kissed him. Would thou not
come to God, if he would look upon thee? He will see thee whilst yet a great
way off. Would thou not come, if God will compassionate thee? He will draw
forth the bowels of his compassions to thee. Would thou not come to him, if
he would meet thee? Behold, he will run to meet thee. Would thou not come,
if God would embrace thee? Lo, he will fail upon thee, and claspe thee in the
arms of his mercy. Would thou not come if he would pardon thee? He will
seal thy pardon with a kiss. Oh my soul, up, come to Christ, receive and
embrace him without any more ado. Thus by considering GODS promises, and
weighing his sweet mercies in Christ, faith cannot but receive much life and
quickening. So may a man do with other like places, and with promises, whereof
the Word is full. This shall suffice for instance to direct us, and let us see
how much the consideration of the promises would conduce to the quickening of
our faith.

2 Secondly, it is not enough for a man to have repented in his first
conversion, nor to have it renewed it upon some sin since fallen into; but it
is required that before the Sacrament, there be always a fresh renewing of
repentance. So often as the Priests went into the Tabernacle, they washed their
hands and their feet, at every fresh entrance, a fresh washing, Exodus 40. 31,
32. When they went into the Tent of the Congregation, and when they came near
unto the Altar, they washed, as the Lord commanded Moses. So must it be here,
there must be a fresh washing in the laver of repentance, before the receiving
of the Sacrament. And that upon these reasons:

1 First, though we be well washed before one Sacrament, yet before another
it is a great deal of soil that our souls gather. Though we wash our hands
well this morning, yet because a man is meddling with this business, and
meddling with that work, it cannot be but his hands will be sullied before
next morning again. Men have many occasions of business in the world, meet
with many snares and tentations, have many slips, and treadings awry, and so
contracting fresh pollutions there is need of fresh purgations. We desire at
the Sacrament to have CHRIST make a fresh entrance into our hearts, therefore
there must be a fresh trimming and dressing up of the house; as when we look
for ghests, though our houses be tollearably handsome already, yet we do
afresh dress up our houses for their entertainment, and make them more than
ordinarily handsome; every room is swept, washed, rubbed, strewed, and
garnished. How much more should there be a fresh trimming, and dressing up of
the rooms of our hearts, for the entertainment of so glorious a ghest as the
LORD CHRIST is. Look as it is said of Satan in his kind, Mat. 12. 44, 45.
That when he finds his house swept, and garnished, then he enters and dwells
there; so it is true of the LORD CHRIST in his kind, that when he finds his
house swept and garnished, then he enters and dwells there. He will not enter
into, nor dwell in a sluttish undrest heart. Repentance renewed before the
Sacrament, it sweeps and garnishes the heart, and so fits it for Christ's
entrance. The entertainment we should give the Saints of God, should be much
more given to Christ himself. How should the Saints of God be entertained? see
3 John 6. (...), Deo convenienter, says Beza. It is a phrase hard to be
englished, Agreeably to God, as one would say. Christ is God, blessed for ever;
and therefore when we entertain him, we must entertain him (...), with such
entertainment as beseemes God. Then we do so entertain him when the heart is
swept and garnished. That is done by the fresh renewing of our repentance, when
we come to receive him in the Sacrament.

2 Secondly, when we come to receive the Sacrament, we come to renew our
acquaintance with the Lord. Now what it is that helps to bring us into
acquaintance, the renewing of that must renew our acquaintance. What is it that
helps bring us into acquaintance with God? see Job 22. 21. 23. Acquaint now
thy self with him. If thou return to the Almighty. Repentance a great means
of acquaintance with God, and so renewing of repentance a great means to renew
acquaintance with God. Since therefore in the Sacrament there is a renewing and
a refreshing of our acquaintance with God, there must necessarily be a renewing
of our repentance before the Sacrament.

3 Thirdly, the Scriptures speak of a sealing with the holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 1.
22. Ephesians. 1. 13. Ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, and Ephesians. 4.
30. Now as in Courts, there be some days that are called Sealing-dayes; so
there be some special sealing-times and sealing-dayes in this kind.
Sacraments are seals, Romans 4. 11. And Sacrament days are the sealing days of
the Court of Heaven. So that when a man comes to the Sacrament he comes to be
sealed. And therefore in this regard there must be a renewing of repentance
before the receiving of the Sacrament. Otherwise a man is not sealeable, not
capable of the seal and the impression of it. Hard wax will not receive the
print of the seal. Before we put the seal to the wax, we first melt the wax,
or warm, and so soften it at the fire, and so prepare it for a capacity of the
seals impression. So when the heart is melted and is softened, then it is fit
to take the seal of the Spirit in the use of the seal in the Sacrament. Now
the renewing of repentance before the Sacrament, is a melting, a warming, and a
softning of the heart, and a fitting it for the seal. So needful then and
requisite, as the melting or softning of the wax is before sealing, so needful
is the renewing of repentance before the Sacrament. Many come to the Sacrament,
and there is no print or impression made in their heart, there is no appearance
of any seal; let such consider whether they did not neglect the softning of
their hearts by not renewing their repentance.

Quest. Wherein stands this renewing of repentance?

Ans. 1. First, in a fresh examination of our hearts, to find out our sins
and corruptions. We saw before, that we must examine our graces, but that is
not all, there must be an examination of our selves for our sins. That Lam. 3.
40. Let us search and try our ways, is to be done in our renewed repentance
before the Sacrament. Better we our selves search and make inquiry, before we
go to the Sacrament, than God should inquire after our iniquities, and make a
search after our sins at the Sacrament. Job complains, Job 10. 6. That God
enquired after his iniquity, and searched after his sin. That is a sore thing.
We can look for no better at the Sacrament, if we have not done it before we
come thither.

2 Secondly, in a solemn confession of sin, with deep humiliation for them.
This confession, let it be full, and bring out thy sins, as they took the
Vessels of the Temple, Ezra 8. 34. By number and by weight. By number first.
Charge thy self impartially with all the sins thou can recall. So let thy
confession be full in regard of enumeration, Lev. 16. 21. All their iniquities,
all their transgressions. Then by weight; so let thy confessions be full in
regard of aggravation, make them as great and as foul in their natures and
circumstances as thou can, Psalm. 25. 11. Psa. 40. 12. 2 Samuel 24. 10. And thus
happily may we understand that place, Levit 16. 21. He shall confess all their
iniquities, and all their transgressions in all their sins: not only their
sins, but all their transgressions in their sins; that is, he shall not
only confess their sins, but he shall aggravate their sins, by laying open
how many transgressions were wrapped up in their several sins, and how many
transgressions were in the several circumstances of their sins. The laden soul
is called to come to Christ, is promised ease and refreshment: and this promise
is made good in the use of the Sacrament. As therefore we would be in the
number of those whom Christ calls, and to whom he promises ease and refreshment;
yea, as we would have this ease and refreshment in the Sacrament, so come with
laden souls as much as we can. The heavier and the weightier we make our sins
in our confessions, the likelier they are to lade us. And let thy confessions
be with deep humiliation; let them be dolorous confessions with grief and
sorrow for sin, and from a sight and sense of it. Labor to see and feel thy
sin, and sight and sense of it will work sorrow for it. Sight helps to
sorrow. As in that case, Lam. 3. 51. Mine eye affects mine heart: so is it true
in the sight of sin: the eye that sees sin affects the heart, feeling of sin
helps to sorrow. The weight of it felt, will bring the heart to sorrow in
confession. David's confession was with sorrow, Psalm. 38. 18. I will declare,
that is, confess mine iniquity. But how shall his confession be qualified? I
will be sorry for my sin. How comes he by his sorrow? Surely by that, Verse. 4.
For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden; they are too
heavy for me. What can make the heart more heavy than when it feels the
heaviness and weight of sin? So should a man carry himself in his confession
before the Sacrament, as Ephraim did in that confession of his, Ier. 31. 18. I
have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. Make thy confessions before the
Sacrament, bemoaning confessions. Let our confessions be ever so long and so
large, ever so exact and particular, yet if done without sorrow, it is but an
historical confession. It is all one, as if a man should come and tell God a
Story, or a long Tale of his sins. God does not require our confessions before
the Sacrament, to tell him that which he knows not; he knows our sins better
than our selves, but that in our confessions we should have our hearts
sorrowfully affected for them. Be sure therefore before thou come to the
Sacrament, to renew thy repentance in confession: one sweet advantage shall
thou have by it amongst others, and that is this; Our selfe-accusations in our
confessions will be a prevention, and a disappointment of Satan's accusations
against us. The Devil, even at the Sacrament, will be laying in against us;
it is good therefore to take a course to defeat him. He will be pleading
against a man, Lord, shall this man be welcome to thy Table? Shall he receive
the benefit of thine Ordinance? He has done thus and thus; I can lay to his
charge these and these sins. Thus by his accusations will he seek to put in a
bar against a blessing upon us. Now when a man before the Sacrament renewes his
repentance, and has in his confessions brought in the accusations Praeventus
Diabolus in accusatione, ultra nos accusare non poterit. Et si ipsi nostri
simus accusatores proficit nobis ad salutem, si vero expectemus ut a Diabolo
accusemur, accusatio illa nobis cedit ad poenam. Orig. Hom. 3. in Levit.
against himself, Satan is prevented: for then we do, as I may say, furnish
the Lord with an answer to stop Satan's mouth: for then will the Lord be ready
to answer for us, Why Satan, thou accusest this man of nothing, whereof he has
not already, to the full, accused himself; he himself has accused himself
of all this already. Thou come too late, all thine accusations shall be no
bar to my blessing. The elder brothers nose swells at his Fathers kindness
and goodness to his prodigal brother, and therefore Luke 15. 30. He rips up
all his courses, and throws the filth of them in his face, that he was one
that had devoured his Fathers living, and had spent it among Harlots. And this
he does now whilst they are at the Feast, at the fatted Calfe, and good
cheer. Yet all this does the prodigal no hurt, the music ceases not, the
Feast is not broken off, nor he thrust out of doors again. And how comes it
about that all this did him no hurt? Because the prodigal had prevented his
brother, he himself had accused himself to the full in his confessions, when
he came to his Father: and so by his own confession, had took out the sting
and poison of his brothers malicious accusation. So that his brother comes too
late now, the Feast and the merriment go on nevertheless. So will the Devil
be snarling against, and picking quarrels against men, even in the Feast time;
but he comes too late to do them hurt, if they themselves have first put in
the bills of their own inditements against themselves in their confessions
before their coming to the Sacrament.

3 Thirdly, in judging and condemneing our selves. The duty instanced in S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. especially in judging our selves unworthy the favor and
honor of coming to the Lords Table. Lord, I am not worthy, says the
Centurion, that thou should come under my roof. So should we acknowledge
our utter unworthiness of coming under the roof of Gods house, much more of
coming to his Table. We should judge our selves unworthy of such fellowship
with God. And the more unworthy we judge our selves, the worthier ghests shall
we be in the Lords acceptance. And thus must our faith and our repentance be
renewed, before our coming to the Lords Table.

Chap. 17. Excitation of earnest desires after Christ; and a strong expectation
to receive him and his benefits.
actual preparation, is the excitation and stirring up in our selves strong
and earnest desires, that we may come with enlarged hearts and affections, with
hungring and thirsting desires after Christ in his Ordinance, and after the
Ordinance in which Christ is to be had. This is the due Order that God
requires; he that comes thus, comes in due Order. So should men come to the
Sacrament, as Christ to that Passover, Luke 22. 15. With desire have I desired
to eat this Passover with you: that is, I have exceedingly, earnestly, and
heartily desired to eat it with you; not desired it, but desired it with
desire. Single desires will not serve the turn, but a man must come with
desiring desires, with double desires, with earnest and strong desires, that
will seek God after the due Order. God must be sought after the same order in
the Sacrament, as in other his Ordinances. After this Order must GOD be sought
in all his Ordinances, Psa. 63. 1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek
thee. There is the duty of seeking. He will seek God in his Ordinances, in his
Word, Worship, Sacrifices, etc. Well, but after what Order will he seek him?
After the due Order. How is that? with longing, thirsting, enlarged desires of
spirit, My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee. Then comes a
man to Gods Ordinances, and so to the Sacrament in due Order, when he comes
with these thirsting, longing desires. So should a man come to the Sacrament,
as an hungry man comes to his meat, as a thirsty man to his drink. A man that
is hungry, is not only willing to eat, a man that is thirsty, is not only
willing to drink, but he strongly longs after his meat, and drink; with
desire he desires it, and thinks it very long till he have it. In the Sacrament
there is not only food, but a Feast, such a Feast as that, Isay 25. 6. If an
hungry man will long after food, what will he do after a Feast, after a Feast
of choice dainties? How needful this disposition is, appears by these things.

1 First, only such are invited to the Sacrament, as are invited to come to
Christ: for what come they to the Sacrament for, but to come to Christ. Now
they only are invited to come to Christ, and they only are fit to come to
Christ, that do hunger and thirst after him with enlarged desires, Isa. 55. 1.
John 7. 37. Apoc. 22. 17. So must they be qualified that will receive Christ,
and so must they be qualified also that will receive him in the Sacrament. It
is cheerely coming to the Sacrament, when a man knows he shall be welcome. He
shall be sure to be welcome that is invited, and the desiring, hungry, thirsty,
enlarged spirit, is undoubtedly invited.

2 Secondly, to such only is the end of the Sacrament made good. As such are
only invited, so such are only fed and feasted. What come we to the Sacrament
for? Come we not to be made partakers of the good things there prepared for us?
God, he prepares, and makes ready for us, Mat. 22. 4. And when we come, we come
to eat the good things GOD has prepared, and made ready for us. Now if we
would eat those things which GOD has prepared for us, we must come prepared
with hunger, thirst, and desires after these things. And when we come thus
qualified, we shall be sure to meet with a blessing, and to feed upon that
which God has prepared. God that would have men deal their bread to the
hungry, Isay, 58. 7. will certainly himself much more deal bread to an hungry
soul, Psa. 107. 9. For he satisfies the longing soul, and fills the hungry
with goodness. Do we not come to the Sacrament to be filled, to be satisfied?
would we not be loath to be sent away lanke and empty? They that come with
longing souls, shall be sent away with satisfied souls. Isay 44. 3. I will
power water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. Not
drop, but power, not a shower, but a flood. So liberally God answers hungring
and enlarged desires. There is a phrase, Isa. 58. 10. If thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry. When men come hungry to his Ordinance, God will draw out
his soul to satisfy them. We shall see it made good in David's case, Psa. 63.
1. My soul thirsts, my flesh longs. What came of it? Did he long in
vain? Did he lose his longing? No: but Verse 5. My soul shall be satisfied
as with morrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips.
So abundantly should his heart be satisfied and cheered, with the fat and
sweet of GODS Ordinances, that he should break out into the praises of GOD,
What an excellent thing is it to taste the marrow and fat of Gods Ordinances!
much more to feed on it! much more to feed unto fullness and satisfaction!
whose teeth would not water after such curious delicates? Bring longing, hungry
enlarged desires, and fat, and marrow shall be our portion. For herein has
spiritual hunger an advantage above bodily. Bodily hunger a man may hunger
withal, and yet his hunger helps him to no meat nor satisfaction: But
spiritual hunger does, as having the promise of satisfaction. Christ out of
his compassions will liberally releeve all hungry Ecce, pauper venio ad te
divitem, miser ad misericordem, ne recedam vac^us, vel contemptus. Esu^iens
incipio te quaere^e, ne deserar ^ te jejunus. Famelicus accedo, ne ^ecedam
impastus. Et si antequam comedam suspiro, da vel post suspiria ut comedam.
August. lib. medit. c. 39.
souls that with desire seek after him. Excellent is that place, Mat. 15. 32.
Then Jesus called his Disciples unto him, and said, I have compassion on the
multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to
eat, and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. He that
would not out of his compassions send away the multitude with fasting bodies,
lest they should faint; how much more, think we, will he compassionately
regard an hungry soul, and not send it away fasting from the Sacrament, lest
it should faint. Christ's compassions will not suffer him to send away an hungry
soul fasting. Alas, he knows it would faint if it should come empty, and go
away empty, if it should come hungry, and go away hungry.

3 Thirdly, the more strength in our desires, the more hunger in our spirits,
the more abundant and the more plentiful satisfaction. The more our hearts
are enlarged in our desires, the more Gods hand will be enlarged in his bounty,
Psalm. 81. 10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. God has an open hand,
for all that have an open mouth. God has an hand wide open, for such as have
their mouths wide open. A mouth wide opened, shall be a mouth full filled. A
wide mouth shall be a full mouth. God will enlarge himself to all that come to
him with enlarged hearts. Gods admeasurements of grace and spiritual good, are
suitable to men's inlargements and dilations of their spirits. Three things fit
a Vessel to receive a great measure of liquor. 1. When it is of large
capacity. A small Vessel may be filled, but yet a small Vessel cannot have so
much infused into it, as a Vessel that is of larger capacity. The larger the
bucket is that is let down into the Well, the more water it brings up. 2. When
it is an open Vessel. Though a Vessel be of sufficient capacity, yet if the
Vessel be shut, and the mouth of it closed up, though it be thrown into the
Sea where there is water enough, yet it fills not. 3. When it is wide open.
Though the mouth of a Vessel be open, yet if it be not wide open, it does not
fill so readily. Take a Bottle, or a narrow-mouthed Glass, and dowse it under
the water, and yet it may be pulled up again with little or no water in it,
though it be of great capacity, because the narrowness of the mouth hinders
the ready and quick passage of water into it. A wide-mouthed Vessel, as a
Paile or Bucket, is no sooner under water, but it is instantly filled, because
the mouth of the Vessel is wide and broad. So when we come to Gods
Ordinances, to the Sacrament, we should come so as to be filled, we should
come to get as liberal largesses as possibly we can. The way to do that, is
to have our hearts Vessels of competent capacity, to have them opened, to have
them wide opened. The way to do these things, is to have our hearts enlarged
with hungring and longing desires. Such enlarged desires open the mouth, and
open it wide; and when our mouths are opened, God will open his hand, his
filling hand. As therefore we desire to have the Lord fill our mouths when we
come to the Lords Table, so let us get our mouths wide open. When we come to
the Sacrament, why come we? Is it not that we may eat our fill of Christ's
body, and drink our fill of his blood? Is it not that we may go from the Lords
Table as Christ went from Jordan, full of the Holy Ghost? As we desire to have
full mouths, so let us bring opened, wide opened mouths. When men come to the
Sacrament with hearts enlarged, and hungring desires, Christ will give such a
Commandment to the Sacrament, as he did to those servants concerning the
water-pots, and it shall do as they did, John 2. 7. Jesus said unto them, fill
the water-pots with water. And they filled them up to the brim. So in this case
will Christ say, Lo, here be men come with enlarged hearts, with earnest and
strong desires, I see they have opened their mouths wide; fill them with my
Spirit, with my virtues, and efficacies, fill them with spiritual strength
against their corruptions, fill them with power to walk in obedience: and upon
this command of Christ, the Sacrament shall empty it self with an abundant
blessing upon their souls, yea, it shall fill them up to the brim. What an
happy thing is it to be full, brim-full of Christ? A mouth wide open, will be a
means to fill the heart full, brimme full of Christ. That man comes happily to
the Sacrament indeed, that can say after his being at the Sacrament, as they
did in that case, Psalm. 126. 2, 3. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and
our tongue with singing. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad. Now, would thou be able after a Sacrament to say, When I was at the
Sacrament, then was my mouth filled with laughter, my tongue with signging, and
mine heart with spiritual comfort and joy; The Lord has done great things for
me, whereof I am glad. Would thou after a Sacrament be able thus to say? Why
then when thou go to the Sacrament, Open thy mouth, and open thy mouth wide,
and GOD will fill thy mouth with laughter, and thine heart with spiritual joy.
It is true, that a great many go from the Sacrament, and their mouths are not
filled with laughter, but with complaints, with sad complaints of the little
good they receive at the Sacrament. Many come from the Sacrament with empty
mouths, empty hearts? And what may the reason of it be? Is not God as
bountiful as he was wont to be? Yes surely: he is the same God that ever, his
hand is not shortened; but the very reason is, that men come with shut mouths,
or at lest, with their mouths but narrowly opened; and shut mouths, and
narrow mouths, must needs be empty mouths. We open not, therefore God fills
not; we open not wide, therefore God fills not full. Is the Sea empty, because a
stopped Vessel is not filled when thrown into it? Is there no water in the
River, because a narrow mouthed Vessel brings up so little? Surely there is a
sufficiency of all spiritual good, in Christ a fullness of blessing in Gods
Ordinance: all the fault is in our own indisposition, we come with dead,
livelesse, formal, narrow, straight, and closed hearts, and that is the very
bane of the businesses, See how Saint Paul speaks to the Corinthians, 2 Cor.
6. 11, 12. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged,
ye are not straightened in us, but ye are straightened in your own bowels. So
says Christ: O ye sons of men, mine hand is full, mine hand, and mine heart is
open unto you, mine Ordinance in the Sacrament is open unto you; that is not
straightened in its own nature, but it is ready to power out it self to you.
What is the matter then that ye go away so empty mouthed? ye are straightened in
your own bowels, you have not opened mouths, nor enlarged hearts. Certainly,
if men could come to the Sacrament, as Hannah did to that service of
Thanksgiving, 1 Samuel 2. 1. it would be far otherwise with us; Mine heart,
says she, is enlarged over mine enemies. So if we could say, mine heart is
enlarged toward my Savior, my desires, and hunger is enlarged after him, we
should then find Gods hand suitably enlarged to our hearts.

Quest. But how should a man get his mouth wide opened, how should he get his
desires thus enlarged after Christ?

Answ. 1. First, get a sense and a sight of Christ's worth, and thine own
wants. Offer meat and drink to a man that is full, and he will not open his
mouth to receive it, The full despises the honey-combe; but let a man alone
till his stomach be empty, and when once he feels the pinches and twitches of
emptiness, and when once he feels the want of meat and drink, and so begins
to prize the worth of it, he will quickly open his mouth, and open it wide,
readily, and greedily too, if food be presented to him. Such a sense of the
want and the worth of Christ, would open our mouth wide indeed. There is
nothing so shuts up our mouths as our senselessenesse of our wants, and the
worth of Christ. The pincht Prodigal can think upon, and desire the bread in
his Fathers house. Labor therefore to affect thine heart with the sense of thy
want of Christ; labor to feel how miserable thou art without him; labor to
see his riches, excellencies, and all his allsufficiencies, these things would
be as keys to unlock and open our shut mouths.

2 Secondly, labor in private, before you come to the Sacrament, by your own
endeavors, to stretch and widen your mouths. Strive by much prayer to get
thine heart enlarged. Inlargements of the heart in private prayer, will fit the
heart for enlargement in the Sacrament. One duty affords contribution to
another, and one duty disposes to another. Labor to have thine heart enlarged
by private meditations and workings upon the promises. This is that which is
the mischief of all, Men put off the work of opening their mouths, till in a
manner they be opening their mouths to receive the Elements, and having the
work then to do, they are so shut up in hardness, and deadness, that they
cannot by any means open their mouths at all. The heart will not on a sudden,
and at a beck, be brought into a Sacramental frame; it is a work that will
ask time and pains. The opening of the spiritual mouth, and the widening of
it, is not so soon, nor so easily done, as the opening of the bodily mouth. It
is a work that must be done gradually, and with some striving before hand. It
will ask much prayer. The same God that must fill them, it is even he that
must open them, and therefore he must be sought to earnestly. It will ask
much meditation and struggling in private. A man that would make a bladder
capacious to hold spices, he blows it, and rubs it, and blows and rubs it
many times over, and all to make it the larger. If a man were promised, that on
such a day he should have as much money as his purse would hold, how would he
every day before be stretching, and reaching his purse, that by little and
little he might stretch it to such a bigness and capacity, that it might
receive a great sum. If therefore thou would have thy heart capacious and
large at the Sacrament, be often before the Sacrament struggling with thine
own heart, and get it well enlarged by the serious use of private helps. Our
customary formality undoes us. When we should be eating and drinking, then have
we our mouths to open. How can they eat and drink, whose mouths are not
opened? It is said of Solomon in another case, 1 King. 4. 29. God gave Solomon
largeness of heart, as the sand that is on the Sea shore. It is said of Hell,
Isai. 5. 14. that Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth without
measure. Now if it were thus with our hearts, that we had largeness of heart,
as the sand on the Sea shore, if our hearts were enlarged, and our mouths
opened without measure, yet were there abundantly enough in Christ to fill our
hearts, and satisfy the hungring desires of our souls: our desires cannot
exceed Christ's riches, nor Gods bounty, he is able to give above all that we
can ask or think: and therefore let us labor with all our might, for a
distention, and a dilation of our hearts and desires, stretch, and widen them
to the utmost we possibly can.

Object. Men seem generally to have these enlarged desires, this hunger and
thirst; for how desirous do men seem to be to come to the Sacrament, and how
wondrous ill would they take it to be kept back?

Answ. There be false hungers, and false thirsts, false desires. 1. First,
there is a desire that comes from custom and fashion. It is the custom of the
Time, or the custom of the Town, and by any means they will be
neighbour-like; and because others go to the Sacrament, they must needs go too.
It is not any desire of Christ, nor any hungring after him in his Ordinance,
that draws them on, but only a desire to do as others do. You shall see many
desire to go to a Feast, whither they see all their neighbors go, and will
take it exceeding ill, if they be not invited; not because they want a meals
meat, or because they greatly care for the cheer, but because the rest of
their neighbors go, and it would be some disgrace to them to be left out; and
therefore are very desirous to go, though they weigh not the cheer a whit,
when they come there. 2. Secondly, there is a desire that comes from
superstition. Many have a strong conceit, That the very deed doing, what ever
they be that do it, and how ever they do it, will work wonders with them. They
are persuaded, that if they do but receive the Sacrament, that they shall
receive some good thing, though they know no more than the post, what good
thing it is that is to be received. This is a superstitious thirst. 3. Thirdly,
there is a true thirst, and a right hunger indeed. And this is discerned and
distinguished from the other by these things.

1 First, by the object of it, for it is directly carried after Christ,
fellowship, and communion with him, and fruition of him and his benefits, Psalm.
42. 1, 2. My soul pants after thee, O God, my soul thirsts for God, for
the living God, when shall I come and appear before God? This neither do
ignorant nor superstitious persons do. Experience proves it, for when they are
questioned withal what makes them desirous to come to the Sacrament, either
they can give no reason why they desire to come, or else never give any such
reason as this. Their desires, at the best, are but after the work and the
performance, beyond which they never look.

2 Secondly, by the grounds of it: for the grounds of true desires, 1. Either a
sense of the want of Christ, a selfe-emptinesse. Want of drink makes men
thirst, want of meat makes men hunger. So true desires come from the sense of a
man's own wants and emptiness, which can only be supplied, and satisfied by
Christ. 2. Or else from the sense of former sweetness and goodness of Christ
in the use of the Ordinance. A man has formerly received the Sacrament, and in
the use of it has found abundance of sweetness in communion with CHRIST,
has found pardon sealed, faith strengthened, has found his heart inlivened,
and enlarged, has gotten some power against his lusts, some strength unto
obedience: and having formerly received some good by it, this quickens and
stirs up his desires, and makes them the more vehement after Christ and his
Ordinance. But with ignorant and superstitious persons, it is not so. It is
neither a sense of present wants, nor feeling of former benefit that moves
their desires to come.

3 Thirdly, by the qualities or properties of it. They are these:

1 First, an holy kind of impatience in the want of the Ordinance. A man in
bodily hunger and thirst, grows impatient in case of delay, thinks every
minute seven, till he come where he may have that which will satisfy. True
desires, specially in case of delay, think long, till they be at the Ordinance
where Christ is to be had. It is not once in a year will serve his turn. An
hungry man eats often, a thirsty man drinks often, and thinks long till he comes
to his meat, and drink. It is so here, Psa. 42. 1, 2. My soul thirsts, when
shall I come? Not so with ignorant, formal, and superstitious ones. Let all be
but agreed to stay from the Sacrament, and once in a year will richly suffice
them.

2 Secondly, nothing quiets the heart, nor can still the craving desires of it,
but enjoyment of Christ in his Ordinance. When a man is heartily hungry, and
thirsty, nothing satisfies him but meat and drink. Give him what else you
will, yet still he craves meat and drink. So give a man what you will, that
desires Christ in the Ordinance, yet his soul is not quiet and satisfied. Give
him the Ordinance, yet if he have not Christ in the Ordinance, his desires are
not at quiet. Formality, and superstition, let them but do the outward work,
let them but receive the outward Elements, though they receive nothing at all
else, yet they are well a-payd, and their spirits highly well contented. They
think themselves as well as a Sacrament can make them.

3 Thirdly, great and sweet contentment in the use of the Ordinance. What sweet
contentment does an hungry man find in eating his meat, in drinking his
drink, Judge. 15. 19. When he had drunk, his spirit came again and he
revived, Prove. 25. 25. As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from
a far Country. The Proverb implies a great deal of contentment, that a
thirsty man takes in drinking cold waters. No such sweet finds formality, or
superstition, in the use of the Sacrament. And so much may suffice for this
fourth thing.

5 The fifth thing to be done in actual preparation is, To raise up in our
selves, and to come with a strong expectation of the benefits to be received
in the Sacrament. There be excellent and precious things to be received in the
Sacrament. As in the institution we have a commandment to eat and drink, Take
and eat: so we have a promise from Christ of excellent things to be dispensed
in this Ordinance. Take and eat: why, what if we take and eat? what shall we
take, and what shall we eat? What is it that is to be had in the use of this
Ordinance? This is my body. Drink ye all of this; What shall we drink? This
is my blood. So then Christ in the institution of this Sacrament, has promised
that worthy receivers shall eat his body, shall drink his blood. In the
Sacrament Christ tenders his body to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk; and
promises that he will give those things to the faithful receiver. Now then
when we come to the Sacrament, we should come with an expectation to have these
promises made good, we should come with a full account to receive these things
promised. When Peter and John went up to the Temple, the Creeple asking an
alms of them, Acts 3. 4. they fastening their eyes on him, said unto him, look
on us. And the Text says, he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive
something of them. And his expectation was not disappointed, he received
something, and a better thing than he expected. When we come to the Sacrament,
we should give good heed to the Sacramental promises, and should have a fixed
eye upon them, expecting to receive something from them, and from the
Ordinance. And surely such expectation of ours should not be disappointed. If
we come with expectation, God would never send us away without satisfaction in
our expectation. We never find any that came to Christ to be healed, or helped
in any kind, but they came to him with a strong expectation to receive the
benefit they came for. If a Leper came, he came with expectation of cleansing.
If a blind man came, he came with expectation of his sight. If a lame man came,
he came with expectation of the restitution of his limbs. And we never read in
all the Gospel, that ever any man that came with an expectation of any good
from him, that was turned away with his expectation deceived. If I have caused
the eyes of the widow to fail, says Job, Chap. 31. 16. Poor Widows, that
were oppressed and wronged by others, or that were in want, and needed succor,
they came to Job, and they came to him with expectation, that he would
assuredly pleasure them. Their eyes were to Job, and Job seeing that they came
to him with such an expectation, he by no means would cause the expecting eyes
of the Widow to fail. If we would so come to the Sacrament with our eyes to
Christ, and to his promises, expecting his making good his promises to us, he
would not cause our eyes to fail. Thus therefore resolve, Christ has promised
to give in the Sacrament his body and his blood, to give the benefits of his
death, he has promised to seal pardon, to manifest himself, to give power
against lusts, etc. I will therefore now go to this Ordinance, with a
particular expectation of such and such a particular blessing as my soul
stands in need of. And most sure it is, that the want of this duty proves very
prejudicial to us. How come many from the Sacrament without any benefit, or
good at all. How falls it out so? They have as much as they expected; as they
went expecting nothing, so they come away receiving nothing. God will not drop
down his blessings upon oscitant and negligent hearts. We our selves will not
give unto others where we know there is no such thing expected from us.

Chap. 18. God to be sought in special manner by prayer, before the Sacrament.
seeking of God in prayer. Indeed prayer is a common preparative duty to all
services of God, yea, to all works we take in hand, Col. 3. 17. And whatsoever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus; that is, calling
upon the name of the Lord, and seeking first to him by prayer. It is laid to
their charge as a great sin, Isay 30. 2. That walk to go down into Egypt, and
have not asked at my mouth. No business, especially business of weight and
concernement, should be undertaken without prayer. And what business of
greater weight, what business wherein we stand so much in need of God, and his
help, as in the worthy receiving of the Sacrament? If common and ordinary
business must not be meddled withal without prayer for direction and blessing,
how much less should this great business of receiving the Sacrament? How
needful a duty this is will thus appear:

1 First, this duty neglected, it will cast a dampe upon all other our
preparations. This failing in the last act, will mar all that hitherto we
have done, neither can a blessing be expected upon all the rest, in the want of
this. We know Solomon's Proverb, Prove. 16. 1. The preparations of the heart are
in man, but the answer of the mouth is from the Lord. The meaning of it is,
that though a man have studied hard, and have well provided and prepared
himself what to say, yet he has need of Gods help, to deliver the thoughts of
his mind, and that a man cannot bring forth his conceptions without the
obstetrication of Gods assistance. A Minister, when he is to preach, spends
time in preparation for the work; now when he is thus prepared, yet he needs
the help of God for a door of utterance. Is it not therefore exceeding
necessary for a Minister, though he have ever so well prepared himself by
study, to seek to God by prayer, that utterance may be given unto him, that he
may open his mouth, as S. Paul desires to be prayed for, Ephesians. 6. 19. Though a
man by study be well and sufficiently provided, yet if a man, without prayer to
GOD for his assistance, should up into the Pulpit, might not such an one fear
that his mouth might be stopped, and God should silence him in the Pulpit? Or
could he look at lest that his tongue should so speak, as that the
preparations of his heart should go to the hearts of others? For all a Ministers
preparations, notwithstanding he stands in need of Gods special assistance,
and therefore it nearly concerns him, together with his preparations to seek
to God by prayer, for that help and assistance of his. Just so it is in the
case of the Sacrament. The preparations of the heart are in man, but yet
ability and power to do the work at the Sacrament, is from the Lord; so that if
God help not, and assist not, all preparations come to little. And it cannot
be expected that God should help, when he is neglected and not sought to, and
entreated to help. We need Gods help in all things, but specially in holy
duties. What was the bearing of the Ark on the Priests shoulders to the
receiving of the Sacrament? One would think there should have needed no such
special help to that work of bearing the Arc, besides the general concourse
of Gods providence. And yet it is said, 1 Chronicles. 15. 26. That God helped the
Levites that bare the Arc: yea, it was such special help, that they offered
sacrifices upon it. And if they needed the help of GOD to bear the Ark of the Lord; how much more do we need the help of God in this solemn action and
service of receiving the Sacrament? And if such need of help, is there not
then as much need of prayer? Will help come from God without prayer? Will the
Lord help us if we seek not for his help? nothing less. Nay, so far from
helping us, that we may rather fear he will curse our performances. For upon
our preparations, before specified, to come to the Sacrament without special
seeking God in prayer, what is it better than a trusting in our selves, and in
our preparations? Assuredly God will blast all selfe-confidences, and all
confidences in our own preparations. Therefore never think thy self duly
prepared, till to all the rest thou have joined solemn and earnest seeking of
God by prayer.

2 Secondly, it should be a man's great care, both to sanctify himself to the
Ordinance, and to have the Ordinance sanctified to him. Sanctify your selves,
says Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. to the Levites. Now prayer is the way to do
both. It sanctifies us to the Ordinance, and the Ordinance to us, 1 Timothy 4. All
things are sanctified by the word and prayer. All things, both persons to the
Ordinances, and Ordinances to the persons, not only meats and drinks, but
Ordinances, Sacraments are sanctified to our uses by prayer. Where prayer is
neglected, neither is the person sanctified to the Ordinance, nor the Ordinance
to the person.

3 Thirdly, what an happy and a joyful thing is it, when a man comes to the
Sacrament, and it shall as it were say to a man, as Ananias said to Saul, Acts
9. 17. Brother Saul, the Lord has sent me unto thee, that thou might receive
thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. So when the Sacrament shall come
with such commission to us, how blessed a thing is it? The Lord has sent me
unto thee, that thou may receive comfort, and be filled with the Holy Ghost.
Now there is a course to be taken, that the Sacrament may be sent with such a
Commission. But what may that course be? Do as Saul did, Verse. 11. Ananias,
go inquire for Saul, etc. for behold he prays. Saul was praying, and praying
hard, and then when he is at prayer, before Ananias his coming, then God gives
this Commission, Go Ananias, go thy ways to Saul, and let him be filled with
the Holy Ghost, for behold he prays. So if men before the Sacrament would
spend time in prayer, and be earnest in seeking God, God would give a
Commission and a charge unto his Ordinance, Go and be effectual and powerful
to such a man, be a means to fill him with the Holy Ghost, for behold he
prays; and has before his coming to my Table spent much time in prayer. It
was at the Sacrament of Christ's baptism that Christ's prayer opened Heaven and
brought down the Holy Ghost, Luke 3. 21, 22. And there is no question, but our
prayers at the Lords Supper, would the more easily and readily open heaven, and
bring down the Holy Ghost, if we did but begin the work at home in private
prayer by our selves.

Upon these considerations therefore let us be stirred up to bestow much time
in private prayer by our selves, before our coming to the Sacrament. Do in
this case as the Prophet speaks in that, Zech. 12. 12, 13, 14. Every family
apart, their wives apart. We must not only pray when we are met in public, and
join with the Minister, but we must pray in our Families, pray in our Closets,
every Family apart, the Husband apart, the Wife apart, the Children apart, the
Servants apart, every soul apart by himself. And have a special care in
prayer to put up to God such Petitions as are suitable to the business of the
Sacraments; yea not only is God to be sought by frequent and fervent prayer,
but when we find our hearts more dull and untoward to the work, it is not
amiss to quicken and put more life into our prayers by fasting. It may be thou
have such hardness and deadness in thine heart as can not be cast out but by
fasting and prayer. Holy fasting proves an excellent preparative to holy
feasting. Fasting prayers will bring feasting joys. Thus is God in special
manner to be sought by prayer. But how this is done is pitiful to consider.
Many know not what praying means. He that cannot pray, can never receive the
Sacrament as he ought to do. How rarely is God sought apart in the closet? Or
if any prayer be used, what is it but men's customary formalities that they use
at all other times, which no more concerns the Sacrament, than the riding of a
journey, or going to plough, or any other common occasion. There is no putting
up of Petitions agreeable to the occasion, no begging of those particular
blessings that are to be had in the use of the Ordinance. Not one of an hundred
thinks on these things. Urge men to prayer in this kind, and may they not
answer, as David to Saul when in his armor, 1 Samuel 17. 39. I cannot go with
these, for I have not been accustomed to them. So they cannot pray and seek
God when they are to come to the Sacrament, because they are not accustomed to
these duties at other times. How can they pray before they come to the
Sacrament, that pray not at other times? And thus we now see how we are to
prepare our selves before we come to the Sacrament. Now therefore be we
exhorted to take pains, and to be industrious in the doing of these duties of
preparation; up and be doing, and the Lord will be with you. And for our better
encouragement to be painful and industrious in seeking God in these duties of
preparation, know this, That God will never be wanting to true and industrious
desires and endeavors. God will give good and happy success, sweet and
gracious answers, to all such as seek him industriously in those ways and
means that he appoints. Luke 19. 1, 5. Zacheus had a great desire to see
Christ, but yet had great discouragements. The crowd was great, and he a little
man. But his discouragements dampe not his desires, but his desires make him
industrious against his discouragements. He runs before* climbes up into the
Sycamore, or wild Figtree, gets him a place there, from whence he might see
Christ over the heads of the multitude. And what comes of all this? Was it
labor lost? Was it pains taken to no purpose? No. It proved pains wondrous
well worth the while: for do but see what followed upon it.

1 First, as soon as Christ comes near him, he looks up to, and sees him. It
had been small comfort to have seen Christ, if Christ had not seen him. They
that set themselves to seek Christ, shall not only see Christ, but shall be
seen of Christ. How many of the multitude see Christ, crowd, and touch Christ,
and yet are not once minded, nor regarded by Christ? But Zacheus who is thus
painfully industrious to see Christ, both sees, and is seen.

2 Secondly, He not only sees Christ, and is seen of him, but he hears
Christ, and hears him call him by his name, and in particular to speak to him.
For Christ to speak to him, and to speak to him by name, being a man he had
never seen before, how must this needs affect and ravish his heart?

3 Thirdly, he invites himself home to his house, to be his guest, to eat and
drink with him. If he had but barely seen Christ, it had been some content,
he had not altogether lost his end. But that is not all, Christ looks up to
him, casts up a gracious look toward him. Oh what a sweet comfort is it, to
have Christ look graciously toward one! And yet that is not all neither, but
Christ speaks to him by name, Zacheus* As if he had said, Though thou know
not me, nor I ever saw thee before, yet that thou may know that I take
special notice of thee, and bear a special favor to thee, Lo, I call thee
by thy Name. The good Shepherd knows his Sheep, and calls them by name, John
10. Know therefore that I call thee by name, and call thee by name as one of my
Sheep. This was sweet. If Christ had said no more but this, Well done Zacheus,
thou out of a desire to see me have taken pains, now see me, look upon me thy
fill, that had been sweet; but here is more yet, Zacheus, come down, I will
go to thine house, to thy Table with thee, thou shall be my Host, and I will be
thy guest. Since thou have taken so much pains to run, and climb, and have by
thy pains overcome all discouragements, Come, come down Zacheus, thou shall
entertain me, have me for thy guest, and have sweet fellowship and communion
with me. So sweetly, so abundantly, were Zacheus's painful endeavors
recompensed. Oh, what sweet and precious figs does Zacheus gather in this wild
fig tree? Who would not run and climb, and clamber with all his might into
such a Tree, to pick such excellent fruit? When we therefore are to come to the
Sacrament, do we the like. When we come to the Sacrament, would we not be glad
to see Christ, to have him look graciously upon us, to have communion with him,
to have him invite himself to us, to have him be a guest in our hearts? Would
we not be glad to have it thus with us? Surely there is little comfort in the
Sacrament, when it is not thus with us. Word and Sacrament both, are but dead
and dull services when Christ is not seen in them; when we hear not his
voice, see not his face in them. Therefore when we are to come to the
Sacrament, look to that, and provide for it beforehand; that when we are
come, we may see Christ, have him see and own us. But how may that be done?
Set thine heart, first, strongly to desire to see Christ; and then though thou
may have discouragements, that there is a multitude, and a crowd of duties to
be done, and that thy stature and strength is very little, and therefore no
great hope that thou should get the sight of Christ in the Ordinance; yet
for all that, hold on thy desires to see Christ, and run before, and get up,
and though it cannot be done without much ado, yet climb up into the Sycamore
Tree, and thou shall see Christ, and have communion with him from the top of
that Tree. I, but what is that Sycamore Tree? what is this running before? what
is this climbing up? It is out of a desire to see and enjoy Christ in his
Ordinance, an industrious paines-taking in private duties of preparation,
examination, excitation, and renewing of faith and repentance, and striving in
prayer with God. This is running before, this is climbing up into the Sycamore
Tree. And whosoever takes pains beforehand, in the forenamed and forehandled
duties of preparation, he runs before, he climbes up into the Sycamore, and
shall speed as happily as Zacheus did; shall from the top of that Sycamore, so
painfully climbed, see Christ, and enjoy fellowship with him.

All that come to the Sacrament say they desire to see Christ, and enjoy him
there; and yet to how many does Christ say in effect, at the Sacrament, as the
Lord speaks to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 12. 18. Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking,
and drink thy water with trembling. So, Son of man, eat thy Sacramental bread
with quaking, and drink the Sacramental wine with trembling, Go, get your
ways home with a drooping, and an heavy heart. But why should they so do?
because they see not Christ, nor Christ looks not at them, vouchsafes no
fellowship with them in his Ordinance. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart* says he, Eccles. 9. 7. for God now accepts
thy works: but contrarily may it be said to many, Go thy way, eat thy bread at
the Sacrament, with sorrow, and drink thy wine at the Sacrament, with an heavy
heart, for God accepts not thy work, nor thy service herein. Christ does not
look upon thee, does not invite himself to thee. And what may the reason of
it be? Men say, they desire to see and enjoy Christ in the Sacrament, but they
do not run before, they do not take pains to climb up into the Sycamore
Tree. Their desires are, idle, lazy, slothful; there is no industrious
preparation, no industrious examination, no industrious renewing faith and
repentance, there is no industrious praying, and painful seeking of God
before*hand. And hence is our mischief and miscarriage, we run not, we climb
not, and therefore we see not. So long as Zacheus kept on the ground, he saw
not Christ, nor could see him; but when he had run before, and climbed, then he
does more than see him. Our desires keep on the ground, we spend no time, we
take no pains, the week, and the day before, and therefore we miss the
comfortable sight of Christ in the Sacrament. But let our desires be once
running and climbing desires, let them once get up in the Sycamore Tree, and
they shall find fruit worth the running and the climbing for, Pro. 27. 18.
Whosoever keeps the Fig tree, shall eat the fruit thereof; so, he that climbs the
Fig Tree, shall eat the fruit thereof. We must not think that these Figs will
drop into our mouths, they must climb for them that will have them, and
climbing is painful. They that will take Zacheus's pains, shall reap
Zacheus's gains. A little faith, a faith of as small a stature as Zacheus, if
it be industrious, and will take pains beforehand, will help a man to great
benefit and comfort from Christ in his Ordinance. Though industrious
preparation, examination, prayer, etc. be teadious and wearisome to sloathfull
flesh, and that pretends a press and a crowd of earthly businesses that must
be looked to, and a crowd of duties to be done, that will keep a man off from a
possibility of seeing Christ; yet all the wearisomenesse notwithstanding, and
press of secular business notwithstanding, hold thy self closely to this
work, there will come that comfort, and that sweet in the Sacrament, that will
pay for all. Though it were troublesome to run before, though it were a matter
of trouble and difficulty to climb and clamber into the Sycamore Tree, yet
finds Zacheus that precious fruit therein, that richly paid him for all his
pains. Now besides all this pains in our own personal preparation, we must
also know that we must have a care to prepare others, as we stand charged with
them in their several relations to us. Ministers must not only prepare
themselves, but must do their best to prepare their people. As Josiah speaks
to them, 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. Sanctify your selves, and prepare your brethren: so
it may be said to Ministers, sanctify your selves, and prepare your people: so
to Parents, sanctify your selves, and prepare your children: so to Masters and
Governors, sanctify your selves; and prepare your servants and your Families.
See Exodus 12. 26, 27. It shall come to pass, that when your children shall
say, What mean you by this service, that ye shall say, It is the Sacrifice of
the Lords Passover, etc. And Verse. 48. When a stranger shall sojourne with
thee, and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his males be
circumcised, etc. Such whom it concerned, must look that he were prepared
before he came. Thou therefore that have others under thy charg, have a care to
prepare them, instruct them, direct them, call upon them to have a care to come
in due Order. If thou know any sin or evil in them, admonish them, and
advise them to repentance for it, and to a resolution to a reformation of it
before they come to the Sacrament. And thus much for preparation to the
Sacrament.

Ob. But when I have done all that I can, I must say, I am an unprofitable
servant. When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, says our
Savior, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our
duty to do. The Lord then be merciful unto me; for if when I have done all
that is commanded me, and when I have done that which is my duty to do, I must
say, I am an unprofitable servant; then how much more must I say it, that am
far short of doing all that in this particular I am commanded to do, and have
not done that which is my duty to do? I doubt therefore that I may not come to
the Sacrament, because I cannot find my self thus prepared; I were better
keep away than come, unless I were thus prepared. I have done what I possibly
can do, but alas, how short am I of what is required?

Answ. 1. First, have recourse here to that which before was said in the last
point of the second Chapter. Labor and endeavor to be as exactly prepared as
possibly thou can, but if thou can not attain to that measure and degree
of preparation thou desire, yet if thy heart witness to thee, that what is
wanting in thy preparation, is not from sloth, idleness, and lothnesse to take
pains, but it is the highest degree that with all thy pains thou art able to
attain unto; I say unto thee in this case, as Saul spoke to David in that, 1 Samuel 17. 37. Go, and the Lord be with thee. Go to the Sacrament, and fear
not, but that the Lord will be with thee.

2 Secondly, if indeed thou have no faith, no repentance at all wrought or
renewed in thee, I would in any case advise thee to forbear; for why should
thou destroy thy self, as Solomon speaks in that case, Eccl. 7. 16. But now
deal uprightly, as in Gods presence, and take heed as well of bearing false
witness against thy self, as against thy neighbor. It is a sin to bear false
witness against thy self, as well as to foredoe thy self, and therefore make
conscience of it, deal sincerely therefore. Dare thou confidently, and upon
unquestionable grounds affirm it, that thou have no faith, no repentance? I
much fear me, say thou, that I have not. That is not the point what thou
fear, but what thou assuredly know. A man may have much faith that fears
he has none: yea, there may be greatest faith, where there be greatest
fears. Thou, upon serious examination of thine own condition, not upon an
ignorant self-love, dare not for a world, resolutely and peremptorily say,
thou have no faith, no grace, no part in Christ; then take heed how thou upon
thy fears forbear Gods Ordinance.

3 Thirdly, if thou have done thine utmost in the sincerity of thy spirit to
fit thy self for the duty, and thine heart charges thee, neither with any
gross guilt in thy life, nor with any slothful formality in thy preparation,
though thou can not find thy self so fitted as thou would, yet go to the
Ordinance, if it be upon conscience of giving God obedience. Christ commands
the use of the Sacrament, Do this in remembrance of me. Now though thine own
fears discourage and dis-hearten thee, and when thou look at thy self,
thou fear to go; yet if when thou look at Gods commandment, and in the
conscience of it fear to stay away, here in this conflict of fears, let
this last fear get the victory; and be more afraid to stay from the Sacrament,
in regard of Gods commandment, then to come to the Sacrament in regard of thy
discouragement. Gods commandment says Go, thine own discouragements says Go
not. Give obedience rather to Gods commandment, than to thine own fears.
Obedience yielded to God, out of pure conscience to his commandment; yielded,
I say, against discouragements and fears, may be no whit inferior unto, nor
less acceptable then a preparation in a more exact and excellent degree then
yet thou have. Such obedience is most excellent and most acceptable; for that
is the most excellent obedience, when there is nothing else to toll and draw us
on but only Gods commandment. When a man finds himself in such a frame of
spirit, as that he questions not but to meet with comfort, and a good answer at
the Sacrament; then possibly not Gods commandment, but that comfort may rather
seem to draw him to the duty. But now when a man has some discouragements, in
regard of the fears of the indisposition of his spirit, and yet in regard of
Gods commandment, dares not absent himself, dares not but go: it is clear,
that such obedience is pure obedience, because there is nothing to draw him on
but Gods commandment, and that he does the duty upon this ground, Because God
will have him do it, and that he does it more for Gods sake, than his own.
Excellent is that Exo. 14. 15. The Lord said unto Moses, speak unto the
children of Israel that they go forward. Forwards Why, there was great danger
before them, they go upon a manifest danger, the Sea is before them. As good go
backward to the Egyptians, or as good stand still and let the Egyptians come
and put them to the sword, as to go forward. It is but death to stand still,
but death to go backward, and it is no better than death to go forward. What
safety can be expected by going into the Sea? Well, for all this, speak to the
children of Israel that they go forward. Now to go forward, because God
commands it, when nothing but present danger in sight, was an argument of pure
obedience: it was not safety, but conscience of obedience to Gods commandment,
that carried them forwards. A man in the truth and sincerity of his spirit has
done his utmost in his preparation, and yet his heart misgives him that he
shall sin to go to the Sacrament, and that he shall run himself upon a
manifest danger; speak unto such a man that he go forward, because God
commands him to do him this service, and his going forward in obedience, being
pure obedience, it shall return him at last as great comfort, as if he had
been so prepared as his desire was to have been.

Object. I, but my heart is full of fears and doubts; I fear and tremble to
come to Gods Ordinance in my fears.

Answ. Yet come; Fears in coming are no bar to comfort. Thou may come in
fear, and yet go away with much comfort. See Mark 5. 33. The Woman fearing
and trembling came and fell down before him. And what says Christ to her?
Verse. 34. Daughter, go in peace. She comes to Christ with fear, she goes away
in peace; she came trembling, she goes away rejoicing. If her fear and
trembling had kept her from Christ, she had missed of that sweet and
comfortable answer, Daughter, go in peace. We know not what comfort we deprive
our selves of, when we suffer our fears and jealousies to prevail so far
with us, as to keep us from Christ in his Ordinances.

Object. But my fear is, that I shall not meet with Christ, nor find him in
his Ordinance, and therefore what should I do there?

Answ. A man may then meet with Christ, and find him, when he least of all
hopes to find him. Mary meets with Christ, John 20. 15. and supposes he had
been the Gardener, and accordingly inquires of him as of the Gardener, Where
he had laid Christ. But yet before an answer could be returned her, she turned
her self from him, for when Christ speaks to her, Verse. 16. She turns her
self to him. Therefore she had turned away from him, as thinking it a
bootlesse business to stand talking with him, and inquiring of him about
finding of Christ. And just when she as hopeless of finding Christ by him,
turns her self from him, Christ calls her by her name, Mary. So that a man
may often find Christ, when he least hopes for it. Therefore though thou have
but little hope to find Christ at the Sacrament, yet turn not from it, but
come to Christ in his Ordinance, even then when thou least hopest for it,
may then hear so gracious a compellation from CHRIST, as may make thy soul
joyfully echo back again, Rabboni.

Chap. 19. Meditation, and exercise of Repentance at the Sacrament.
he comes to a great man's table, but there is a great care also to be had of
that carriage, and behavior that beseemes such a man's table, and person.
Though a man come handsome, and cleanely apparel'd to a great man's Table, yet
he may there carry himself so rudely, unmannerly, and uncivilly that he may
give great offense. As therefore we must have a care to get our hearts into an
holy, and fitting frame before we come, so no less must our care be to have
them in a convenient frame during the time of the whole action. Though a man
have bestowed much pains with his heart before his coming, yet, if there be
not a care of due behavior in the action, all his former pains may be lost.
Though the Priests had been careful to have washed themselves, and to put on
their Priestly garments, yet might they be guilty of irregularities at the
Altar in not placing the wood, or the parts of the sacrifice in due order,
Leviticus 1. Therefore as the Apostle speaks in the general, so it may be
said in this particular, 2 John 8. Look to your selves that we loose not
those things which we have wrought, etc. So look to your selves when ye have
bestowed a great deal of time, and pains in preparation, that by a loose, and
careless carriage in the duly doing, you loose not the things you have done.
There must be a care therefore of the duties to be done in the Action, Duties
convenient. There be some duties in which the whole congregation join
together, in which we must take heed of all looseness, and evagation of
spirit, especially expressed in idle gazing about, have a care to hold the heart
close to all those duties in which all join together. But I mean not to
insist in these. There are therefore some special; and personal duties that
every one is particularly by himself to perform, and those have a special
care of. The duty in general to be done at the Sacrament. 16. The offering up
of our selves to God in an holy, and spiritual disposition in receiving of the
Supper. This general branches it self into diverse particulars. And they are
these.

1. First, solemn, serious and deep meditation. A leading duty to others that
follow, and that which only furthers them. There must be an heart enlarged
with godly sorrow for sin, there must be compunction, and contrition of
spirit. It is meditation that must fit for it, and bring that, and lay that to
the h^^^^ which must bruise it. Meditation gives a man Meditatio siquidem
pascit scientiam, scientia compunctionem, compunctio devotionem. Inter opera
August. l. 3. de Spir. and anima.
a sight, and knowledge of himself, of his sins, of the riches of Gods
mercies in Christ, and such knowledge is it which works compunction of spirit.
We are to be taken up in duties of Thankesgiving, and to be more than
ordinarily enlarged therein. There is no such way to enlarge the heart in that
duty, as by meditation to heat and warm our hearts. So Psalm 104. 33. 34. I
will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing praise unto my God
whilst I have my being, my meditation of him shall be sweet, I will be glad
in the Lord. There is nothing so feeds spiritual joy, and so maintains and
holds up that holy flame that should be in a man's heart in the duty of
thankesgiving, as does meditation. That is the Oil and the Fuel that keeps
such fire burning. The sweeter our meditation is, the more is the heart
prepared, and enlarged to praises, thankesgiving, and joy in the Lord.
Therefore a special duty to be done at the Sacrament is, to take up our
hearts with serious meditation. And for the better raising and feeding
meditation, it is good when we are come to the Lords Table, to do as Solomon
wishes us to do in that case, Proverbs 23. 1. When thou sit to eat with a
Ruler, consider diligently what is before thee. He advises it for a man's better
caution, if he be a man given to his appetite, that he may not be desirous of
such dainties as are set before him. But in this case it is good to consider
what is set before us to provoke our appetite, and to stir up in us a longing
after those dainties. Consider therefore what is set before thee, what is done
before thee. Consider the Sacramental elements, the sacramental promises, and
sacramental actions. Here then we see Bread, and Wine set before us, and not
bare bread and wine, but the sacramental Body, and Blood of Christ: This is my
Body, This is my Blood. Behold then what a Feast God has prepared for us; such
a feast as that: Isa. 25. 6. A feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the
lees, of fat things, full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. Alas!
how lean are our souls? What hunger-starved spirits have we? But here be fat
things, full of marrow to feed, and fat our lean souls. How dead and dull are
our hearts; but here is wine upon the lees, here is wine that goes down
sweetly, that will cause the lips of those that are asleep, to speak, that
will refresh and sweetly quicken our spirits. Here we see this Bread broken,
this Wine powered out. Here we see Christ crucified before our eyes; now we see
him hanging, and bleeding upon the cross, we now see him pressed, and crushed
under the heavy pressure of his Fathers infinite wrath: Now we see him in the
Garden in his bloody sweat. Now may we behold him under the bitter conflict,
with his Fathers Celebrantes co^monemur quasi ungulam findens, and ^^minan^
pecus ^^voca^e ad fance^* and minu^atim commolere Dominicae institutionis
exemplum, ut semper passio sist in memo^ia, etc. Cypr. de caena Dom. M^d^t^^io
^uminat ^^vores vulne (...)* fixu^as ^la vorum, lanceam ut acetum, persecuto^u^
faevi^iam, Apostolo^um fugam, and mo^^em ^urpissimam, corporis sepulturum.
Bernard. Hom de d^ob. Discip. e^nt. ad E^^.
wrath upon the cross. Behold the man, says Pilate, That is our duty to do
now by meditation, to represent unto our selves the bitterness of Christ's
passion: Exodus 24. 8. And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the
people, and said: Behold the blood of the Covenant. So here: Behold the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the world: Ioh. 1. and behold the blood of
that innocent, and spotless Lamb; yea, behold him now shedding his precious
blood to take away the sins of the world, and look upon him as the
Scapegoat, bearing, and carrying our sins upon him. Represent we unto our
selves in our meditations, as lively as we are able, all the sorrows of
Christ's passion. Ps. 26. 6.
How prodigious a darkness was there at Christ's passion for three hours
together? Surely a special end of this darkness, was to show the dreadful
and horrible wrath of God against his own Son, now hanging on the cross, a
sacrifice for the worlds sins, was it nothing, or was it but a small matter
that God did manifest his wrath against him, by letting loose the tongues, and
hands of all his carnal enemies against him, but that the Lord himself from
heaven would reveal his wrath against the unrighteousness of the world, which
now lay upon him. Now stood Christ in our stead, we should have suffered the
horror of darkness for ever, even that blackness of darkness, as Jude
calls it. Now Christ undertaking for us he suffers darkness. And God by this,
as by a visible sign, would testify, that the blackness of darkness,
caused by Gods wrath for sin, was upon him. Thereby conceive we in some sort
the sad plight, and woeful agony in which Christ then was. God causes the Sun
to shine upon the Just, and the unjust, Mat. 5. 45. But now, that Christ is a
sacrifice for our sins, and to suffer his Fathers wrath for them, he must not
have so much as the common comfort of the light of the Sun, but as if he
were of all unjust ones the most unjust; the very light of the Sun shall be
taken from him, and he be left in horrid darkness. Do but look upon Christ
on the cross, under all our sins lying upon him, and how heavy a press, how
ponderous a weight was that? But consider besides this, how many were the
pains of his body by their inhumane, and barbarous usages? what was the bitter
exacerbation of his Spirit, by so many base and ignominious reproaches of all
his malignant opposites, what, was it nothing to be scourged? to give his
cheeks to the smiters? to be spitefully entreated, to be spitted on, and
endure all those outrageous insolences of his enemies before, and at his
crucifying? Oh! how bitter were these things? But consider besides all this, to
have all the power of Hell against him, and all those Lions, Bulls, Unicorns,
and Dogs, to be taken up, and employed in assaulting and afflicting him. Oh!
how past all conception of the understanding of man was the smart of this
misery? Here was Earth against him; here was Hell against him. And yet Earth
and Hell not enough, but Heaven it self against him. After all this, to have
God his Father from Heaven by this prodigious, dreadful, and long darkness,
to testify his wrath against him: here was that which added weight and
perfection to all the rest. To be three whole hours together under a visible
sign of the darkness of Gods countenance, under the darkness of the sense
of his wrath, witnessed from Heaven, by the darkness of the Sun: how bitter,
and sharp a conflict was this above all the rest? Thus represent we to our
selves Christ hanging on the cross; thus, Behold the Lamb of God rosting in
the fire of wrath; yea, further, After that we have seen Christ thus for three
hours space in deep silence, conflicting in this time of darkness with all
these sorrows, Now as not able any longer to hold his peace, think we that
we hear him by that formidable cry, manifesting the bitterness, and
unutterable extremity of his passion: My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken
me? All these three dark hours was Christ drinking this bitter cup, and now
at the third hours end was he come to the dregs and lees of it. This was the
sharpest paroxisme and fit of his passion. Now were the envenomed arrows of
the Almighty shot up to the heads in his soul. And how can we see, and hear
Christ suffering all this for us, and not withal in our meditations stand
astonished at the heynousnesse and hideousness of our sins, for which no
other way of expiation could be made, but by this bitter passion of Christ.
Behold in the passion of Christ as in a glass, the greatness of sin. Think
we sadly with our selves, Surely sin against God must needs be more than men
commonly esteem it. It could be no small matter for which the dear Son of
God did suffer such horrible and dreadful torments on the cross. Let we out
our hearts therefore here in the meditation of the greatness of our sins.
And withal, Ad victimam illam pendentem in cruce nos conferemus. Ibi vere
contemplabimur Deum, ibi in ipsum cor Dei introspiciemus, quod fit misericors,
quod nobis mortem peccatoris, etc. Luther. in Genesis 19.
let we out our hearts especially in the meditation and admiration of such
unmatchable love and goodness as God has shown in the work of our
Redemption. Labor to comprehend, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height; and to know, and see the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.
What heart is able sufficiently to admire the depth of the riches, the
bottomless depth, the unfadomable depth of the riches of Gods love, and mercy
in Christ. How may we with David cry out: Lord, what is man that thou art
mindful of him? Psalm. 8. 4. and upon a better ground with Job, Job 7. 17.
What is man, that thou should magnify him? and that thou should set
thine heart upon him? especially that thou should so be mindful of him,
that thou should set thine heart upon him, as to give the Son of thy love
to suffer the cursed death of the cross, to make us cursed children,
firebrands of hell, damned hellhounds, heirs of blessings and eternal life:
Is not here matter of meditation and admiration to take up all the thoughts and
hearts of men and Angels. And how should such love fire and inflame our hearts
with holy love to God, and Christ? How should our hearts grow warm, and hot
within Tribue ut concaleat cor meum intra me, and in meditatione mea exardescat
ignis. Aug. medit c. 17.
us? That as David speaks in another case, Psalm 39. 3. Mine heart was hot
within me, whilst I was musing, the fire burned. So whilst we are thus
musing, and meditating of the love of Christ in his passion, the fire should
burn, and our hearts should wax hot within us, the fire, and flame of our
love to Christ should kindle, and grow hot in our hearts. The view of his
passion should work in us an holy Rogo te per illa salutifera vulnera tua quae
passus es in cruce pro salute nostra, e quibus emanavit pretiosus ille sanguis
quo sumus redempti^ vulnera hanc animam meam peccatricem, pro qua etiam mori
dignatus es: vulnera eam igneo and potentissimo tel^ tuae nimiae Charitatis --
Configcor meum jaculo tui amoris, ut di cat tibi anima mea, Charitate tua
vulnerata sum, etc. Aug. lib. medit. c. 37.
passion of love. The view of his wounds should wound our hearts with holy, and
enlarged affection to him. Follow, and go along with CHRIST in all his
sufferings in thy meditations. Begin where his passion begun, John 12. 27.
follow him thence into the Garden, from thence into the High Priests Hall, from
thence into the Judgment Hall, from thence to the Cross. There is not a
passage in all the story that affordes not matter of meditation; and not a
meditation that may not set forth his love to thee, and kindle thine to him.
Thus therefore at the Sacrament should our hearts be employed in the meditation
of CHRIST'S death, and passion, and thus should we make that good, Cant. 1. 12.
Whilst the King Sit^^ at his Table, my spikenard sends forth the smell
thereof: that is, whilst CHRIST had communion with me, my graces were
exercised, and manifested themselves, even then whilst I had fellowship with
him. As CHRIST sat at Table Mary took a pound of ointment, of Spikenard very
costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and the house was filled with the
odor of the ointment. So the King sits at his table, and when we sit at his
table in the Sacrament, we should cause our spikenards to send forth, the smell
thereof. That we do, when in the ordinance we take up our hearts with the holy
meditations of the love of Christ, in his bitter passion. Such holy meditations
are the smell of the spikenards, and are as pleasing to Christ as Mary's
spikneard was, that filled the whole house with the odor thereof. This Christ
commandes, and makes it one maine end of the Institution of the Sacrament. Do
this in remembrance of me, therefore appointed he the Sacrament, that therein
we might in special manner meditate upon his passion, and his love to us
therein. David had a Psalm of Remembrance, Psalm 38. in the title. But for
the death of Christ, his love in it, and the benefits by it, we have not only
some Psalms of Remembrance, as Psalm 16. 22, and 69. and others, but besides,
the Lord Christ has to the worlds end appointed a Sacrament of Remembrance,
that this great work of CHRIST'S death, and his infinite love, and mercy therein
might above all other works be meditated upon, and had in remembrance. One
specially in the Evangelists is worth our notice. Some of Christ's works are
specified only by one Evangelist, at his turning of Water to wine, as his
healing the sick man at the poole of Bethesda, his healing that blind man, Ioh.
9. Some of them are specified by two Evangelists, as the history of Christ's
birth by Matthew, and Luke. Some things are recorded by three of them as the
Institution of the Sacrament of the Supper. But as for Christ's death, and
Passion it is recorded by them all four. Only two write the History of his
birth, but all four the History of his death, without doubt to teach us, that
though all Christ's works, and actions are to be seriously minded, meditated
upon, and remembered, yet none so special as his death, and sufferings. And
therefore specially should his death be meditated upon at the Sacrament, whose
institution was purposely for the remembrance of it. Therefore ought men to
make special conscience of this duly. How cold, and dead a remembrance of
Christ's death is the receiving of the Sacrament without this serious meditation
of the bitterness of his death, and the sweetness of his love therein? We
make not good the end of the Sacrament without it, yea we as much as in us
lies make the Sacrament but a dumb show. What remembrance is there of Christ's
death in such receiving the Sacrament? Makes it be in a fresh crucifying him
again by our unworthy receiving.

2 Secondly, An exercise of Repentance. And this exercise of Repentance must be
in two things.

1. First, in godly sorrow for sin. 2. Secondly, in a solemn renewing of our
Covenants with God.
1. First, in godly sorrow for sin, for our own sins in particular for
which Christ did undergo all that sorrow, and smart in his sufferings. We
have in the Sacrament a representation of the sufferings of Christ, we have
him crucified before our eyes. Behold, says John, the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world. In the Sacrament should we behold him taking away
the sins of the world. In it we see, and behold Christ crucified, we see his
hands, feet, and side pierced, now this sight should so affect us, as it
should pierce the very hearts of us. What? The blessed Son of GOD to strip
himself of his glory, to humble and abase himself to the ignominious, and
accursed death of the Cross? The glorious Son of GOD thus abused, and
abased, Why? How comes this about? The only begotten Son of the Father to
make such bitter lamentation, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? What
may the cause of all this be? Alas, all this was for our sins. It was not
Judas, not the Jews, not Pilate, not the Soldiers, but they were our sins,
thy sins, my sins that put the Son of God to all his sorrow. We, we, and
none but we were the evil beasts that devoured this Joseph. Our sins were so
heinous, and had so provoked the Justice of God, that there was no way to
satisfy Gods Justice, to appease his wrath, and to make our atonement, but by
the precious blood of the Son of God crucified on the Cross. And shall I now
see my sins lie so heavy upon him, as to make him sweat blood; shall I see him
even squeezed under the huge weight of my sins; shall I see my sins crown
him with thorns, nail his hands, and feet to the Cross, Gore his side with
the spear, with an unpierced heart? Oh the deep sorrow that our hearts should
be leavened withal when we see Christ's body brusing, and bleeding in the
Sacrament. Christ our Passover is sanctified for us. The Passover was to be
eaten with bitter herbs, or will bitternesses Exodus 12. 5. And how happy is
that soul, that in this respect can say at the Sacrament as, Lamen. 3. 15. He
has filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with wormwood? It
should be with us at the Sacrament as with them, Zech. 12. 10. They shall
look upon him whom they have pierced. And how shall that sight affect them?
And they shall mourn and be in bitterness for him, as one that mournes for
his only son, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne. How bitterly
will such a man mourn? So bitterly shall they mourn when they look upon
Christ whom they have pierced. And great reason, for is it not a matter of
greater sorrow to pierce the only Son of God, the first borne, the first
begotten from the dead, then to loose one only, or first begotten son? So
here in the Sacrament we look upon Christ whom we have pierced, this sight
should fill our hearts with bitterness, should make our hearts full of sorrow.
Not only with an Historical sorrow, or a sorrow of natural compassion when
we hear or see, some sad, or sorrowful event, this is nothing, but Homini
non est necessarium ut Christu^ in ipsius passione deploret sed magis seipsu^
in Christo. Luther.
with a practical sorrow, with an unfeigned sorrow of heart, that we by our
personal sins have had our hands imbrued in the blood of the Son of GOD,
that our sins envenomed those thorns, those nails that pierced him, and by
their venom made them put him to such bitter anguish. Have we hearts
conformeable Si vis ipsum cognoscere, sicut se fregit, ita te frange: quia qui
dicit se in Christo manner, debe^ sicut ille ambularit, and ipse ambulare.
Bern. hom. de duob. dis^euntib* ad. Em.
to the Christ we see in the Sacrament. Thou beholdest a broken Christ, thou
beholdest a bleeding Christ, thou beholdest a bleeding Christ, behold him
therefore with a broken heart, with a bleeding heart, with a pierced spirit. So
behold Christ in the Sacrament, as the Virgin Mary his Mother beheld him on the
Cross. And how was that? Woman, says Christ, behold thy Son. How did she
behold him? Simeon tells her, Luke 2. 35. That a sword shall pass through her
soul. Then did a sword pierce through her soul when she beheld him pierced on
the Cross, that sight was a sword through the heart of her. So when we see
him pierced in the Sacrament, it should be as a dagger in our hearts. Oh wretch
that I am, that my sins have been thorns on his head, nails in his hands,
and feet, a spear in his side: LORD, says David, when he saw the people
slaughtred by the Angels sword, lo I have sinned, and I have done wickedly,
but these sheep, what have they done? 2 Samuel 24. 17. So say Elect puer Dei
mei. quid tanta amaritudine, quid tanta confusione dignum commiseras? Prorsus
nihil. Ego perditus homo totius proditionis tuae causa extiti. Ego domine unam
acce^bam comedi, and dentes tui obstupuerunt: quia quae non rapuisti tunc
exvolveb^s Bernard. Sermon. de pass. Dom.
here, lo I have sinned, I have done wickedly, but this Innocent, and
Immaculate Lamb, what has he done? It is I that have sinned, and it is thou
Oh LORD that have smarted. It is I that have sinned, and it is thou Oh Lord
that have suffered. It is I that have put thee to all these sorrows, my
oaths, my uncleanness, my lusts, my covetousness, my drunkenness, etc.
These were the Iudasses that betrayed thee, these were the Jews that crucified
thee. Lord I have eaten the sour grapes, and thy teeth were set on edge, LORD
I played the thief, and thou restoredst the things thou tookest not.

Do this, says Christ, in Remembrance of me. He would have the Sacrament
appointed to renew, and refresh the remembrance of his sufferings, that in the
remembrance of his sufferings we might remember our own sins the causes of
them, and be deeply humbled for them. That as the Prophet speaks in that
case, Lamen. 3. 19, 20. Remembering mine affliction, and my misery, the
worme-wood, and the gall, my soul has them still in remembrance, and is
humbled in me. So in ^^is case, remembering Christ's affliction and his misery,
the gall and the wormwood, our soul should still have them in remembrance,
and be deeply humbled in us: what a sweet temper were it to be at the
Sacrament with a melting heart? Mine eye, says the Prophet, affects mine
heart, Lam. 3. 51. how happy that our eye could effect our heart? we have
Christ crucified for our sins, in our eye at the Sacrament, o that that which
our eye sees could affect our heart with such sorrow for sin as becomes. That
our vide quomodo his qui Christi commemorant passionem, inter sacra officia
quasi per quosdam canales de interioribus fontibus egrediantur torrentes, and
super omnes delicias lachrymis nectarijs anima delectetur -- Ros matutinus est
de caelestibus stillans, and quasi unctio spiritus mentem deliniens. Gemitus
illos pietas excitat -- and se sanatam and sanctificatam agnoscens fletibus se
abluit, and lachrymis se baptizat. Cypr. de caen. Dom.
eye could affect our heart, and our heart could affect our eye, that whilst
we behold Christ shedding his blood for our sins, we could be affected with
such sorrow upon the sight of our eye, that our heart could melt out at our
eyes, and shed tears for those sins for which we see Christ shed his blood.
That we could turn the Sacrament of the Supper, into a baptism of tears, and
could wash, and baptize our selves with the tears of Repentance, as Saint
Cyprian speaks. It was laid to the charge of those unkind husbands, Malach.
2. 13. that by their unkindnesses they caused their wives, when they should
have been cheerful in Gods service, to cover the Altar of the Lord with
tears with weeping, and with crying out insomuch that he regarded not the
offering any more, nor received it with good will at their hands. But how happy
were it with us that we could so be affected with our unkindnesse to CHRIST
our Husband, that we could cover the Lord's Table with our tears, with
weeping, and with crying out, how then would the Lord regard our service the
more, and receive our receiving with good will at our hands? Vere potest
conscindere cor meu^ miserum, and sanguineis lachrimis madefacere: quia ecce
creator meus pro me sanguineo rore prefunditur, nec levi quidem sed decurrente
in terram. Vae misero cordi, quod ta^, and tanto ^udore non madescit perfusum.
Bern. de pass. Do^. tract. c. 37.


Alas, alas, for the hardness of our hearts, that we can see our Lord all in
his gore blood for our sins, his blood shedding upon the earth, and that our
hearts cannot be rent, and bleed tears of blood, that this blood moystens not,
and softens not our hard hearts! Consider ye and call for the mourning women,
and send for cunning women that they may come, says the Prophet, Ier. 9. 17,
18. that they may come. And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us,
that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eylids gush out with waters.
So when ye be come to the Lord's Table, consider ye, consider ye, O lacrymae,
ubi yos subtaxistis? O lacrimae ubi estis? Vbi estis fontes lachrymarum?
Movemini obsecro ad fletum meum, fontes lachrymarum fluite super faciem mea,
Rigate maxillas meas Date mihi planctu^ amarum. Ber. de mod. ben. viv. sermon. 27.

Miserum me, quomodo sic insensata facta est anima mea. -- Miserum me, quomodo
sic induruit cor meum, ut oculi mei uon indesinenter producant flumina lachry.
marum. Aug. med. c. 34.

Percute Domine, percute obsecro hanc durissimam mentem meam, -- and sic de
capite meo educ aquam immensam, and de oculis meis veru^ fontem lachrymarum.
Aug. med c. 37.


what is before you. Call for mourning hearts, call for mourning affections,
call for sad, and sighing spirits, call for tears, that your eyes may run
down with tears, and your eylids gush out with waters. Say with the same
Prophet, Ier. 9. 1. Oh that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep, etc. Ah our rocky hearts, harder then the neither
millstone, that cannot dissolve into rivers of tears upon the view of so sad a
spectacle as the sight of CHRIST hanging crucified on the Cross for our sins.
Smite LORD, thou that can bring water out of the rocks, and can turn the
flint into a standing poole, LORD smite thou this rocky heart, break thou this
heart of flint, and make the waters gush out abundantly. And this is the first
exercise of repentance at the Sacrament.

2 The second exercise of repentance at the Sacrament is in a solemn renewing
of our vows, and covenants Plinius sub Trajano scripsit solitos stato die
convenire Christianos ante lucem, carmenq, Christo quasi Deo co^muni voce
dicere: Postea se Sacramento obstringere, non in scelus aliquod, sed ne furta,
ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum
appellati ab negarent. Centur. Magdeb. Cent. 2. c. 6.
with GOD to hate, forsake, and renounce all our former sins, lusts, vanities,
unprofitablenesse, and to walk more closely, and watchful then ever before.
The word Sacrament is a latin word that signifies an Oath, to receive the
Sacrament is to take, and receive an Oath, And when we receive the Sacrament we
should bind our selves in a solemn Covenant with God to forsake all our sins,
and to walk in new and better obedience before GOD. And that practice of
repentance rises thus. In the Sacrament I see CHRIST crucified for my sins. And
was CHRIST crucified for my sins? Surely then I resolve, and vow too, and
covenant with God that I will use my sins as I see they have used CHRIST. They
pierced him, I will pierce them, they killed, and put him to death, LORD I will
do by them, as they have done by thee, I will kill, crucify, and put them to
death. LORD CHRIST thou gave thy self for me. Behold here I am, and here I
give my self to thee. That same is to be done in the Sacrament which we find,
Deuteronomy. 26. 16, 17, 18. This day the Lord has commanded thee to do these
Statutes, etc. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and etc. And
the Lord has avouched thee this day, etc. So may it be said of a Sacrament
day; This day the LORD thy GOD has commanded thee to keep his Statutes, etc.
And this day thou have avouched the LORD to be thy GOD, and to walk is his
ways, etc. And this day the LORD has avouched thee to be one of his. There
should be in a Sacrament a mutual avouchment between GOD, and his people. When
we come to the Sacrament, as we come that GOD may avouch us for his people,
so we should come to avouch him for our GOD, and that we will keep his
Commandments. We can have no comfort in the use of the Sacrament, unless in
it God avouch us for his people. And we have no reason to think that God will
avouch us for his people, unless we will avouch him to be our GOD, and
covenant with him the renoucing of our lusts, and yielding him obedience. This
therefore is to be done in the Sacrament, Lord avouch me for thine, as I
avouch, and covenant my self to be thine in all obedience to thy Commandments.

It must be with us at a Sacrament, as it was with the Jews of ancient in a
Sacrifice. In Sacrifices the people did not only offer their oblation, and
perform that service, but withal they did in Sacrificing renew, and make
their covenants afresh, the covenants of offering up themselves a living, and
acceptable Sacrifice, of mortification of their brutish lusts, of an holy, and
obedient life. So much implies, as that Romans 12. 1. So that place, Psalm. 50. 5.
Gather my Saints together, those that have made a covenant with me by
Sacrifice. Therefore in Sacrifices there was a making of covenant with GOD. The
same must be done in the Sacrament of the Supper, we must there renew our
Baptismall covenant. For in the Sacrament there is, and must be a mutual
stipulation, and sponsion between GOD, and the soul of a Communicant, that as
we expect GOD should bind himself to us, so he expects that we should bind
our selves to him. As David joins the cup of salvation, and the paying of his
vows together, Psalm. 116. 13, 14. I will take the cup of my salvation, I will
pay my vows unto the Lord, so should we join the cup of blessing and the
making of our vows together, I will take the cup of blessing, I will make my
vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people. And thus in these
two things must there be a practice of repentance at the receiving of the
Sacrament.

Chap. 20. Faith to be Actuated and exercised in the Sacrament; An exercise of
Thankesgiving, Love, and Mercy.
third thing in which the spiritual and holy disposition in receiving the
Sacrament stands is an exercise of faith. Now must a Communicant speak to his
faith as Deborah does to her self, Judge. 5. 12. Awake, Awake, Deborah, Awake,
Awake, utter a Song. So Awake, Awake oh my faith, Awake, Awake, and now
bestirre, and rouse up to do the special, and maine work of the Sacrament in
the receiving of Christ now offered, and tendered in his Ordinance. The great,
and chief work of the Sacrament comes now to be done in the Actuating of faith
so, as to fetch forth the fat, and marrow of the Ordinance. For the better
conceiving, and practicing of this point we must know these four things.

First, That CHRIST is an allsufficient fullness for the through supply of all
the wants, and necessities of our souls whatsoever they may be, Col. 1. 19. It
pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell. First then, there is
a fullness in him. Secondly, All fullness is in him. Look whatsoever it is
that is required to be in a Mediator, it is all fully in him, it has it all
to the full. Thirdly, He says not simply that this fullness is in him, but
that this fullness dwells in him. A Vessel may be full, and a Treasury may be
full, but these may be emptied again, and so an emptiness may follow that
fullness. But this fullness dwells in him, it is an Inhabitant, resident,
permanent fullness, so as he is, and ever shall be full. There is in him a
fullness of merit for our justification, and a fullness of spirit, and
habitual graces, and so a fullness of efficacies, virtues, as mortifying,
sanctifying, quickening virtues. And thus he is full of all kinds of Graces,
Apoc. 3. 1. He has the seven spirits of God. And Esa. 11. 2, 3. with which
that suites, Prove. 8. 12, 13, 14. And therefore not only Treasures, but All
the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge are hid in him, Col. 2. 3. And all
these Graces he has in the highest, and fullest degree. Therefore the Apostle
says not, Col. 2. 3. In whom is knowledge and wisdom, but the treasures of
knowledge, treasures of wisdom. Some pieces of silver and gold are not
treasures, but the treasures are vast heaps.

Secondly, That Christ is thus filled, and enriched for the behoof of his
Church, and members, that he may conveigh and communicate unto them of his
fullness for the supply of their wants. There is in CHRIST not only a fullness
of abundance, in regard of which he is sufficiently full in himself, but also
a fullness of redundance, by which he overflowes, and fills all his Saints. His
fullness is not only a full fullness, but a filling fullness, John 1. 14, 16.
Full of Grace, and Truth, and of his fullness have we all received and grace
for grace, Ephesians. 1. 23. Which is the fullness of him that fills all in all.
There is such an abundance powered out upon him, as that he is not only full,
but he has received a good measure running over, so as to fill all the empty
souls, and all the empty hearts of his people. For look what CHRIST received,
he received for us, Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have
received gifts for men; That is, gifts to give unto men, as the Apostle
expounds it, Ephesians. 4. 8. When he ascended upon high, he gave gifts unto men.
So that he received to give, he was filled to fill. He is the well head, the
fountain which is not only full it self, but springs, and flows over to the
filling of streams. He received a fullness, that we might receive of his
fullness, and that he might derive of his fulness to us.

Thirdly, that Christ derives, and conveighes of this fullness and goodness of
his unto us by his own holy Ordinances which he has sanctified as the
channells of conveyance. By the Word, and Sacraments does he communicate of
this his fullness unto us, Luke 5. 17. As CHRIST was teaching, the power of God
was present to heal them. When the Minister of the Word is on foot, then is
Gods power present, and ready to exert, and put forth it self for spiritual
good, Acts 9. 17. The Lord has sent me, that thou might be filled with the
HOLY GHOST. CHRIST could not of his own fullness immediately have filled Saul
with the HOLY GHOST, but CHRIST sends Ananias to him that he might be fill(...)
with the HOLY GHOST. But (...) must Ananias do it? By the Acts 22. 14, 15, 16.
^^^istery of the Word, and Sacrament. He preaches to him, and he baptises him,
and so by these Ordinances is the HOLY GHOST conveyed unto him. We find
mention made, Zech. 4. 12. of two Olive branches, which through two golden pipes
emptied the golden oil out of themselves. Those two Olive branches emptied
golden oil out of themselves into the golden Candelsticke, but yet they did it
through the two golden pipes. So it is in this case; All golden oil it is in
CHRIST, He is the Branch, as Zechary calls him, Zech. 4. 3. He is the olive
Branch, and the olive tree from whom comes all the golden oil of grace, and
spiritual comfort, and he it is that empties it out of himself into our
hearts. But yet he does empty it into our hearts by his Ordinances, they be the
golden pipes by which this golden oil is conveyed. CHRIST does not
ordinarily empty the oil into our hearts immediately, but first into the
golden pipes of his Ordinances, his Word, and Sacrament, and so through them
into our hearts. The graces and comforts of the HOLY GHOST are often in Scripture
compared to oil, and the pouring forth of those graces to Anointing. To this
purpose is that speech of David, Psalm. 92. 10. I shall be anointed with fresh
oil, or green oil, that is, thou shall add fresh measures, and new
increases of the graces of thy spirit. So that after the first gift of the
spirit, in the first work of grace, GOD often annoynts his people with fresh
oil, and that he does in the Word and Sacrament. He annoynts them in the
ministry of the Word, Esa. 61. 1, 3. The Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings, to give the oil of joy for mourning. God anoynts his Ministers, that
they may annoint his people. By preaching the Gospel God anoynts his people
with the oil of gladness. So he anoynts us in the use of the Sacrament of the
Supper, there in special manner he annoynts with fresh oil. God deals at
this spiritual feast as the Jews used to do in their feasts, they used in
token of welcome to anoint their guests, Luke 7. 46. Our Savior tells Simon
the Pharisee, Minc head with oil thou did not annoint, that is, thou have
not bid me welcome, nor cheered me. God at the Sacrament annoynts the heads of
his people. That look as Mary did with CHRIST, John 12. 2, 3. There they made
him a Supper -- Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, and anointed
the feet of JESUS; Then. When? Namely when at the Supper they made him. So
deals the LORD with his people at the Sacrament. There he makes them a
Supper, it is the Lords Supper, then takes the LORD precious ointment, and
annoynts their heads with fresh oil, there they have fresh unctions, and fresh
delibutions, there he gives them fresh, and new comforts, fresh supplies, and
new measures of grace, then, and there he annoyntes them at the Sacrament, yea
the Sacrament is the very Alabaster box of precious ointment, and out of this
box God powers it on their heads as she on Christ's head as he sat at meat,
Matthew. 27. 7. So that a man may truly speak of the Lords Table, as David of
his own, Psalm. 23. 5. Thou preparedst a Table before me, thou annoyntest
mine head with oil. When God prepares this Table for his, and they prepare
themselves aright and in due order for this Table, and come as they ought to
do, God does at this Table feast them, and annoint their heads with oil,
cheeres them, and bids them heartily welcome.

4. Fourthly, That the way to make this ordinance thus effectual to us is the
Actuating, and setting our faith on work upon the ordinance, and Christ in the
ordinance. Christ is full, Christ communicates of his fullness, Christ
communicates of his fullness by his ordinance, but yet if now at the ordinance
our faith lie still, and stir not, if our faith be idle, or a sleep, here is
nothing done, nothing gotten at the ordinance, but the Sacrament proves a dry
empty husk unto us, there is neither oil, nor anointing to be had. Therefore
now the maine work of all at the Sacrament is to awaken, and Actuate our
faith, and to set it on work upon Christ in his ordinance, and so draw forth
the efficacy of Christ, and his ordinance. The power of God is present in his
ordinance to heal, and to help, but now withal the power of our faith must
also be present to set this power of God on work, to make the ordinance an
healing, a working ordinance. If Gods power be present, and our faith be
absent, or as good as absent, Gods power will not work, for then will his power
work, when our faith works. A conduit is full of water, now a man that would
fill his vessel, must bring it to the conduit, must bring it to the cock, and
set it there, but yet that is not enough, if that be all, and he do no more,
he may go home again with an empty vessel: Therefore the man that would fill
his vessel when he has brought it to the conduit, and set it under the cock,
he also turns the cock, and then the water runs forth, and fills the
vessel. So here, Christ is the conduit of all grace, and spiritual good, he
that would be filled must come to him. His ordinances the word, and Sacrament
they are the cocks of this conduit, so that a man that would be filled, must
not only go to Christ, but to Christ in these ordinances must bring his
vessel to these cocks. And that's not enough, but when he is come to them, he
must turn them; faith Actuated, and working upon the ordinance that turns the
cock, and then the efficacies, and virtues of Christ flow forth, then these
waters power forth abundantly. See that speech, Isa. 12. 3. Therefore with joy
shall ye draw waters out of the wells of salvation. Christ he is indeed a well
full of water: But now as the woman of Samaria said to our Savior, John 4. 11.
Sir, thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep, from whence then
have thou that living water? So in this case, Christ is indeed the well of
salvation, but yet this Well is deep, and how can a man fetch up those waters
thence, if he have nothing to draw with? God therefore of his goodness has
provided us buckets to fetch up these waters out of this well, and they are his
ordinances. But now though there be a well stored with abundance of water, and
though also there be buckets to fetch up these waters, yet if a man do not let
down, and draw up these buckets he cannot draw waters out of the Well. Now the
setting faith on work in use at the ordinances, and the Actuating of it
therein, that is the letting down, and drawing up these buckets, that is the
turning of the wheel which draws up the buckets with water. Christ is the
Well of salvation, the ordinances are the buckets, faith Actuated, and set on
work in the use of the ordinances, is the drawing of waters up out of the well
of salvation.

See how David speaks, Psalm. 105. 41. He opened the Rock, and the waters
gushed out, they ran in the dry places like a River. Waters gushed out of the
Rock: but when? when the Rock was opened. So Gods Ordinances, and Christ in
those Ordinances have abundance of waters in them, such abundance as gushes out
to the refreshing of dry souls, but yet first these Rocks must be broken up,
these Rocks must be opened. But how must these Rocks come to be opened? As
the Rock in Horeb was opened, Exodus 17. 6. Behold I will stand before thee
there upon the Rock in Horeb, and thou shall smite the Rock, and there shall
come water out of it, that the people may drink. GOD stood upon the Rock, but
Moses must smite the Rock, and then comes water out of it, that the people may
drink. God is present in his Ordinances, and his power is present at them, The
power of God was present to heal them, Luke 5. 17. but yet before water will
come out that we may drink, we must first smite the Rock, and when it is
smitten then shall we have it opened, and waters gushing out. Now what is this
smiting of the Rock? It is nothing else but the Actuating of our faith, and
setting it on work in the use of the Ordinance, faith Actuated and set on work
smites the Rock, breaks up,, and opens the Rock. So that in an Ordinance,
and at the Sacrament that should be a man's wisdom which was Moses his
error, Numb. 20. 11. with his Rod he smote the Rock twice, and the water came
out abundantly. Smite the Rock twice, again, and again, Actuate we our
faith, and then the water shall come out abundantly.

Gods Ordinances, or CHRIST in them, is not only a Rock from whence waters
come forth, but they are Rocks from whence Oil, and Honey issue forth. That a
communicant may say of the Sacrament as Job speaks in that case, Job 29. 6.
The Rock powered me out rivers of Oil. And this Rock powers out Honey. But
how and when? Does it power forth rivers of Oil, and Honey to all comers? No
such matter. How many neither find Oil, nor Honey thereat? But how come men
to have honey, and oil at this Rock? when men do as Moses speaks of Israel
Deuteronomy. 32. 13. He made him to suck Honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the
flinty Rock. God gave Israel honey, and oil out of the Rock, but how? Did he
make the Rock drop it into their mouths, whilst they stood gazing, and
looking upon it? No. He made him to suck it. If he had been so idle as not
to have taken the pains to have sucked it, he might have lickt his lips long
enough after it, ere he had had it, ere he had tasted, much less have been
filled with it. So thus men come to have oil, and honey out of the Sacrament,
and CHRIST in the Sacrament when they suck: when Faith is Actuated, and set on
work in the use of the Ordinance, and applies Christ in it, then faith suckes,
and when faith suckes, then it fetches honey, and oil out of the Rock. As the
Prophet speaks in that case, Isa. 66. 11. That ye may suck and be satisfied
with the breasts of her consolation, so in this. There must be sucking before
there can be satisfaction. The word, and Sacraments, are breasts of
consolation, and these be full of sweet milk, but there can be no satisfaction
unless there be sucking. A child may handle the mothers breasts, may play with
them, may kiss them, but all this while the child is never the fuller;
Therefore the child when it would be satisfied, it lays its mouth to the
breast, gets the nipple into the mouth, and then suckes, and draws with all
the strength, and might and so fetches forth the milk out of the mothers
breast. So must it be in these case. Men may come to the Sacrament, and gaze
upon the elements, and eat, and drink them, and yet not receive the sweet of
the Ordinance, but if they would have the milk out of this breast, they must
fall to sucking, and to drawing with all their power, and strength. Then do
men suck, and draw the breast of the Sacrament, when in the use of it they
Actuate, and set their faith on work. Faith Actuated suckes virtue out of he
Sacrament, suckes from Christ in the Sacrament mortifying virtue to kill lusts,
healing virtue to cure the pollutions of the heart, quickening virtue to enable
to duties, and actions of spiritual life.

Look how David speaks of wicked men in that case, Psalm. 73. 10. Waters of a
full cup are wrung out to them. So is it to all true believers in the
Sacrament. They have therein full draughts of Christ's blood, they have their
hearts filled as with the comforts of the Holy Ghost, so with the efficacies of
Christ, they have waters of a full cup. But how come they by these waters of a
full cup? They are wrung out to them. And how are they wrung out to them? Faith
being set on work in the Ordinance, and working upon the Ordinance, that
wrings out waters of a full cup, that wrings out the juice, the sap, and sweet
of the Sacrament, that wrings and presses out the succulency of it. It is just
here as it was in the dream of Pharaohs Butler, Genesis 40. 10, 11. The clusters
of the Vine brought forth ripe grapes, and Pharaohs cup was in mine hand, and I
took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaohs cup. The Sacrament is as a Vine
set before us, full of clusters of rippe grapes, and these grapes full of
Juice, Christ with all his fullness offered to us in this Ordinance. Now our
care, and course should be to have the liquour, and blood of these grapes
powered into the cup of our hearts. How may that be done now? As Pharaohs cup
came filled. He took the grapes and pressed them, and crushed them into
Pharaohs cup, and so the cup was filled. So must we take these grapes, and
press, and crush them, we must squeeze forth the liquor of them. That we do
when faith is Actuated, and is set on work in the use of the ordinance.
Actuated faith takes these grapes, and presses them, and wrings out of the
Ordinance that which fills our hearts.

When therefore we are come to the Sacrament, and now are to receive, set we
all the Powers of our faith on work. Lift up this eye to see Christ, reach out
this hand to lay hold upon, and receive him, set this mouth on feeding, eating,
drinking, sucking. Set the mouth of thy faith to the breast of the Sacrament,
and Quomodo ergo capiunt, qui lac capiunt? Iesum Christum, inquit Apostolus,
and hu^c crucifix^^m. Suge quod pro te factus est, and cresces ad id quod est
Aug. in Psa 119.
suck, and draw at it with all thy might, and draw hardest, for that virtue of
Christ's thy soul stands in most need of. David speaks of the marrow of Gods
house, and Ordinances, Psalm 63. 5. He that will have the marrow out of the
bone, must break the bone, and knock the bone, and that will fetch sorth the
marrow. So must faith work, and bestirre it self, and take pains at the
Ordinance, and then the marrow of the Sacrament will be had. So should a man
do at, and with the Sacrament, as Christ's Disciples did when they passed
through the corn fields, Luke 6. 1. And his Disciples plucked the ears of the
corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands. They did not pluck off the
ears, and so eat the whole ea^es, but first they rubbed the ears in their
hands to fetch out the corn. So at the Sacrament set faith on work, to rub
the ears, and fetch out the corn that is in them for food. A rubbed ear will
yield corn fit for food, but there is no eating of ears unrub'd without
danger, Prove. 29. 33. Surely the charming of milk brings forth butter. They
must charm therefore, and charm hard, set their faith hard to this work of
charming, that will have butter, that will have benefit out of the Sacrament.
There is oil in olives, but before there could be oil fetched out of them to
anoint a man's self withal, they used to tread the olives, and so express
the oil out of them, as appears, Micah 6. 15. Thou shall tread the olives,
but shall not anoint thee with oil. It is threatened as a Judgment, but yet it
implies that oil was fetched forth by the treading, stamping, bruising, and
breaking of the olives with their feet. The Ordinances of Gods word and
Sacraments are olives, full of good, full of excellent oil, but these olives
will not drop oil upon us, they must be stamped and trod, if we would have oil
out of them to anoint our selves. Faith Actuated, and set on work in, and upon
these ordinances, that treads these olives, and helps us to the oil of them.
And how-ever the Prophet in that place threatens it as a judgment that they
should tread Olives, and not anoint themselves, yet it never so falls out in
this case. He that Actuates his faith, and sets it soundly on work to tread
these olives, he shall be sure to dippe his foot in oil, and to be
comfortably anointed in the use of the Ordinance. It is only the want of faiths
taking of pains in industrious treading of the olives, that makes us go away
dry headed, dry hearted, and unanoynted from the Sacrament and all other
Ordinances. Thus must faith work hard at the Sacrament, and eat her bread in
the sweat of her brows.

Quest. But how, and in what manner is faith to be Actuated, and set on work
in the use of the Sacrament?

Answ. In the Sacrament consider three things. First, Sacramental offers.
Secondly, Sacramental promises. Thirdly, Sacramental Representations: fix the
eye of faith upon them all, and set faith on work upon them all.

1 First, in the Sacrament we have Sacramental offers, Christ Himself is
offered with all his benefits. Take, eat, drink. I see then God offers me
Christ to be taken, His body to be eaten, His blood to be drunk. Here then
must faith Actuate it self, and set it self on work, striving with all it is
might to take Christ, to eat, and drink Christ offered. Lord Christ, as
verily as I take, and eat, and drink these outward Sacramental elements, so
verily do I by my faith receive thy self into my soul, and feed upon thee
for spiritual nourishment. Christ is offered to us, offers to come in, and
enter into our hearts. The Act of faith now then is that, Psalm. 24. 7. Lift up
your heads, o ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors. But why
must these gates, and doors of their hearts be thus lift up? And the King of
glory shall come in, Christ is come, and he makes an offer to come into your
hearts, open therefore the gates of your hearts, lift them up, even from off
the hooks, that fair, and full way may be made for his ready entrance: when a
great man, specially a King comes to a man's house, he will not only open the
small wicket, his little door, but he sets open his great gates, throws them
wide open to make spacious way for his entrance. Now Christ in the Sacrament
offers Himself to come to us, the King of glory offers to come in. Here then
let thy faith busily bestirre it self in widning the passage, and opening
thine heart to make Christ way, now strive might and maine to stretch open
thine heart to such a breadth, and largeness as a fit way may be made for the
King of glory to enter. Do in receiving Christ at the Sacrament, as Zacheus
did in receiving him into his house, Luke 19. 5. Zacheus, says Christ, Make
have, and come down, for to day I must abide at thine house. Here Christ
offers Himself to Zacheus, and upon the offer made, instantly Zacheus made
haste, and came down, and received him joyfully. Think upon that gracious
offer of Christ's how Zacheus bestirred himself, with what haste he leaped down
from the Tree, with what readiness, and heartinesse he brought CHRIST home,
with what sweetness of affection he claspes about CHRIST when he entertained
him into his house. Christ makes thy soul the same offer at the Sacrament, now
let thy faith as busily bestir herself as Zacheus did, hasten, open, claspe,
embrace, welcome, and receive CHRIST thus offered to thee.

Secondly, In the Sacrament we have Sacramental promises. This is my body.
This is my blood. This is my body which is given for you, my blood which is
shed for you. Shed for the remission of sins. Take, Eat, Drink, says our
Savior. Well what if we do so, what shall we get by it? What shall we be the
better for it? A great deal the better, for this is my body, my blood; I
promise you in the use of this Ordinance you shall receive my body, and my
blood, that body which was once crucified and offered for the redemption of the
world: that blood which was shed for Recon(...)n, and Remission of sin, and you
by being made partakers hereof s^^ll receive efficacious virtue of my quickening
death. So that these are Sacramental promises. So that here is that which may
abundantly set faith on work, for the promises are the most proper object for
faith to work upon. Well then, CHRIST says, This is my body given for you, my
blood shed for you, shed for the remission of sins. Let faith now believe
these promises, Lord I believe that thy body was given for me, thy blood shed
for me, thy blood shed for the remission of my sins, Lord I cheerfully and
gladly believe that I am now made partaker of thy body, and blood, and that my
sins are pardoned in thy blood. Faith must do here, as David does, Psalm. 60.
6, 7. God has spoken in his holiness, that is, he has made me a gracious
promise that he will bring all the land under mine obedience. Here David has
Gods promise, mark now what follows: I will rejoice, says he, I will divide
Sechem, I will mete out the valley of Succoth, Gilead is mine, Manasseh is
mine. See how he actuates his faith upon Gods promise so as to rejoice, so as
to take possession of Sechem, Succoth, Gilead, and Manasseh. So Christ has
spoken in, or by his holiness, This is my body which is given for you, this is
my blood which is shed for you, for the remission of your sins. Here be
Sacramental promises. Now upon the view of these promises should a man Actuate
his faith, and say, I will rejoice, I will eat Christ's flesh, I will drink
his blood. Christ is mine, His death is mine, His Resurrection is mine,
Remission of sin is mine, Pardon, and Heaven are mine. And thus by this
Actuation of faith should a man with John, lean on CHRIST'S bosom, John 13.
23. When he is at the Sacrament, so participating of him, as to have communion
with him in all his benefits Thus lean we on our beloved, Cant. 8. 5. when at
the Sacrament. Again; This is my blood shed for you, for the remission of
sin. Lo here is that blood offered me to drink, and promised to me in the
Sacrament, by the shedding whereof, remission of sin was purchased, yea here is
remission of sin, not only offered me, and promised me, but of fered, and
promised under seal. Now then Actuate thy faith, and say, Lord I accept, Lord
I believe this sealed pardon of my sin. And faith thus Actuated, will make good
unto us the Sacramental promises; for as it is true in case of prayer, Mar.
11. 24. What things soever you desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them, so is it as true in case of receiving. What
things soever ye desire when ye receive, do but Actuate your faith, and set
that on work for them, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

Thirdly, In the Sacrament we have Sacramental representations. There is in
the Sacrament a visible remembrance of CHRIST'S death, and in the breaking of
the bread, and pouring out the wine, there is a representation of Christ's
death, and Passion. When I see the wine powered out, it represents unto me the
shedding of Christ's blood, here I see Christ's blood shed on the Cross. What is
to be done now when I see this blood in the Sacrament? Do but consider that
same, Exodus 24. 6, 8. Moses took of the blood of the Sacrifices, and put it in
basins, and he took the blood, that was in the basins, and sprinkled it upon
the people, happily with a bunch of hysope, as the manner was, to which David
alludes, Psalm. 51. Purge me with hysope. Now so must it be here: The blood of
our burnt offering which was shed for us, the Lord has put in basins, in the
basins of the Word, and Sacraments, and out of these basins it must be
sprinkled. The Sacrament of the Supper is one basin in which this blood is put.
This blood is held forth in this basin, This is my blood. Now when this blood
is held forth to us in this basin, we should sprinkle our selves with this
blood. That must be done by Actuating our faith, and by the act of faith
applying that blood of Christ unto our selves. We find mention, Romans 3. 25. of
faith in Christ's blood, there is not only faith in Christ's Name, but faith in
his blood. Faith when Christ's blood is holden out to us either in the Word, or
Sacrament, puts her hand into this basin, or dippes the hyssope into the blood
in the basin, and so besprinkles a man's soul therewith. Faith applying CHRIST'S
blood to a man's self, does put her hand into the basin, does dip the hyssop
into the blood in the basin, ye does with Thomas put her hands into the wounds
of CHRIST, and take blood thence, and besprinkles the soul withal. When
therefore we see CHRIST'S blood in the Sacrament, we are to take it, and
besprinkle our selves with it, that is, we are to have faith in his blood, and
by faith to apply the merit of Christ's death unto our own souls. And this
application is the Actuation of faith.

Nay that is not all, faith seeing the wounds, and the blood of Christ, not
Cruci haeremus, sanguinem sugimu^, and intra ipsa Redempturis nostri vulnera
sigimus linguam. Cyp. de Coen Dom.
only puts her hands into Christ's woundss, or into the blood in the basin, but
faith lays her mouth to these wound, and to this blood, and suckes these
wounds, suckes in this blood with an holy greediness. A faith Actuated in the
Ordinance is a bloudsucking faith, Prove. 30. 15. The horseleech has two
daughters which cry, Give, give. Such an eager, and holy greediness has faith
in sucking in Christ's blood. It cannot be satisfied, but still cries, Give,
give. Lord give me evermore of this blood, give me of this blood to sprinkle my
unrighteous soul, Give me of this blood to staunch the bloody issues of mine
heart, Give me of this blood to heal my leprose spirit, Give me of this blood
to help subdue and mortify my lusts, Give me of this blood of Christ
crucified, to crucify old Adam, and all my rebllious lusts. Thus when a man
suckes in earnestly the blood of Christ, whom he sees crucified, and shedding
his blood in the Sacrament, and suckes it in for his several and special
necessities, then is faith Actuated in the use of the Sacrament.

And thus also may and must a man Actuate his faith for his comfort. In this
basin of the Sacrament I see Christ's blood. Christ's blood is a reconciling
blood, Romans 3. 25. Col. 1. 20, 21. It is justifying blood, Romans 5. 9. We are
justified by faith. How by faith? By faith in his blood, Romans 3. 25. It is a
pacifying blood, Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 2. 13, 14. A pardoning blood, Mat. 26. 28.
Ephesians. 1. 7.

It is a sanctifying blood, Heb. 13. 12. A purging blood from dead works, Heb.
9. 14. A cleansing blood, 1 Ioh. 1. 7.

It is a mortifying blood, such a blood as fetches out the heart blood of old
Adam, and delivers from the dominion of sin. The blood of Christ crucified,
is crucifying blood, Romans 6. 2, 3, 6. Gal. 6. 14. It is a blood that sets
prisoners free, Zech. 9. 11. It is a blood that makes men Kings, and Priests,
Apoc. 1. 5, 6. It is a softning, molifying blood that makes the heart tender,
it supples a stony heart, and Illa invicta vis, and duarum violentissimarum
naturae rerum (ignis, and ferti) contemptrix hircino tamen ^sipitur sanguine,
faedissimo Animalium. Plin.
makes it a heart of flesh, Zech. 12. 10. Goats blood some say breaks the
Adamant, which neither Iron nor fire can do: but to be sure the blood of this
Goat, Lev. 16. the blood of this Lamb breaks the Adamant heart of a man,
which nothing else can break.

It is a quickening blood that brings life, and strength with it. Therefore
represented by wine in the Sacrament. It is life-bloud, blood full of Heb. 13.
20, 21. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
etc. typified by that, Exodus 24. 7, 8. Now what a deal of comfort may faith
draw from all this. Alas my person is unrighteous, but LORD thy blood is
Justifying blood, mine heart is unclean but thy blood is sanctifying blood, my
lusts are many and mighty, but LORD thy blood is Mortifying blood. Mine heart
is wondrous hard, but Lord thy blood is softning blood, mine heart is exceeding
dead, but Lord thy blood is quickening blood. In this blood of thine I believe,
this blood of thine I thirstily drink down, this blood of thine I heartily
apply, with a comfortable expectation of all these blessed benefits. Be of good
cheer, oh my soul, here is pardoning blood; to comfort thee against thy
guilt; here is sanctifying blood to comfort thee against the pollutions of thy
nature,

He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53. 5. And here in the Sacrament
we may see his wounds, and faith must look upon them as healing wounds. With
his stripes are we healed, Isa. 53. 5. what sweet comfort may faith fetch
hence? Look upon the wounds of Christ on the Cross, as on the Cities of
refuge, whither thy pursued soul by the avenger of blood may fly for safety,
and Sanctuary. Indeed I am a grievous sinner, I have wounded my conscience
Feccavi peccatu^ grande, turbatur conscientia, sed non perturbabitur, quoniam
vulnerum Domini recordabor. Ne^pe vulneratus est propter iniqui^ates nost^^^.
Quid tam ad mortem, quod non Christi mo^te salv^tur? Bernard. ^i^p. Can. Sermon.
61.
with my transgressions, but behold my Savior here wounded for my
transgressions. I have ^^^se to be troubled in my conscience for the wounds my
transgressions have made therein, but yet my conscience needs not sink in a
despondency of spirit, whilst I look at these wounds of Christ; Here be
wounds for wounds, healing wounds for stabbing wounds, curing wounds for
killing wounds. He was wounded for our transgressions: what wound so deadly
that cannot, or may not be healed by his death, and wounds? what comfort is
here for faith in the wounds of Christ crucified, whose death is represented in
the Sacrament? Foderu^t manus ejus and pedes, latusque lancea foraverunt. and
per has rimas licet mihi sugere mel de petra, and oleum de saxo, id est,
gustare, and videre, quonia^ suavis est dominus -- At clavis reserans, clavis
penetrans factus est mihi, ut videa^ voluntatem domini. Quidni videa^ per
foramen! clamat c^edens sit in Christo mu^dum reconcilians sibi, patet Arcanum
co^dis per foramina corporis? Patent viscera misericordiae Dei -- Quidni
viscera per vulnera pateant? In quo enim clarius quam in vulneribus tuis
eluxisset, quod tu domine suavis, and multae misericordiae, etc. Ego vero
sidenter quod ex me mihi deest userpo mihi ex visceribus domini quoniam
misericordia affluunt, nec desunt foramina per quae affluant. Bernard. s^p.
Cantic. Ser. 61.
They pierced my hands and my feet, Psalm. 22. 16. They pierced his side with
the spear, and there came out water and blood, nay there comes out of those
wounds honey, and oil unto faith. By these passages may our faith suck honey,
and oil out of the rock, and may taste how good, and sweet the Lord is. The
nails, the spear, the wounds all preach unto faith a reconciled God, that God
is in Christ reconciling the world to Himself. The Lords bowels are laid open
by these

Oh my Dove that art in the clefts, or holes of the Rock, Cant. 2. 14. Some of
the Ancients understood those clefts of the Rock the wounds of Christ in which
the Dove, the Church hides, and shelters her self. However, it may be alluded
to, and that, should be no work of faith at the Sacrament, when it sees those
clefts of the Rock opened, like a Dove to betake her self thereunto for
shelter, and security against all fears and distresses Tuta requies est infirm
is peccatoribus in vulneribus salvatoris, securus illic habito Patent mihi
viscera per vulnera. August. Mannal. Miles aperuit mihi latus Christ lancea,
and ego int^ali, and ibi requiesco securus. Aug ibid.
that wrath, and guilt may put the conscience to. Do any fears of wrath
trouble thine heart? Does any Conscience of guilt disquiet thee with the fears
of hell? Why now in the Sacrament for thy comfort behold the holes in the Rock
where thou may be sheltred. Dwell now in the rock, and be like the Dove that
makes her rest in the sides of the holes mouth, Ier. 48. Nessell thy soul now
at the Sacrament in the clefts of this Rock. See, and fully believe thy peace
to be made with God in Christ's blood, and look upon him wounded for thy
transgressions, with such a faith, as may fill thine heart with an holy
security against all such fears, faith thus Actuated cannot but send thy soul
from the Sacrament with much comfort. And thus much for the Actuation of faith,
which is the third thing in that holy disposition requirrd in the receiving of
the Sacrament.

The fourth thing follows, which is an exercise of thankesgiving to God, for
the great work of our Redemption by the death of Christ. And this must rise
from an heart affected, and enlarged in the use of the Ordinance, the heart
being warmed, and growing hot with the sense of Gods goodness, a man should
break out and give vent to his heart in magnifying Act. 14. 17. Filling our
hearts with food and gladness. Now when the heart is cheered, and refreshed
with the creature, it should then let out it self in thanksgiving to God,
Nehem. 9. 25. So they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted
themselves in thy great goodness, Psalm. 22. 26. The meek shall eat and be
satisfied, they shall praise the Lord that seek him. So when the heart is
cheered with the sense of the sweetness of an Ordinance of the Sacrament, when
the Lord has filled the heart with spiritual food, and gladness, when we
have been filled, and have delighted our selves in Gods great goodness in the
Sacrament, then let we out our hearts to bless, and praise the LORD. See it in
David. Psalm. 63. 5. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow, and fatness.
That blessing he looks for in Gods ordinances: and what should then follow? And
my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. When, men are excessively
filled with Wine, they shout and make a noise, and sing, and take on. The
Prophet alludes to it, Psalm 78. 65. like a mighty man that Fons vitae,
replementem meam torrente voluptatis tuae, and inebria cor meum sobria
ebrieta^e amoris tui. Aug. medit. c. 37.
shoutes by reason of wine. Such excess, and such drunkenness the Apostle
forbids, Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess. But yet
there an holy, and a sober Inebriation the Apostle allows, and calls for. But
be filled with the spirit. Drink deep of that Wine. And where is that Wine to
be drunk? As in other Ordinances, so in the Sacrament. Here Christ makes merry
with his people, Eat O friends, drink ye, drink abundantly o beloved, or be
drunken with loves, Now when a man has liberally Cant. 5. 1.
drunk of this Wine of the spirit at the Sacrament, what should follow? That
which follows in that Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing, and making melody in your hearts to the
Lord. When a Quo interius exteriusque rubricati a sapientibus hujus saeculi
judicamur amentes.
man is made Red with this wine within, and without, as St. Cyprian speaks,
then should a man let out his heart in holy Iubilitions, and Thankesgivings
Haec ebri^tas non accendit, sed extinguit peccatum, etc. Cypr. de caen. Dom.
unto God. Do this in remembrance of me, that is, in remembrance of the great
work of your redemption wrought by me, and do it in a thankful remembrance.
So remember it as to have your hearts in special manner enlarged in all
thankfulness unto me for this work. And from this it is that this Sacrament
bears the name of the Eucharist, as being the Sacrament of Thankesgiving for
the work of Redemption in the remembrance whereof it is celebrated. Our Savior
gave a pattern of this, Matthew. 26. 30. When they had sung an Hymn. So then
they sang an Hymn together. An Hymn is a Psalm of praise. So the Jews in
the celebration of the Passover did sing the 113. Psalm with the five
following Psalms, which they called the Great Hallelujah, which they began to
sing after that cup of Wine which they called Poculum Hymni, seu laudationis,
the Cup of praise. And thus it should be with us in receiving the Sacrament.
At all times, upon all occasions we should sing Hallelujahs to GOD, but at the
Sacrament we should sing a Great Hallelujah, at all times we should
thankefully bless GOD for the work of our Redemption, but at the Sacrament we
should have our hearts greatly enlarged in more special manner to bless God
for Christ's Death, and the sweet comforts received in the use of the Sacrament.

Fifthly, and lastly, this holy Sacramental disposition stands in an exercise
of love and mercy. In an exercise of love, when we look upon our fellow
members communicating with us, we should cleave to them in Cor. 10. 17. For we
being many are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
bread. So that in partaking of that one bread, we are one bread, and one body.
Many corns go to the making of one loaf, but yet they will not be knod into
one loaf, unless by the mixture of some moisture they be wrought, and
fastened together. Love exacted and stirred up is that moisture that unites us
many several grains into one bread. So 1 Cor. 12. 13. We drink into one
spirit, that is, into one soul.

In an exercise also of mercy, and compassion to the poor members of Indigne
manducant qui corpus and sanguinem Christi in Sacrame^to manducunt and bibunt,
membra autem ejus Evangelio non agnoscunt. Aug. cont. lit. Tetil. l. 2. c. 55.
Christ, showing mercy to them in contributing to their necessities. And here
specially at the Sacrament should that ground work with us, 2 Cor. 8. 9. And
thus we see what the concomitant duties are, and such as accompany the Action.

Chap. 21. Subsequent duties, and such as must follow the Sacrament received.
third, and last sort of Duties, in which the due order of receiving the
Sacrament stands, and they are subsequent duties, such as follow after the
Sacrament received:

There ought to be a special care of duties after the Sacrament, as well as
before, and in receiving, for though a man may come conveniently prepared, and
may in a good measure be holily conversant in the duty of receiving, yet if a
man be careless, and look not to himself after the duty is done, he may
mar all. A man may come to his meat prepared with a good stommach, may eat
it with a good appetite, and feed hungrily, and heartily, and yet as soon as
he has eaten may do that which may spoil all. If a man, before his meat be
well out of his mouth, fall to sleep, or to serious study, or to violent
exercise, or specially if he shall after meat eat some unwholesome food, or
take some poison, these must needs hinder digestion, and concoction, these must
needs make him the worse after his meat, though he come to it prepared with a
good appetite, and fed upon it with a good stomach. Physicians before they give
physic prepare the body for it, and give it when the body is in a convenient
disposition for it, but that is not all. They have also a special care to
order, and diet a man after he has taken his physic. For though a man's body
may be well prepared before taking physic, and be well disposed in taking it,
yet if a man be not afterward careful of taking cold, be not careful what,
and when he eats, his physic will not kindly work, nor do him any good.
Carelessness in diet, in taking cold afterward may Qui pharmacum sumunt,
solent eo die ab omnibus abstinere quibus pharmaci vis, and operatio, impediri
potest. Gualth. in 1 Cor. 11. 27.
dead, and kill the force of the physic, so as it may not only do a man no
good, but much hurt, though the physic were very good and proper for his
body, and disease. A great care therefore ought to be had of a due, and a right
ordering our selves after the Sacrament. And this care thus to order our selves
stands in these two things.

First, In a man's examining himself after he is come from the Sacrament. Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat, and so let him drink. So also, let
a man eat, and drink, and so let him examine himself. A man is seriously,
and faithfully, after he has been at the Lords Table, to consider between
God, and his own soul what entertainment, and welcome GOD has given him,
whether God has dealt with him at this Supper, as Mary dealt with CHRIST at
that Supper, John 12. 2, 3. whether the LORD has powered any precious ointment
upon him or not, what comfort, and increase of faith, and grace he has
received, what quickening, what refreshment, what friendship and communion with
CHRIST, what virtue he has found to flow out of Christ into his own soul.

Now upon such examination a man shall find that it has been well with him at
the Sacrament, or it has not, he has had a good day of it, or no good day.
And accordingly as he finds, so he is to proceed.

First, then if a man have found no joy, comfort, enlargement, no communion
with, nor answer from CHRIST, but upon examination finds that he has been
unfruitful, and that his heart was full of deadness, hardenesse, and dullness
of spirit; then two things are to be done:

First, Suspect thy self that some miscarriage has been in thee, either in
thy preparation to, or in thy performance of the duty. Labor therefore to find
out where the fail was, and what it was that hindered the efficacy of the
Sacrament, that caused God to keep his hand close, that caused him to deny to
anoint thee with fresh oil. And having found out what hindered, and deaded the
Sacrament, judge thy self for that, and be seriously humbled for it. And this
being thus done, so that after our receiving we can but be sensible of our own
senselessness of heart in that holy duty, and can mourn for it, and complain
to God of it, and of our selves, we need not be overmuch dismayed, and cast
down, because this is one fruit of the life of Christ which was undoubtedly
received in the Sacrament. Though thou have not that thou would have had,
yet thou have that which was worth the going for. Construe this very thing as a
fruit of going to the Sacrament, and be thankful for that.

Secondly, Endeavor by after pains in prayer, and humiliation to quicken, and
awaken the efficacy of the Sacrament, for this we must know as a point of
great use and comfort, that Sacraments do not always work for the present,
but the efficacy may come afterward. It is in this case as in that, 1 Samuel 10.
1. 6, 9. Samuel anointed Saul and said, The Spirit of the Lord will come upon
thee, etc. And it was so that when had turned his back to go from Samuel, God
gave him another heart. The Spirit of God came not upon him in the Anointing,
but afterward, when he was departed from Samuel. The Actions of God are of
eternal efficacy, though he put forth that efficacy in such times, and seasons
as he sees good. Though the Sacrament work not for the present in the
administration, yet if we be after touched with a sense of our unworthiness,
and thereupon awaken our selves to quicken the Ordinance to our selves, the
Sacrament, shall be ready afterward to empty it self with blessings upon our
souls, and shall prove effectual, and comfortable unto thee. The first
Sacrament of the Supper the Disciples received, it is not like they found the
efficacy of it for the present, for they then knew, nor understood nothing of
CHRIST'S death, neither could it sink into their heads that he should dye, but
yet afterward when they came more clearly to understand the mysteries of
Redemption, and the whole doctrine of Christ, no question but they reaped the
benefit of that Ordinance, which then they fully understood not. Physic does
not always work when it is taken, but many times a good while, some days
after. It is with the Sacrament as it is with the word. Many a man hears the
word; and minds it, but for the present it has no work at all. It is possible
that seven years, twenty years after it may work, a Sermon preached seven
years before may prove the means of a man's conversion seven years after,
we have an example in that kind, John 10. 41, 42. And many resorted unto him,
and said, John did no miracle, but all things that spoke of this man were true,
and many believed on him there. John had preached of Christ before, they did not
there upon believe in Christ when he preached. John was dead, and gone, but now
when Christ comes amongst them, they upon John's former Sermons preached a great
while before, do now believe. John was dead, but his word was not dead, that
now works when he lies in his grave. Thus also may it be with the Sacrament,
it does not always presently work, it may, and does work some longer time
afterward, when a Communicant humbled for his unprofitablenesse in the duly
endeavors, by after-diligence and Humiliation to quicken and put life into it.
And if such a course may quicken a Sacrament some time after, then why not much
more on the same day? What hinders but it may be in the case of the Sacrament
of the Supper, as in the Sacrament of Baptism? The efficacy, and force of
Baptism does not presently appear, no not presently upon the years of
discretion. Many an one lives vitiously, in sinful course, a swearer,
adulterer, etc. but yet afterward if God give once a man the heart to be
touched with the sense of his own unworthiness, and he begins to bestirre
himself to secke GOD by faith, and Repentance, the Lord quickens a man's
Baptism, and makes it as powerful, and efficacious as if that very day
administered. So in this case, possibly a man that has been at the Lords
Table, and has more then once been an unworthy receiver, but yet if a man
shall come once to be humbled of that unworthiness, God will make sacraments
so often unprofitably received, to become efficacious unto him. For though he
were unprepared to receive, yet God was not unprepared to dispense the benefit
of them. Therefore if we have miscarried in our preparations, and dispositions
so as we have found no benefit, no comfort, yet here is a remedy and an help,
take this course by after-diligence, and after-Humiliation to fetch life into
that Ordinance in which thou were dead, and which was dead unto thee in the
Administration. It is a frequent, and foul fault amongst many, that so soon
as the Sacrament is done, and the duty ended in public, they never once look
after it more. They leave the Sacramental disposition, and devotion in the
Church, there they shake hands with it, and bring not a whit of it home with
them. When the Sacrament is done, all is done with them, and as they come to
it, so they go from it, without any examination at all. It is never once more
thought upon. And thereupon no Humiliation for deadness, hardness, and
indisposition in the duty, and no care to make up that by after diligence,
wherein they were wanting in the present performance.

2 Secondly, If upon this examination we find that we were refreshed, had our
hearts enlarged, had virtue from, and communion with Christ, and that GOD was
very good to us, then do these two things:

1 First, Bless God with all thy soul for his mercy showed unto thee,
acknowledge with all thankfulness Gods gracious dealing with thee in the
communication, and manifestation of himself to thee in his Ordinance.

2 Secondly, Be careful, and watchful to keep up, and maintain that holy,
and gracious frame of heart in thee which thou acquirest in, and bring from
the Sacrament with thee. A man when he finds enlargement, and a gracious
disposition of spirit in the Ordinance, should be of Peter's mind, when in the
Mount with our Savior in his transfiguration, Master, It is good being here.
It is good to be here as long as may be, when therefore in the Sacrament we
have gotten holy affections by degrees wound up to some spiritual height, have
gotten them up to more than an ordinary, and common pitch, our care should be
to keep, and maintain so long as we can, what we have gotten at the Sacrament,
to keep the sweet meats we bring from this banquet. It is true indeed that
we cannot hold them up in that height, and pitch, to which we have wrought our
hearts in holy duties, and in the heat of holy exercises, but yet we should
endeavor it what we can, and so long as is possible by after private duties of
prayer, meditation, good conference, and the like. That as David prays for the
people in that case, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. when he saw them in a floate of good
affections, their hearts sweetly, and graciously enlarged, O Lord, says he,
keep this for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare or stablish their heart unto thee. As if he had said, Lord
thou see what a good frame of heart is in them at this present, oh that thou
would keep, and maintain this frame of heart in them ever. So when we
find a good frame of heart wrought in us at the Sacrament, we should pray,
and endeavor that this frame of heart might be still upheld, and continued in
us. See an excellent example of this after a Sacrament, 2 Chronicles. 30. 21, 22.
They find their hearts comfortably, and sweetly enlarged in the use of Gods
Ordinance, and loath they are to let this frame of heart sink in them, feign
would they keep it up still, and therefore see ver. 23. what they do: And the
whole assembly took counsel to keep other seven days, and they kept other
seven days with gladness. This was done to keep up still this gladness of
heart which they had in keeping the first seven days. And this by way of
proportion, serves to teach us what a special care we should have after the
receiving of the Sacrament, to look wisely to our selves, to keep alive as
long as may be, that holy fire that was kindled in our hearts in the use of the
Sacrament.

It is a gross miscarriage, and a shrewd fail in men, who after good and
fair enlargements at the Sacrament, have no care to keep their hearts in good
frame by prayer, meditation, or good conference, but as soon as they come from
the Sacrament, do fall to worldly and earthly conference, or vain and idle
discourse, and so all on a sudden quench, dash, and dampe all, undo all they
have been so long a doing in their preparations, and performances. Such abrupt
chopping off, and jumping off from holy duties, is a dangerous quenching of the
Spirit. Such a quenching of the Spirit, as tends much to the hardening of the
heart. Iron red hot put into water, and suddenly quenched, it makes it the
harder. It is a very dangerous thing to the body, when it is hot, and in a
sweat, suddenly to cole it; by casting off a man's clothes, or leaping into the
cold water: Such a thing is as much as a man's life is worth. Such sudden
coolings, and dampings of spiritual heats, got in holy duties, cannot be
without much danger to the soul. What a poor thing is it, that when at the
Sacrament a man has gotten an excellent fire kindled, and flaming in his
heart, that an hour or two after, he should not have so much as a coal, or a
spark of that fire remaining? And so much for the first thing to be done after
Receiving, namely, the examining of our selves.

2 The second thing to be done follows: And that is; A special, and a
wondrous great care to keep touch with GOD, to express the power, and
efficacy of Gods Ordinance in making our good, and keeping our vows and
covenants we have made at the Sacrament, our own hearts are very false,
fickle, and slippery, there is therefore the more need to look narrowly to
them. They never long more to break loose, then when they are fresh bound with
new cords. The devil also is exceeding malicious: He is never more busy,
more violent to tempt, and bring men to sin, then when they come new from the
Sacrament. He knows that is the way to make their sins out of measure
sinful. He is exceeding desirous to go in, and go down after a
Sacramental sop. No sooner was CHRIST Baptized, Luke 3. but Luke 4. presently
after the Sacrament received, he sets fiercely, and with all his skill, and
strength upon him in his tentations. Look how Senacherib did with Hezekiah, so
does Satan with us: When Hezekiah had reformed the Church, settled the worship
of GOD, and had put all in good order, 2 Chronicles. 31. then Chapt. 32. 1. After
these things, and the establishment thereof, Senacherib came with his army into
the land. So when a man has been at the Sacrament, and has renewed his
Covenants with GOD, and stablished his resolutions of better obedience; After
those things, the Devil will come with all his forces, and seek to make a man
break his vows, and neglect his Covenants. Therefore proportionable, and
answerable to the looseness of our hearts, and to the malice of Satan, should
our care be to keep our covenants and our vows, and to express, and manifest
the power, and virtue of Gods Ordinance in the holiness, and obedience of our
lives. Now should our care be to show what benefit we have received by the
Sacrament, in walking closely with GOD in the forsaking all former sins, and
performing all duties of obedience formerly neglected. Elias, after he was fed
by GOD, went in the strength of that food forty days, and forty nights, 1
King. 19. 8. So should we walk in the strength of our Sacramental food many
days and nights, and show that indeed we have received strength by, and from
it by keeping our covenants with GOD of holiness, and obedience. See how
Wisdom speaks, Prove. 9. 5, 6. She kills her beasts, she mingles her wine,
she furnishes her Table, she invites her guests; Come, says she, eat of my
bread, and drink of the drink which I have mingled. But mark what it is that
she requires of her guests after she has fed them, and feasted them at her
Table, Forsake the foolish and live, and go in the way of understanding. Now,
that I have fed and feasted you at my Table, live now no more as ye were wont
to do; now choose new company, and new courses, now become new men, and go,
and walk in new ways. It is the very thing that GOD looks for at our hands
after we have been at the Sacrament. So should it be with a man after his
communion with GOD in the Sacrament, as it was with Jacob after his communion
with GOD in Bethel: Genes. 29. 1. Then Jacob lift up his feet, and came into
the land of the people of the East. He lift up his feet, he went with
strength, with spirit, with cheerfulness, and Then he went, that is, after he
had had that sweet fellowship with GOD in Bethel, he was so cheered, and
refreshed with that spiritual bait, that in the strength, and force of that,
he went on livelily, and cheerily in his journey. So when we have had
fellowship with GOD in the Sacrament, in the strength of that heavenly bait at
the Sacrament, we should lift up our feet, and go on cheerily, livelily,
lustily in our journey toward Heaven. After Christ had been at Jordan at the
Sacrament, he goes forth furnished with strength from Gods Ordinance to
encounter the Devil; Then Jesus returned from Jordan full of the HOLY GHOST to
be tempted of the Devil: Mat. 4. 1. Luke 4. 1. He went from the Sacrament
full of the HOLY GHOST, and full of power against the filthy ghost. So should
we rise from the Sacrament full of the Holy Ghost, Tanquam Leones igitur ignem
spirantes ab illa mensa recedamus facti diabolo terribiles, and caput nostru^
mente revolve^tes, and charitatem quam nobis exhibuit, Chry. ad pop. Hom. 61.
full of power, and spiritual strength, and like Lions, breathing fire, as
Chrysostom speaks, so as we might be terrible to Satan, and powerful
against our lusts, and corruptions to mortify and subdue them, for this is one
maine end and use of the Sacrament, for which we come to eat, that we may get
from CHRIST in it, power to mortify our lusts, and corruptions, and to be
enabled to walk in better obedience then we have done. Therefore that we may
show that we have made good the end of the Sacrament, we must mortify lusts,
and perform duties of obedience with more power than ever. That which Paul
speaks, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more, etc. It must
specially be remembered after the Sacrament; Let him that swore, swear no more;
that used to lie, lie no more; to be drunk, be drunk no more; to be unclean,
be unclean no more, etc. This we come for to the Sacrament, and this vow we
at the Sacrament. It is the note of a man that shall go to Heaven: Psalm. 15.
That he keeps his oaths and his promises, though to his own hurt. How much
more then should a man be careful of his oaths and promises which he makes
to GOD in the Sacrament, and that for his own good? Therefore after the
Sacrament thus think, and reason the case with thy self: I have been at the
Sacrament, I have there vowed, and taken the Sacrament upon it, that I will
forsake my sins, I have been a swearer, oaths have been frequently, and
familiarly in my mouth, I have been guilty of drunkenness, uncleanness,
oppression, covetousness; well now according to my vow at the Sacrament, I
will watch over my tongue that I swear no more, I will get this blood out of
my mouth, and this abomination from between my ^eet^, I will beware how this
leprosy break out again Zech. 9. 7.
in my lips, since the word is gone out of my lips, by which I have vowed at
the Sacrament against this sin. I will now this day begin to renounce my
drunken company, and courses. I have neglected holy duties in public, and
private by my self, I will this day begin to read Scripture, to pray
diligently by my self, and to do all those duties of holiness mine oath at
the Sacrament binds me to. If after thou have been at the Sacrament, Satan,
or any of his instruments set upon thee in any tentation to any evil, or
sin, fear thy self with thy sacramental vow. Say to Satan, I was lately at
the Sacrament, there thou know what a vow I made to GOD, therefore I may not
do this evil. Would thou have me be forsworn before GOD? Should I, that
have been at Gods Table, and have eat and drunk with him, should I lift up
the heel against him? I that have taken an oath to the contrary? Avoid Satan,
I may not, I will not in any case do it.

Thus should a man fence himself Legitur de quadam sancta ^^^gine, quae
quo^ie^ ten^abatur, non nisi bapti^mo, ^uo repugnabat dicens brevissime,
Christiana, sum. Intellexit enim hostis statim virtutem baptismi, and fidei,
quae in veritate promittentis pendebat, and fug^t ab ea. Lut^^^.
against Satan's temptations by his having been at the Sacrament of the Supper,
as that Virgin did, of whom Luther speaks, by her having received the Sacrament
of Baptism, when she had vowed, and covenanted with God against those things
to which he tempted her, Satan I am a Christian, I have been baptized, there
I vowed to the contrary. And so she quenched the fiery darts of the Devil with
the waters of her baptizme. So do when Satan tempts thee after the receiving of
the Supper: Avoid Satan, I have received the Sacrament, and therein made a
covenant to the contrary.

It is a great fault in men that they are no more watchful over their hearts,
and ways after the receiving of the Sacrament, and no more careful to
express the power of the Ordinance in their lives. It was a great fault in the
Disciples, that there was at all a contention amongst them for greatness, and
superiority, Luke 22. 24. But their fault was so much the greater by the
circumstance of time wherein the quarrel sprang, for it was presently after
they had received both the Sacrament of the Passover, and the Lords Supper, as
appears by the verses before going. Was that a time to be contending, to be
striving, when they were newly risen from the Sacrament? contending, and
striving with God in prayer, for a blessing upon his Ordinance freshly
received, had been far more seemly, and seasonable, woeful is the carriage
of many, and much to be lamented. Many come to the Sacrament, and there make
their vows of Renouncing their sins, and becoming new men, and yet when once
the action is over, and past, how soon are their vows forgotten? how quickly
return they to their old courses again? It may be, the same week return
unto the same sins, receive the Sacrament on the Lords day, and drink drunk
again before the next Lords day, nay it may be, be drunk the next morrow, nay
it were to be wished, that it were not to true a complaint, that they be drunk
the self same day. So for other sins, men have not the care, nor conscience to
forbear them the same day, but swear the same day they receive, and have
their oaths in their mouths before the bread, and wine are well out of their
mouths: Just as the strumpet, Prove. 7. 14, 18. I have peace offerings with me;
this day I have paid my vows, come let us take our fill of love, so she styles
her filthy lust, until morning, let us solace our selves with loves. The self
same day that she had been at the sacrifice, and the Altar, the self same day
she plays the Whore, and comes from the Altar, into the adulterers bed. How
heinous had her adultery been at any time, but when she had been at Gods
Altar, to play the strumpet, and the filth in that very day, how heinous was
her transgression? Must she needs sacrifice her self to the Devil in her
lusts in the same day she had been sacrificing to God? It is an heinous thing
that has been objected justly against some impure Popish votaries, that they
have risen from Harlots sides, to consecrate the Sacrament. And is it not as
heinous to rise from the Sacrament to whoredom, as to rise from whoredom to
the Sacrament? Is it not as heinous a thing to rise from the Sacrament to
drunkenness, as to rise from drunkenness to the Sacrament? How happy were it
that that which was laid to Isreal's charge, might not be charged upon too too
many Communicants, Exodus 32. 6. The people sat down to eat, and drink and
rose up to play. How many sit down to eat, and drink the sacramental
elements, and that done, rise up to play? To what play? To play the beasts, to
play the swine, to play the wantons, to play the wretches, and so make
themselves by such receiving, twofold more the children of the Devil then they
were before. That was exceeding heinous, and horrible, that the Lord complains
of Ezekiel. 23. 39. for when they had slain their children to their Idols, then
they came the same day into my Sanctuary to profane it. What villainy was this?
Play the Idolaters, the merciless murderers of their own Children, and then
come the same day into the Lords Sanctuary? what had they to do to come into
Gods Sanctuary upon any day, but especially upon the same day? And had it not
been every whit as heinous to have come to Gods Sanctuary, to the Lords Table,
Mal. 1. 12. and the same day to have committed Idolatry, murder, and so also
to fall to Adultery, Drunkenness, Blasphemy, and oaths? Is not this in an
high degree to pollute Gods name, and his Table, and to make the fruit thereof
contemptible? Mal. 1. 12. What is this, but to take poison after Physic? O
shame that those hands that have been reached forth to receive Christ's body at
the Sacrament, should afterward be stretched forth to oppression, and violence;
that those mouths and lips that have drunk Christ's blood at the Sacrament,
should be after, and specially the same day, defiled with the slabbering drivell
of oaths, filthy obscaene speech, and rotten communication? The Habassines,
after the receiving of the Sacrament, think it not lawful for them to sp^t
that day till the setting of the sun. Brerew. enquir. cap. 23. 166.
It is no better then superstition in them, but yet their superstition will
rise up in Judgment against the monstrous profaneness of many amongst us.
They that hold it unlawful to do so much as spit that day, would they out of
excess of drunkenness spue that day? They that will not spit that day, would
they endure the Devils drivell to fall from their mouths that day in ungodly
oaths, and unsavory rotten communication? They that will not spit that day,
would they in that day spit in Gods face, as common profane swearers, and
blasphemers do?

But yet some again there are, that have so much reverence to the Sacrament,
and so much respect to the Ordinance, that upon that day they receive, they
will carry themselves fairly and demurely. If they be tempted by their
companions to any irregular carriage, they can answer, Oh fie, by no means, I
have been to day at the Sacrament, I may not so much forget my self. And it
is a good answer; But yet that day once over, the next day, or a few days
after, let out themselves, and take their former sinful liberties. Now here
let men a little consider themselves. Does the sacramental efficacy last, and
does the sacramental covenant bind but for a day? If, because thou have been
at the Sacrament to day, it be a good argument that thou must not sin, and
break out to day; why is it not as good an argument for the next day, for the
next week, for the next month, the next year? Is the efficacy, the bond of the
Sacrament stinted to a day? Nay, if thou return to thy sins seven years,
twenty years after thou have received; if in so long a time thou should
not, or could not receive again, yet still the bond is as strong upon thy
conscience, as if thou had received the Sacrament but this present day. There
is one and the same reason in both Sacraments. The Sacrament of Baptism is but
one administered, and that in our infancy, and yet I know our Baptismall vow,
and covenant, binds to the day of our death, though we should live an hundred
years, yea, though we should fulfill Methusela's days. The same covenant and
vow we make in Baptism, we renew at the Supper, and the bond in this, as
binding and as lasting as in the other Sacrament. That is true, or should at
least be true of both the Sacraments, which Paul speaks of the Rock, 1 Cor.
10. 4. They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them, or went with
them. They drank of the material Rock, which is called a spiritual Rock,
because it was a type of Christ. The Israelites did not only drink of the
Rock when they were at it, but after they were removed and gone from it, they
still drank of it. But how could that be? yes, the Apostle says, The Rock
followed them. That is, the water that issued out of the Rock followed them as
they journyed, and streamed after them in their removes. So the Rock followed
them virtually, the virtue and benefit of the Rock followed them, and went
along with them. So is it, so should we have a care it should be, that the
Sacraments should not only be efficacious when we are present at them, and in
the act of receiving them, but their efficacy and virtue should follow us, and
stream after us all the while we are traveling in the wilderness of this
world, till we come into Heaven.

When we come to the Sacrament, and do not show the efficacy and power of it,
do not keep our covenants, and walk the more religiously and fruitfully
after it, there follows upon it these two evils:

1 First, God accounts such receiving no service done to him. The Sacrament
received without following, and answerable obedience, he reputes and accounts
as no service at all to him. Look how God contests with his people, Zech. 7.
5. 6, 7. Did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? And when ye did eat, and
when ye did drink, did ye not eat etc? Should ye not hear the words, etc?
As if he had said; ye have kept many fasts for many years, but ye did no
service to me in all your fasts; for your fasting was no more service to me,
then when ye did eat and drink for your selves, and for your own pleasure and
delight. But how so? Because with your fasting, ye joined not your obedience
to me and my words, there followed no obedience in your lives; and therefore
you fasted not unto me. Did ye at all fast to me, to me? So likewise will God
contest with such communicants, as do not express the power of the Sacrament,
and keep not their sacramental covenants in following obedience. When ye
received the Sacrament in the first, second, third, and every month in the
year, did ye at all perform any service unto me, unto me? And when ye did
eat, and when ye did drink, did ye not eat for your selves, and drink for
your selves? Should ye not hear the words which the Lord cries by his
Ministers? Your eating and drinking at the Sacrament, is no more service to me,
then when ye eat and drink at your own ordinary tables for your selves, and
your own pleasures, so long as after your receiving, and eating, and drinking
at my Table, there follows no expression of the power of mine Ordinance, no
conscience of keeping your covenants, in yielding obedience to my words in your
lives. Now what comfort can we have in our having received the Sacrament, if
God accept it not as a service done to him? Nay, it is so far from being a
service accepted of God as done to him, that he accounts it treachery against
him. It is true here, which Hoseah speaks, Hos. 6. 7. But they like men,
transgressed the Covenant, There have they dealt treacherously against me:
There, that is, in the very Covenant they have played false with me; where they
thought they did God great service, there they abused him; where they thought
to please God, there they provoked him to anger, there they dealt treacherously
against me. It is in it self a service to God to receive the Sacrament, and to
make a Covenant with him. And many think they do God good service herein, but
they are deceived, because like deceitful false hearted men, they transgressed
the Covenant; There, there, in the very Covenant, they deal treacherously
against GOD. And so it is no service, but a provocation to the Lord: For what
can provoke more then treachery? And what is it but treachery to transgress so
solemn a Covenant.

2 Secondly, we horribly pollute, and take Gods Name in vain, and make our
selves guilty of spiritual perjury before God. What think we of perjured and
forsworn persons? What think we will become of them? When we take an oath
solemnly at the Lords Table to forsake our sins, to walk in obedience in the
performance of such holy duties, and then afterward live in those sins still,
and in the neglect of those duties still, Are we not forsworn? If we swear
Siquidem vovens, and non solvens, quid nisi peiero? Bernard. de Precept. and
Disp. c. 20.
to do such a thing, and do it not, do we not forswear? And is it a light
thing with us to be forsworn, and that by the breach of an oath, and covenant
made solemnly with God? Do but consider, how heavily God threatens Zedekiah
for breaking his oath and covenant, with the King of Babylon, Ezekiel. 17. 12. --
21. Read, and well observe the whole place. Zedekiah made an oath to
Nebucadnezzar, and brake it: And what follows upon it? Verse. 15. Shall he
escape that does such things? or shall he break the Covenant, and be
delivered? Verse. 19. As I live, surely mine oath that he has despised, and my
Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon his own head.
But how? He should die for it in the midst of Babylon. Verse. 16. and it first
cost him the loss of his eyes, so soon as he had seen his children slain
before his eyes. So smart vengeance has God for perjury. God has sworn that
he will be revenged upon such as are forsworn, verse 19. And though men will,
yet GOD will not be forsworn. Now then will the Lord be so heavily avenged
for breach of oath, and covenant with a man, nay, with an heathen man, and an
Idolater? Woe then to that man that breaks covenant with the great God of
heaven and earth, who will not be mocked, who will not be baffled withal, who
will be a swift witness, and a severe Judge against all such as grossly take
his glorious Name in vain, and so foulely pollute his holy Ordinance. And thus
a man doing the duties required before, in, and after the Receiving of the
Sacrament, comes to the Sacrament after the due order. And he that walks after
this Rule, peace shall be upon him, and all the Israel of God.

FINIS.

