A TREATISE OF PATIENCE.

WRITTEN BY FATHER FRANCIS ARIAS, OF THE Society of Jesus, in his second part
of the Imitatio^ of Christ our Lord.

Translated into English.

In patientia vestra possidebitis animas vestras. In your Patience you shall
possess your souls. christogram IHS


With permission of Superiors, Anno 1630.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY. To the right honorable and most noble Lady, the Lady
B. A.
MADAM
In the translating of this Treatise of Patience, I have had no cause to
exercise Patience, for I dispatched it with a great deal of gust, in regard
that I was commanded therein by your Ladyship; the expression of whose will
gives ever occasion of much joy to me. Now therefore, since, upon the matter,
it came from your Ladyship, it is but reason that it return again; though it
must not be without the interest of my humblest thanks for your ministering me
so fair an occasion, whereby I may have seen more clearly what in my self I
ought to be; and consequently what I am not: To the end that hereafter, if I
grow not more patient, yet at least I may grow more humble, through the too
certain knowledge of my great defects.

Your Ladyship, I assure my self, will be pleased to look upon it with
attention; especially in regard of what it is in it self; though partly also,
because it is a poor present of mine And I shall pray our good God, with whole
my heart, that you also may be much the better by it, in thanking his divine
Majesty, for that which you shall perceive him to have given you, and in
praying him hard, to enrich you, with whatsoever you may yet find your self
in this virtue to want. And if his holy name may be glorified hereby, and your
soul and mine assisted to do him the better service, it is that very reward,
which most willingly I would bestow upon my self for this little labor,
though I had all power in mine own hands: yours Ladyships, I most humbly
kiss, and do you reverence, with the heart of

A most obliged and most humble servant ever. T. M.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE I. CHAPTER. IN what the virtue of Patience consists; and how the
supernatural favors of God are necessary for our suffering the miseries of
this life with true Patience Chap. 2. Of the evils, or inconveniences of pain
which Christ our Lord began to suffer even from his Conception, and Birth;
and of the example of Patience, which he gave us therein. Chap. 3. How Christ
our Lord endured the company of the wicked, and of the example of Patience,
which he gave us thereby. Chap. 4. Of the evils of pain, which Christ our
Lord suffered in his Passion; and of the example of Patience, which he gave us,
by suffering them with so great good will Chap. 5. Of the Patience, desire, and
love, wherewith Christ our Lord endured all those torments, for the example and
edification of our souls. Chap. 6. Of the Patience wherewith we ought to
suffer the loss of temporal goods, and of the example which Christ our Lord
gave us herein. Chap. 7. Of the Patience, wherewith we are to endure corporal
infirmities; and of the example, which Christ our Lord has given us herein.
Chap. 8. Of the other great benefits, which are drawn from corporal
infirmities, when they are borne with Patience. Chap. 9. Wherein it is
confirmed, by the example of Saints, how great the fruit of sickness, and other
tribulation is; and how this is an effect of Gods mercy, which he shows
toward his friends. Chap. 10. Of the fruit of the increase of Faith, and
Patience, which we must gather from the Patience, which the Saints have showed
in suffering their infirmities and pains. Chap. 11. Of the Patience wherewith
discomforts, and spiritual desolations, are to be endured; and of the example
which Christ our Lord gave hereof. Chap. 12. Of the necessity, and fruit of
Patience; and how it is a sign of the election and predestination of God.
Chap. 13. How pleasing the virtue of Patience is to God, and of the great
favors which he affoardes them, who suffer with Patience. Chap. 14. Of the
means, whereby the virtue of Patience may be obtained; which is, that we be
watchful to consider the fruit thereof, and the examples whereby we have
been taught it by Christ our Lord. Chap. 15. Of other means whereby we are to
obtain, and conserve the virtue of Patience, namely to consider our sins,
and to resort to Almighty God, for the remedy thereof.
A prayer for obteining Patience of Almighty God.
WHy do I complain, o Lord, when I am wronged, or afflicted unjustly; if I
call to mind how grievously I have offended thee; how often I have deserved
Hell; how great thy mercy is, appointing me to suffer light temporal
punishment in this life, whereas I have deserved most grievous and everlasting
torments, in the next? For it is not fitting that there should be delicate
members under a thorny head, and which has been most cruelly used for them.
Why should I complain, if I do but remember, that for suffering patiently for
a time these present labors, thy mercy will comfort me, and with thine own
hand thou will wipe the tears from mine eyes, and wilt give rest to my broken
and afflicted bones; and that thy comfort and reward will be according to the
measure of my Patience and suffering. Let therefore whatsoever adversities
reine down upon me for thy sake, o Lord; so that thou give me strength and
spirit to endure them: because that, without the help of thy grace, the
weakness of my nature would fail. Make me, o Lord, to bear all false
judgments, vain suspicious, slanders, al injuries courageously, without
repining, without complaining, without excuses, without any interior feeling
of them, and without any exterior sign: and let my soul be so much the more
ioyed and delighted within it self; by how much the more innocent it finds
it self, and free from the fault, where with it is charged Strengthen my
soul, o Lord, with the knowledge and love of thy most sacred Passion, that I
may not only bear present adversities with joy, but also wish them when they
are absent: and that I may account it a kind of cross, to live and die without
a cross.

A SHORT TREATISE OF PATIENCE WRITTEN BY Father Francis Arrias in the second
part of his book of the imitatio^ of Christ our Lord.
THE I. CHAPTER. In What the virtue of Patience consists; and how the
supernatural favors of God are necessary for our suffering the miseries of
this life with true Patience.
IT belongs to the virtue of true Patience, to suffer all those things, which
are adverse, and serve for the punishment of man in this mortal life, with a
heart so firm, and constant, that to avoid and fly from them, he do nothing
which is faulty, and contrary to the will of Almighty God. It belongs also to
Patience, that the sorrow which naturally is raised in the soul of man, by the
approach and presence of miseries, be moderated and subdued in such sort, as
that it may do no harm to the same soul, by putting it into disorder and by
making it swerve from the right line of reason. This is that Patience which is
necessary for us, and to which we are bound by express commaundment; whereby
a man is secured from committing either mortal or venial sin in such
occasions. But other degrees of Patience there are of greater perfection, which
belong to Counsel, and not to commaundment, whereof we shall speak
afterward.

Saint Gregory the Great, describes this Patience, which is necessary for us,
after this manner. Patience consists in suffering those evils of punishment,
which happen to us by the will of others, with a moderate and equal mind; and
in that a man dispose not himself to hurt that other man, from whom it comes;
and that receiving the scourges of pain and sorrow, and other tribulatio^s at
the hand of God, he complain not, and murmr not against him. And declaring
elsewhere, how it is not necessary for this Patience, to which we are bound by
precept, to quench entirely that sorrow and grief, which a mind receives
through the evils of punishment, but to moderate it in such sort, as that it
may not be inordinate and hurtful, he says thus; Some think that true
constancy and wisdom, consists in not feeling those scourges, and
contradictions, which come to us in this life from the hand of God; and others
have too excessive sense thereof, and are too much afflicted and dismayed
thereby; but the true virtue of Patience, and true wisdom teaches us to hold
the mean between those two Extremes. In such sort, as that a Christian must
neither be of a stupid heart (because this necessary virtue of Patience
co^sists not, in that a man feel no sorrow for his adversity) nor yet that on
the other side he should feel so much dismay and grief as to make him pass
beyond the bounds of reason. For if he exceed therein, he offends against the
virtue of Patience. And because it happenes sometimes, that some, when a cross
arriues, or when a wrong is offered, do by the help of God bear it well at
that time; and yet remembering it afterward, fall either into sorrow, or into
rage, with impatience against him who offended them, the same Saint pronounces
thus. He is the possessor of true Patience, who at the time when he receives
the hurt, does bear it without inordinate grief; and when afterward he
happenes to remember it, reioyces and is glad that he e^dured it. And the end
which a faithful Christian is to hold, in the suffera^ce of these
punishments, and in using this moderation, and in putting this restraint upon
grief, must be to conform himself to the good pleasure of God; and to will
that, which God wills. For the will of God is, that a man should under go that
evil of punishment, by whatsoever way it come to him; whether it be by means
of devils, or men, or other creatures. For by whatsoever means it comes, God
is the first Author, and the first cause from whence it proceeds; and so his
pleasure is, that men suffer, and accept well thereof, as growinge to them from
his hand. This is Saint Paul's advice, Heb. 10. when he speaks thus to his
faithful children. Because you are encountered with so many crosses, which
assault the strength of your hearts, you have need of Patience, whereby you may
in all things, perform the will of God, and yield entire obedience to his
comaundments. And complying after this manner with his heavenly will, you shall
obtain those most high and eternal benedictions, which the Divine Majesty
has promised to such as keep his law.

Now by reason that man's weakness, after the fall of Adam, is so great, it is a
matter of much difficulty for him to suffer all those evils of punishment,
which happen to him in this life, with such strength of mind, as that he
transgress not the bounds of reason, and the law of God. And if we consider
man in his natural force, not only is this hard for him, but wholly
impossible. For though as Saint Thomas says well, a man, for the enjoying of
temporal blessings, endure eue^ by the strength of nature many grievous
things, because the natural love, which he carries to himself, helps him on;
and with the greater natural love, he over comes another love which is less;
yet to obtain spiritual and eternal blessings, wherein consists our
salvation, which is the true end of virtue, he is not able to endure the^. For
a natural love, is not able to produce this effect: but a love supernatural,
and grace from heaven is necessary for the enduring thereof. And so we see,
that the Philosophers and wise me^ of the world, who by the strayning upon the
force of nature, did profess to obtain the true virtue of Patience, were able
indeed to reach but to the shadow and appara^ce thereof, as Saint Cyprian notes
in these words. I find not, O my brethren, that amongst all the ways of
spirit which are taught us by our holy Religion, any one of them is more
useful, toward the obtaining of the Kingdom of heaven, then this of perfect
Patience. This was professed by the Philosophers; but as the wisdom which they
professed was for the most part not sollid, and true; so neither was their
Patience; because no man can be truly wise, or patient, who knows not the
wisdom and Patience of God by way of faith. This is the discourse of S.
Cyprian.

Now therefore, since the weakness of man is so great, in suffering crosses with
Patience, and that he is in so great necessity thereof, for living well in this
world, and for the obreyning of heaven in the next; it pleased Christ our Lord,
to provide us with two very principal and efficacious remedies, for the
strengthening of our weakness, and for the exalting of our nature; in such
sort, as that it might obtain this divine virtue, and the perfection thereof,
with much facility. One of these means, is the example of his most holy life,
and passion, whereby we may be animated to bear crosses with Patience; and the
other are those supernatural helps, and succors of grace, which he deserved
for us, by his sufferings. Let us therefore go declaring the chief examples of
his life, whereby he moves, and persuades us, to suffer all the adversities,
pains, torments and contradictions which may happen to us in this world, with
true Patience. To the end that considering them at good leisure, and with true
feeling and spirit, we may stir our selves up to an effectual purpose, and
desire to bear Crosses. And so also, by a lively faith of those so holy and
blessed Mysteries, and by the the means of humble and deuont prayer, we shall
obtain all those succors of grace, which are needful for the bearing the^
with perfect Patience.

THE II. CHAPTER. Of the evils or inco^ueniences of pain which Christ our Lord
began to suffer even from his Conception, and Birth; and of the example of
Patience, which he gave us therein.
THe son of God, as soon as he was borne into the world, did instantly suffer
pain and sorrow. He instantly felt the pain of cold, for he was born in
winter, and in an open undefended place. And for as much as the body of the
infant Jesus, was extremely tender, and delicate, in regard that he was of a
most perfect pure complexion, he felt the injuries and inco^modities of the
season, more then ever any other infant did, how delicate soever he might be.
Upon the arrival of the seventh day, he felt the grief and torment of
Circumcision, which was extreme. For if they, who were grown men, did feel
it much, because the pain in it self was great, as also for that they had
reason wherewith to understand it; how much more must the infant Jesus feel
that pain; who, with being of so delicate constitution, had also the use of
reason in perfection. And this pain of his was increased in him, because the
Virgin, who was present there, and saw the blood and tears which the infant
shed, did all melt with grief; and, having her heart full of a most dolorous
compassion, would be sure to sigh, and shed mournful tears. And her most
blessed son, observing the sorrow of his most sacred mother, whom he
incomparably loved, and of whose sorrow he well knew how great it was, had much
pity of her; and that pity caused a greater wound of sorrow in his soul,
then the knife had made in his body.

This sorrow for the Circumcision, was followed, at the end of little more then
thirty days, by his banishment, into Egypt; whither the way was very long,
and very painful: and took up the toil of many days, and the banishment
lasted many years.

Another immense sorrow, which Christ our Lord endured, and which began in him
from the instant of his Conception, and continued till his expiring upon the
Cross, was that which was caused in him, by all the sins of the whole world,
for they al were present to him; both those which had been committed from the
beginning of the world till that time, and those which then were in committing;
and those also which would be committed euentill the very end of the world. Now
the man who loves God and his neighbors in great measure, is much afflicted by
offenses committed against God, and by the loss of souls: and so much more as
a man loves God, and his neighbors, so much more is the offense of God, and
the loss of souls, intolerable to him. So says Saint Peter. ^. ep. 2. c.
that the sins of the Inhabitants of Sodom, did grievously torment the soul
of holy Lot, day and night. Since therefore Christ our Lord, did supremely love
the glory of the eternal Father, and the salvation of souls; he having
always present to him, so many sins, whereby the eternal Father was
affronted, and souls destroyed and condemned; that most sacred soul became a
very sea of immense sorrow, which tormented it ever day and night without
either cessation, or moderation.

Another most greiuous torment which Christ our Lord was pleased to suffer for
us, was to be tempted by the devil in the desert. For to be tempted, is to be
provoked, and solicited to sin; which is a thing most ugly and to be abhorred.
And this was not only a vast affront to him, by means whereof he exercised
Humility (as we have declared elsewhere;) but it was also an excessive grief to
him, by occasion whereof he exercised Patience. For if some most chaste virgin
who were a great lover of purity, and a great detester of all dishonesty, being
seen alone by some filthy person, and being solicited by his speech to commit
uncleanness, would feel more offense, and pain thereby, then if they should
beat her with cudgells, or dragg her by the hair, through the streets; much
more would Christ our Lord, who did supremely love the will, and glory of his
eternal Father, and who deeply detested all kind of sin, find it for an
incomparable kind of torment, and feel it more then many of the torments of
his very Passion, to see himself solicited, and provoked by the devil, to
affront his Father, and to commit so wicked, and so abominable a thing, as
sin is.

This torment was accompanied by another, which was to be carried by the devil
from the desert to the pinnacle of the Temple; and from thence to the top of the
mountain. Which, whether it were, that he were taken up, and carried in the
air, as some of the Saints understand it: or that the devil guided him, like
one who would lead another by the hand, as other holy writers have conceived,
the devil being so wicked, and so deformed a creature, and Christ our Lord
seeing so clearly that malice and deformity of his, and yet to be so long so
near him, and to be touched or carried by him, must needs be of so excessive
pain to him, as to equal many torments of his Passion. And so does Saint
Gregory compare it saying; when we hear them tell, that Christ our Lord,
being true God and man, was carried by the devil to the City of Jerusalem, it
causes horror and amazeme^t in such as hear it. But yet it is no wonder,
that he should suffer himself to be carried by the devil, who is the head of
wickedness; since he was pleased to be crucified by the members of the same
devil. This is the saying of S. Gregory; whereby he signifies, that the torment
to have been carried by that infernal beast the devil, imports a kind of a
resemblance to that other torment, of his having been crucified by sinners; and
so doubtless it was a most greiuous affliction to the soul of Christ our Lord.

All those crosses and contradictions, which Christ our Lord suffered, through
the whole course of his preaching; the injury of ill words; the deeds of
persecution which were cast upon him; the slanders, false testimonies, the
attempt to break his neck down the hill in Nazareth, and to stone him many
times in Jerusalem, belong to the virtue of Humility, in as much as they
carried disgrace and contempt with them; but for him to have made choice, and
to have embraced them, in regard that they were painful, and dolorous to his
heart; and to endure them as such, belonges to the virtue of Patience. And
Christ our Lord endured them with so extreme Patience, that whereas he might
most justly have taken vengeance of his enemies, for every one of those pains
in particular; and might insta^tly have delivered them over to the fury of
hell, there to suffer that torment, which they deserved; or else might have
annihilated them, by taking off his hand of protection and preservation from
them; yet he would not do them any hurt at all, not gave he to them by way of
answer, any word, which might be so severe or sharp, as might occasion the
least disgust to them; but he conserved them in being and life, and he gave
them holy inspirations; and all the actions, which he performed, and all the
words, which he uttered, were ordained to make them do penance, and that they
might not be lost and damned, but become saved souls in heaven.

At that time did he endure the society, and the sins of that miserable
Judas, with unspeakable Patience. Our Lord perceived well, the malice and
ingratitude of his heart; the thefts which he committed upon the alms, which
was delivered to his care; and that treachery, wherewith he knew he would sell
him over to his enemies; and yet did he not cast him out of his company, nor
did he deprive him of the dignity and authority of his Apostolate, whereof he
had made himself so unworthy; nor spoke he any word of affront to him, nor
showed him any offended or untoward countenance, but he affoarded him al those
common benefits and favors, which be imparted to the rest of his Apostles.

By these examples of Patience, which our Lord gave us in the time of his life,
and course of his preaching, he taught and persuaded us to have Patience;
whereby we are to suffer all the crosses and contradictions of this life; and
all the persecutions, oppressions, and injuries of me^; not giving place, nor
so much as entry into our hearts, to ill will, or hatred against any man; nor
for complaints or murmuring either against God, or man; nor yet to any
inordinate grief: but suffering them with a moderate, firm and constant mind,
which swarues not from the rectitude and rule of virtue; and is desirous, that
in all things the will of God may be fulfilled. So says Saint Cyprian, most
excellently describing the example of the Patience of Christ our Lord, by these
words.

What glory is so great, as that a man may become like God, in the exercise of
Patience, enduring the inconveniences of this life, and the injuries of men, as
God does long endure the offenses which sinners commit against him. Which
Patience, Jesus Christ our Lord did teach us, as he was man; not only by word,
but by deed also. For he said, he came into the world to work the will of his
father. And amongst those other admirable virtues, whereby he discovered to us
the power of his divinity; one was, the Patience whereby he imitated his
eternal Father; and so all those things which he did, from the time when he
was borne with mortal flesh into this world, did carry the seal and stamp of
Patience upon them. For he took on him, as has been said, the weight of all
the sins of men, that he might pay by suffering for them. He was tempted by
the enemy; and yet he did him noe hurt for it: but was only content to
overcome him. He endured the horrible wickedness of Judas, with a Patience so
large, as lasted till the end of his life. He endured the Jews who were
incredulous, ungrateful, proud, rebellious, and contrary both to his doctrine,
and to his example. And he endured them in such sort, as to heap benefits
upon them; and to treat them with meekenes, and to receive such of them to his
favor and friendship, as would be converted to him. What greater Patience, and
what greater clemency can be conceived, then by means of shedding his blood to
purchase, and to impart a life of grace and glory to them, who through hatred,
and by most wicked means, took a course to spill that very blood? And since
we are the members and disciples of Christ our Lord, who is the way of
salvation and life it self, it will become us to follow his example. These ar
the words of Saint Cyprian.

THE III. CHAPTER. How Christ our Lord endured the company of the wicked, and
of the example of Patience, which he gave us thereby.
ONe of the things which good men find most difficulty to endure, in this
life, is the society and conversation of wicked men, whilst they continue in
their wickedness. For in regard that they abhor sin so much, and have such
feeling of the offenses, which are committed against God, and of the loss and
damnation of souls; for them to see those offenses before their eyes, and to
observe their neighbors to lie under the wrath of God, condemned and lost,
according to the state of present justice, and yet not feeling their own
misery, by reason of the great blindenes and obstinacy, wherein they are; and
to see withal, that they can provide no remedy for this so great mischief,
nor give any impediment to these offenses against God, and to this loss of
souls; they receive, I say, herby intolerable pain; and carry their hearts
even tra^spersed from side to side with the sword of sorrow; and have extreme
desires to depart out of the society and conversation of such sinners, and to
be still remaining far from the^. And in regard this misery happens sometimes
to good men, because sometimes the wicked are such persons, as whose company
they cannot leave, because they are either sons, or parents, or brothers, or
husband, or wife, or their governors, or servant of the same Lord, or
subjects of the same Prelate, their pain and grief does extremely increase
upon this occasion. Now how vehement this torment is, for good men to endure;
and how great desire they have, for as much as may concern themselves, to
depart out of their company, Christ our Lord himself, did o^ce declare in
weighty words. Matt. 17. Marc 9. When he descended from the Mount Thabor, he
came to those troops of people, which were expecting him, and he found his
disciples much afflicted and confounded, in that men had brought one to them,
who was both a possessed and a lunaticke person, whom they were not able to
cure. And by occasion thereof the Scribes and Pharisees, who were present,
reproached them, as wanting virtue from heaven to send devils out, and they
affirmed that their Master did it in the power of Beelzebub. Saint Mark
signifies thus much, by saying that Christ our Lord found the Scribes in
debate, and argument with his disciples. And then our Lord said to them; O you
incredulous and rebellious generation, how long shall I remain, and converse
amongst you, how long shall I expect you, and endure your obstinacy and malice.
By these words did Christ our Lord declare the trouble which the wickedness and
conversation with vicious persons, who would not be converted and hindered the
conversion of others, did put him to, and that he felt that pain more then
death it self. So says Saint Chrysostom. Our Lord signified by this, that he
even desired death, and that his Passion was not to be troublesome, or grievous
to him; but that the thing whereof he was most sensible, and which afflicted
him most, was to converse with rebellious sinners, who made resistance to the
truth; and upon whom he saw, that the fruit both of his life, and death would
be lost.

Now as this was an immense torment to Christ our Lord, so is it very grievous
to be endured by virtuous men. But that which they are to do, for suffering it
with that Patience which is fit, and for gathering from thence, that fruit of
merits which God desires, is this: To distinguish on the one side, by the use
of reason between that which is the fault of others, and the loss of souls,
and the offense of God; and that on the other side, which is their own
affliction, and pain; and then to be afflicted for those sins, for as much as
they imply the offense of God, and withal to be sorry for the loss, which
souls receive thereby, and to make instant prayer to God for them; and as for
the pain and torment, which results thereby upon them selves, to accept it at
the hands of almighty God, and willingly, to be content to suffer it, during
all that time, which God shall think fit not to take them out of that company,
and conversation of the wicked. By this means, that company of the wicked,
will be a divine Purgatory to them; which may cle^se their souls both from
sins, and the punishments due thereunto; and a way of exercising chatity and
humility, and patience, which are of so great worth and merit, and so very
acceptable in the sight of God.

And to animate them to suffer this punishment with this Patience, they are to
consider those examples of Christ our Lord, whereof we have spoken; which are,
the immense and continual torment which he felt in behoulding all the sins
of mankind; and that which he felt in being carried by the devil to
Jerusalem, and to the Mount; and that which he received by his conversation
with the Jews, who continued rebellious in their infidelity; and that
particularly, which he received by keeping Judas in his company, and in the
College of his Apostles. For to this end it was, that he chose that miserable
creature for an Apostle; as well knowing how wicked he was to be; and for this,
after he was perverted, did he continue him in his own company; and he
tolerated him, to the end that by this example they might seriously endeavor
to endure those wicked and perverse people with Patience, whom they might
chance to have in their neighborhood, their house, their family and their
society. So does Saint Augustine advise us saying. Christ our Lord had one
amongst his Apostles, who was wicked; and he served himself well of that
wickedness. First, by complying with that eternal ordination of God concerning
his Passion; and secondly to give an example to the world, of the Patience
wherewith they were to endure wicked men.

Let us therefore animate our felues, by these examples of Christ our God and
Savior, to suffer with a good will, and a constant mind, whatsoever troubles,
contradictions, and crosses may grow to us, by our neighbors, our domestics,
and our familiar friends. Let us consider and ponder well, what Christ our Lord
endured at the hands of sinners, for the love of us; and how he has endured
our very selves, dissembling our sins, when we deserved hell for committing
the^; bestowing benefits on us, when we committed offenses against him;
imparting mercies to us, when we did him wrongs; cryinge out, and drawing us
to him, and converting us by his grace, when we had departed from him, and were
fled out of his house, and were making war against his Law. This Patience of
Christ our Lord, wherewith as God he endures all sinners, and has endured our
selves; and, as man, endured those wicked people with whom he co^uerst in this
world, must induce and strengthen us much, in the way of sufferance.

Great (says Saint Ambrose) is the Patience of God, in not insta^tlie
punishing sinners, but in suffering them for sometime, till they may be
converted. And in another place; If our Lord, our God, and Savior Jesus
Christ, who with one single word could have cast his enemies into the most
profound pit of hell, did yet endure them with Patience, why should not
miserable men, who are full of sins endure the^ also with Patience, when in
this life they receive pain and trouble from other men, by whose means they
are corrected, and punished by Almighty God for their sins? This is the
discourse of Saint Ambrose. Let us therefore give this glory to God, that for
his love we may endure all evils of punishment; Let us yield this honor a d
give this gust to Christ our Savior, in that, to imitate him, we may have
occasion to suffer all the injuries, and contradictions of men. Let us bestow
this benefit upon our own souls in wiping away our sins by exercising this
virtue of Patience; and let us fill it full of comforts, and merits. For, as
Ecclesiasticus chap. 1. says, the Patient man suffers only during a time
which is limited; and afterward, for his having suffered, Almighty God gives
him true joy, which springes from that grace which at the present he receives,
and from that hope of glory, wherewith he is to be endowed afterward.

THE IV. CHAPTER. Of the evils of pain, which Christ our Lord suffered in his
Passion; and of the example of Patience, which he gave us, by suffering them
with so great good will.
THe chief examples of Patience, which Christ our Lord gave us, were of his
most sacred Passion, by reason of the many, and various kinds of sorrows, and
torments which he suffered therein, with unspeakable Patience: and we will
declare these torments, and the Patience wherewith he suffered them; for the
edification of our souls; and particularly that we may learn to suffer all
the miseries of this life with Patience.

When they apprehended our Lord (he giving them leave to put the malice and
fury of their wrathed hearts in execution) the torments were many, and very
grievous which they gave him, with their hands, and feet, by cudgells, and
irons, and other instruments, which they had, and used throughout that whole
way, till they came to the house of Annas. For if, after they had employed upon
his person, so many and most cruel kinds of torment, through all that night,
and so much of the next day, till they nailed him fast to the cross, they yet
were not satisfied at all; but after they had crucified him, they did yet
continue to persecute him, with their viperous tongues; and after they had
fetched all the blood out of his veins, together with his life, they would
needs open his side, and fetch the blood forth from his very heart; what is to
be thought, that they would do in that furious onset, when first they began to
exercise their cruelty upon him, and to stream out their deadly poison against
him, which had lain for so long time horded up in their malicious hearts?

In the house of Caiphas, the High Priest, when Christ our Lord had confessed
who he was, and when all the Judges had condemned him as a blasphemous person,
and worthy death; the soldiers and Ministers of justice, together with the
servants of the Priests in whose power he was, rushed in upon him with extreme
cruelty, and most grievously tormented him, with buffers, blows, and spitting
on him; and they went continuing, and augmenting those torments, throughout
that whole night, with many inventions, all full of cruelty and hellish fury.
And some holy men, to whom God has revealed many secrets of his life and
death, have said, that in that night, our most blessed Lord was stricken four
hundred times, with hard buffets, and cruel blows, upon his face and neck,
and all the rest of the parts of his most blessed body.

This passed in the house of the High Priest; and now let us see, what torments
he suffered in the house of Pilate. The first was, to be bound to a pillar, and
there to be most cruelly scourged. What extreme pain must it be, for him to
be tied so forcibly to a pillar, that the cords and ropes would be e^tering so
deep into his delicate flesh, as to make the blood even break forth? What
torment, nay what flood of torments, would it be, for him to be scourged after
that manner. For the whippes; wherewith they did it, were most cruel,
consisting of sharp rods, and biting cords, which (as many affirm) had hooks
and spurs of iron at the ends thereof. The executioners were strong, fierce
and many; who yet changed by turns; and all were full of mortal hate and
spite against our Lord. His sacred flesh was most tender, and most delicate,
and all framed of the blood of that most pure Virgin. The imaginatiue part of
Christ our Lord did perceive every one of those scourges, which they gave him,
after a most distinct and perfect manner. In other men, the feeling of a deeper
pain or grief does astonish the imagination; and so they have no feeling of
other lesser pains: and therefore it happens, that some man may have his very
skull parted, and his body thrust through, and yet not feel the pain; by
having his imagination so much employed, and discomposed by his inward Passion
and rage. But in Christ our Lord it was not so: for he had his imagination, and
the apprehension of his soul so perfectly bent upon every particular pain,
which he felt, as if he had only felt that single pain; and the sense and
apprehension of one pain, did not hinder his feeling of any other. And this
proceeded from the great perfection which he had in all the powers and senses,
both of his sacred body, and soul. Those scourges being so cruel, and those
executioners being so able and strong, and his sense of the pain so perfect,
there was besides, so great multitude of strokes, and blows, which he
received, that some holy men affirm, that those which were inflicted upon him
at the pillar, did pass the number of five thousand. And not only did they
scourge his back, but after they had dressed that in such a fashion, that there
was nothing to be seen but wounds and blood, they untied him first, and then
tied him again, with his back turned toward the pillar; and scourged him the
second time, with the same cruelty, upon the belly, breast, face, and all the
other parts, which were discovered; in such sort, as that the whole most holy
body of Christ our Lord, was flead, and plowed over, into such furrows, as
discovered the very bones. And he who had been the most beautiful of all those
men whom God ever made, remained so disfigured, and deformed, that it was even
a horror to behold him. So says Saint Augustine. The force of those cruel
scourges being renewed so many times, did break the skin, and discovered the
very flesh of the most blessed body of Christ our Lord.

That torment of his scourging was followed by that other torment of the crown
of thorns. For those Pagan soldiers, to please the chief of the Jews, and
(as Saint Chrysostom says) for the interest of that money, which was given
them to the end that they might be the more cruel toward him, took our Lord
into their power, who was already wounded, and as it were even all opened by
those scourges; and then they placed him all tremblinge with cold, in the Court
of Pilates house; and in that public Theater, in the sight of all that people,
they stripped him again of his own clothes; and they put an old purple vest
upon him for scorn; and upon his head a crown of thorns.

This act of theirs, besides that it was of extreme affront (as we have
already showed,) was also most painful to him: for the thorns, whereof the
crown was wouen, were extreme heard and sharp; and they environed his whole
head, and temples; and they passed and penetrated them, even to the veins,
nerves and bones; and made his sacred blood, stream down over his face, his
neck and his hair. The sacred head of Christ our Lord had in all that day,
and the night before, received innumerable blows, and wounds; sometimes with
cudgells, other times with irons, sometimes with swords, other times with
gauntlets, and often with the fists; and by this means it was so battered,
that whatsoever touched it, caused excess of pain being then such already,
and then instantly placing a crown of thorns upon it, so cruel as this,
whereof we have spoken; what excessive pain, or rather torment, would it be
sure to cause? And to this it may be added; that the pain and torment which
the crown of thorns caused; had no intermission like those others, which
either were soon ended or much diminished, but it still continued, and lasted
even till his very death. For he ever had it on, and the thorns served to
nail it to his head; and if at any time they took it off, either to cloth,
or strip him, they instantly put it on again. And not only did these sorrows
last till his death, but they increased much. For, every time when they stroke
his head, either with the cane, or any other instrument of pain; and every
time when the crown did by chance stir of it self, that pain renewed, and
increased.

Another principal torment, which followed upon this, was to lay the Cross
upon his back, that so he might carry it to the place, where he was to be
crucified. This torment, was extremely grievous; for that the Cross was very
heavy, and contained, as holy men observe, fifteen feet in length. Our Lord
was all worn, and wounded, even to his bowels; his strength was utterly
consumed; and his shoulders upon which the weight was laid, were flead. And
now, if the only touching of such a part, with the hand, does put a man to
great grief and pain, what pain and grief would it cause to our Lord to lay
so heavy a weight upon a body so wearyed, and so wounded? And for as much as
the Cross was long, and would be dragging upon the ground, by meeting with
stones in the way and stirring by that means upon his shoulders his pain and
grief would be increased.

In this sort went our Lord, with great sorrow and pain, all that long way
from Pilates house to Mount Caluary, which consisted of one thousand eight
hundred and seauenty two paces. And because our Lord would work no miracle, in
carrying the weight of that Cross; but give leave that nature might suffer as
much, as possibly it could; therefore, when he had dispatched a good part of
the way, he grew to faint, and fall down under the burden. And the prime men
of the Jews, conceiving that there might be danger, least he should die amongst
them in the way, gave him Simon Cyrenaeus for a companion, who might help him
to bear the Cross: and so the assistence, which they affoarded him, grew not
from clemency in them, but from a desire to impose greater torments upon him,
by his dying, not there in the way, but on the Cross it self.

The sorrows and torments of that way being past, and he being the^ arrived at
Mount Caluary, they began to give him new torments. One was; that they stripped
him, by taking his own clothes away, so to put him naked upon the Cross. Now
this was a most painful thing to our Lord; because his clothes stuck fast to
his wounds, by the means of baked and congealed blood; and whenever they
took them off with violence, they still opened the wounds again, they flead
his body, and renewed all his former pains. To this was added that other
torment, which the cold air caused: for that penetrated into his body, upon
the opening of his flesh, and made him all quake and tremble, through the much
cold he felt; and this torment lasted till he expired.

The other torments which followed upon his nakedness were these. The soldiers
took that most holy body, with extreme fury, and spread it forcibly upon the
Cross; and applying his back to the wood, and extending his arms and feet at
length, they began to nail one of his hands; and the nail being great, and
not very sharp, it carried before it through the hole, both of the skin and
of the flesh. Then took they the other hand, and because the body and the
nerves were shru^ke up together, through the cold, they were feign to draw out
the hand with violence, to make it reach that hole, which they had already
made. They also took his sacred feet, and they furiously stretched them forth
to nail them. And there be holy men, who deliver, that for the nayling of his
hands, they gave six and twenty strokes with the hammer; and for the nayling of
his feet, six and thirty; and that through the violence wherewith they drue his
hands and feet to nail them down, the joints of his sacred body were
dissolved, and the bones displaced, in such sort, as that they might be
numbered, one by one. O how great and sharp, were these torments, to that most
delicate body? how did they even part his bowels, and even pearce his heart?
Our Lord did very literally perform that which the Psalm 21. had said, They
have boared through my hands and feet, and they have fastened them with nails
to the Cross; and by reason that the parts of my body were so extended one
from another, and all the substantial humor thereof so consumed, all my bones
might be numbered.

As soon as his most sacred body was nailed, they raised the Cross up on high;
and they suffered it to fall with great force, (together with his most sacred
body which was fastened to it) upon a hoale made in a stone, which was there
provided for that purpose. This was another incomparable torment; for then all
the parts of his body did even open their joints; and his bowels did all
quiver; and the hoales of his hands and feet, did spread abroad, and began to
stream forth blood, like so many springes. It is past expression, to show the
greatness of the torments, which those blessed arms endured, being nailed and
so strictly extended; and those sacred feet, which sustained the weight of his
whole body; and that divine head, which now had no resting place but upon
thorns; and the pains which all those parts of his body felt, every one of
them being out of the true place; and those finally which were felt by that
blessed soul of his, which carried upon it, the immense weight of all those
torments together, continuing after that manner, that soul being grown a very
sea of woe, for the space of three hours; till expiring, he laid it in the
hands of his eternal father.

THE V. CHAPTER. Of the Patience, desire, and love, wherewith Christ our Lord
endured all those torments, for the example and edification of our souls.
AL these immense sorrows and torments did Christ our Lord endure with a
Patience, which was unspeakable, and indeed only worthy of himself. He
complained not of his enemies, who treated him with so extreme cruelty; nay he
defended not himself against them, nor was he angry with them, nor did he show
them any countenance of disgust, nor did he speak any one word, which might
do them any affront, or offer them any threate, or put them to any pain. Nor
did he so much as wish the^ any hurt, but did both wish and speak benignely
and mildly to the^. And he conserved in his most dear heart, a great love
toward them all, wherewith (for as much as they would be capable thereof) he
loved them; giving them holy inspirations, and offering them divine succors,
and praying for them, and wishing that they would profit thereby, and cooperate
with them, and be converted to him, and so be saved. And he was ever ready to
pardon them, and to receive them to his grace, and glory, if they would be
converted to him.

In this manner did Christ our Lord carry himself toward those enemies of his,
who tormented him; and with this love, and with this Patience, did he treat
them. And he suffered those pains and torments in such sort, as that he did
greatly desire and delight in them; and he embraced them with the extreme gust
of his heart; and rejoiced in the interior part of of his soul with
unspeakable gladness and joy, that he had them to suffer. And so when they laid
the Cross upon his back, and when they nailed him to it, he intertayned it
with so much appetite and gust, as cannot be expressed. Great is the
contentme^t and affection, wherewith a mother embraces a most beloved son,
when she finds him delivered out of a long and dangerous captivity; and sees
him return safe and sound into her house. But incomparably much greater was
the contentment and gust, wherewith Christ our Lord embraced the Cross. For
already there were passed, three and thirty years, since he had begun to
desire, and love it, with an immense desire and love; that so he might work
the salvation of the world thereupon: and then perceiving, that his so long and
vehement desire was to be satisfied, it cannot be expressed, how great gust he
had; when they laid and strecht him upon that Cross. And therefore, embracing
it with those bowels of his most tender love, he would say to it in this
manner, in the interior part of his heart. O most happy Cross, how long is it
since I have loved and desired thee? it is now three and thirty years since I
live enamoured of thee, and I all enkindled with the flames of this desire and
love, to see myself conjoined to thee. O thou most precious wood, whereupon the
just price for sin shall be paid, and the divine justice shall remain fully
satisfied, and my Father shall be perfectly glorified, and man shall be saved,
and freed from sin and death, and eternal damnation; and shall make his entry
into the Kingdom of heaven: O with how good a will I suffer my self to be
nailed to thee, and will so continue upon thee, till I leave to live!

And because the affection and desire which Christ our Lord had to suffer, was
the cause of that unspeakable Patience, wherewith he endured all the sorrows
and torments of the Cross, let us consider the testimonies of the Ghospel
wherein he declared the fra^ke will and desire which he had to suffer; and
wherewith he offered himself to his Passion and death. He discovered this his
pleasure, in that he manifested and declared many times, and in particular
manner to his disciples, how he was to suffer in Jerusalem; and the torments
and kind of death which he was to suffer. Once he said thus to them. Matt. 16.
It is fit that I go to Jerusalem, and that I suffer many torments, at the
hands of the Scribes and Pharisees, and chief Priests; and that I be put to
death by them. And Saint Peter persuading him, not to endure it, he reproved
him in sharp manner, for seeking to hinder his Passion. It is clear, that
since he knew so long before, what he was to suffer, he might have avoided it,
and fled from it, if he would: and since he did not so, it is plain he had an
affection and desire to suffer it.

Another time going up to Jerusalem, some few days before that Easter, when he
suffered, he said thus to them. Matt. 20. Behold we are going up to Jerusalem,
and the son of man is to be delivered up to the Princes of the Priests, and to
the Scribes, who will condemn him to death; and will deliver him over to the
Gentiles, to the end that he may be scorned, scourged, and crucified by them.
As if he had said; Behold, how without being carried, or compelled, we go, in
a most voluntary manner to Jerusalem, where those things which concern my
Passion and death are to be accomplished; to the end that you may understand,
how willingly I offer my self to that Passion and death, whereby I am to save
the world:

He also discovered the great affection, and desire which he had to suffer, by
his going to that garden, which was so notorious a place, and where he knew his
enemies would seek, and find him out; as also, in that being there, and
knowing that his enemies came to apprehend him; he went not thence to some
other place, where they might not find him; but he went by that very way where
they were cominge toward him; and he went to meet them, and animated his
disciples to go with him, saying. Matt. 26. Rise up and let us go; for he who
will betray me, is near at hand. So says Saint Jerome, when he declares these
words. Our Lord went to encounter his persecutors, without any fear at all of
his Passion; and he voluntarily delivered himself to them, that they might
deprive him of his life, and he said to his disciples, Rise up, and let us go:
as if he had said; let not our enemies find us here like fearful men; but let
us go with good courage to receive them; and let them see, the confidence and
cheerfullnes, wherewith we offer our selves to death.

Being gone forth to meet his enemies, and already standing before them; and
they having many lights whereby they looked upon him; and he being well known
to them, and especially to Judas: yet was it not in their power to know him
then, because he gave them not that power, not concurred with that faculty of
their mind, whereby they were to have known him; till such time, as he
discovered himself to them by saying, It is I: declaring thereby, how truly it
was in his own hand not to be taken, or so much as touched by the^, unless he
would himself. So says Saint Chrysostom. Our Lord standing in the midst of
his enemies, did blind their eyes; and this he did, to make them know, that
not only they could not have apprehended him, but not so much as have seen
him, if himself had not given the^ power to do it. He also declared thus
much, by making them return and fall backward to the ground, like dead men,
and that with one only word; discovering clearly thereby, how easy a thing it
had been, for him to defend himself from them, and to take away both their
strength and life, if he had been pleased. He had formerly been in fear in the
garden; to declare the weakness of man's nature; and by the immense love which
he bore to man, he overcame all that natural fear; and he being overcome by
that very love, and by the extreme desire which he had to suffer for the
salvation of mankind, went forth to receive his enemies, as if they had been
his most beloved friends. And first having made it plain, that they could not
once have touched him, nor so much as have known him, if he had not been so
pleased; he then gave the^ leave and power to do what they would to him. And
this he declared, by saying. This is your hour, and the power of darcknes.
This is that hour, wherein liberty is given you, to the end that you and the
Princes of darcknes, by your means, may execute both his power, and his cruel
will, upon my person.

This affection, wherewith Christ our Lord offered himself to the torments of
death, and this invincible Patience wherewith he endured them, had been
prophesied by Esai 53. chap. in these words, He offered himself to death,
because he would. The same Prophet had said, The eternal Father had laid all
our sins upon Christ our Lord, to the end that he might satisfy for them all;
and all those sins might be destroyed, and consumed by the virtue of his
Passion. And instantly he declares the manner how he laid them upon him, which
was not by forcing, or constraining him to suffer; but by infusing an immense
charity into him, and by inspiring, and moving his heart thereby to the end
that voluntarily and freely, and with extreme readiness and gladness he might
offer himself to death. And declaring the Patience, wherewith he suffered that
death, he says; As a sheep he opened not his mouth. So great was the
Patience, the desire and love, wherewith he endured the torments, which he
took upon him, for the discharge of our sins, that he opned not his mouth,
either to defend himself, or complain of others. Like a quiet sheep, which
bleyes not, when his throat is cut; so went he in sufferance and silence, as
he was carried to death: and as an innocent and still lamb, which is sile^t
and quiet whilst they sheere him, so our most blessed Lord, did in quiet
silence and repose endure that fierce outrage, wherewith his enemies tormented
him, and that most cruel fury wherewith they put him to death. By these and
other testimonies, did Christ our Lord declare the immense love and most ardent
desire, which he had to suffer the torments and death, which he endured for
man, yea and yet to endure greater torments, and to suffer more deaths, if his
enemies had power to give him more; wheereupon we may infer, the
unspeakable Patience and joy, wherewith he suffered them.

We must ponder, and continually meditate, with a very profound and deep
consideration, upon these examples of Patience, which shine in the life and
Passion of Christ our Lord; and thereby we must be animated to suffer and
endure with true Patience, all those evils of punishment, which may happen to
us in this life, how great or tedious soever they may be. For therefore (says
Saint Efrem) the afflictions and tribulations of this life, seem grievous and
intolerable to us, because we consider not the Passion and death of Christ our
Lord. Let us therefore allwaies carry before our eyes and imprint in our hearts
this death and Passion of his; and all those examples, which he gave us therein
of Patience: and let us imitate him, by suffering all the contradictions and
penalties of this life with a good will. And since it becomes a soldier to
follow his captain, with much labor and with offering himself to troubles,
and wounds, and dangers of death; though he be but a mortal man, who cannot
give him strength wherewith to fight; nor can raise him from death if he should
by in the combat; nor can give him, who conquers any other reward then some
te^porall thing of small value; how much more is it reasonable, that we follow
and imitate Christ our Lord, and Savior, by suffering with Patience? Since he
gives strength to them, who follow him wherewith to suffer, and co^forts
wherewith to do it cheerfully; and delivers them who imitate him from eternal
death, and and bestows the most excellent reward upon them of eternal life.
For, as the Apostle says, it is a word most faithful, true, and worthy of all
estimation, that, if we die with Christ our Lord, that is to say, if we die to
our sins, and ill desires, abhorring and mortifying them, as Christ our Lord
died to his corporal life; we shall lead a most glorious and blessed life
together with him; And if we suffer the sad and painful things of this world,
and even death it self with Patience, for the love of Christ our Lord, and in
imitation of him, we shall reign with him for ever in his celestial Kingdom.

THE VI. CHAPTER. Of the Patience wherewith we ought to suffer the loss of
temporal goods, and of the example which Christ our Lord gave us herein.
THough any one of the pains and torments, which were suffered by Christ our
Lord, may serve for a sufficient motive, to animate us to endure all the
afflictions and tribulations of this life with Patience; yet that kind of pain
endured by him, which carries most rese^bla^ce to the Cross, which most
usually is to be suffered by us, does use to comfort and induce us best to
suffer it: and for this reason we will treat of some particular Crosses, for
which we may find particular examples of Patience, in the Passion of Christ
our Lord. One of the ills of punishment, which happens ordinarily to men, is
the loss of their estate, and temporal goods, which befalles them sometimes
because they are robbed; sometimes they loose them by means of fire, and
shipwrackes; sometimes by unjust suites in law; sometimes they are coosened of
them; and sometimes they are put to prejudice by the intemperate seasons of the
year. By what way or means soever we grow to loose our temporal goods, we
must eudure it with Patience, accepting it at the hand of God, and conforming
our selves to his holy will.

The particular example which must comfort us in this affliction, and give us
heart to bear it with Patience, is to see that Christ our Lord was unjustly
stripped of all his clothes in his most sacred Passion, by those most base
soldiers, who crucified him. He lived poor in this world; and because he loved
and extremely delighted in poverty, he possessed no temporal goods at all.
Those things which he received by way of alms to sustain his Apostles, and to
divide amongst the poor, he had already bestowed. There remained no more to
him, but his clothes, and of those they stripped him, and left him naked: and
that nakedness was acco^panyed with great cold, and great shame, which he
suffered, by remaining in that sort till he dyed. From others who are
executed, me^ take not their clothes till they be dead; but from our most
blessed Lord, they took his, whilst yet he was alive; and he was pleased to
e^dure this being dispoiled of his clothes, and this pain and shame in
remaining naked, that he might suffer for us, and withal might give us an
example of Patience.

Let us therefore animate our selves by this example of Christ our Lord, to
suffer any want, or loss of temporal goods: and let us say thus in our own
hearts. Since Christ the King of glory, and the universal Lord of the whole
world, would needs, for love of me, and for my salvation, endure poverty and
the want of temporal goods; and was content that they should strip him of all
his clothes, and expose him naked to the air, and put him to the shame of
appearing so to the whole people; most just it is, that I, for love of him, and
for the salvation of mine own soul, should endure this want of means, and
this loss, or wrong, whereby I am deprived of the temporal goods which once I
had. And let us consider for the better exercise of our Patience, that
whatsoever prejudice or temporal loss we have, does come to us from the hand
of God, and for the good of our souls.

This did Christ our Lord discover to us, by another example, and testimony of
the holy Gospel. Matt. 8. Luc. 5. Mar. 8. He went into the country of the
Gerasens, where he found two men tormented with devils. He cast the devils
out, and so cured the men by the power of his word. The devils besought him,
that since he had cast the^ out of those men, he would give them leave to enter
into a great heard of swine, which was feeding in those fields hard by, and
which belonged to the inahbitants of that City. Our Lord gave them leave to
do it, and instantly they possessed those swine, which might arrive to the
number of two thousand, and they carried them with extreme fury into the sea,
where they were drowned. Hereby we are taught, that the devils could do no
hurt to the swine, unless our Lord had given them leave: as neither the devil,
nor any other creature, can do us any hurt at all, unless God give the^ power
to that purpose, and unless he work by means of the devil, or that other
creature, which does us hurt, whatsoever it be. For though God be not the cause
of any fault or sin; yet is he the cause of the punishment, which is brought
on by reason of the sin or fault, and is received by means thereof. So says
Saint Athanasius. Since the devils have not so much as power over swine, which
are but the goods of men, it is clear that they have no power over men, who are
made according to the image of God; and so we have no cause to fear the
devils, but only God. And the same did he declare concerning the hurt which
might grow to us from any other creature, that it also proceeds from the hand
of God, saying, Matt. 10. Two sparrowes are of so little value, that they are
sold for a toy, and yet God has so particular care and providence over every
one of them, that not one can fall dead to the ground, or be taken in a snare,
without his disposition and will. And the^ how much more will he take care of
men; and not consent that any creature should so much as touch them, either in
soul or body, or so much as in their goods, without his leave? In this manner
did Christ our Lord declare, that all ills of punishment, proceed to us from
the hand of God.

He also showed, how he ordaines them all, to the good of souls; that is, to
the end that sinners may be converted, and just persons saved; because he
desires not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted and live; and
particularly he procures this, when he takes their goods from them, as Saint
Augustine notes, saying thus. When God visits his servants with the want of
things necessary for this life, and makes them suffer hunger, or thirst, as he
proceeded with the Apostles, he fails not thereby of the promise which he made
them, that nothing should be wanting to them. For these temporal goods, are
helps and kinds of Physic to the soul; and God is the Physician, who best
knows, when to minister them, and when to remove them; and so when they are
wanting to us, as they are many times, we must know that God Almighty is the
cause thereof, for the exercise of our virtue, and for the good of our souls.
And speaking in particular, of that which Christ our Lord did with the
Gerasins, in depriving them of their goods, when he gave the devils leave to
drown their swine, Saint Jerome says; Christ our Lord gave the^ not that
liberty, by way of granting their desire, or to perform their will; but to the
end that the loss of their goods might be profitable to the owners for their
souls, and be an occasion of their salvation. And the spiritual profit, which
came to them hereupon, as Saint Chrysostom observes, was that they might know
the power, which devils had to do men hurt, if God did not hinder them, and
so they might be thankful to him for defending them by his divine providence;
as also to the end that they might fear, and fly from sin, by means
whereof, men grew subject to the power of devils, to be vexed by them in this
life with temporal pains, and in the next with eternal torments.

These are the motives and reasons, which a faithful Christian must consider,
to the end that he may bear the loss of temporal goods with Patience;
namely, the example of Christ our Lord; and that it comes from the hand of God;
and for the good of his soul. And thus the loss of temporal goods, will be of
greater profit to him, then the increase thereof would have been. For, that
little temporal loss, will be the occasion of a great spiritual gain: The
Saints of God, have confessed and experimented this truth. Whilst the blessed
Laurentius Iustinianus (he who afterward was Patriarch of Venice) was one day
out of his Monastery, the house fell on fire; and that part thereof was burnt,
where he kept the provisions of food, which he had laid up for the whole year.
When the Saint came home from abroad, the Religious men told him what had
past, and they were afflicted by occasion of so great a loss. But the Saint,
considering how it came ordained by the providence of God, who so deerly loves
us, and who in all things procures the good of souls, and especially of such
as serve him, received this loss with much contentment; though not for the
loss it self, but because the will, and ordination of Almighty God, was
accomplished thereby. And so with a cheerful contenance he said to his
Religious; What hurt is there, my children, in this which has happened to us?
It is no ill, but good; it is no loss but gain; since by means thereof, we
shall better execute our good desires, in practicing poverty, and Patience.

It is a great benefit to the servant of God, and of much merit and value, when
he may distribute his goods to the poor, and employ them upon the works of
mercy: but if he chance to loose his goods, if they be stolen from him, if
gotten away by injustice, or lost by any other accident, and if he accept of
that loss with much Patience and with much contentment, for the love of God,
and to conform himself with his divine will, who so ordained; he ordinarily
does advantage his soul more, and it does merit more, and please God more by
this course, then by the other. For this Act of the virtue of Patience and
resignation is more pure and free from self love, and thereby a man does more
deny and mortify his own will, and does more exercise Faith and hope in God,
as also the love of his, and the estimation of his holy will. And so we see,
that our Lord has taken away these goods by some sinister accident from many
Saints, which they would have given away in alms; to affoard them means of
greater merit thereby; and for the exercise of that rare Patience, wherewith
they accepted and loved their adversity, and had gust therein, as proceeding
from the will of God. Saint John the Patriarch of Alexandria, a man of rare
mercy toward miserable men, and even a very miracle of mercy, sent from
Alexandria, to the Adriaticke sea thirteen ships full laden with merchandise,
and things of value, which he had raised out of the Revenues of his Church,
that so they might be sold in diverse parts remote, and the whole price be given
by him to poor people in the way of alms, as his custom was. Now it pleased
Almighty God, that upon the rising of a great tempest at Sea, all the goods were
cast away, and the ships returned empty to Alexandria. And God did thus
ordain, because he more esteemed the great Humility, and Patience, which the
Saint would exercise in this wrack, the^ the Mercy which he would have
exercised, if the goods had not been lost. And so without all fail the profit,
which the Saint drew from thence, was admirably great; he receiving it with a
good will, and giving God hearty thanks for the same; and humbling himself
much, by the knowledge of his sins; in regard whereof he confessed, that God
had sent him that loss, to cleanse him more perfectly from those sins.

Saint Chrysostom teaches us this truth, and confirms it by the example of
holy Job, saying thus; Nor only the doing of good, but the suffering of ill,
obtaines a high reward, in the sight of God: and Job seems to have profited
more in virtue, by the afflictions which he endured, then by the good deeds
which he performed. For really, it was not so illustrious, and so high an act
in him, when with the wool of his sheep, he clad the naked, and set his house
open to the destitute, that they might take part of the goods he had; as when,
hearing that the fire had consumed his stock, and that his house was fallen,
and his fortune overthrown, he accepted of that loss, at the hands of God,
and thanked him for it. And a greater victory did he obtain of the enemy, and
he confounded him more, in giving thanks to God upon the loss of his goods,
then in bestowing the^ upon poor people. For certainly it is an act of greater
virtue, to endure the loss of goods with a generous and grateful mind to
God, then to bestow alms upon the poor. Nor is it a thing to be admired, for
a man to give God hearty thanks when he is in good estate, and when things
succeed prosperously with him; but upon the arrival of mischances, and in the
loss of temporal goods to give hearty thanks to God, and to esteem such
contradictions for benefits, is a very admirable thing; and gives a very
excellent testimony of great virtue. This is the discourse of Saint Chrysostom.

Let us therefore serve our selves of these examples, and testimonies of Christ
our Lord and of his Saints, to make us suffer all loss of temporal goods,
with Patience. Let us so much esteem of of the spiritual health of our souls,
that whatsoever may be profitable to us for them, we may value as a great
mercy, and gift of God. And since the loss of te^porall goods, gives us matter
and occasion for the exercise of Charity toward God, by loving it because he
loves it; and for the exercise of Patience, by enduring it and accepting it
willingly because God sends it; and because thereby we discern the love which
God carries toward us, and the care he has of our salvation (since he gives
us helps, and ministers us occasions whereby we may serve him the better and
so profit more;) let us esteem of every temporal loss for a very great
benefit, and mercy of God; and as for such let us thank and praise him saying,
with holy Job. chap. 1. It is God who gave me this temporal blessing, and it
is he who has taken it away; as himself was pleased so has he proceeded with
me. Most just and holy was his will, both in giving it and in taking it, and
his holy will the blessed for ever.

THE VII. CHAPTER. Of the Patience, Wherewith we are to endure corporal
infirmities; and of the example, which Christ our Lord has given us herein.
ANother evil of punishment, and very usual and common in the life of man, is
corporal infirmities and feauers, and several other pains and torments, and
wounds, which he suffers; by reason whereof, he is in great need of Patience:
and we must fetch it also in this kind, from the example of Christ our Lord.
And though our most blessed Lord had no natural infirmities at all; nor was it
fit that he should have any, because these are wont to proceed, from some
defect of complexion, or natural faculty of the body, or from some disorder in
life; yet all the pains, and torments of his most sacred Passion, may serve
for a most efficacious motive, to make us support all kind of those
infirmities with Patience, which may happen to us in this life; and
particularly the pain, and torment of thirst, which he suffered upon the
Cross, and the being so forsaken and abandoned, as then he was. For that which
me^ are much troubled with, in their sickness in their sickness is the pain
and torment which sickness put them to; and the want of that assistance and
service, which is necessary for the cure, or ease at least, of the infirmity;
and all this was found extrea^ly in that thirst, which Christ our Lord endured
upon the Cross.

The thirst, which Christ our Lord suffered, was most vehement; First by reason
of the incomparable labors and vexations, which he had suffered all that day
and the night before; and secondly, because by the hurts and wounds, which they
had given him, he had shed either all, or in a manner all the blood out of his
veins; and by the way as he went, and by the vexation and labor to which he
was put he had sweat away all the humor of his sacred body, which then was
grown all consumed, and dry. And to this it must be added, that from the
supper of the night before, and in all that day following, he had not dru^ke,
so much as one drop of water. Now if any one of these things be wont to cause
great thirst, as we see in men who are wounded, and have shed much blood, and
in them who have labored, and sweat much, and in them also who have not drunk
of a long time before: what kind of thirst shall that have been, which was
endured by Christ our Lord? Infallibly it was most extreme; and the torment,
which it caused, was grievous, beyond any thing which we are able to express.
And now declaring the pain and torment, which he felt thereby, he said thus, I
thirst; and the remedy and comfort, which he obtained for the ease thereof,
was, that one of the soldiers took a sponge, and wetting it in wine, which was
spoiled and grown vinegar, and mingled with gall, he tied it to a long cane,
and so applied it to his sacred mouth; and our Lord took thereof, not to
drink it down (because it was not fit that he should drink of so deadly a
thing) but he took it to have a taste thereof; he took as much as might serve
to afflict, and torment his taste; so to suffer the more for us. So does the
devout Lanspergius declare, saying; Our Lord, understanding well, how bitter
that drink was, which they gave him, did yet take thereof, through his great
love to us; not so swallow it down, but only to afflict his tongue and taste
with bitterness: that so he might take torment in that part of him, from which
sin grew in us. For Eve committed her sin by tasting of the forbidden
fruit, and by means of her sin, did Adam sin; and so have we all done
after him.

Such a kind of refreshinge was allowed to Christ our Lord against his pain,
and torment of thirst, which was to increase the same pain, and torment. So
says Saint Cyrill; In stead of some wholesome drink, which might refresh him,
they gave him a bitter and hurtful drink; and that curtesy, which they would
seem to use in giving him somewhat to take, was converted into cruelty, by
giving him so vile a thing. And this did Saint Luke chap. 23. signify, saying;
that the soldiers, putting a scorn upon our Lord, did offer him vinegar. The
Psalm recounts the injury and affliction, which hereby they put upon Christ
our Lord, amongst the rest of his torments saying. Psalm. 68. They gave me gall
in steed of meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. That is to
say: they were so far from having compassion of me in my miseries; and so
great was the cruelty which they used toward me, that when I came with my
Cross upon my back to the place of torment, in steed of some aromaticall wine
(such as they used to give dying men for their comfort) they gave me wine
corrupted, and mingled with gall, and mirrhe; which being so very thick was
become as a most bitter, and most hurtful meat. And being afterward nailed
upon the very Cross, having my blood exhausted, and I being totmented with
thirst, and declaring the thirst I had, they gave me vinagre mingled with gal
to drink.

This was the torment of thirst, which Christ our Lord suffered upon this
Cross, and thus was he content to be abandoned; and by means of this, and the
rest, which he endured there, all faithful Christians are to comfort
themselves in their corporal infirmities, and must be animated to endure them,
with Patience; to imitate our Lord thereby, and conform themselves to his holy
will. So says Saint Gregory; To the end that sick persons may conserve the
virtue of Patience in their sicknesses, they must continually consider the
pains which our God and our Redeemer did suffer at the hands of his own
creatures, and how many affronts, how many buffets, how many spittings, how
many scourges, and how many thorns he endured for our salvation; and
particularly how, to bestow the sweetness of heaven upon us, he took, when he
was most thirsty, the bitterness of gall for himself. This is the saying of
Saint Gregory.

Besides this, Christ our Lord declared by many examples, and testimonies of
the holy Gospel, how great blessings are contained in corporal infirmities;
and how great fruits are gathered from thence by such as endure them with
Patience. By this means of sickness, he drew many to his Faith, and to his
grace, and to the obedience of his Gospel; and he cured them so, of many
sins. For when they found themselves sick, they went in search after health
of the body; and then believing, and doing penance for their sins, they
obtained also health for their souls. So does the holy Evangelists inform us
often. For speaking of those women, who with great devotion and faith followed
Christ our Lord, Saint Luke says. chap. 8. Our Lord going to preach amongst
those Cities, and towns, diverse women followed him, whom he had delivered
from impure spirits, and cured of their infirmities.

Some of these, were Marie Magdalen, and Ioanna the wife of Chusa, a lawyer of
Herod's, and Susanna, and many others. And they following our Lord, did supply
him out of their means, with necessaries for the sustentation of his life. By
these words, the holy Evangelist gives us to understand, that their having been
sick, and cured by our Lord, was the way to make them believe in him, and to
follow him; both in body and soul. And of the woman, who was sick of a bloody
flux, Matthew. 9. Marc. 5. and had found no remedy by her Physicians. S. Matthew
declares the same; and that her infirmity had made her look for remedy in
Christ our Lord; and to be believe and confide in him, with so lively faith,
that she obtained health both in body, and soul. And the same thing happened
to the paralitike, Mat. 9. Mar. 2. for whom the roof of the house was taken
of, that he might be brought before our Lord: for his infirmity was the cause
why he made himself be carried, and presented to him; and that he would
believe in him, with sorrow for his sins, and so obtain pardon thereof. The
same also happened to innumerable other sick persons, whose sicknesses were
the cause, why they sought out Christ our Lord, and gave ear to his word, and
believed in him, and amended their lives, and obtained true cure of their
souls.

A great blessing of God, is this kind of corporal infirmity, since it is the
root, and occasion of so high a good, as it is for man to know his sins, and
to be sorry for them, and to obtain a clean and healthful soul, and eternal
happiness afterward. Saint Gregory aduises sick persons, to consider this well;
that so they may understand the great benefit of sickness, and thus he says.
Let sick persons consider how profitable the sickness of the body is for the
health of the soul, and how great a gift of God it is. For it makes a man
enter into himself, and know his weakness, and his sins, and the miseries
to which he is subject. It makes him fear God, and reform his life, that so
by means of penance, he may be made clean from his former sins, and may be
bridled and fortified toward the not committing others afterward. Saint
Gregory Nazianzen relates how being one day present with Eudoxius, a holy man,
who was sick; and interpreting, at the request of the sick man, the seauenty
second Psalm, wherein the holy Ghost declares, how God is wont to visit his
servants in this life, with the scourges of sicknesses, and other afflictions;
that holy man (whom some conceive to have been Saint Basil) lift up his eyes
to heaven, and exclamed saying, I give thee thanks o celestial Father, and
Creator of mankind, for that thou do us good against our wills; that is,
thou sendest us infirmities, and other miseries, which we would not have;
whereby yet thou do good to our souls; and by exercising this exterior
man, which is the body, thou clensest the interior man, which is the mind;
and thou carriest us on toward eternal happiness, by adversities, and
contradictions to our gust. And Saint Gregory adds further, that the Saint
spoke those words, as rejoicing and delighting in his sickness.

This divine effect of sickness, is thus declared in holy scripture by the
mouth of the wise man. Prou. 20. The sign of the hurt, and the secret wounds
of the belly, do cure men's evils. His meaning is, that both the exterior
hurts of the body, which are not very grievous; and those also which are deep
and dangerous, and do pierce even into the most inward part of the bowels,
do cleanse the soul from sin. An admirable mercy of God i^ this, and a most
singular testimony of his love, and of the most ardent desire which he has of
our salvation. For man being forgetful of himself, and careless of his
salvation, and in stead of virtue loving vice, and not walking on toward
heaven, but toward hell; Almighty God is pleased to visit him with sickness,
and tribulation against his will; whereby he makes him enter into himself, and
to abhor the sin which he loved before; and to forsake the way of hell,
wherein he was going; and to pursue the way of heaven, which he had left; and to
fly from many sins, into which formerly he had fallen. This is that mercy of
God, which Saint Isidorus ponders saying. Almighty God, seeing that many men
will not reform themselves upon the motion, and at the instance of their own
will, sends them adversities; that being troubled, and afflicted, they may be
amended, and so grow to love those things which formerly they loved not. And
finding that some are so inclined, and prompt to sin, he scourges them with
infirmities of the body, to the end that they may give it over; and he leaves
them sick, because it is better for them to be broken by sickness, and pain,
and so to obtain the eternal salvation of their souls; then to live full of
health, and full of sin; and so to walk on toward hell. This is the saying
of Saint Isidorus.

And because sickness does not produce so excellent, and divine effects in all
Christians, to take away their former sins, and to hinder such as are future;
but only in some, who when they are sick, do enter seriously into their own
hearts, and have contrition for their sins, and change their lives; it is
therefore necessary for all men, upon observing that they are sick, to open
the eyes of their soul, and to examine their consciences well, and to consider
seriously of all those things, which may give impediment to their salvation;
and confessing their sins with sorrow, give a faithful account of all to
their ghostly Father; and instantly put all things in order, with great
diligence, which concern the amendment and reformation of their lives; least
otherwise that sickness which God did send a man with love and mercy, and to
the end he might be cleansed from sin, and so be saved; do not grow to serve
but as a preface and beginning of those endless torments, which are to be
suffeby him, in the next life; as it will be to all them, who will not profit
by the sicknesses which God sends. So says the same Saint. The scourge of
adversity and tribulation, does then cleanse the soul from sin, when the man
changes his manner of life; for unless he change his life, his sins remain
where they were. So that, upon the whole matter, every scourge and adversity,
which God sends a man in this life, is either to be as a spiritual Purgatory
for his sins committed, and of the penalty to which he is subject for the
same; or else it will serve for a beginning of that other pain, which he is to
suffer afterward. For certainly, the pains and torments which are eternally to
be suffered by some, in the life to come, are begun to be suffered some of them,
even in this life.

The truth which this holy Doctor has drawn out of holy scripture, carries
great force with it: and the Holy Ghost therein does teach us, and confirm by
the example of many sinners, that God did scourge them with great infirmities;
and because they profited not thereby, they passed on from temporal pain and
death, to eternal. And this ought to move us much, to receive any sickness,
as a most precious gift of God, and to give him great thanks for it, and to
profit by it; making a change of our life to the better; to the end that, being
clear both of guilt and pain, we may make a short and certain entry into
eternal life. And so, that may be fulfilled in us, which Ecclesiasticus chap.
3 says. A great infirmity of the body makes a ma^s mind sober; that is, it
cleers it from sin, and does moderate and justify it in all things.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of other great benefits, which are drawn from corporal
infirmities, when they are borne with Patience.
BEsides this so excellent effect of clensing and freeing the soul from sin,
infirmity of the body uses to produce diverse others, which are very high, and
of incomparable benefit. Which dispose the soul, to the end that it may
receive gifts from God, and that it may better and perfect it self more in
virtue, and increase in merit; and that it may praise and glorify almighty God
more, and that a man may so, become a particular instrument of the glory of
God, which shines in him, either by his freeing him from that sickness with
particular providence, and love; or by giving him admirable virtue and
strength, whereby to endure it with so great Patience, that it may be seen how
it is God, who helps him to endure so much, and with so good a will, in
contemplation of eternal life.

Those blind men to whom Christ our Lord gave their sight at his entry and
issue out of the City of lericho. Luc. 18 Mat. 20. had neither seen his
miracles, nor heard his doctrine; but had only met with the fame of the
wonderful things which he did; and of the mercy which he used toward all;
and thereby they grew to believe in him, with so great faith, and devotion,
that, before all those troops, which followed him, they did with great cries,
confess him to be the true Messiah, and the Savior of the world, saying,
Jesus thou son of David have mercy on us. And after, when they received their
sight, they followed our Lord, praising and glorifying God. Many of the
children of Israel, and of the wise and prudent men of the people, had heard
the doctrine of Christ our Lord, and seen his miracles, with their own eyes,
and yet they had not embraced his faith, nor had they been moved by his works,
to glorify Almighty God; whilst yet these blind men, by the only fame of the
works of Christ our Lord, which had come to their ears, received his faith,
and glorified and confessed our Lord. And the cause thereof was, in regard that
the blindenes and poverty of these men, made them more capable, and better
disposed to consent to those divine inspirations, wherewith Christ our Lord
touched their hearts, and called them, to receive the light of faith which
Christ our Lord offered the^; as also to the end that the fire of divine love,
might more easily inflame their souls with true devotion, and move them to
glorify the divine Majesty.

The Gospel expresses not, that Christ our Lord did pardon their sins; or
that he bad them sin no more, as he had done to other sick persons; but that
he gave them light, both in body and soul, to the end that they might see and
believe in him; and devotion, wherewith to confess praise and follow him. Upon
which we may infer, that they were already good men, and in the favor of
God: and so this is proved to be that effect of sickness, which we are now
declaringe; Namely that it disposes such as are good, to receive new gifts
from God, and to better them, and perfect them, by their growing in virtue, and
by making the^ increase in merits, both of grace and glory.

The blessed Euagrius Bishop of Antioch, and disciple of Saint Macharius,
relates that; going one day in company of other servants of God to visit that
most holy man John a Moncke of Egypt, and a great Prophet, and much reverenced
by the Emperor Theodosius, as being one of the greatest Saints of that time;
one of those co^sorts of his fell sick of a violent burning fever; and
besought the Saint to cure him. But the Saint made him answer in these words.
Thou desire to drive that from thee which it imports thee for the good of thy
soul to keep. For know, that as bodies are washed, and cleansed with
saltpeter, and other things of that nature, and do so become more
beautiful, and more pleasing to the eye; so are souls more cleansed by
corporal sickness, and made more beautiful, and acceptable to the eyes of
God. Thus said this Saint. And this is the effect, which is produced by
sickness, in good men; Namely that the soul grows thereby in purity, and
grace, and in all those virtues, whereby they are to please and serve God. And
let us now cast our eyes upon some other examples, which may declare to us, how
sickness makes men become instruments of the glory of God, that so his power
and goodness may shine more in them.

When Christ our Lord was curing the man who was borne blind, his disciples
asked him, 10.9. what sin it was, which had caused blindness in that man,
whether it were of him, or of his parents. Christ our Lord made them, this
answer; That it was neither for his, nor his parents sin; but to the end
that the works of God might be manifested in him. His meaning was, that
neither the actual sin of him, nor of his parents, was the cause of his
being borne blind: nor was that blindness imposed on him in punishment of any
sin, which either his parents or himself had committed; but he was borne
blind by the good will of God, to the end that by giving him sight, the world
might grow to see those works, which were proper to the divinity; namely the
working of Miracles, by his proper virtue, which might testify and declare,
that he who wrought them, was true God. By these words, did Christ our Lord
discover his unspeakable goodness, and liberality, and most sweet providence,
which sometimes permittes small inconveniences to arrive to the body; thereby
to bestow great benedictions upon the soul; and to honor his servants, after
an extraordinary manner; making the^ admirable instruments of his glory: as he
proceeded with this blind man, who^ he made blind, to the end that,
delivering him by this miracle, it might grow public, that himself was the
true God and Savior of the world; and that as such, he might be believed, and
obeyed, and glorified, both by that blind man, who received the benefit, and
by all those others also, who would profit by the notice thereof. And so by
imparting a great blessing to the soul of that blind man, by the light of
faith, and grace which he gave, he declared the glory of his divinity. Let us
produce another example of the same nature. When Lazarus was fallen sick, his
sisters sent a messenger to our Lord; 10.11. who said, look here O Lord, for
he whom thou love is sick. Now, in that Lazarus was sick, being so good a
man, and so much beloved by Christ our Lord, we are taught that sickness is a
great gift, which God not only bestows upon sinners for their conversion, but
also upon just and holy men, for the bettering of their souls, and for their
increase in grace, and merit; and therefore when God sends sickness, it should
be received with a right good will. Saint Augustine says, he who loves God,
loves that which God loves; and therefore it is, that he loves corporal
sickness, which is the work and gift of God. O how full it is of all reason,
that a man who is the servant of God, should receive that sickness which God
sends him, with a great good will, and a cheerful heart! If a man being sick,
God should give him health, he would receive it very readily, and with much joy
and thanksgiving; and yet certainly ought he to receive that sickness,
wherewith God visits him: with greater affection, and thanksgiving: as being a
most profitable gift of God. This is delivered by Saint Augustine. And although
it be true, that for the point of not sinning through impatience, it suffices
to endure, and bear the infirmity, without desiring to be quit of it, by
unlawful means, (as we declared before;) yet to gain and merit much more
thereby, and to obtain greater gifts, and graces from God, a man, as Saint
Augustine faith, must receive it with much contentment, and with a very
affectuous manner of thanksgiving. And it is fit that we proceed after this
manner, in regard that sickness is of much greater profit to many servants of
God, then health would be; and it is a great gift of God toward all; and gives
them means of much spiritual good; and for this reason does God give it to
whom he loves, as he did to Lazarus, whom he loved much.

Our Lord having received this message from the two fisters, said to them who
brought it; This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God; and to
the end that the son of God may be glorified by occasion thereof. His meaning
was, that that infirmity was not to end in death; because, though the man were
to die, yet he was not to continue dead; but shortly to return to this present
life; and so it was not ordained for his death, but for the glory of God. And
the particular glory of God, to which it was ordained, was, that the son of
God, might be glorified by occasion of that sickness, and death which followed
thereupon; he giving life to the dead man, and perfect health to him who at
that time was sick: and so he was known by means of that work with faith
and obedience, to be the true God and Savior of the world.

By these examples did Christ our Lord discover to us, how the sickness of his
servants, might turn to his glory; which happens sometimes by his freeing them
from their infirmities, and from the dangers and pains thereof, of, by such
particular and extraordinary means of his divine providence, as greatly serve
to manifest the love and care, which he has of them; and inuit all such as
know thereof to praise, and love, and confide in his goodness more and more. At
other times (and this is most usual) this is performed by Christ our Lord in
the sickness of his servants, by his giving them great and efficacious
favors, and succors; whereby they are made able to carry their infirmities
with rare Patience, and with admirable contentment. And so, whilst they are
sick, they perform high acts, and of great service to God; by means whereof,
thee awake, and provoke all men to praise and glorify Christ our Lord, for
working such wonders in his servants. This so precious fruit of sickness, is
excellently described, by that divine Diadocus, in these words. As, for the
making of a good impression, by any seal upon wax, it is necessary first, to
soften that wax, with the fingars, or with fire; so, to the end that the seal
of divine virtue, may be imprinted upon the soul, and that it may increase,
and grow perfect in virtue, and in the gifts of God, it is necessary that it
be exercised, and refined by infirmities, and many other tribulations, and
troubles; whereby is may be disposed, and softened, for receiving the
impression of this divine seal. And just, as in the primitive Church, God
wrought this glorious effect, in his servants, out of the persetion of Tyrants,
and through the torments, wherewith they afflicted, and martyred Christians; so
now does God produce the same effect, in the souls of his servants, by means
of temptations, and interior assaults of the devil; as also of exterior and
corporal sickness, and pain. I say, that in place of persecutions, which are
ceased, God sends them the affliction of temptations in their soul, and of
sickness in their body; to the end that the image of divine beauty may be made
perfect in their hearts. It does therefore much import, that we receive with
great contentment the temptations and sicknesses, which God sends us; and that
we give him thanks for them: for by this means they will grow to be a kind
of martyrdom to us. This we are taught by Saint Diadocus. Let us therefore be
much animated, to receive any infirmities or tribulatio^s, which God may send
us, with a good will and let us be content to suffer them as long as it shall
please God; not limiting him, either in the degree, or quality of the Cross;
nor yet in the time, that it is to last. For it is God who knows, what is
convenient for us to endure; and therefore we must remit our selves to his
will, and resign our selves wholly, into his hands. For if (as Saint Ephrem
says) me^, who have beasts, upon which they cause their burdens to be laid and
carried from one place to another, do well know, what weight or burden every
one of the^ is able to bear, and that very burden do they impose, and no
greater: and if the potter, who makes vessels of clay, and puts them into the
furnace of fire, does well know how long they are to be kept there, to the end
that, when they are taken forth, they may be well conditioned, and tempered,
and profitable to the use of man; and not remain therein more time, then is
convenient, least so they grow to be burnt up, or broken; nor yet less time
then is necessary, least so, they be taken forth too soft, and be subject to
loose the form they have: how much more does God, who is of infinite wisdom
and goodness, and mainteines a most exact providence over all his creatures, and
especially over mankind, know that just burden of sickness, or other affliction
which every one is able to undergo, and bear, by means of that help which
himself is pleased to affoard; as also the time, during which it is fir, that
he bear it? Nor will he impose more weight, then a man can carry, nor let it
continue longer time, then it is fit for him to bear it; to the end that he
may grow a faithful and true servant of his, and may be capable of that
glory, which from all eternity, he had provided for him.

A most certain truth it is, that God, of whom the holy Scripture says, that
he made all things, in weight number, and measure, and gouernes them all with
so great suauity, and who well knows the quality and degree of that infirmity,
or other affliction which every one is able to bear, either by that natural
or supernatural strength, which he has received of him, as also how long he
is able to bear it; will not impose a sickness, or other Cross, nor permit
that it continue any longer time then he can suffer it with Patience; or then
is fit for the good of his soul. So says Saint Augustine. Be not troubled
about thy bodily health; but desire thou of God, that he will give thee that
which is most convenient for thee: and so if he know, that thy health will be
good for thee, he will be sure to give it thee; and if he give it not, be thou
well assured, that it would not have been good for thee. We see many, who
being sick, conserve themselves clean from sin; who if they had been in
health, would have committed many: and many men being in health, deliver
themselves up to great wickedness; who if they had been sick, would have
avoided the same. God does well know what is fit for every one. In this let us
place our chief care, that our souls may be, and continue whole. This is
delivered to us, by Saint Augustine.

Let us therefore herein, be very faithful and true to God, and very obedient
to his divine will: and let us so desire health, or any other conueniency of
this life, and so let us beg it of God, as that we may yet be ready still, to
receive any sickness, or other contradiction, at his holy hand, whensoever he
shall be pleased to send it; since our suffering these things with Patience,
serves so greatly to the glory of God, and to the good of our souls. And not
only, when the inconvenience which happe^s to us, is very great, let us esteem
it for a great mercy, and blessing of God, and full of profit to our souls;
but also we must think highly of it, and value it as a great benefit, and of
much profit and merit, even when the sickness is not great. For, as the divine
Rusbrochius says; whatsoever evil of punishment, (how light soever it may be)
we suffer to the honor and glory of Almighty God, will be of greater benefit
to us, then if he had given us the Empire and dominion of the whole world. For
whatsoever evil we suffer with Patience, for the glory of God (how light
soever it may be) God does give us for the same, no less thing, then himself:
For giving us his grace, he gives us himself with it; and so possessing the
gift, we come to possess therewithal, that Lord himself of infinite goodness,
who gives it. Our Lord will not permit, that we should suffer adversities for
his love, without much profit and great reward: and so, by means of that which
we suffer, he communicates all that chief fruit of his most sacred Passion,
which are those spiritual and celestial blessings, through which we possess
God here by grace, and afterward by eternal glory. And therefore does God give
us afflictions, and pains in this life; not because our affliction or pain is
pleasing to him; but for that incomparable benefit, which he knows that we ar
to obtain by means hereof; and which he ordained, from all eternity to bestow
upon us, in reward of that Patience, wherewith we bear it. This is said by
Rusbrochius.

And now by this consideration must we faithful Christians, be greatly moved,
and encouraged to suffer corporal sickness and all other evils of
punishment, with great contentment. For, if the devil (as Saint John
Chrysostom says) when he propoundes to the heart of man, some temporary, and
even momentary delight, (the fruit and punishment whereof, are most grievous
and eternal torments) does induce and overcome him so far, as to win him
to expose himself to so great a misery, for so fle^der a delight; how much
more is it reason, that we, who are the faithful servants of Jesus Christ,
when he proposes to our hearts, those immense and eternal joys of heaven, be
moved and persuaded to receive a sickness, or some other light and short trouble
and to endure it with Patience, which bringes forth such fruit, and reward
after it, as is eternal life, and an everlasting kingdom of glory: and (above
all) which produces the fruit of pleasing, and glorifying Almighty God, which
is incomparably the greatest reward and fruit, which can be conceived.

THE IX. CHAPTER. Wherein it is confirmed, by the example of Saints, how great
the fruit of sickness, and other tribulation is; and how this is an effect of
Gods mercy, which he she was toward his friends.
BEcause it is of so great importance to have an understanding, and feeling of
this truth; namely that it is a work of unspeakable love in God to send us
sicknesses and other afflictions, which he expresses toward his greatest
friends, and he proves and perfects them thereby; and makes the^ worthy of
most beautiful and most precious crowns of glory, we will confirm it by the
example of some very emiment Saints. Timothy, that holy Bishop, and the
disciple of Saint Paul, was sick of a pain in his stomach, 1. Tim. 5. which
is a grievous and irksome disease, and had also many other infirmities. And
Saint Paul, loving him much, and very tenderly, and well knowing the great
need he had of health, that so he might with gust, undergo all those
difficulties, which the office of a Bishop exacted at his hands; did not yet
take away this sickness, nor desire of Almighty God that it be taken away. He
cured other sick persons, Act. 9. and that with so great facility, that it
cost him no more the^ to put of his girdle, or to take out some handkercher,
which had wiped of his sweat, and then to give it, that it might be laid upon
those sick persons, and insta^tly the men were cured. And he obtained so very
easily that which he used to ask of God, as that begging once the lives of two
hundred seaue^ty and six persons, who were going with him to Rome, and were in
danger of perishing by the way, God did grant the suite, and freed them from
death at his request: and yet to this disciple of his, who^ he loved so much,
he neither gave health by miracle, nor did he beg the cure of God; but
permitted him to continue sick as he was. And for some ease in those
infirmities which he had, he gave noe other the^ that ordinary remedy, which
any vulgar friend, would have prescribed, saying: do not still drink water
alone, but take a little wine, for that pain of stomach, which you endure;
and for the many other infirmities which you suffer. But why then did not Saint
Paul free his disciple Timothy from these sicknesses? Because he knew, that
they were great testimonies of the love which God bore him; and that they were
profitable to his soul, by occasioning him to grow in Patience and humility
and favor in the sight of God.

Saint Gregory Nazianzen had many and grievous sicknesses; and in his age they
were both greater, and grew in effect to be continual. Amongst the rest, he
had the gout, which tormented him much; and so, as that he could not stir,
but carried. And thus, howsoever he were of strong constitution, his many acts
of penance, and continual infirmities, consumed him at last; and he came to
die, at the age of 65. years as Caesar Baronius collects by the writings of the
Saint. Notwithstanding that he was still so sick, he yet labored much; and by
those labors he greatly benefited the Church; and by his infirmities, he
greatly benefited himself, for he carried them with Patience, and had much
comfort therein.

Saint Basil was tormented with most grievous sicknesses; and sometimes they
brought him to the very doors of death. Yea they were so continual, that the
pain he suffered, when he was best in health, might pass for grievous
sickness in another. Himself in his Epistles, speaks thereof; and in one of
them he says; I have had many sicknesses, and one of then has succeeded
another; and now I am also sick, and there is scarce an hour of my life,
wherein I expect not my death. And in another letter of his, he says; If when
I am best, (according to the appearance, I have of health) they account me
amongst them who are given over; from thence it may be understood, what kind
of thing I am, when I am fallen into an express disease. And it was matter of
great admiration, that under the weight of so many, and so great sicknesses, he
could labor so hard, by writing, disputing, preaching, governing, and going,
as it were, in pilgrimage, to preach the Gospel in diverse parts of the world;
and that being so wasted with such pains of body and distempers of blood, he
should not slack one whit in the care, and solicitude which he carried, in
effect, to all the Churches of the East; which were mightly persecuted by
heretics. And by means of these infirmities, that most holy Doctor, did
mightily augment the merits of his most pure life.

Saint Gregory the Pope, was exercised by Almighty God, with extraordinary
infirmities, and most sharp pains, which continued a long time with him. He
had certain seasons of the gout, so long and tedious, and which gave him so
excessive pain that in one pang thereof it continued with him, no less the^
two years. He says thus, in one of his Epistles, I have such torment by the
gout, that my life is grievous to me. I daily faint under my pain, and I
expect the remedy of death. He had also in his body, an interior ardour of
heat, which did, as it were even broyle, and dry up his very bowels. And in
all these infirmities, and torments, his heart was in such conformity to the
will of God, and he so greatly did desire to suffer them, that he sought not for
comfort and ease of his miseries in this life, but only desired it for the
next. And he esteemed the^ for singular blessings, and gift of God and was
thankful for them as being such; as he declared in an Epistle which he wrote
to Saint Leander, Archbishop of Seuill, (who had written a letter to him,
wherein amongst other things he told him, that he had been much tormented by
the gout) and Saint Gregory answered him, after this manner. You tell me that
you are tormented by the gout; and my self am also vehemently tormented by
the continual pain of the same disease; but it will be easy for us to find
comfort in these miseries, if we call our sins to mind, and consider that
we are purged from the^, by these infirmities; and that so they are not mere
scourges of God, but blessings also, whereby his divine Majesty does us so much
good. With such Patience as this, did Saint Gregory bear his sicknesses; and
so they were of great help to him, for the obtaining of that most eminent
sanctity, and most profound humility, and of that most plentiful light, which
shined in his most holy soul. Of the insufferable infirmities, of Saint John
Chrysostom, and of the invincible Patience, and constancy wherewith he suffered
them, and loved them; and of the great merits, which he acquired by them, it
would be a long business to write, and therefore we will remit our selves to
his history; and to his letters, where he speaks of them.

Almighty God gave also to the holy Saint Bernard, many grievous, and dangerous
sicknesses for the increase of his virtue, and for the greater purifying of his
life. And yet, to give more increase to the pain of his sickness, and of his
sanctity thereby, God ordained, so that such remedies as were given him for the
ease of his pain, should prove to be of greater torment to him. For a
certain holy Bishop, a friend of his, (through the fear he had, least the
Saint would not there be cured well, by reason of the rigor, which he was wont
to use against himself, took him out from the Monastery, wherein then he was,
and delivered him to an Infirmarian; who through ignorance chanced to treat
him so ill, and gave him things so hurtful to eat, and so painful to take;
that even men, who had been healthy and hungry, would have had difficulty
therein. And if the Saint asked for one thing, the Infirmarian gave him an
other, very contrary to that whereof he had need. Now the Saint endured these
sicknesses, and this ill treatinge with so great Patience, that he never
complained, nor uttered so much as any one word of disgust; but obeyed that
rude fellow, in all things, as any very obedient subject would do his
superior.

Saint Hugh, the Bishop of Lincoln, had extreme pains in his side, which to
any other man, would have been of great impediment, in the exercise of the
Episcopal function; but he suffered them with so great Patience, and strength
of mind, that he labored with that afflicted body of his, as if he had been
perfectly in health; and indeed it was a kind of miraculous thing, how he
could have strength and courage to do so much.

Saint Dominicke had many infirmities, and extreme pains in his stomach, and
yet through the great desire which he had to suffer, and well decerning, that
those were particular gifts of God, he had much joy therein. And though
whilst he was sick, they did diverse things of much contradiction and trouble
to him; he never complained, nor showed that he was offended thereby, but gave
God thanks for all.

Saint Francis, besides the sickness he had, wherein he was converted to God,
had after eight and twenty years, for the space of twenty other years of his
life, many grievous sicknesses; and he suffered extreme pain in them. He had a
sorenes of eyes, which put him to extreme trouble; and once, through the pain
thereof, he was feign to be shut up fifty days, without being once able to
behold any light at all, either by day or night; and the torment was so great,
that he could take no rest at all. He had extreme aches in his head, in his
side, and in his spleen, and he had also great burning feauers. His sicknesses
and torments were such, that he had not a part of his body, which was not
tormented with excessive pains; and his flesh was so wasted, that his skin
did even cleave to his bones. And besides all the rest of his infirmities, he
had a kind of dropsy in his feet, which gave him much affliction. So that his
very diseases were so painful, that they may be accounted to have brought him
a tedious martyrdom full of torment. Now this Saint, endured these infirmities
with so admirable Patience, that he never complained of them; nor, so much as
showed to be troubled at them; but he loved them, and rejoiced in them; and
through the great love which he bare to them, he called then his sisters; and
he was wont to say, I give thee thanks, o Lord for these pains; and I beseech
thee, that if it be pleasing to thee, thou give me a hundred times as much;
and this shall be of great gust to me. For the gust of my heart, consists in
this, that thy will may be accomplished in me. Saint Thomas of Aquine had
great sicknesses. He suffered grievous pains in his stomach; and he had a
Fistula in one of his legs; and he endured these infirmities with so great love
of God, and desire to suffer, that he mortified himself, by forbearing to take
such things as might have given him gust, and ease. Being one day wholly
without appetite, and thinking upon a certain fish, whereof he might well have
eaten; they brought it: but he, to mortify his sense, did then refuse it; and
God accepted this act of abnegation at his hands, and remedyed his necessity by
other means.

The blessed Laurentius Iustinianus, had grievous and dangerous diseases. Once
they thrust a hot iron through his neck, another time they opened a part of
his throat, with a razour. These pains were extreme, and the Saint endured
the^ with so great Patience, that neither did he complain, nor sigh, nor made
any show that he was in torment; but remained immovable, as if it had not been
he, whom they burnt and wounded, but some other man. That which happened to
those Saints whom we have mentioned her, has happened also to innumerable
others; namely to be exercised by almighty God with most grievous sicknesses,
to endure them with admirable Patience, and to gather inestimable fruit from
thence.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of the fruit of the increase of Faith, and Patience, which
we must gather from the Patience, which the Saints have showed in suffering
their infirmities and pains.
FIrst we may draw from hence a very great and clear testimony, of the in
fallible truth of the most holy Religion of Christ our Lord, which was
professed by all those Saints. For to suffer so grievous sicknesses, and so
bitter pains, so many years, with so invincible Patience, for the obtaining
of spiritual and invisible benedictions, does incomparably exceed all the
natural power, and strength of man. And so we see by experience, that men,
who are void of the Faith of Christ our Lord, ca^ not bear such sicknesses and
pains with true Patience; but they faint and fail of courage therein; and
they fall into great sorrows, and other disorders against reason: and some go
so far as to despair.

Silicius Italicus a most worthy man amongst the Gentiles, and of great
wisdom and authority who had been Proconsul in Asia, and Consul in Rome, had
a grievous sickness, and was subject therein to much pain; and not being able
to endure it, and being seauenty and five years old, he killed himself. And
as Cato Vticensis, (who went for so wise a man) not being able to endure the
affront of being held to be overcome by Caesar, killed himself, to be free
from that affront: So did Silius Italicus, kill himself to be freed from the
pain of his sickness, which he was not able to endure. The Gentiles, who
through their own fault, were not assisted by supernatural favors from God
for the suffering of such pains with Patience, were subject to this great
weakness, and impuissance in suffering them. And even amongst Christians, they
who are not in the grace of Christ, suffer sicknesses and pains with great
difficulty: and when they chance to be very great, men do by occasion thereof,
commit many sins, and fall into much disorder against the virtue of Patience.
Whereas we see, that Saints and the servants of Christ our Lord, endure most
grievous sicknesses, and intolerable and most tedious pains, with so great
Patience, that they love them, and rejoice in them, and thank God for them.
And all the power of the sickness, and the fiercenes of the pain, can not make
them commit any little error against virtue; as we have proved by so many
examples. It is therefore a most clear, and certain truth, that these men are
greatly assisted, and strengthened by Almighty God, as true faithful souls,
and servants of his; and that they are exalted by supernatural favors, both
to do and suffer those things, which all the power and strength of humane
nature, can by no means do, or suffer. For certainly Patience, when a man is
in some great adversity, is a gift of God, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 61.
Patience comes to me from our Lord. And S. Augustine thus declares the reason,
and root of this truth. Amongst wicked people so much more courageous is any of
them toward the enduring the inconveniences of this life, as there aboundes in
him more covetousness and concupiscence and love of the world, in regard whereof
he endures the^: and amongst just persons, so much the more courageous is any
such man to suffer pains and torments, as he has the greater charity and love
of God in him, for whose sake he suffers them. The love of the world has his
root in free will, being assisted and carried on by the gust and delight,
which men take in things of the world; and the charity, and love of God is
infused by God himself: and so the Patience of just me^, is a gift given by
God, which was communicated to them by charity, whereby they exercise true
Patience.

The second fruit, which we must gather from hence, is a great courage and
heart for the enduring of any sickness, or afflictions, which it may please God
to send us; as also a firm confidence, that we shall be able to endure them
by Gods grace, with true Patience, and to the great benefit of our souls. We
know well indeed, that we are not able to endure them by the only strength of
man's nature, but by the favor and help of God: and that God is ready to
impart those helps and favors in great abundance, and with much liberality;
and that, in fine, he will bestow them upon us, as he has done to all his
Saints and true servants. For so the eternal God (who is truth it self) has
promised, and so has Christ our Lord merited for us. And as the truth of God
cannot fail, nor the merits of Christ our Lord be diminished; so it is
certain, that succor cannot be wanting to us, on the part of God, if we be
disposed to profit by it. Because (as S. Paul says) 1. Cor. 10. God is
faithful, and true in the accomplishment of his promises: and will not permit
us to be tempted with any affliction, or temptation which may be too heavy for
us to bear, and master being assisted with that grace, and favor from
heaven, which he is ready to give us for that purpose. But rather he will take
care, that in the time of the temptation or tribulation, things shall succeed in
such sort, either by increasing our strength, or by diminishing our Cross, as
that we may be able to endure it; yea and to overcome it at good ease, and
reap much fruit, and merit by it. This is delivered by Saint Paul. And
since, after the example of Christ our Lord, and of his Saints, we are
resolved to make the right use of these helps from God, and to serve our
selves of these favors, and to do on our part, what we can; we may be
confident and assured (if we still rely upon that succor from heaven) that we
shall endure sicknesses and all other Crosses with Patience. And that those
things, which it is impossible, or at least very hard for our natural weakness
to endure, will be made easy and sweet to us by these helps from heaven;
namely by the gifts of grace, and those divine consolations, which God will
impart to us; to the end that we may suffer them not only with Patience, but
even with joy also, as the Saints did.

Not only must this hope encourage us to suffer, but it must greatly comfort
us therein. Saint Saint Basil declared it by these words. In the time of our
tribulation we must not seek for help at the hands of our own strength, or
power, or riches, or authority, or humane glory; but at the hands of God, who
gives it to all such, as seek it. And with this confidence in God be glad if
thou be sick; for who^ God loves, he corrects and betters by sickness: and if
thou be poor, be glad; for God has prepared eternal blessings for thee: and
if thou suffer any affro^t for Christ our Lord, esteem thy self happy therein;
for that affront will be changed into that glory, which the Angels enjoy. Let
us therefore resolve our selves, not to make our first recourse in our
tribulations to humane help; and let us not rely thereon, but have recourse to
God with prayers, sighs, and tears. Let us place our confidence in him, and
expect that from him: for he it is, who can save us. This is the saying of
Saint Basil. And by this very reason of hope, does Saint Peter comfort us
saying. 1. Pet. 4. Do you greatly rejoice, since you communicate with Christ
our Lord in his afflictions and pains, by suffering in imitation of him, to
the end that when after this life the glory of Christ our Lord shall be
manifested in heaven, you may also be made partakers thereof, and may exult in
that supreme and everlasting joy, becoming like him in glory, as you have been
in pain.

THE XI. CHAPTER. Of the Patience wherewith discomforts and spiritual
desolations, are to be endured; and of the example which Christ our Lord gave
hereof.
THese ordinary evils of pain, of the remedy, whereof we have already spoken
(such as are loss of goods, and sicknesses) are common both to the good and
bad; but there is another evil of pain, which usually does only happen to
such as are good; and for the enduring whereof, they stand in great necessity
to learn Patience from the example of Christ our Lord. This evil, are those
discomforts, and drynesses, and spiritual afflictions, which God is wont
sometimes, to impose upon the souls of such, as do most cordially serve him;
to the end, that by the exercise of Patience, and humility, they may grow up in
virtue, and serve him better. When a servant of God, who loves him much, does
treat and converse with him by means of Prayer and Meditation and
contemplation, and gusteth much in that familiar communication and commerce
with God, he finds by experience the unspeakable dear sweetness of his love;
he enioyes a most lively feeling of his presence, his goodness; and his mercy;
and he possesses a most evident and joyful hope, and very entire promptitude
of devotion. Now it happens sometimes, that this man, remaining in this
spiritual paradise, and passing there a great part of his pilgrimage in this
life, God does so ordain concerning him, not only sometimes but very often,
and long together, that enabling him still to maintain and hold the
substantial part of his love, which consists in loving that which he loves
above all things, and in taking contentment therein, and in yielding obedience
to his commaundments, and in carrying a hatred against all sins; and in using
diligence to avoid them, and in being watchful and attentive in the performing
of all good works; enabling a man (I say) to do all this, God yet depriues
him of the experimental knowledge and gust, which he had of him, and of his
goodness, and of the sweet feeling of his presence, and of the facility and ease
which he was wo^t to find in treating and communicating with him, and the
readiness of his devotion, and the joy which he was wont to take in his hope.
And though that soul remain still in grace, and friendship with God; and with
a firm determination ever to serve him, and never to offend him; yet is it dry
withal, and sad and discomfortable, and full of fears, and assaulted by
dismaies, and doubts. And though it be true, that this soul has lost nothing
in point of virtue, or of the merit which it had, or of the love wherewith it
loved God and was beloved by him; yet in finding it self so altered, it fears
least it should be hated and abandoned by Almighty God. This is the greatest
tribulation and affliction, to which good men are subject in this life; and
that which they apprehend most: and Christ our Lord discovered both the
inconvenience, and the remedy in the holy Gospel.

The Apostles were full of comfort in the society of Christ our Lord, Matt. 14.
Maro. 6. enjoying the suauity, and regalo of the sight of his presence, of the
hearing his doctrine, and of the favor and privilege of his Miracles. And our
Lord having once wrought that Miracle of the five loaves of bread, whereby he
had so particularly given them comfort, and done them honor, he separated them
from himself; comanding them to imbarke them selves without him, and that so
they should transport them selves, to the other side of that sea. The Apostles
found this to be a very untoward, and unpleasing business; and notwithstanding
that they obeyed, yet they did it with great repugna^ce, the thing being much
against their mind. This was noted by the Evangelist saying. He compelled and
constrained his disciples that they should enter upon the ship, without him;
which is as much as to say, he made them enter perforce, and much against their
will. And the reasons of this repugnance in the^ was first, because they would
feign not have wanted that sweet presence of Christ our Lord, which they did so
deatly love. For so says Saint Chrysostom. Our Lord constrained his
disciples, in regard it was a thing so very hard for them to depart from him.
Which grew, without doubt, from that great ardour of affection which they
carried toward him. Another reason thereof might be the fear they had, least
wanting his presence and favor, some trouble or danger might happen to them at
sea. And thus also says Saint Hierome. The disciples had reason to depart
unwillingly, and with much repugnance from our Lord, for fear least in his
absence they might sustain some hurt, or incur some hazard by sea.

The disciples being departed from our Lord, and being embarked and already
under sail, there rose a stiff and contrary wind, which made them a high
Sea, and brought a great storm upon them. The disciples rowed hard, but could
not advance their back a whit; and so passed the rest of that day, and all the
night following in great labor and hazard; till at length, toward the morning,
our Lord did visit and comfort them, and make the tempest cease. By this
difficulty the disciples knew their own weakness, and the great need which they
had of our Lord; and so they desired his presence much the more. And when he
had visited them, and freed them from that danger, they grew more in faith, and
hope, and love of him; and so casting themselves all prostrate at his feet,
they cried thus out, with a more feruorous faith, and with more entire
devotion; Thou art certainly the son of God.

By the departure which Christ our Lord caused his disciples to make from him
against their will, he taught us, how sometimes he would part his faithful and
great friends, who serve him, and love him, and have much gust in his presence,
from that dear company of his. Not, for as much as concerns the friendship,
which he bears them, nor for as much as concerns the state of grace wherein
they live; but only concerning the sweet comunication which they had with him,
and the joy and comfort which they felt by his presence. And this he does very
much against their will: but howsoever, he does it yet for their good; to the
end that they may grow to understand their weakness better, and what poor
things they would be without God; and may become more humble, and distrustful
of themselves, and exercise themselves more in Patience, and have a greater
desire and make a greater estimation of the gifts of God; and that when
afterward, he shall visit them, and restore them to the gift of his delightful
and dear presence, they may grow up in faith, and hope and love of him. Thus
says Saint Chrysostom. Our Lord suffered his disciples to labor all night,
by rowing, and to let their ship be tossed from one side to the other; that so
they might desire his presence so much the more; and that the fear, and danger
of shipwreck being passed over, they might confide the more in him, and carry
him the more deeply impressed in their memory, and their heart.

An other time Christ our Lord took his Apostles with him, and he put himself
with them, upon the Sea; and laid himself down to sleep, in the pup of the
ship; and whilst he was sleeping, there rose so fierce a tempest, that it put
them in danger of perishing. And they, co^ceiuing that because our Lord was
sleeping, he saw not the peril wherein they were, came toward him, and awaked
him saying; Save us Lord, for we perish. Our Lord then rose up; and having
reproved them for their little faith, he made the tempest cease.

By this did our Lord discover to us the same mystery, although in other
terms. In that, when Christ our Lord was on shipboard with his disciples, a
tempest rose; we are taught, that whilst he is present by grace with his
servants, who are just, and holy men; the tribulation, and temptation, and the
seeming to be abandoned by Almighty God rises up against the^. And though our
Lord do well discern the affliction wherein they are, and has great care of
them, and will be sure, not to let them perish; yet to their thinking, he has
little better then forgotten them; and it seems to them, as if they were
forsaken, and abandoned by him, and that they are in great danger of perishing.
Now our Lord proceeds thus with the^, for their greater good, to the end that
they may the better know themselves; and understand by experience of how
little strength they are in time of tribulation; and that, being freed from it
by our Lord, upon whom they call, they might the better judge of the assistance
and favor which he affoardes them; and that they may confide more in him, and
more admire his goodness and power and divine providence, and become more
perfectly subject to his heavenly will. So says Saint Cyrill. Our Lord
permitted, that a tempest should rise, for the exercising of the Apostles in
virtue; and that knowing and confessing the danger, wherein they were, they
might frame the higher conceit of the power of the power of the same Lord; and
might resort to him, and place all their confidence in him. And although they
were in so great fear of perishing, yet in very deed they were safe; nor was
it possible that they should be lost, having that omnipotent Lord so present
with the^ as they had. This is delivered by Saint Cyrill.

But that example of Christ our Lord, which is most proper to comfort his
servants in this kind of tribulation, and to animate us to suffer it with
Patience, is that abandoning by the eternal Father, which Christ our Lord
endured upon the Cross; which he declared when he said thus, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? The eternal Father had not forsaken him, for as
much as concerned the grace and glory of his soul; nor for as much as
concerned the union of the humane and divine natures in him; but he abandoned
him (according to what we have already declared) for as much as concerned the
sensible ease and comfort, which might flow from the superior part of his
soul, to the inferior part of the same soul, and to the sensitive part of
the body, which he suspended, and detained, to the end that it might not
redound upon it, nor be communicated to it; that so the pain of his Passion,
might be the more pure, more grievous, and more hard to be endured.

By this abandoning, and disco^fort of Christ our Lord, all the servants of God
are to be hartened, and comforted in this kind of affliction of drynes and
desolation; considering, and discoursing with great weight of reason after this
manner. Since the eternal Father, did abandon his Son in his Passion, whom
he infinitely loved; depriving him of all sensible ease and comfort: and since
the Son himself, would also have it so, to the end that he might suffer so
much the more for the love of man; most just it is, and most reasonable, that
the men of God who are members of the same Christ, be also deprived at some
time of sensible co^forts; and that they may be afflicted, and forsaken, to the
end that they may resemble Christ himself; and that the parts of the body may
be like the head. Yea it is most reasonable that they should suffer this
discomfort and desolation even gladly and with gust, for the love of the same
Lord. Let them also consider, that as Christ our Lord (though he were abandoned
by his Father) departed not as he was man, from the union which he had with him
by love; nor from the vnio^, which he had with the divinity; nor did he loose
one jot of the infinite grace, and immense glory, which he had in his most
holy soul: so also his servants (though they want those spiritual feelings,
and sensible comforts, and though they be molested and afflicted) are not
therefore departed from the amity and union with God; nor have they lost any
part at all of his grace and love; but they continue still his friends, and
still are pleasing in his sight; but by this exercise of humility, and
Patience, they grow up in all virtue, and merit, both of grace and glory.

Most excellently does Iustus Lanspergius thus describe these afflicted
servants of God, of whom he had known many by experience. We find many
friends of God in this world, who want all that sensible comfort in all the
spiritual exercises of devotion, which they were wont to enjoy; so far, as
that sometimes they can hardly once raise their spirit up to God; and by a
secret dispensation of Gods providence, they seem to be (as it were) oppressed,
with a great obscurity of heart. And, notwithstanding all this, for as much as
concerns the substance of virtue, they have it, with a great fear to offend
God; and they fly from al kind of sin, whether it be great or small, with
much care; and they watch very attentively, and keep straight ward upon their
hearts, for mainteining the purity of their conscience; complying exactly in
all those things, which they understand to concern the will of God; and they
are truly mortified, and humble. Such persons as these, although they have not
those feelings of love, and sensible devotion, have yet a true and lively
faith, whereby they live, and direct their course; and they are certainly great
friends of God, though themselves do not understand it so. This is said by
Lanspergius.

Let therefore the servants of God, be comforted in this kind of tribulation,
and be encouraged to bear it, with Patience; resolving to take it at the hand
of God; and resigning themselves to his divine will; to the end that he may
do, and dispose of them, as shall be most pleasing to himself. And let them
remain firmly persuaded in their very hearts, that so long as they conserve a
hatred against sin, and a firm resolution to comply with the commaundments
of God, (and that chiefly for the love of him, and through an effectual desire
and will to please God in those things which he has ordained) although they
be much afflicted withal, and love without any comfort or sensible feeling of
devotion, yet in truth they are the friends of God; they are in the state of
grace; they walk on toward salvation, and eternal life; they are pleasing to
God by their good works; and he will never aba^don or forsake them. For thus
has he promised, to such as with love persevere in his service, saying to every
one of the^ as he said Iosue 1. and Heb. 13. I will not forsake thee, nor take
my hand off, from thy defense.

THE XII. CHAPTER. Of the necessity, and fruit of Patience; and how it is a
sign of the elect and predestined of God.
BY many ways did Christ our Lord declare the great fruits and merits of
Patience, in his holy Gospel; First by having ordained, that tribulations and
adversities should be the way to heaven; which cannot be well borne, and
without disadua^tage to the soul, but by the virtue of Patience. This
ordination of his did he discover to us, in that himself being come into this
world to save it, and to restore man to the grace, and glory of the eternal
Father, which man had lost by sin, he was pleased, that his most holy life
should be assaulted and exercised (from the first instant of his birth, to the
last when he expired upon the cross) by many persecutions, and adversities of
many kinds. And this is that, which was signified by Simeo^, Luc. 2. when
taking the infant Jesus into his arms, he said to the Virgin; This infant
shall be set up for a sign, which shall be contradicted. Christ our Lord was
the sign of man's reconciliation to God, and of the pardon of sin, and of
eternal life: for Christ our Lord wrought all this. And as a cause is a sign
of the effect, so Christ our Lord, was the sign of all the good, which came to
man; and of that mercy and love, which God showed him: but yet withal, he was
a sign contradicted, by the devil, and by the world. A sign he was, against
which all the lovers of the world, and all malign spirits did, by their means,
dart forth the arrows of persecutions, of injuries, of torments, and
contradictions, both in word and deed.

This is that way, which Christ our Lord chose for himself in this world: and
since all the elect, and predestined of God, are to be like Christ our Lord
(as Saint Paul. To. 8. declares saying, They whom God elected and approved
from al eternity, he ordained that they should be like his son, who is the
perfect image of the eternal Father) it follows, that they all must walk in
the way of tribulations and adversities, as Christ our Lord did; to the end
that being partakers of his Passion, they may also partake the honor of the
sons of God, and the glory of being kings in heaven. This is explicated by
Saint Gregory, in these words. He asks what is the reason, why God afflicts
and abases them in this life, imposing contempt, and pain upon them, whom he
has elected from all eternity, to become so very high and glorious in the
Kingdom of heaven. And he answers his own question thus; Because God sees
that he is to recompense, and reward men with such immense and eternal
benedictions in heaven, for this very cause does he afflict them, concerning
these inferior things of the earth; depriving them of things of small value,
and inflicting pains upon them, which last not long. Since therefore it is so
certainly true, that a man can not bear the adversities of this life to the
profit of his soul, and with the fruit of virtue, and the merit of eternal
glory, but by fortifying his heart through the the virtue of Patience; it
follows, that Patience is that thing, which carries men on with security, and
certeinty, through the right way to heaven, which is that of tribulations; and
that consequently, the same Patience is the mark of such as are elected, and
predestined by Almighty God. For all men both good, and bad, have adversities
and tribulations in this l^, though some more, then others; and therefore the
only having them, is no sign of predestination; but the suffering the^ with
Patience, that indeed is the sign, which distinguishes them, who are elected
and predestined, from such others as are not so.

This did holy Judith lib. Iud. c. ^. confess saying, that all they who have
been pleasing to God, have passed faithfully through many tribulations. He
says not that they only had tribulations, but that they perseuered, faithful
therein to God, and obedient to his divine will; which signifies, that they
exercised true Patience, in their tribulations. This very ordination did our
Lord discover also, in that being able to cast all those damned spirits into
the bottomless abisse of hell, and to keep them shut up there till the end of
the world, without giving then power to go once out from thence; yet he does
not so, but allows them liberty to go forth, and to remain in the air
amongst men; though yet withal, (for as much as concerns themselves) they
carry the very pain of hell about them. Of this we have a testimony in the
Gospel. For Christ our Lord being in the company of the Gerasens, Luc. 8. and
having cast a legion of devils out of a certain man; they besought him, not to
cast them into hell, which he granted, and so he gave them liberty to possess
a heard of swine, which they drowned. And that liberty, which our Lord gave to
those devils, to remain here amongst me^, he allows to innumerable others;
and he does it, to the e^d that they may assault me^ with several temptations;
that so they may exercise Patience, and humility, by suffering their attempts;
and by ouercoming the persecution of the devils. So says Saint Chrysostom.
The devils desired of Christ our Lord, that he would not cast them down into
that bottom, that is, out of the world into that darkness and Abisse of Hell,
as the devils had deserved; and our Lord forbore to cast the^ down, and
suffered them to remain in this world, to the end that virtuous men might not
loose those crowns of glory, which they were to gain, by resisting those
devils, and by fighting with them, and ouercoming their temptations.

Since therefore for the suffering of the persecutions, and vexations of
devils, and resisting their temptations, and continuing in combat against
them, the virtue of Patience is so necessary; it follows that it is the fruit
and effect of Patience, to conserve the soul in such sort, as that it may
receive no hurt from temptations, and assaults of the devil; and to increase
their merits in heaven, by the victory over those temptations; and thereby to
manifest by an experimental way, who are truly just, and elect of God. So does
the holy scripture declare to us in many places. It says in Ecclesiasticus, c.
27. As the furnace of fire, tries the pots of the potter, so does temptation
and tribulation try just men. The meaning is, that as the hot burning furnace
does examine and declare which vessels are good and fitly tempered, and which
indeed are they, which being cast into the fire, are not cracht or broken
thereby, but remain hard and whole, and fit for the use of man; and as it does
also show, which other of them are ill made, for they crack, and break, in
the hot furnace; so does temptation and tribulation, whether it be offered by
devils or by men, declare and show who are just, and holy. And these are they,
who through the evils and temptations which they endure, are not broken or
overcome by impatie^ce, or other sins; but through the virtue of Patience,
persevere firm and constant, in the practice of virtue, and the keeping of the
law of God.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. How pleasing the virtue of Patience is to God, and of the
great favors which he affoardes them, who suffer with Patience.
ANother way, whereby Christ our Lord declared the fruit, and merit of
Patience, is, the particular favors and extraordinary benefits, which he
vouchsafed to to men, who suffered adversity, with Patience. Christ our Lord
came to the Piscina of Jerusalem, and amongst so many sick persons as he
found there, he imparted only to one of them, who had remained there sick
eight and thirty years, so great a favor, and so illustrious a benefit, as it
was, both to cure his body, and to justify his soul. And the cause, why our
Lord bestowed this blessing, rather upon him, then any of the rest, was because
he endured his sickness, with more Patience then others. As is plain, in that
he, having been sick so many years, made no complaint, but answered so meekly
to what was asked. Saint Chrysostom observes this, and says; Christ our Lord,
Io. 5. did not ask the sick man if he had any desire to be cured, as if he
had doubted of his will; but only for the manifesting of his Patience, who
having been eight and thirty years, and daily hoping for health, which he
could not find, did yet nevertheless continue without going away, and
despaired not being there; and to teach us also, that the reason why he cured
rather him then others, was his great Patience. Let us declare another example
to the same purpose.

Christ our Lord Io. 9. cured a man, who was borne blind; and for the
constancy, where with he confessed the same Lord, and defended his truth, the
Pharisees did persecute, and affront him, both by word and deed; and they cast
him, as an excommunicate person, out of the Sinagogue. The good man obeyed this
unjust comandment, and endured that wrong with Patience; and Christ our Lord,
who knew it al, seeing the affliction wherein his faithful servant was, and
the Patience wherewith he bore it, sought him out of set purpose, and spoke to
him after this manner, with great affability and love. Do thou believe in
the son of God? which was as much as to say; Will thou believe, that he who
cured thee, is the true son of God? And even as he was speaking these words,
he did withal infuse a most excellent clear light into the most inward part of
his soul, to make him know and believe, that he who had cured him, was not
only a Prophet, and a Saint (as already he had confessed him to be) but also
the true, and natural son of God; for the question did import so much. And
so he believed, and asked; Who is he O Lord? And that Lord answered him thus.
It is even he who is speaking with thee. Then instantly he fell prostrate, and
adored him.

This so admirable favor, to seek him, and comfort him, and honor him, and
communicate so great light of faith and grace to him, did God vouchsaffe to
this man, for his having been so faithful in confessing him, and so patient in
suffering that wrong, which they had done him in regard of Christ our Lord. So
says Saint Chrysostom they who with Patience suffer the injuries which are
imposed on them, for mainteining the truth of Christ our Lord, these men are
greatly favored, and honored by him; as we see by the example of the blind
man, whom the Jews cast out of the Temple: for the Lord of the very temple
sought him out, and he received him with great love; and, as a soldier who had
fought valiantly, he crowned him with a crown of inestimable worth and beauty;
such as was the eminent grace, and pawn of heaven, which he bestowed upon him.
So great account as this does Christ our Lord make of a faithful, and patient
man; and so much does he esteem him, that omitting many others, he seeks him
out with care, he comforts him by his words, he joys his heart by his
presence, he honors him by his favors, and he aduances him by his gifts. This
does Saint Thomas observe in these words. The Evangelist, by relating, that
Christ our Lord sought out the blind man, whom he had cured, gives us to
understand, that he was diligent in harkening him out, because he found more
faith and virtue in him, then in others; whereby we may infer, that he more
esteems one just person, the^ ten thousand sinners. This we are told by S.
Thomas. And though it be no exaggeration at all, to say that God does more love
one just man, the^ the whole world of sinners put together (since absolutely
speaking he only loves such as are just, with the love of grace;) yet
considering how greatly God esteems the salvation even of sinners, and the care
he has to convert them, to say that God more loves to save and favor one just
man then many thousand of sinners, is no slight expressio^, but does greatly
discover the particular providence and care, which God carries toward just
persons; and it gives matter also of much confidence to them who serve him,
that through his goodness they are to be greatly favored, and assisted by him
toward their salvation

Christ our Lord did also discover the value, and fruit of Patience in this,
that when he would vouchsaffe any great unusual benefits to any, he first
disposed and prepared them, by the exercise of Patience. He was pleased Matt.
15. to feed four thousand men with seven loaves of bread; and before he would
impart this benefit to them, he made them stay three days, in the patient
sufferance of hunger, and the pains of being in a desert; and continuing to
hear his divine word. He was pleased to feed five thousand me^ with five
loaves of bread; and before he would allow them this Regalo, he made them stay
till toward might; when his disciples said, Lord the hour of eating is come,
and gone; let these troops divide themselves amongst these neighboring
villages, that so they may have means to eat. When already they had exercised
their Patience, by suffering hunger, he vouchsaffed to show them so great a
mercy as it was, to refresh them with a plentiful and sweet food; whereby
their bodies were sustained; and he also made faith and confidence increase in
their souls. So says Saint Chrysostom. Those troops of people declared
their faith by suffering hunger, and expecting till the evening.

In this sort does God impart illustrious favors, to such as co^serue, and
exercise Patience, in their adversities and troubles: and to whom he is pleased
to vouchsaffe particular favors and mercies, he sends crosses and
tribulations, that so exercising Patience therein, they may grow more capable,
and be more worthy of the especial gifts and graces, which he will impart. So
says Saint Isidorus. Then are the eyes of our Lord behoulding just persons
with greater piety and mercy, when they are afflicted, and persecuted by the
wicked; and then does he provide greater blessings for them and more eminent
rewards of glory, when once they are tried by some tribulation which they
suffer with Patience.

Let not therefore any man conceive, that when he is afflicted, he is forgotten
by Almighty God; nor that he has lost the virtue, and grace he had, when he is
abased, and persecuted by men. Let him not permit the devil to deceive him,
who would feign persuade him to this error: but let him be very confident,
that God has then a more particular care of him; and loves him more, and
comunicates more gifts, and more singular favors to him; and that then he
grows up more in virtue, and augments his merits both of grace and glory. Thus
says Saint Chrysostom. Let us not conceive it to be a sign, as if God did
forsake, or forget, or esteem us little, because he sends us adversities, or
troubles; but rather let us hold it for a most certain toke^, that he has
particular care of us; and that then he is to show us greater mercies, when he
afflicts and tries us. For if we have committed many and very grievous sins;
we may free our selves from them by Patience, and thanksgiving in tribulation
which grows from a contrite heart. And supposing, that we should not be liable
to those many grievous sins; yet by suffering tribulation with a thankful
mind, we shall obtain most abundant grace at the hand of God. For so good he
is, and so liberal in doing us good, that when he sends us any adversity, he
gives us matter to exercise more virtue; that he may show us more mercy. This
is delivered to us by Saint Chrysostom.

And this so excellent, and admirable effect of Patience, which is exercised in
tribulations, Christ our Lord declared, when he said, Io. 15. I am the true
vine. For as much as concerns the nature of man, which I have taken, I
resemble some very fruitful and perfect vine, which yields most excellent
fruit. My celestial father is the husband man; it is he who planted this vine
of my humanity, and who cultiuates the same; he it is who made me man, and who
placed in me the immense fullnes of grace and glory, which I have; and he who
works all that fruit in me, which either I do, or shall herafter yield.
Every bra^ch; that is every man, who being united to me by faith, shall not yet
yield the fruit of a good life, my father will cut off from me; either whilst
he is to live, by letting him fall into errors, whereby he will loose his
faith; or else when he comes to die, by despoyling him of those supernatural
gifts (through which he was once united to me) and also of power to do
penance, and so to be saved. And every branch; that is to say every true
faithful man, who is united to me through faith quickened by charity, who
shall produce the fruit of good works, my father will purge by celestial
doctrine, and by inspirations, and interior gifts, and by adversities also and
tribulations; that suffering them with Patience, and charity, he may yield both
fair, and most abundant fruit of holy actions, and most pleasing to God, and
full of profit to souls; which shall deserve most precious gifts of grace, and
be crowned with that most sublime reward of eternal glory.

THE XIIII. CHAPTER. Of the means, whereby the virtue of Patience may be
obtained; which is, that we be watchful to consider the fruit thereof, and
the examples whereby we have been taught it by Christ our Lord.
NOt only did Christ our Lord instruct us by his example, concerning the
necessity, which we have of Patience, and the effects and merits thereof; but
he also taught us the means, whereby we are to obtain it; and of this we are
going now to speak. And because we treated thereof abundantly in another
book, we will here content our selves, to declare briefly some examples,
whereby Christ our Lord has instructed us.

The first means toward the receiving and suffering with Patience, all the
evils of punishment, which may happen to us in this life, is that we be
prepared and armed with the particular knowledge and consideration thereof: It
would not fail to be matter of most grievous affliction and pain to the
disciples of Christ our Lord, and (even the greatest which they ever felt in
this world) that their Master must suffer such a death; and therefore our most
blessed Lord did arm them for it long before, announcing his Passion to them
many times. At the first, he told them of it thus, in covert terms; Io. 2
dissolus this Temple, and I will build it again in three days and Io. 3. As
Moses lifted up the serpent in the the desere, so must the son of man be
raised up on high. After this he spoke of it in a more distinct and clear
manner saying once, Matt. 16. I must go to Jerusalem to suffer and die; and
another time, Matt. 20. Luc. 18. Behold we ascend to Jerusalem, and the son
of man is to be delivered over to the Gentiles, and he is to be scorned, and
scourged, and spit upon, and crucified. In this manner did he give them notice
of his Passion, a long time before, that so they might be provided, and
prepared to endure it; and that, when it should be present to them, they might
not be scandalized, nor troubled, nor dismayed thereby; but might endure it
with Patience. So says Saint Hierome. Our Lord spoke often of his Passion to
his disciples; providing them against the temptation, to the end that they
might not be scandalized, when the persecution should arrive, and should see
the ignominy of the Cross.

He also advertised them a long time before, Matt. 23. Luc. 21. of the pain
and persecutions, and torments, and death, which them selves were to suffer in
their own persons, for preaching that Gospel, which they were to carry,
throughout the world. For thus he said. You shall be persecuted, and vexed, and
brought before Judges; who in respect of me, will torment, and sake your lives
from you. Having prepared them with the notice of these miseries, which were to
grow upon them, he made them know, that Patience was the remedy which they
must procure, to the end that by those crosses, they might receive no hurt, but
rather incomparable benefit. And he said thus to them. One hair of your heads
shall not perish; and in Patience you shall possess your souls Which was as if
he had said; Although you may have many enemies, and powerful opposits; yet
shall you be so assisted and defended by Almighty God, who takes most
particular care of you, that you shall not receive the least hurt thereby; and
by the Patience which you shall have in your tribulations, (whereby in
expectation of celestial benedictions, you shall remain firm and constant in
my service, to the very end) you shall conserve and securely possess the
safty, and spiritual life of your souls; till you carry the^ to the glory of
heaven.

This is the first remedy, which must be used, for suffering the miseries of
this life with Patience; namly that every man in his own heart reuolue, and
consider with attention, what miseries and adversities may happen to him in
this life; whether they be sickness, poverty, injuries offered by men,
temptations of devils; or else troubles and difficulties in any bodies
particular office, or state. And let him persuade himself, that if they come
upon him, they shall come ordained by Almighty God, and for the good of his
soul; yea and that it is greatly fit for his salvation, that they come upon
him. For they are means, where by Almighty God does address, and order his
predestination. And let him accept of them from that instant, for that very
time when they may chance to come; and let him dispose him self with courage
to receive them willingly, and with thanksgiving, when they shall be sent. For
a man being thus provided and prepared, will, receive and suffer them with more
Patience, and advantage of his soul. So says Saint Chrysostom. The adversity
which comes upon men suddenly, and unexpected; is wont to be very grievous, and
much felt; but that which is considered before it comes, and for which we are
ready and prepared, is more easily endured, when it arriues.

Another means for suffering tribulation with Patience, is seriously to
consider and ponder the most happy success which they have, and the conclusion
which they make, when they carry themselves well therein; to the glory of God,
and their own greatest good. Christ our Lord gave this remedy to his
disciples, for when he told them things which troubled the^, he instantly also
told them of that comfort and glory, which was to follow upon that pain. When
he told them sometimes, that the son of man was to suffer, Matt. 16. and 20.
and be crucified in Jerusalem, he instantly also added that most glorious end
of his Passion, and death, by saying; And the third day, he shall rise again.
And when he said thus in the garden, Mat. 26. you all shall suffer scandal
this night, upon my occasion, he added immediately after, But when I shall be
risen from the dead, I will go to Galile before you. As if he should have
said, neither will I remain in death, nor shall you perish in that scandal;
for I will rise from the dead, and you being free from all danger shall follow
me. And Matt. 13. Luc 21. having annou^ced the extreme persecutions, and
tribulations, which they were to suffer for preaching the Ghospel, he tells them
withal, of the admirable fruit which was to grow to them thereby, namely the
very preaching it self of the Gospel, over the whole earth; and that it
should be believed, and received by all the nations of the world. It would
seem, that from such impediments of persecution, and death of the preachers
themselves, it might follow that they should not be able to preach the
Gospel, nor persuade any body to embrace it; and yet we see, he says, that
so great fruit would follow, that it should be preached, and received over the
whole world; and that all nations were to be saved by their faith in it, and
their obedience to it.

This is that which we are to consider, and ponder in our tribulation, namely
the admirable fruit, and glorious end, to which we arrive thereby, and in
contemplation hereof, we must animate our selves to suffer, not only with
Patience, but eue^ with joy. So says the blessed Saint Mark the Ermite. When
you shall be vexed, and shall have received some temporal loss, or some
affront, and dishonor, do not look only upon the present ill, but cast also
your eye upon those divine favors of grace, and glory, which hereafter you are
to receive for that ill; and you will certainly find that you shall gather
abundant fruit from tribulation; and that he who persecutes you, will prove the
Author of great benedictions to you both in this life and the next. This also
is advised by Ecclesiasticus c. u. saying. In the days of thy prosperity,
remember thy misery; and in those of thy misery, call thy prosperity to mind;
for an easy thing it is, for God to give every one his payment, and reward,
according to his works, in the hour of his death. His meaning is this, as
Saint Gregory declares; In the time when thou have either temporal or
spiritual prosperity, remember the afflictions which may happen to thee, either
in body or soul: that so thy prosperity may not make thee proud, but that thou
may be conserved in humility. And so also, in the time of thy adversity,
whether it be spiritual or temporal, remember the blessings of grace, and
divine consolations, which thou have enjoyed at other times; and those also
which afterward thou may receive: that so thou be not dismayed, nor overcome
with sorrow, but may suffer all kind of affliction, with Patience, and
courage.

By this consideration, does S. Paul animate us, to endure all the
tribulations, and adversities of this life, with contentment and strength of
mind; saying thus; 1. Cor. 4. All the trouble and tribulation of this life,
how long soever it may be accounted to last, does yet pass away eue^ in a
moment; and is but light how heavy soever it may seem; and (as a meritorious
cause, which is grounded and rises from the grace of Christ our Lord,) it
works in us an inestimable and most sublime weight of glory, beyond all that
which can be expressed, or even conceived; and which is not to be temporal,
but eternal.

THE XV. CHAPTER. Of other means whereby we are to obtain, and conserve the
virtue of Patience, namely to consider our sins, and to resort to Almighty
God, for the remedy thereof.
ANother, means which we must use for the conseruing of Patience in
adversity, is to consider the many sins which we have committed in this
life; and how justly we deserve the adversity, which we suffer for the same,
and indeed all these, which may possibly come upon us in this world; and to
move our selves to compunction for the same, and even to a desire, that we may
be punished for them by Almighty God, with mercy in this life. Christ our Lord
himself, admonished us of this means, in the holy Ghospel. There fell a Tower
near the Poole of Siloe, by the City of Jerusalem, which killed eighteen
persons; Luc. 13. and again after this, some of the Galileans, being in
oblation of the Sacrifice of certain beasts, Pilate sent out a squadro^ of
soldiers who killed them, and so mingled their blood with the blood of the
beasts which they had sacrificed. Now when they related this accident to Christ
our Lord, he said thus to them. Do not conceive, that those Galileans were the
greatest sinners of all the Galileans, in regard that this adversity of suddene
death came thus upon them; for it is not so: but I say to you, that if you do
not penance, you all shall perish. And so also do not think that those
eighteen men upon whom the tower of Siloe fell, were the wickedst men who
d'welt in Jerusalem; for it is not so, but I declare to you, that if you do
not penance you all shall perish.

By these divine speeches, Christ our Lord taught us two things. The one, that
those sad accide^ts, and deaths, which men call disastrous; do many time come,
in the way of punishment for sin; but yet, that God does not always punish
sinners in this life, with such calamities as these; but he does often, either
reserve the^ for their punishment in the other world, or else expect that they
should voluntarily do penance, and so inflict some punishment upon themselves
in this life. And secondly, he lets us know, that when such afflictions and
tribulations happen to others, we must be sure to enter into our own souls,
and to consider the sins which we have committed, and how justly we merit
all kind of punishment for them; and we must conceive in our hearts, a great
repentance and grief, for having committed them; and in penance, and
satisfaction for the same, we must punish and mortify our bodies, with penal
works; and be willing to accept whatsoever troubles or tribulations, it may
please God to send us.

A most certain truth it is, that God sends adversity to his true, and
faithful servants (who yet have sinned in this life) to the end that suffering
them with Patience, they may discharge, and satisfy for those sins, which
they have committed. As that holy Virgin Sara confessed, saying, Job. 3.
Blessed be thou o God of our fathers; for that when thou art offended with us,
and do send us troubles and afflictions, it is then, that thou show great
mercy toward us; For in the time of tribulation, whereby thou punishest, thou
pardonest the sins of them who inuoke thy name with a true heart. Thus does
God proceed with man, by means of tribulation. Some who are in sin, he
induces by this means to do penance, whereby they grow to be free from the
offenses, into which they had fallen; and such as are in the state of grace, he
occasions to exercise Patience, whereby he delivers them from those penalties,
which they had incurred for their former sins. And so great care has God, to
show this mercy to this elect, that he permits other men, either through
ignorance, or malice, to afflict and trouble them; and by occasion, and under
the title of faults which they have not committed, in the sight of God. Just as
the brethren of Joseph, Exodus 1. who finding themselves to be afflicted, and
punished in Egypt, for the supposed offense of being spies, which they had not
committed; came to know that indeed God sent them that punishment, for the
sin which they had committed, in selling their brother. And so they confessed
it saying. This punishment is justly inflicted on us; for we have sinned
against our brother; and this trouble is come upon us for that sin. Saint
Esrem relates of himself that being a boy and going into the fields to play,
he hunted a calfe of another man's so hard; and threw so many stones at it, as
that he killed it at length. And walking about a month after, through that
field again, he fell out to take him rest amongst some shepherds, who were
looking to their flocks; a part of which flock was wanting that night, for
it had been scattered by some ravenous beasts. The Lords of the flock, thought
they had been thieves, who did that hurt, and that Efrem was some Camerade of
theirs. They accuse him, and take him for a thief. And whilst he was in
prison and much afflicted, an Angel appeared to him in his sleep, demanding
the cause of his being there. He answered, that he had been taken, without any
fault of his. Then the Angel said; I know well that thou art free from any
fault in this; but remember that thou made a fault not long ago, in killing
the calfe of that poor man; and so thou will see, that now thou art justly
taken and made prisoner in the part of God; and that his judgments are very
just. He also told him of others, who were there imprisoned, for offenses
which indeed they had not committed; but they had committed other sins, in
regard whereof God sent them that punishment, which they had justly deserved.
The Angel vanished; and Efrem speaking after with those prisoners, found that
to be true which the Angel had told him; and they were executed for offenses
which they had not committed; and satisfied thus for others, which had been
committed by them.

These are the just judgments of God, whereby he gouernes the world, and
addresses his elect to the end of eternal happiness, for which he chose them.
And from hence we must learn, to think holily of God, in all those
tribulations, and adversities, which he may send us in this life: confessing
and acknowledging that he proceeds most justly with us; because for our sins
we deserve those punishments which he sends us, yea and others which are
incomparably greater. And we must know and confess moreover, that herein he
shows us an unspeakable kind of mercy; for as much as by the light, and short
punishments of this life, he not only delivers us from those fierce pains of
Purgatory, but also from the eternal torments of Hell.

Thus did that holy Tobias proceed in the tribulations, which God sent him; for
he received the^ willingly for his sins; and acknowledged that the punishment
was very just, and that he deserved both that, and a far greater. And he
acknowledged that God showed him a sovereign kind of mercy, for as much as he
punished him that so he might deliver him both from the faults, and from the
penalties, also which he had incurred thereby; so to save him in the e^d. This
does he confess by saying thus, Tob. 3. Just art thou, o Lord, and all thy
judgments are very just; for if we have been delivered into the hands of our
enemies, to be made captives and to be destroyed and killed by the^, and to
become the very scorn of all nations, it is because we have sinned against
thee, in not keeping thy comaundments, nor conuersing with a pure heart in thy
presence. And further, confessing the great mercy wherewith God punished them
for their sins, he says, Tob. 13. Our Lord punishes us for our sins, and
the same Lord shall save us for his mercies sake. After this manner, by the
knowledge of our sins, and of the punishment which we deserve for the same,
we are to embrace all those adversities which God may send us in this life,
with much Patience, yea and we must praise, and thank him for them.

Another, and a very efficacious means, whereby we must help our selves to
suffer all tribulation with Patience, is instantly to resort to Almighty God in
any affliction of ours, whether it be great or small; beseeching him, with our
whole hearts, that he will give us strength to bear it well; and to conform
our selves entirely to his most holy will. And although it be lawful to desire
of God, that he will take the tribulation from us, (so that yet we still
resign our selves to his good pleasure, that so he may do that which shall
most import our salvation:) yet this is not necessary; but our better suite is
to be, that he will help us to endure it, and overcome it.

When Saint Peter, with the leave of Christ our Lord, began to walk upon the
water, Matt. 14. and when he found, that a stiff wind was risen, he grew
troubled, and distrustful; and began to sincke; and our Lord to deliver him
out of that great danger of drowing, did not cause the wind to cease (as Saint
John Chrysostom observes) but stretched forth his hand, and laid hold on him
therewith; and made him walk upon the water, till he brought him back to the
ship. Now this must we beg of God in our troubles, namly that he will take us
by the hand, and that he will vouchsaffe us his help and favor; that so our
afflictions may do us no hurt; but that suffering them with Patience, they may
yield great fruit to our souls, and be of much glory to Almighty God. This is
that which David Psalm 117. begged of God in his tribulations; and that which he
desired and begged, he also obtained, as himself affirmed saying. In my
tribulation I called upon my Lord and my God, and cried out to him in the most
internal part of my heart: and he, of his infinite mercy, heard my voice from
that holy temple of his, which is heaven: and he accepted my prayer, and
imparted that favor which I desired.

Besides these means, there is yet another, which is very effectual, toward
the obtaining of Patience, and it is to ponder profoundly well, how all the
contradictions and punishments which happen to us in this life, be ordained by
the providence of God, and are sent us by his holy hand, for our good. And
(besides those other testimonies, whereby we have proved this truth elsewhere)
Christ our Lord declared it in his holy Gospel saying thus. Matt. 10. Fear
not, for all the hairs of your heads are numbered. The meaning is, that God
has so particular care, and providence over you, that he has counted even all
the hairs of your heads, and knows the number of them all; and there is
nothing done, even concerning any of them, which he ordaines not, for the good
of that man, who puts his confidence in him. Now if Almighty God conserve the
memory and care of so light and triuiall things, as are the hairs of our head
(which serve but for the ornament of men, and which although they be cut off,
do not put the parties to any pain,) and this so fa^e, as that even one of
them must not be cut, or lost, without his pleasure; how much more tender care
will he take of the life, and salvation of that man, who puts his trust in him;
and of all those principal things, which belong to him, that he may conserve,
and cherish, and ordain them for the good of his soul; and not permit that he
be put to the least prejudice without his pleasure; and that whatsoever happens
to him, in order to his temporal affairs, may prove to the good and remedy of
his soul; and for the doing all that which is fit for the carrying him on, to
the end of eternal felicity, for which he was created.

This is the nature of Patience, whereof we have spoken; and these are the
most excellent effects, and frui^s thereof. These are the means, whereby it is
to be obtained, and these are the examples, whereby we have been taught it by
Christ our Lord. Let us therefore procure to obtain it, and moreover to
exercise it toward the whole world; complying with that which the Apostle
says thus to Timothy: ep. 1. c. 6. Embrace, and exercise Patience diligently.
And that also, which he says to the Thessal. ep. 1. c. 5. be patient, and
suffer at the hands of all men. By this most precious virtue of Patience, we
shall obtain, and conserve all the gifts of God, and become superiors to all
our enemies. For Patience will fortify us in the confession of our Faith,
against tirants; giving us strength to endure all their torments* Patience
conserues the supernatural love of God, and of our neighbor; for it gives us
courage to resist all those things which are contrary to charity. Patience
conserues and gives perfection to wisdom; taking away those impediments of
anger, and sorrow, which obscure the soul. Patience builds up abstinence, and
temperance; inabling a man to suffer hunger, and thirst, and to bring sensual
appetites into subjection. Patience defends justice, increases humility,
conserues peace, and purity of heart; and gives perseverance in all virtue. And
so it fulfilles that, whereof Saint James chap. 1. says, that it makes the
work perfect; because it gives perfection, and completenes to all the virtues.

O blessed Patience; happy are they who possess thee. For thou art the virtue,
which give perseverance in all good things; and which openest the way to
heaven, where we may see with perfect charity, and delight with supreme love,
in that infinite beauty of God; and possess for ever those gifts of glory,
which he has provided for them who continue in his service, according to that
which our Lord promised saying; He who perseuers to the end, shall be saved.

FINIS.

