C R

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

royal coat of arms By the King.
A Declaration of Orders made by the Governor and Company of Merchants of
London, trading to the East Indies, concerning private trade, to, in, or from
the said Indies, ratified and allowed by the King; And by His Majesty's consent
may be Printed for the better publication thereof.
WHereas upon the humble complaint of the Governor, and Company of Merchants
of London, trading to the East Indies, It has pleased His Majesty by His
Royal Proclamation, straightly to prohibit all private, or underhand Trading,
either to, in, or from the said Indies, otherwise then shall be allowed and
licensed by the said Company, for the important causes and reasons therein at
large expressed, and unto which in all occasions, relation must and may be had.

The said Governor and Company, for the better encouragement of all such
persons as now are, or hereafter shall be employed by them in their Ships and
Voyages, as Commanders, Factors, Captains, Masters, Officers, Mariners, or
Soldiers, and notwithstanding the extraordinary great Wages, which they are
accustomed to pay in their employments, the said Company is also content, and
does hereby declare, and give license unto all, and every person or persons
aforesaid, to adventure and trade for their proper and private Accounts, either
to, in, or from the said Indies, upon Ship or Ships, wherein they or any of
them are, or shall be personally employed in such Wares and Merchandise only,
as here under are expressed, both for the quantity and quality of the same.

And first the Wares or Merchandise which are (as aforesaid) to be exported in
the Companies Ships, to the East Indies, are as follows.
1 Perpetuanoes, drapery. 2 Pewter. 3 Saffron. 4 Woollen Stockins. 5 Worsted
Stockins. 6 Silk Stockins. 7 Silk garters, and Ribband Roses edged with gold
lace. 8 Beaues Hats, with gold and silver Bands. 9 Felt Hats. 10 Aquauitae, and
all other sorts of strong waters. 11 Knives of all sorts. 12 Spanish leather
shoes. 13 Iron. 14 Looking-glasses.
The Wares which are licenced as aforesaid, to be brought into England, in the
Companies Ships from the East Indies, are as follows.
1 Long Pepper. 2 White Pepper. 3 White powdered Sugar. 4 Preserved Nutmegs. 5
Preserved Ginger. 6 Preserved Mirabilons. 7 Beezer stones. 8 Cotton yarne. 9
Drugs of all sorts. 10 Aggat beads. 11 Blood*stones. 12 Musk. 13 Alloes
Soccatrina. 14 Ambergreece. 15 Rich Carpets of Persia and Cambaia. 16 Quilts of
Satin, and of Taffaty, and of painted Callicoes. 17 Benjamin. 18 Damaskes of
China. 19 Sattens of China. 20 Taffaties of China. 21 Quilts of China
imbrodered with gold. 22 Quilts of Petania imbrodered with silk. 23 Galls. 24
Wormeseeds. 25 Sugar Candy. 26 China dishes, or Purslaines of all sorts.
But for Cloth, Kersies, Lead, Tin, and all other Wares whatsoever, not
mentioned, as above written, either Native or Foreign, serving for the
Voyages, into the said Indies, or for the relading of the said Ships from
thence into Europe, they are wholly reserved to the only use, account, and
adventure of the said Company.

And it is further declared, that each particular man employed in the Voyage,
as before written, may lade and adventure, for his own private and proper
account, in the Wares and Merchandise before written, and not otherwise, so much
only as can be packed in one Chest of four foot long, one foot and a half
broad, and one foot and a half deep, and to the Commanders, Factors,
Captains, Masters, Pursers, and Masters Mates of every Ship, is granted a
double proportion, that is to say, two Chests of the said length, depth, and
breadth, upon such conditions, for the lading and vnlading of all the said
Goods in the places appointed, as are contained in the said Proclamation.

And the said Company do further promise, that they will not demand, or take
any Freight for the Merchandise which shall be laden or reladen in their
Ships, as before written, but will freely give and bestow the same, to each
particular man in their proportions, although it will amount to a great sum
of Money in every Voyage of this nature, where the Freight cannot be valued
less then forty pounds sterling for every Tonne.

Lastly, the said Company do in like manner grant and license the said
proportion of private Trading, and no more, to each particular man, as
aforesaid, from Port to Port in the East Indies, in whatsoever kind of
Merchandise, excepting only those sorts of Commodities, which at any time
hereafter shall be laden for the Account of the said Company in the same
Ships, where any such private Trade shall be permitted, after Warrant first
obtained under hand writing, from the Presidents, or other chief Factors,
which manage the Affairs of the said Company, in the respective places of the
East Indies, that so all may be done and performed according to the tenor and
true meaning of these Orders, declared and published in the House of the said
Company here in London, and in other convenient places, and sent likewise unto
all their Factories in the East Indies, together with His Majesty's said
Proclamation to prevent ignorance in any person or persons to whom it may or
shall appertain.

Dated the 20th of March, 1627. in the East India house, London.
Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton, and John Bill, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty.


