INFORMATION FOR THE IGNORANT OR THE APPLICATORY PART OF A LATE PRINTED BOOK,
CALLED, A LIGHT FOR THE IGNORANT, containing a few Observations upon the 1 Cor.
10. which do strongly prove it to be absolutely sinful to hear the word
Preached in any False State, or Assembly whatsoever.

Also a Postscript containing a Challenge (laid down in 9. Propositions) to all
the Non-Conformists in Old and New England, and Holland.

Made by N. E.

JER. 15.19, 20. Therefore thus says the Lord, if thou return, then will I
bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me, and if thou take forth the
precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth, let them return unto thee,
but return not thou unto them.

Printed in the Year of God, 1640.

A FEVV OBSERVATIONS OUT OF THE 1. CORINTHIANS 10.
THE First thing to be observed is this, That God having committed a Kingdom
or Kingly state Ecclesiastical to Christ our Mediator who is the King of it;
that those that he does bequeath or commit this Kingly state unto, they are by
actual receiving of it, Incorporared into him. This the Scripture calls an
ingrafting into Christ, Joh. 15.1. Romans 11.24. it is called a marriage, Reve.
19.7, 8, 9. and diverse other phrases it has to set it forth.

Secondly, that this is Simbole-wise set forth by example of Israel; the act
that the faithful do, comparing it with theirs; and Moses with Christ, and
the Mosaicall state, and worship, with the Evangelical state and worship.

Thirdly, that this state and worship, it being Gods, they were only bound to
it, and to no other: but straightly charged to observe whatsoever he had given
them in charge, and to walk uprightly in this state, and in all the ordinances
of the Kingdom. So that to this state, must men flow unto, and to no other,
and here to abide and not to depart.

The straying, of the faithful in matter of Religion in public affairs, is
called Idolatry, the which the servants of God must flee from, verse. 14. The
faithful must not break the first Table, no more then the second.

The Second Observation is this, That as the faithful are incorporated into
Christ (that is, tied and knit to him) so that Christ and his appurtenances go
together, I mean the privileges of the Mediatourship, the privileges of
marriage state, and all the appurtenances thereunto belonging, verse. 16. and
this food is for all the faithful; so that as they have the true and glorious
state of Christ, so they have it filled and adorned with rich and glorious
privileges and ornaments, and that as they be spiritual, so they be precious
in nature and use. Here is the seat, habitation, and dwelling of the
ordinances of God: these and none other are the things commanded to be observed
and kept; these and none else-have the promises belonging to them; these and
none other have juice and life in them, in this state.

And as here be all the ordinances of Gods public worship, so here is the
appurtenances belonging to them, as State, Laws, Offices, and administrations,
with their glory or blessing on them.

First therefore here be the ordinances of Christ. Secondly, they be here in
their proper place. Thirdly, they be here in their right use. Fourthly, they
stand here in their beauty, with the blessing on them, with all their
attendances, and with the lively use of them.
The Third Observation is in verse 17. because the faithful are one body, or
bread, or cake, they be united and knit together by a spiritual bond, or tie,
even their corporation. This one-nes is such that admits not a division in
religious acts, they be a religious society or body, it is spiritually one.
This respects chiefly those that be a body, or Church (yet it is largely to
be understood) for there is no permission given to any to walk contrary to
this rule.

To this one state of Christ and ordinances, and privileges, with their own
appurtenances thereto appertaining, belongs one people or body, or Church, with
their adherent matter adhering thereunto. So this one body is partaker of one
bread or means of spiritual nourishment, which is spiritual feeding upon the
ordinances. So that as the body is one (that is) one in compactnesse or
knitting; one in Charter, one in Laws, one in ordinances, one in offices, and
one in administrations; so it must be one in communion, and one in feeding on
this bread, or means of spiritual nourishment. They being baptized into one
Christ, by one Spirit; partakes of one calling, and of one faith and hope, as
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. so partakes of one fellowship, 1 Cor. 1.9. So that here is
the open house that God does keep, that whosoever is hungry must come to, for
satisfy their hunger, and not seek spiritual food any where else but in this
state.

The Fouth Observation is out of Verse the 18. where the Apostle lays it down
example-wise, that so as in a Table or Glass they might see the point in hand;
and the ground that the Apostle lays against them to disprove, and condemn
their judgment, and so their practice in eating of the Idols instituted meats
(if any did so) this Verse shows that the aforesaid state and ordinances, and
all things pertaining to them, they be unseparable: so that those that partake
of the ordinances in a state, partakes of that state, or power and authority,
by virtue of which they are administered. So that as every ordinance of that
state has an author, or institutor; so they cannot partake of the ordinance
but they must partake of the Altar that sanctifies the Ordinance to the
receiver. By Altar in the New Testament of Christ is to be understood not any
material Altar, as that of old: but some spiritual thing or things, as is
clear in the Testament of Christ. Now that there is an Altar in the time of
the Gospel, as well as in the time of the Law, is clear by a multitude of
places of Scripture, Ezekiel. 43.14. Heb. 13.13. Reve. 8.3. That this Altar is not
Christ himself, is clear to me from this 8. Chapter and 3. Verse, where he is
the High Priest that offers up the incense with the prayers of the Saints: And
that is not in the heavens properly, but in the heavenly state, appears by the
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Chapters, with the whole Revelation. What this Altar is we may
gather out of Reve. 11.1. where the Temple, and the Altar, and the worshipers
are distinct. The Temple I conceive to be the state, for that compriseth all
within it, as the Altar; the several institutions therein, the worshippers,
the people, and this appears in the text. That this is no wordly Temple, but
spiritual, is plain: For as the Altar is, so is the Temple (to wit spiritual)
therefore the oblations, and sacrifices be spiritual, the which being offered
to God in, and upon this his own institutions or Altar, they become acceptable,
as Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. And as it is in this true state, so it is in all
false states (that is) there is the same connextion and communion betwixt the
things themselves (that is) the state depends upon the Lord of it, and owner of
the same (as afterward may be seen) and the institution depend on the state,
and the ordinances depend on the state and institutions. So that without the
state no institutions, and without institutions, no ordinances, and so no
worship. So also is the matter dependant on the form, and the form or state,
on the author of it; so that the matter and form are relatives, and the form
and author are relatives also (that is to say) they cannot be separated. So the
receipt or partaking of such ordinances that are to be partaked of in a state,
the partakers to have communion with the state and King of it, as this example
does show. So that the matter is dependent on the sacrifice; the sacrifice
dependant on the Altar, the Altar on the state, the state on the owner of it,
and so comes in here, If this were any thing to reprove the judgment or
practice of the Corinthians, then it shows that by their general communion
in eating instituted meat, in that instituted state and Temple, they did
partake of it, even of that diabolical state and institutions, though they
were not of that body, but were of the Church of Corinth, and come to the Idols
Temple but on occasion: yet says the Apostle, those that eat of the sacrifice
of the Altar, partake of the Altar, for it is the Altar that sanctifies the
gift to the receiver, Mat. 23.19, 20, 21. and it is the pollution of it, (that
is to say of the Altar) that pollutes the gift or sacrifice, and those that
offer it, Hos. 9.1, 2.4. Eating is used for receiving and for feeding, and so
for all religious communion, as Act. 10.13, 14. and in this Verse for partaking
of the Altar, as well as of the sacrifices, showing that he that partakes of
any administration in a state, does partake of the power, or institution, by
virtue of which it is administrated.

5. The Fifth Observation, is out of Verse the 19. where the Apostle as he does
mention the ground that their judgment was built upon Chapter the 8 verse the
4. so he also uses their own grounds, in their own phrases, that so he might
both reprove their error, and also that he might show the contrary. Now in
that the Apostle speaks question-wise, it is not because he made doubt of the
unlawfullnesse of their practice, but to show the vanity of the ground of it;
and to show that when it is compared to the truth, and brought to the true
touchstone, the revealed will of God it vanishes away, though it might seem
colorable and strong: yet it being but the beam of a Spiders web, in regard
of the truth it self, he shows it has no force norstrength in it: therefore he
inclusively affirms that the Idol is something, and that that which is offered
to Idols is something, because it alters its property to that which it was
before, being now set apart for Religious uses, and is not to be understood
that he held as they did but the contrary (namely) that it was unlawful for
them to go to the Idols Temple to eat of their meat or sacrifice.

6. The Sixth Observation is out of Verse the 20. where the Apostle comes to a
full answer affirmatively to their objection laid down Chap. 8.4. that there
is but one God. And in it are sundry things to be observed: As First the thing
employed in the former Verse (to wit) it was not as it was thought, but as he
plainly affirms in this 20th Verse (to wit) that the Gentiles did sacrifice
to Devils, in which he shows what a near relation there is between the
worship, and the worshippers: the near conjunction between the author of
their worship (namely the Devil) and the worshipers who had communion with him.
And if it be here objected this is meant of none but the Idols worship, and not
of those that worship God, and that with some glorious show of truth, as is
done in the Antichristian state, it must be remembered, that if we will worship
God, it must be tendered up to him, in his own house, and by his own rules and
ordinances, or else it is not his, neither does he accept it: neither can men
truly be said to do it to him, if it be done in any false state whatsoever, he
being any the author of it, but some other, for he never instituted no state
for his people to worship and serve him in, but only one (namely) this heavenly
Jerusalem which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. therefore though men that
walk in false states do pretend that they worship God, even the true God, yet
the truth is otherwise; and this I apprehend to be clear in this Verse: for
the Corinths would never have frequented a worship that they had knowledge of
it, was done to the Devil; neither had the Apostle said any thing to the
purpose in so saying, had it not been so that they did not know that it was so,
for they did plead for it upon other terms, even upon moral grounds (as the
Professors do for hearing in the Assemblies.) So then it follows undeniably,
that men may pretend to worship the true God, though the matter and manner of
worship be false. So also that men in religious communion cannot sever at their
pleasure, and put difference between the office and administration, and the
ordinance and thing administered (that is) they can as they pretend hear the
word, and partake of the exercise of the gift, and yet not partake of the
office: for they do not (they say) hear him as a man in office, but as a man
endued with a gift to preach the word. If these persons are so skilled in this
division, let them show their wisdom herein, and compare it with the wisdom
of God, which says that there is no dividing of them; so that as any partakes
of the one (that is of the administration) they do partake of the other (that
is) of the power or office by virtue of which it is administered. For we must
remember that an office, and an administration, is the Chariot wherein the
thing administered does ride, and were it not for the office, neither person,
nor gift, nor ordinance, nor administration could be there, to exercise his
gift, so that the power puts into office, the office into administration, and
they both put forth the ordinance, or thing administered. Here also if any think
that those that are not joined into followship, that they are more tolerated
in this particular then others that are in a state: The Apostle overthrows
that whilst he shows, that those of Corinth that went to the Idols Temple,
went as those that were not in fellowship with them, for that was not all their
sin, that they for the present left their society, but that they had taken up a
sinful communion, both with persons, and with things which was unlawful. So
that the Apostle urges the foulness of that practice, chiefly for the
unlawfullnesse of it in it self, which he would never have done, had not that
place or state bin to have been abandoned of all whatsoever that fear the
Lord: Therefore this practice of going to Idolatrous Assemblies, which the
Spirit of God calls whores houses, Prove. 5.7.8. and 13.14. is not only
unlawful in the Corinthians, but also in all others that be in the order of
the Gospel, for what ground or warrant has persons to come there at all;
seeing this is one badge and mark of our Christianity to have our faces
toward Sion, and our backs upon Babylon, Jere. 50.5 and 51.9. and in the
walking in this way, and on this ground persons are to be held, and judged the
people of God, and not otherwise. So that here is a shutting up of the
controversy, namely, that there is no more to be said, but that this verdict
must be given, even that they that had communion with the Gentiles in their
Temples and sacrifices had communion with him that the Gentiles had communion
with: But the Gentiles did sacrifice to, and had communion with Devils:
Therefore those that had communion with them in eating of their sacrifice had so
too: But it is the mind of God that all those that he called by his name,
should not have fellowship with Devils: Therefore of all that fear God it must
be avoided, which is done by us when we forsake all false and Antichristian
ways, and walk only in God: true ways, without halting, worshipping him in
Sion the City or place of his presence, according to his own appointment.

The Seventh Observation is out of Verse the 21. where the Holy Ghost does
show the impossibility of the people of Gods partaking of the administrations
both in a true; and false state according to rule, and without wrath it for as
the former part of the Chapter does show in those examples both of the sin of
the Israelites, who though they were incorporated into one body unto Moses
their Mediator, and type of Christ, whose laws and ordinances they were to
observe, yet ran a whoring after their own inventions, and also of the wrath of
God manifessed on them that did so, Verse 5.7, 8, 9, 10. for God cannot endure
any halting between him and Baal, 1 King. 18.21 neither can a man serve two
Masters: but as Christ has purchased soul and body, with the price of his own
precious blood, so he will have us to glorify him in our souls and bodies, 1
Cor. 6.20. and 7.23. which is done by our obedience to the truth; so that the
observation of these things themselves be the only things of our wealth: it is
therefore the Saints wisdom to keep them in the sight of all the people. The
Lord having set before us life and death, it is the wisdom of the Saints to
eschew the ways of death, and to have their feet guided in the paths of life;
these things being so opposite to each other, that the embracing of the one, is
the rejection of the other; for a man cannot walk in the true ways of God,
but he must reject, and hate the false ways of the Devil. Besides for these,
and like sins (that is) for leaving of the pure ways of God, and imbraceing
ways of their own, the Lord removes the Candlestick from, and abhorres even
his own inheritance; so that for this he forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh the
tent that he had pitched among them, Psalm. 78.60. so that they be unfit for
communion with him, and incapable of such heavenly treasures as the Saints are
made partakers of, that so do. So that God does warrant and approve of no such
persons walking so; so that if there be an evil heart in any, thus to depart,
or draw back from the living God, his soul can have no pleasure in them, Heb.
3.12. and 38, 39. And thus I understand this Scripture treats of the communion
of the people of God both with him as God, 1 John 3. Heb. 12.23. and also with
Jesus as Mediator, ver. 24. and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament.
The things that they have with God in Jesus Christ is that heavenly state
called Mount Sion, the City of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and the drawing
near to God in the ways of his worship herein, is the drawing nearer to him
in a new and living way, consecrated by the veil of his flesh, Heb. 10.20, 21,
22. This being the state which the Lord has instituted for the good of the
godly, they are here to dwell under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1.
there to lie town in peace and quietness because the Lord is at one with them,
and not to change their habitations; for all ather ways are ways of
darkness, Isay 59.8, 9, 10, 11. and he that walks in darkness though he
says he has communion with God, he is a liar (as says the Apostle, 1 John
1.6.) Seeing the Saints have received a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, yea a
Kingdom with all the glorious appurtenances thereunto belonging: therefore let
all the Lords people have grace, whereby they may serve the Lord with reverence
and godly fear, by walking uprightly and unblameably in his ways. Concerning
the approved use of Gods ordinances we are taught of God, to use them as he
has given commandment and not otherwise: For in Exodus 20. God straightly forbids
the unholy use of any thing that his Name is put unto, the which is done when
it is used any other wise then that he has appointed, as the whole body of the
Scripture does plainly manifest. Now Gods Name is largely to be understood, and
the command is as large as the name or things: so that by Gods Name we are not
only to understand Gods Essence, as Exodus 3.14 but also his Attributes, as
Exodus 3.5, 6. and also his Ordinances, his Word and Gospel, Deuteronomy. 33.34. Acts
9.15. as also the Law of Christ, Esaias 42.1. is called his Name, Mat. 12.21.
also prayer, Genesis 4.26. and Gods whole worship with all his ordinances
partaining to the same, Deuteronomy. 21.5. Mal. 1.11, 12. and his Seals, Mat. 28.18,
19. and his Censures, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. Mat. 18.20. So that God requires the holy
use of all whatsoever his Name is put unto; so that as he does in the first
Commandment forbid any besides himself to be worshipped, so in the second he
requires all worship to be performed to himself only, according to his own
rules expressed in his word, which contains the only Rules for worship: so
that, as we must receive them only, and worship him only by those rules, so we
must use them as he has required, and not after, neither our own wills, nor
after any others; but to take heed that we do observe to do them, as he has
given charge to use them, and not otherwise, for he will not hold them
guiltless that shall use them otherwise then he requires. So that this Law of
his is the ground of all worship, even of that worship that he requires, and it
inforceth the same, and perfectly binds even all that will by the word of God
manifest themselves to be the people of God to keep close to it, and not to
meddle with any other state, ordinance or worship whatsoever, as the tennour of
this Law rightly discerned does manifest: as also the tennour of the New
Testament does plainly show (namely) that the Lord Jesus Christ has removed
the Candlestick from the Jews, and given it to the Gentiles, Romans 9. and 11.
Chapters, as also Mat. 22.2.7. and so forward, Mat. 21.43. This state or
Kingdom has diverse names in the New Testament, as the stock of a Vine, Joh.
15. it has the name of an Olive stock, Romans 11.24. the name of a Kingdom,
Mat 21.43. Mat. 22.2. the name Temple, Rev. 11.1. City, Mount Sion, Jerusalem,
the house of God, Heb. 12.22. a Golden Candlestick, Rev. 2.1. This state so
diversely named, and set forth, is the proper seat or being of all Gods public
ordinances, and worship (as the Temple of old was, so is this) as the 1 Cor.
10. does show, and as all the Primitive examples does plainly prove. So that
the ordinances of worship as they be placed, and seated there, so they cannot
be lawfully used any where else: so that as Israel of old was tied to the
worship and sacrifices, and feasts of all kinds that did belong to Gods public
worship, so they were strictly tied (as to the worship it self, so to) the
place that he had chosen out of all the Tribes to put his Name in, Deuteronomy. 12.11.
1 Kin. 8. chap. compared with the 9.2, 3. thither to resort at the time
appointed, there to worship and serve the Lord, as also to rejoice before him,
and in his presence. Therefore if there were in any a refusal or omission, it
was a forsaking of him, and did procure his wrath, as in the 2 Chro. 29.6, 7,
8, 9. So the Apostle exhorts to take heed that there be not in any an evil
heart in departing from the living God, Heb. 3.12. but to keep close to the way
of his Commandments. Therefore seeing the Lord has so placed his ordinances
that they cannot be lawfully removed out of his own house, and that all those
that will manifest themselves to be the Lords people by their obedience to his
will, must thither repair for the food of their souls, and not to wander in
the way of the strange woman, seeing Wisdom has a house pollished, her table
furnished with dainties, the command and call of God to come thither, Pro. 9.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Mat. 22.3. Cant. 1.6. and the right use of them, with the
promise of blessing on them, 1 Cor. 10.16. and all the appurtenances, that
belong to them, as this 1 Cor. 10. does show. Therefore as all persons in
matters of Religion are straightly forbidden to worship any other God but the
true God, so also to worship him by any other rules then what he has laid
down: so after no other manner then he has prescribed, as the Scriptures do
jointly drive at, and may be seen in this 10. Cor. The which that we may a
little the better understand, for this end, we must consider that we speak of
Gods public worship, and not otherwise; so we must oppose such acts of
Religion as are done in a public state: so that the sequel of my reasoning is
not only to prove the administering, and receiving of the seals in a false
State to be unlawful, but all other actions (as the preaching and hearing of
the word) or of what nature soever they be, being done by that Diabollicall
opposite power to Christ's, as also by opposite persons to Christ's subjects of
Christ's Kingdom: these persons being powered and authorized, not by Christ, but
by his adversary, so that they are functioned and officiated by the enemy of
Christ, though for some causes to God, and themselves they profanely,
theevishly, and usurpedly intermeddle with some ordinances of God, for which
sin they may justly fear that he will shortly come in flaming fire, rendering
vengeance to them for that their wickedness, that though they preach his word,
yet do not know him, as his servants know him: and also for detayning the
truth in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 1.18. Romans 1.18. So in the second place I
will show that whatsoever power Ecclesiastical, and state Ecclesiastical is
opposite to Christ's power, and state, that that is a whore, and is by the rule
of Gods word to be fled from, and none of the servants of God to be found
therein; For the Lord calls all his elect ones from them, as from the place
where the life of grace cannot breath in, and as from the Cage that is so
unclean, that there can be no building, or abiding there for the Lords clean
Fowls, for that is the hold of every unclean and hateful Bird, Rev. 18.2, 3,
4. Therefore seeing the good word of God which is holy in it self, yet it comes
to be unclean in the use of it in false states: so that instead of nourishing
the souls of them that use it there, it undoes them, and is a two edged sword
to slay them in the true, and right sense of it. So that those vain and frothy
flourishes which are made by the Subjects of Antichrists Kingdom of those
glorious things they have, and possess in these days, are by the Lord
reproved in his truth, as well as the Idols Temple, whose indeed they be and not
the Lords So that this is it that I would prove. First, that God has given a
Kingdom, and State Ecclesiastical to his Servants. Secondly, that this
Kingdom and State is complete with Laws, and Ordinances, with Officers and
Administrations for the execution of the holy things of God. Thirdly, that as
all that by rule would be judged to be the Lords people, are commanded of God
to seek the place where he has put his name, there to seek rest for their
souls; so also they must manifest themselves to be the Lords by their
obedience to the truth, in cleaving to that old, and good way that leads to
eternal life. Fourthly, that no public worship can be performed to God out of
this Kingdom, and state: and that I conceive is clearly manifested out of this
10. Corinht. by the example of Israel of old. Secondly, in that the faithful
in time of the Gospel is in an estate more glorious then they were Heb. 10.28,
29-12.22. Therefore when the Saints come into any other state* or are under
another institution, performing Religious actions therein, they be by the voice
of God pronounced to be Idolaters, as this 10. Cor. 7. does show. Fifthly, that
the Ordinances of Gods house must not be removed out their place, which is
their own state: for as the vessels of the Sanctuary were profaned by polluted
persons; so also in the use of them in any other place then where the Lord had
commanded them to be used: for they could not be used holyly among the
Babilonians who set them in their Temple, because they wanted their proper seat
or place of and being all those that had them when they were removed out of the
Lords house could not use them but profanely, they being not the persons that
God had appointed to use them, nor the place. This is plain if we consider the
tennour of Gods Book with the third precept. So that he has compiled state,
laws, ordinances, with their offices and administrations together, as may be
seen in all the Churches, and in this 10. Cor. Further; that as men must not
partake of any of Gods ordinances but according to rule: So must they use and
frequent none other; for all ways of a man's own are by God condemded, all
precepts of men forbidden; therefore the state and ordinances of Christ with all
appurtenances must of all Gods people be flowed and adhered unto, not to be
departed from, they being the only life of the soul, the wells in the right
use of them, that the waters of life does run in. So that by this little that
is said, I may be discerned both what I intend, and also the drift of the
Scriptures, which is, that Gods ordinances cannot be rightly used out of his
own spiritual house, or state; and that it is unlawful for us to go any
where else to partake of any of them, Cant. 1.6. whether it be the Sacrament or
hearing of the word, seeing he that partakes in any administration in a state,
partakes of the state it self; and so has communion with the Devil, the
author and king of all false states, as the Apostle against the Corinths in the
10th Chap. does strongly prove by many illustrations. So that hearing of the
word under an Institution is as well communion as receiving of the Sacrament:
for the sacrifice here spoken of, was part of the Jews worship, and not any of
their Sacraments, as the Non-conformists ignorantly and blindly affirm. For
they had Circumcision, and the Passover for their Sacraments, instead of which
Christ our King, and ordinance instituter, set up for us under the Gospel
Baptism, and the Supper. Now unto as many as walk according to this rule
peace be unto them, and mercy, and unto the whole Israel of God. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
A PVBLIKE CHALLENGE MADE BY N.E. to all the Non-conformists or Reformists in
Old and New England, and Holland, in the behalf of the total Separation, but
in a special manner made to those persons in London that are convinced that
the Church Ministry and worship in England are all of them Antichristian, and
yet hold it lawful for themselves to walk in a straggling spiritual way,
without joining or uniting of themselves to a true visible Church. But all, and
every one of you are Challenged to Answer these 9. ensuing Propositions
particularly in writing if you be able. London An. 1640.

The first Proposition.
THAT the planting of Grace in the soul, is not only a renovation: but it is
an instamping ingrafting, or creating of a new creature, or a communicating of
the divine nature unto the soul, which in no measure it had before, no not in
Man's innocence, 1 Cor. 15.45. to the 50. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4 For Adam in his
innocence was but a perfect moral man, and had no participation nor divine
communion with the divine nature, which if he had had, he had been as perfect
as Christ himself, and could not possibly have fallen from his innocence; for
it is the Saints communion with the divinity of God which makes them that they
cannot lose the truth of the seed of grace which God has wrought, or bestowed
upon their souls, 1 John 3.6.9. and 4.4.2.27. the ingrafting of which is the
immediate, and alone work of God, Joh. 3.3.5, 6. Ephesians. 2.1.4.5, 6. 1 Pet.
1.3.23. 1. Joh. 2.20.29. and 5.20. 1 Cor. 2.12. wrought without the use of
means. Romans 10.14.17. 1 Cor. 1.18.21.24. Act. 27.22. to 25.34.
And that all that the Ministry of the word, or any other means does, is no
more but this, namely, to manifest, and declare, that this divine principle or
nature is in the soul, Luke 8.5.8.15. or to build up, and strengthen the soul
in spiriturll things, or in the ways of God, Acts 20.28. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. 1
Pet. 5.2.

That the only materials of which a true visible Church of Jeus Christ does
consist, and is made up of, is true matter, and true form, Col. 2.5. that is to
say, that all the matter or people ought to be totally Separated from the
world, and all Antichrstian Assemblies whatsoever, 2 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17. Rev.
18.4. Seeing God in all ages put a visible and distinct difference betwixt his
people, and the men of the World, Lev. 20 29. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Act. 2.40. and 19 9.
of whom it is required that they be not only believers, but also have a
competent measure of knowledge to join, knit, and unite themselves together in
the comely order of the Gospel, Deuteronomy. 29 9.10.12. Nehe. 10.28.29. Jer. 50.4.
Act. 11.23, 24. And the reason why faith only does not make fit matter, is
because that in the working of grace the soul is only passive, and not active
in the least, faith being wrought in, or upon the soul by God alone. But in
obedience a believer is active, therefore it is required he should be fitted
with a measure of knowledge to tender that worship, and service, which he
offers up to God aright, and according to his will, otherwise it becomes
will worship, and a lame sacrifice, which is the sacrifice of fools, in which
God has no delight, or pleasure, Eccles. 5.1, 2.4. And the form is that
heavenly State, City or Kingdom described in the Book of God, which has
diverse, and several Names, as the beauty of holiness, 1 Chro. 16.29. Syon,
Psalm. 84.7. Jerusalem, Esa. 62.6. the Lords holy Mountain, Esa. 65.9.11. his
holy or secret place, which the Lord has chosen to devil in, Psalm. 132.13,
14. Jerusalem the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. The City of the living God, Heb.
13.22 Mount Sion, Reve. 14.1. the beloved City, Reve. 20.9. the holy City, or
new Jerusalem, Reve. 21.1, 2. the Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.35. and that we are
now as strictly tied to the institutions of Jesus Christ under the Gospel, as
the Jews were tied to his institutions under the Law, Acts 3.22, 23. Heb.
3.2.5. and 10.28, 29 and 12.25.

That Jesus Christ in his new Testament never instituded no National nor
Provincial, nor no universal Church, which then must needs have uniuersall
Officers, but only particular Churches, or Congregations, many of which may be
in one Kingdom or Province, 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8.1. Gal. 1.2.22. 1 Thessalonians.
2.14. and all of them independent bodies, Rev. 1.2, 3 Chapters, and yet every
one of them have one and the same state, Gal. 4.26. one and the same King,
head, and Lawgiver, one and the same Laws, one and the same manner of
government; one and the same ordinance; one and the same institutions, and
manner of administrations; having all administeriall power within themselves,
depending upon none; but only upon Christ, their only, and alone spiritual,
and visible head, 2 Cor. 11.2. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and the 5.23. Col. 1.18.24. and
2.19. who though he be spiritual, as the Subjects, Laws, government, worship,
ordinances, and administrations are yet, is he visible, Esaias 9.6, 7. Psalm.
110.12 Act. 7.55, 56. as well as his Kingdom, and all the Laws, ordinances,
and administrations thereof. And that it is altogether sinful, and unlawful
for any whatsoever to inflict any bodily or corporal punishment upon any for
spiritual things, or matters of conscience (seeing excommunication, or casting
out into the world is now in the Gospel put in the place of killing the body
under the Law) which wicked practice notwithstanding is not only used by the
Diabolical, and Satanicall Prelates here in England, but also by the
Magistrates and Priests in New- England, who ungodly, wickedly, and sinfully
unprison, banish, and take away men's goods, and that even for Conscience sake.

That it is the duty of all those that will approve their hearts unto God, and
declare unto his people that they are his, Jam. 2 18 to walk in a spiritual
total Separation from the men of the world, by joining themselves freely and
voluntarily to a true visible Church, there publicly to worship and serve the
Lord according to his own Laws, ordinances and appointment, seeing the Lord
never promised his presence, blessing, peace, nor protection to any persons
whatsoever, but only these that walk in this State, City, or Kingdom, into
which all his people are bound in Conscience to enter into it, Esa. 26.20. Mat.
28.20. Cant. 1.6. that desire according to their duty to glorify him in the
eyes of the world, by holding forth the public profession of the purity of his
truth as so many burning and shining lamps in the midst of a perverse and
crooked generation, Mat. 5.26. Phil. 2.15.

That it savours of a muddy, earthly, carnal, base, and unsanctified heart,
for any man or woman whatsoever, be they high, or low rich, or poor, to plead
that the people of God may lawfully walk in a straggling spiritual way, though
they join not themselves to a visible Church, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Mat. 13.44,
45, 46.6.33. Mark. 10.22, 23. for the servants of God in former ages made no
cavils against, (neither needed they any pressing to) this duty, who with
loning desires desired to come before God, and meet with him in this his Sion,
Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3. and 84.10. and who have taken this Kingdom of God by
violence, Mat. 11.12. Act. 2.41. and that such pleading does declare that the
chief treasure of such persons are the empty husks, and base things of this
evil world, and that their hearts are possessed with selfe-seeking, and self
ends, and covetousness which is Idolatry, Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5. and have no
regard to Gods glory, or honor, for which sin he will plague them, 1 Samuel
2.30. Psalm. 2.12. especially in their inward man, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.12. that they
shall not excel in being famous amongst the true children of Sion, for being
eminent in the knowledge of the true ways and mysteries of God and godliness,
Esa 19. 13, 14. and 59 9, 10, 11, 12. Mal. 2 2. 1 Cor. 1.19. and 3.19.

That Jesus Christ did redeem, and save his people from the wrath to come,
mainly and principally for this end, that they should glorify him both in
their souls and bodies without fear. Luke 1.74. Joh. 14.21. 23. and
15.8.10.14. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Romans 12.1. which is done when they walk
unblameably, and uprightly without any selfe-respects in his public ways;
which it is their duty so to do, Mark 10.30.33. in the worst of times, and
amongst the greatest oppositions whatsoever, Reve. 12.11. and 14.1.4. though it
be to the spoiling of their goods, and the losing of their lives, Mat. 10. 37,
38, 39. seeing Jesus Christ will have his full, and whole price of all those
that will truly embrace and entertain him, Zeche. 11.12. which is to part with
all for his sake and glory, with willingness, and contentednes, Mat. 16.24,
25. Mark. 8.34 35.38. Luke 9.23, 24 and 14 16. whose praise and glory ought to
be more precious and dear unto them, then all they have, are, or shall be, 1 Samuel 4.21, 22. Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. that is to say, then their own eternal
happiness and welfare. And that it is impossible for any of Gods people to
glorify him aright, as they should and ought to do, till they be entered
into, and joined as fellow Citizens with the Saints, Ephe. 2.19. in this
heavenly State, City, or Kingdom, which he instituted and appointed
principally for the perfecting and building up of the Saints, Ephe. 4.10.12,
13, 14. out of which they cannot possibly worship him aright, nor come to the
true knowledge of the naked and pure ways of God: seeing this City cannot be
measured by any but those that are within it. Therefore the peole of God
according to his promise, Psalm. 110.3. Jere. 50.4, 5. ought with all
willingness, with longing and striving desires (without any compulcion) to
come to worship God within this his Sion, Tabernacle and dwelling place, Psalm.
68.16. as his Saints in old time did, Psa. 84.1, 2. and 120.5. seeing here, and
no where else he has promised his presence, with the increase, and growth in
grace, Psalm. 9.11. and 84.7. and 92.13, 14. and 133.3. Zeche. 8.3.12. and has
tied all his worship thereto, Joh. 4.23, 24. Lev. 17.1.2, 3, 4. 9. Therefore
blessed are they that dwell in this his house, that they may be still praising
of him, Psalm. 84.4.

That it is as easy to prove that woman to be an honest woman, that has had
twenty Bastards, as it is to prove the National, or Parishionall Church, or
Churches in England to be Christ's true Spouse, Reve. 13.16, 17. and 16.19. And
that they who by reason of blind and ignorant zeal offered their Children
through the fire to the Devil, and Molech, Psalm. 101.37. Jer. 32.35. had as
much ground and warrant for their so doing: as the members in the Church of
England have for their worship and service which they publicly tender up to
God, Reve. 9.20, 21. and 13.2.4. And that in the worship and service of God
there is nothing indifferent: but his commands does strictly tie us to
punctual obedience in all times, ages, and places; and that we must not in the
least have any respect to a misinformed Conscience, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9, 10.
which so far as it falls short of the word of God, is faithful, seeing it
is to be guided by the revealed will of God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Esa. 8.20. 2 Chro.
5.15, 16, 17. and to be measured by it, and not it by a misguided, or erroneous
Conscience, Mat. 22.29.

That though hearing in it self be a morrall thing, and though a false
administration cannot destroy, nor annihilate any ordinance of God, seeing the
ordinance Maker, is the only, and alone ordinance destroyer, and nullifier,
Act. 6.14. yet hearing of the word preached from any false Officer whatsoever,
is absolutely unlawful, because it is a sinful communicating, and partaking
in his Administration, Office, or Institution, Mat. 23.19, 20, 21, 22. compared
with 1 Cor. 10.18. and Mat. 10.40. Luke 10.16. compared with Reve. 13.2.4. and
1 Cor. 10.14.20, 21. 1 John 5.21. Hos. 9.4. for he that partakes in any
administration in a State, whether true, or false, partakes in the State it
self: Therefore though the naked truth of God in the purity of it, were taught
by false Officers, in false Assemblies, yet it is as unlawful for Gods people
now to go thither to partake in hearing of it, or to eat any spiritual meat
there, as it was for the Israelites to go to the Philistims when the Ark of God was in the house of Dagon, there to seek Gods presence: or for the Corinths
to go to the Idols Temple to eat of their sacrifices there (though eating in
it self be as moral as hearing is) yet the Corinths going thither to eat of
their set apart, or instituted meat, made them to have communion with Devils,
who were the instituters of their institutions and state, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. and
as lawful was it for the Israelites to go to Dan, Bethel or Gilgall, there to
sacrifice and do worship unto God (as it is for us to go to hear the word of
God in false Assemblies) unto which places the Lord peremtorily commands them
they shall not go, Hos. 4.15. and 9.15. Amos 5.5. seeing the Lord had tied all
his worship and service to the Temple at Jerusalem and there only promised his
presence and acceptance of their service and worship, Deuteronomy. 12.11. 1 Kin. 8.
compared with Chap. 9.2, 3. And that the Lord now under the Gospel has as
strictly tied all his worship and service to be offered up and performed in
that heavenly State, City or Kingdom before spoken of, which is called the
Revel. 21.
new Jerusalem, coming down from heaven; the name of which City is, Ezekiel. (...)
The Lord is there. And therefore out of it to worship the Lord may we not go,
lest we sin as the Jews did who left the Temple, and went to sacifice under
every green Tree, which though their sacrifice which they offered up there was
true sacrifice, yet, it comes under a sharp reproof, as a gross and
remarkable sin; because they brought it not to the true State and Altar, where
only the Lord had commanded them to offer their sacrifice. Even so though
persons go to hear the word of God in a false state, and think they may
lawfully so do, yet they come under the same reproof with the Jews, being
guilty of the same sin, there being a true parallel betwixt the Jews offering
up of sacrifice under the Law, which was part of their worship, and of our
hearing of the word preached, which is part of our worship under the Gospel;
the material Temple at Jerusalem being the type, and our spiritual Jerusalem,
or heavenly State is the substance of it, in the which only, and alone, and no
where else his people are to tender all their worship, and service to him:
seeing he has not declared nor promised that he will own any service
whatsoever, but only that which is offered up unto him within this heavenly
State or holy City, his dwelling and abiding place, of which glorious and
excellent things in Scripture Psalm 87.3. Isay. 60.19.20. Rev. 21. and 22.
Chapters.
are spoken of. And that betwixt morrall things and institutions there is this
difference: Morrall things are therefore good, because they are so in
themselves. Institutions are therefore good because the instituter has set them
apart for a holy use, and ordained them so to be; as the Tree in Paradise; and
the Tabernacle, and Temple, and all the things thereunto belonging, and all the
institutions under the Gospel; as the Temple, Altar, and worshipers, all of
which are institutions and therefore holy.

That that Learning of Curious Arts and Sciences, which men attain unto at the
Schools, is but Humane and not of God, the attaining unto which is no way
necessary to the making of a man fit to bear office in the Church of See for
this, A late printed Book, called. The Sufficiency of the Spirits Teaching
without Humane-Learning. By Sam. How.
Christ, but that man that wants them, may be every way as fit as he that has
them. For they puff men up with pride and worldly wisdom which is 1 Cor.
1.19.20 27.28. and 2.1.4.6.13. and 3.19.20.
foolishness, and enmity against God. And therefore those that have these
humane Arts, and earthly learning are not more unfit then others that want
them, to be chosen by the Church of God officially to officiate therein, but
Because they cannot easily be tried according to those rules which the Apostle
Paul lays down to Timothy for that end. For without grace they will, and do
cheat, cosen, and deceive the Saints many times with their Arts, by making
that seem to be a spiritual gift from God, which is nothing else but a humane
Art. But that learning which chiefly makes the Saints fit to bear office in,
and take care of the Church of God, is divine and spiritual learning, of which
God is the 1 Cor. 12.6.7 8.9.10.11.
Author, without which none are truly able to know, and interpret the holy 1
Cor. 2.10.11.14.
Scripture. Therefore woe, woe. to all those that follow, and are guided, and led
by Antichrists ignorant, and spiritual drunken Priests, whose souls are so
infatuated, and besotted with the abominable fornications of the Scarlet whore,
that they are not able rightly to know the will of God, and therefore do they
feed you with ashes, froth, and scumme, and these you take for famous truths,
their hearts being so exceedingly deceived, that they are not able to deliver
their souls from their gross abominable Idolatry, and wickedness, nor say is
there not a lie in our right hand: for as the Prophet Isay. 44.18.
Esaias speaks, they have no knowledge nor heavenly understanding, for God has
shut their eyes, that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot
understand. Answer these 9. Propositions O all ye Non-conformists, or
Reformists, if your much boasted of abilities, have any reality or substance in
them besides windy and cowardly brags, (who think you are separated away frow
Babylon and Antichrist, and yet you are in midst of it and have communion with
him) and by Gods assistance you shall be punctually replied unto. But look to
it, if you go to your cowardly fugitive, and runaway Priests to get them to
answer it, that you charge them not to stuff their Books full with citations
of their rotten, putrified and empty Fathers, and Authors, and Heathenish
Poets, and Philosophers, which usually they do, giving us three of them, for
one well applied place of Scripture. But if now they thus do, of their
Authority I shall no more esteem, then of the dirt in the kennell: The most of
whose Books are fit for no other use, or place, then to be burnt in the fire,
as the Books of those that used curious Arts in the Act. 19.19.
Apostles time were, and so shall the word of God grow, flourish, and prevail
as then it did. Neither let their answer be with tricks and quillets by the
cunning of their deceivable humane Arts, with which they can make black seem
white, just Jugler like; Nor yet with their rotten and false Scholasticall
distinctions, as hearing the word of God from an officer, and yet they do not
hear him as an Officer) which is but a Sophistical distinction serving to no
purpose. And all these humane devises I esteem of no more use in matters of
controversy to find out the naked truth of God, then pitch, rosen and flax is
to quench fire, which will much more increase and aggravate it: even so will
they, though things now should be very dark, yet the making use of them to
make them more obvious and clear, will make them more misty and obscure.
Therefore I desire him, whosoever he be that answers me, to weigh things in the
balance of the sanctuary (I mean the unerring word of God) and to go to the
Law and the Testimony, and speak according to that, otherwise I shall tell him
(and that in the words of the Spirit of God) Isay. 8.20.
there is no light of truth in him. Therefore let it be answered by the
Authority of the Scripture, for it is that which testifies of Ioh. 5.39.
Christ. And the want of the true knowledge of this is the ground of all error
and Mat. 22.29
ignorance, which your Priests by their rotten filthy Diabolical arts, and
inventions do obscure, darken, and eclipse. Therefore I do verily think and
believe that for this cause God will never honor them to do him any special
or singular piece of service, for he takes the wise in their own craftiness,
and disappointeth the devises of the crafty, and sets up on high, those that
below, Ioh. 5.11.12.
and makes the wise men to perish, Isay. 29.14.
and frustrateth the tokens of liars as they are) and makes diviners mad, and
turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge "foolish, which by daily,
and large experience we see manifested, and made good, nor never make use of
them, for principal instruments to pull down and destroy the filthy black:
Soddomitist Babilonian Kingdom of Antichrist; for as fast as any of them by
the word of God do labor to pull it down with one hand, they by making use of
their humane arts, and learning, build it up with both hands: and more
stregthen the enemy with these their wicked weapons, then they weaken him with
any other they can make use of. Therefore let all Gods people that desire with
all their might to pull down the whore, and make her desolate, and naked; cry
down all these wicked Arts, and human-learning, and all worldly wisdom to the
pit of hell from whence they came, and only make use of the two-edged sword of
Gods word, as the very chief weapon to pierce and run through the very heart of
the scarlet whore, and her upholders, for this will pierce even to the dividing
asunder of the soul and Spirit, Heb. 4.12.
and of the joints and marrow, For the word of God is that two-edged sword that
comes out of the mouth of the Lamb our Captain Christ Jesus, who sits upon the
white Horse, who in righteousness and truth does judge, and make war; and with
this he goes forth conquering, and to conquer, and to smite the Nations and
people that do not, nor will not obey his truth, for he treads the
winepresse of the fiercenes of the wrath of Rev. 19.^
Almighty God. And with this spiritual, overcoming, unresistable conquering
weapon are we his Soldiers, or Armies, that are in heaven, or stand upon Mount
Sion (that is, in the true Church, or state of God) ready to do our Fathers
will and pleasure, to fight courageously against our spiritual Babilonian
enemies, in following the Lamb whither soever he goes, and to do him what
service soever he pleases to call us to, and not to love our lives unto the
death; seeing he has redeemed us from among men, and made us Kings and Priests
unto God our Father. Therefore O my Brethren, be exhorted to courage, and zeal,
for the Lord and his truth: for this is it wherein he shall be glorified by us:
therefore shake off all base, and carnal fear, and be not afraid of the
greatness of our enemies; but let us publicly in an united bond, profess the
purity of his truth in sincerity, for we are sure by the word of his Rev. 12.12.
Testimony to overcome all that do oppose us: For the Lord ere long by the
spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming, in this his glorious
Kingdom (before spoken of) will destroy the man of sin, that so long has
trampled this his holy City under foot, for the prosperity and flourishing of
which we are bound in duty to strain for, and hazard all we have. Therefore if I
forget thee o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; and if I do not
remember thee o Sion let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, yea if I
prefer not Psalm. 137.6, 7.
Jerusalem above my chief joy: For my soul longs, yea exceedingly with earnest
desires to see Jerusalem become (as I am sure when Antichrist is destroyed she
shall be) the praise of the whole earth. Therefore all ye choice Speare-men of
the Lord, be as valiant for your God now in the days of Babels tottering, as 2 Samuel 23.16, 17.
David's worthies was for him, and stoutly break through the Hoasts of the
Babilonians those spiritual Phylistims, and fetch, and take the water of life
from out of their polluted hands, which they theevishly have stolen, and
usurpedly make use of, that the Lords weak ones may freely drink of it without
fear of being poisoned: and let us all, yea every one of us that stand upon
Mount Sion with our Fathers name written in our Iere. 50. and 51. Reve. 18.
foreheads according to our duty. Let us put our selves in array against Babylon
round about, and call together the Lords valiant Spearmen, and Archers against
her. Therefore all ye that bend the Bow, Camp against her round about, and let
none that belong unto her escape; but recompense her according to her work,
according to all that she has done let us do unto her, for she has been proud
against the Lord, even against the holy one of Israel. Therefore let us cause
her young men to fall in the streets, and all her men of war let us (as much as
we are able cut off. Now her choice men of war are her officers, whose offices
is that great River Euphrates spoken of in the Revelation, which principally we
must labor to dry up, because till it be dried up, we the sons of
righteousness, and Kings of the East cannot come to take her and destroy her.
Now the chief means to dry up her offices, is to refuse all spiritual
subjection to them, and not to give to any of them at any time their usurped
fees, for this I will maintain, that it is absolutely sinful, and unlawful to
pay unto them any money which they demand, as an Ecclesiastical right, or to
enter bayl unto them: therefore in my judgment those do deny and dishonor
God, and his truth, that directly or indirectly fee, or give money to their
Diabollicall Pursevants, for their liberty when they are taken by them; sure I
am the Apostles and their followers were never so base and cowardly, yet this
is a common sin amongst all our Congregations, the Lord amend it: and in
after time give us more courage and zeal for his glory, otherwise our
condition will be like to Laodicea even to be lukewarm, for which we may
shortly fear the Lord will spew us out of his mouth. A Second sort of her
Champions, are those that draw nearer to God in many things then others of
their Brethren do, and these are called Puritans or Professors, whose
vizards I have in part in my foregoing Propositions unmasked; and these by how
much the more they seemingly draw nearer to God in their false ways, so much
the more hurt and mischief they do, by keeping others more weaker then
themselves from a willing stooping entirely to the Scepter of Christ, for which
sin the Lord plagues them: for it is daily seen that even Publicans and
Harlots enter into the Kingdom before them, to walk in that order which God
has appointed for their building up, therefore against these should we fight,
and with all our strength and cunning, take from them their masks, vizards, and
figge-leaves, unto whom I may truly say as God by the Prophet Esaias 47.
Esaias said to the old Babilonians, that your wisdom, and your knowledge has
perverted you, which makes you say in your hearts you are well and need no
mending. Therefore shall evil come upon you, and you shall not know from whence
it arises, and mischief shall fall upon you and you shall not be able to put
it off, and desolation shall come upon you suddenly, which you shall not know.
Therefore stand now with your enchantments, and with the multitude of your
services (that is to say, with your tricks and quillets, and cunning
soule-deceiving shifts) wherein you have labored from your youth, if so be you
shall be able to profit, and prevail; you are wearied in the multitude of your
Councels. Let now the Astrologers, the Starre-gazers, the monthly
Prognosticaters (that is to say, your famous Priests, those wise and learned
men (as you esteem them) whose frothy savings, and foolish council by some of
you are judged as Oracles; let these I say stand up and save you (if they be
able) from those things that shall shortly come upon you, Behold they shall be
as stubble, the fire shall burn them, and they shall not deliver themselves
from the power of the flame thereof, and there shall not be a coals for you to
warm at, nor fire to set before you. Thus shall it be unto you with whom you
have labored, even your spiritual Merchants from your youth, they shall
wander every one to his quarter, none shall save you. O Jehovah thou Lord of
hosts, and powerful God, that thou would rend the heavens, that thou
would in wrath and fury come down, that the Mountains might flow down at thy
presence, as when the melting fire burns, even the fire that causes the
waters to layle, to make thy great, dreadful, and terrible name known to thy
Babilonian Antichristian adversaries, that the Nations thereof may Isay. 64.1.2.
tremble at thy presence: and hasten thy coming in thy glorious Kingdom, and
cause the brightness thereof to scorch, torment, and torture the very souls and
spirits of thy spiritual enemies: and put Neh. 13.
Nehemiahs courage, and zeal into the hearts of all the Lambs redeemed ones,
that they may at once power out the Vyalls of thy fury and fierce indignation
Rev. 16.
upon the very throne of the Beast, to the ruin thereof, that his worshippers
may gnaw their tongues for very pain, and cry out with weeping, and wayling for
the destruction of their spiritual Babylon, alas, alas; and cause thy servants
in all their spiritual battayles never to make use of any of the Beasts
foolishnes, or humane weapons, which are no better then bul-rushes; but make it
known unto them that it is their duty to be as unlike unto him in all things
whatsoever as possibly they can, and to keep close to thy Law and Statutes, For
blessed are they that do thy Commandments, that they may have right to the
Tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the holy City.

And so my opposites I bid you farewell, and rest yours in any service for
Christ his truth and glory, to be commanded, and truly desiring the good and
welfare of your souls, N. E.

FINIS.

