THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S TOVVER.

OR, The way to be safe in a case of danger.

Published By Ier. Dike, Minister of Epping in Essex.

PSALM. 18. 2. The Lord is my Rock, and my high Tower.

August. in Psalm. 60. Ipse Christus est Turris, ipse nobis factus est Turris a
facie Inimici: cave ne feriaris a diabolo, fuge ad Turrim. Ibi stabis munitus,
and fixus. Quomodo autem fugies ad Turrim? Ante te est Turris, Recordare
Christum, and Intra in Turrim.

Prosper. Nec facile inveniuntur in adversitate praesidia, quae non fuerunt in
pace quaesita.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for I. Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Sun, in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

TO THE Right Honorable and virtuously ennobled Lady; the Lady KATHERIN
WENTVVORTH, my singular good Lady.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THe Divine providence has in wonderful wisdom put an uncertainty upon all
earthly good, and has so ordered it that there should be a vicissitude, an
intercourse, and an enterchange as of seasons so of conditions. There Genes. 8.
22.
must be whiles the earth remains a variety and a succession of seasons. Seed
time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night; And there
ever has been, and will be whiles the World remains, the like variety and
succession of conditions in this life. There is a seed-time, and an harvest.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Psa. 126. 5, 6.
He that goes forth and weepeth bearing precious seed, or the seed basket,
shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
There is a winter and a Cant. ^^ 11, 12.
summer. Lo the winter is past, the rain is over, and gone. The flowers
appear on the earth, the time of the singing of the Birds is come. There is a
day and a night. The morning was come, but the night also does come: thou had
a time of prosperity, but Isa. ^^. 12 Sic J^^^
now affliction is coming upon thee, says the Prophet to Edom. Now as it is a
matter of comfort that may support our spirits in a wette seed-time, in a cold
winter, in a dark night, that a joyful harvest, a warm summer, a lightsome
day will come, so it is matter of fear in a joyful harvest, in a warm
summer, in a bright day, that after these a wet, and a weeping seed-time, a
cold and a pinching winter, a dark and a gloomy night may come. The time may
come when we may say, Lo the summer is past, the raines, and the cold are
coming, and the shadows of the evening stretched out may tell us that then
the day goes away, and that we may Ier. 6. 4.
then say, Woe unto us. As this successive intercourse of conditions in the
times of evil should keep us from a fainting succumbency, and an umbeseeming
despondency of spirit; so in the time when our mountain seems strongest, and
our comforts seem to be most settled, it should keep us from security, and
settling upon our lees. It is good to fear the worst in our best condition, and
so to fear the worst as to provide and prepare for it. Though Job had some
probable grounds to say, I shall die in my nest, yet Job 29. 18.
he never so rocked and lulled himself asleep with the conceit of a
perpetuity of his prosperity, but that he feared what might, and what did
come. I feared Job 3. 25.
a fear, and it came upon me, and that (says he) which I was afraid of, is
come unto me. He never so hoped in hope, but withal in his best estate he
feared a fear. Never any man on earth enjoyed a more glorious peace then
Solomon did, and yet never any Prince that had, and made greater preparations
for war. He had dominion over all the Region on this side the River, and he
had 1 King. 4 24, 25, 26
peace on all sides round about him, And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every
man under his Vine, and under his Figtree, from Dan to Beersheba, all the days
of Solomon. And Solomon had forty thousand stalles of Horses for his Charets,
and twelve thousand Horsemen. Here was great peace and safety, and yet great
provisions against a danger that might happen. His wisdom is exemplary, and
it is wisdom to follow it. Since all earthly felicities are mutable, and
sorrows and calamities may come in their room, it is singular wisdom, as to
foresee them, so to provide for comfort and safety in them. It was a wise
speech of Crates the Theban when he forsook Thebes after it was repaired, and
so fortified: I (...). Aelian. l. 3. c. 6.
need not, said he, a City that Alexander or some other may overthrow. He
thought it a folly to trust to any City or hold for his safety, which might not
be able to withstand Alexanders, or another enemies power. That was the
highest pitch of his prudence and providence; and so far should Christians
go, but must yet withal go farther, not only not to betrust their safety
with any thing in a man's power, but to seek their comforts and their safety in
such an hold and muniment as is above the reach and power of an Alexander, or
any other man. Such an hold, and such a Tower there is to be had. That Is the
gracious goodness of the Lord, that though he will bring changes and
alterations of our conditions, and turn our comforts into fears, yet he will
never put us into such fears, nor put us upon such streights, as that we
shall be left comfortless or Towerlesse. He has in the hardest, and worst
that can befall us, provided us the Tower of his Name; to which, we may run,
and to which if we do run, we shall find succor and safety. So that
looking upon godly and righteous men, will a man say of them, as Balaam said
when he looked upon the Kenites, Number. 24 21.
Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou put thy nest in a Rock? And what
ever sad condition then befall a Christian, what need his spirit be perplexed,
and distracted with fears? When he has put his nest in a rock, why should
any thing put his heart in a fear? But this is our folly, and our weakness,
that God having provided us so strong a Tower as his Name is, that we take not
the advantage of the strength of this Tower, that we make no more have unto,
and into it. It is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7. 11
that he was a silly Dove without heart; and well it were if the same might
not as truly be said of us. To be a Dove without gall, that is commendable, but
to be a Dove without heart, that is neither commendable nor safe. A rod, says
Solomon, is for him that is void of heart. That Prove. 10. 13.
man must needs lie open, and be exposed to the judgments of God that fall
upon the world. A Dove-like, Innocence our Savior requires in us, Be innocent
as Doves; but a Dove-like silliness not minding nor fearing the Fowlers nets
and snares he cautions against when he requires a Serpentine wisdom. And
yet the Dove is not so silly but when she sees a danger, and is in fear of
her enemy, she can dwell in the rock, Ier. 48. 28.
and make her nest in the sides of the holes mouth. The Dove is not without
heart, but in her fear and danger she will seek shelter in the Rock. To get
into this Tower of Gods Name how would it settle and se*cure our hearts, and
quiet Sub tecto Imbrem exaudire. Adag.
our spirits in the saddest conditions? How good is it to hear the rain
rattle upon the tyles when a man sits under the roof? When Moses gave warning
of that dreadful storm of hail and fire mingled with it, such of Pharaohs
servants as feared the Word of the Lord, made their servants and cattle fly
into their houses, ^. 10. ^1.
such as regarded not so fair warning left them abroad in the field. When the
storm came, who were the wiser and the safer then? then both parties saw how
good it was to be housed in a storm. And what is an house to this Tower of
Gods Name? when so much safety in an Egyptian cottage, what will the safety of
a man's person, and the serenity of a man's spirit be within the covert of so
strong a Tower? But who shall be the men that shall have the benefit of this
Tower? Such as be Gods friends. And who be Gods friends? Such as have their
conversation in heaven. They that have their conversation in heaven are the
friends of the God of heaven, and they that are the friends of God shall have
the Name of God for their strong Tower. And therefore it is that I have joined
these texts, and treatises together in one, they having such correspondence
with, and reference each to other.

And now (most Noble, and my much Honored Lady) they coming forth to public
view, I make so bold as to tender and present them to your Honor, as a
public testimonial of my thankfulness to you. I must ever acknowledge mine
engagements unto you, such as transcend possibility of any retribution on my
part, and must leave that unto him that can and will repay you sevenfold into
your bosom. I must with all thankfulness to God acknowledge your Nobleness
in your favors, countenance, and encouragement to me in the work and labor
of my Ministry. There is mention made in Scripture of Hezekiah's acts, and 2
Chro. 32. 32.
his goodness. Acts, and goodness, that is a glorious commendation. We read
of his father Ahaz, his Acts, and of all his ways, first 2 Chro. 28, 26.
and last; but we read of no goodness. They be Acts, and Goodness, good
Acts that make the Name sweet and Honorable. And what were Hezekiahs Acts and
Goodness? I find amongst other, two of special note, The one was that He
encouraged the Levites that 2 Chro. 30. 22.
taught the good knowledge of the Lord. His encouragement of the Levites was
his Honor: there was an Act and Goodness, an Act of Goodness indeed. And in
that Act of Goodness does your Honor share with him. The other Act, and
Goodness of his was that he made a poole and a conduit, and 2 King. 20. 20.
brought water into the City. His purse was going for the benefit of others,
and the good of many. And herein have you followed him in his Goodness, your
Fountains have been Pro. 5. 16
dispersed abroad, and your Rivers of waters in the streets. You have built
Salomons Conduit, and the waters of your bounty and mercy cease not to spring,
and run abroad to the relief of many. Your works praise you in Pr. 31. 31
the gate, as Bathshebaes virtuous woman's should. The backs of the poor which
you cloathe, the loins of the poor which your fleece warmes, the bellies of
the poor which you feed, and the bowels of the poor which you so often
refresh, they all bless you, and God for you. And he that hears the curses
of the poor oppressed, will certainly hear the prayers of the poor
refreshed. Not only Cornelius his prayers, but his Prayers and his Alms both
came up for a memorial before God. Act. 10. 4
The Kings of the Gentiles affected the Title of Benefactours, how well they
Luke 22. 25.
deserved it some of them, their stories witness, but what they affected, you
have really deserved, The Honorable style of a Benefactour to the poor. It is
said of Dorcas Act. 9. 36
that she was a woman full of Good works, and Almsdeeds which she^ did. And
herein it appeared that she was indeed a woman full of Good works that all
the Widows* and poor women which she^ had clothed, stood weeping Act. 9. 39
by Peter when she^ was dead, and showing the coats and garments which she
had made a^ her cost, and clothed them withal. So many coats and garments as
they showed, so many evidences they brought forth of her good works. The like
honor is yours upon the Hic causam notat Lucascur snscitata fuerit Thabita,
nempe quod Deus pauperum misertus, eorum votis, sanctae foeminae vitam
concessit. Calv. in loc.
same grounds. And it is worth the noting that Calvin notes upon that place.
That the text points out one cause why Dorcas was raised from the dead, namely
that God out of compassion to the poor granted the life of that holy woman at
the instance of their prayers. And if God at the instance of the prayers of the
poor whom she had showed mercy to, raised Dorcas from the dead, then how much
more will he at the prayers of the poor continue, and draw out their lives
that do draw out their bowels to the poor? It is certain that God will have
an eye for good over such as have had a good eye to the poor. He will be a
Tower to such in a time when a Tower will be of greatest use. The man that
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, and in evil times, that shall have his
heart fixed, Psalm. 112. 4, 6, 7.
that shall have his heart established, so as he shall not be afraid, is thus
qualified amongst other things. He is gracious, and full of compassion, and
righteous: that is, liberal and good to the necessities of the poor. Such an
one shall find God good to him in an evil time of misery. Gods Name shall be
a Tower of safety to such ^n one. And that that Name may be ever your ^trong
Tower of safety, and that the God of Heaven, and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ would abundantly multiply your Graces, and your Days, that he would
continue and increase the honor of your Noble Family, both in Root and
Branches, and that he would give you at the last a full Reward in his glorious
Kingdom, is and ever shall be the hearty prayer of

Your Honors servant^ IER. DYKE.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes, R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.
Feb. 13. 1638.
THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S TOWER.
Prove. 18. 10. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs
into it, and is safe, or is set aloft.
WHat Salomons drift was in writing this book of the Proverbs we find chap.
1. 2. 3. 4. To know wisdom and Instruction, and that men might perceive the
words of understanding. And not only that they might Perceive the words of
understanding, but that they might Receive the Instruction of wisdom. And to
give subtlety to the simple. Now that which Solomon speaks of his whole book
may be applied in special manner to this particular proverb: when men are in
streights and dangers, and their spirits in distractions, and perplexities,
there is nothing they desire more then safety, a fair issue, and deliverance,
and are casting about in their thoughts, what may be their wisest, and safest
course. And yet such is men's folly and simplicity, that amongst the many
courses they think, and resolve upon; they cannot hit upon the only safe
course of all. Therefore Solomon in this proverb intends to make men know
wisdom and instruction, would have men perceive the words of understanding,
and would teach the simple a piece of holy subtlety and policy, and what course
is the only wise course to be taken in a case of fear and danger: namely,
that the only wise course for a man to provide for himself in such a case is
to be^ take himself to the Name of God, for his Name is a strong Tower, and
that the Righteous having the wisdom thithe^ to be take himself, finds it
well worth the while, and that it is no labor lost, The Righteous runs into
it and is safe, is set aloft out of the reach of his feared danger. And the
truth of this point he illustrates by showing the contrary va^ity of all other
carnal shifts, and confidences of our own, verse. 11. The Rich man's wealth is
his strong city, and as an high wall in his conceit, many build as they suppose
strong castles and towers, in which they suppose to immure themselves, and to
be fenced against all afterclaps, as the Rich man supposes his riches will be
his security against any danger, but alas this and all other Towers and Castles
are but castles, and Towers in the air, only in men's own con^eits: there is
but one way when all is ^one, and that is this, The name of the lord is a
strong Tower, etc. For the sense of the words. By the Name of the Lord ^^ meant
the Lord himself. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. and the Power, the Providence, the Mercy and
Goodness of God. Is a strong ^ower. It is a metaphorical speech, look that a
strong tower is in case of dan^er: such is God, such is his Power, Providence,
Mercy, and Goodness to a man having recourse to him. Runs into it. It is the
metaphor continued, men in danger of a pursuing enemy, not by having a tower,
but by a speedy betaking of themselves, and running thither with all haste
find safety: so men by a speedy betaking themselves to God find shelter, and
protection. The point then that may be gathered from hence is this.

What is the only sanctuary for safety in a case of fear, and danger. What is
the To this purpose makes that prayer of the church for the king. Psalm. 20. 1.
The Name of the God of Jacob defend thee, or set thee on an high place.

A man that in a case of fear and danger will wisely provide for his safety,
must do two things.

First, He must make choice and pitch upon a place, or person in whom, and
which there is such a sufficiency that safety and security may be had. As in
time of war, when a man is in fear or danger of an enemy he will not trust
to his house, but he makes choice of a fort, of a castle, of a tower. And not
of any tower, or castle neither, not of a weak tower, of an unfurnished tower,
but of a strong Tower, strongly built, strongly mand, well munitioned.

Secondly, He must betake himself, and that with speed also to that place, or
person. He must not only go, but he must Run, betake himself with speed.
Both those things must be done in a wise provision for safety. For if a man do
Run to a Tower, yet if that be a weak and an insufficient tower, without
men and munition, and a Ruinous shaken Tower: or if a man do make choice of a
Tower a strong sufficient Tower, yet if in his danger he betake not himself to
that Tower, but he sit still: or if he sit not still, yet he but only go,
and walk on easily toward it, he may well be met withal and a danger may
arrest him, surprise him, and cut him off before he get the Tower over his
head. But the man that will be safe, as he must choose a strong Tower, so he
must go to, nay Run into that Tower. Running will not secure a man unless
the Tower be strong. The strong Tower will not secure a man unless he Run.
There must be strength in the Tower, and speed in the pace. A weak Tower, or
a slow pace, either of them lays a man open to the danger. But when the Tower
is strong, and a man Runs, then is a man in safety. Now thus it is in Running
to God in a case of danger, it is the surest project for safety. for

1. Gods Name is a Tower, a strong Tower. The Name of the Lord is a strong
Tower. The Lord, says David, is my rock, and my fortress, my strength in
whom I will trust, and mine high Tower. Psalm. 18. 2. An house of Fortresses.
Psalm. 31. 2. The Prophet Nahum speaks of terrible things, and of sore times of
trouble, that were coming in his days. Neh. 1. 5. 6. And puts the question
what a man should do for his safety at that time, who can stand before his
indignation, and who can abide in the fierceness of his Anger? What shall a
man do, what course shall he take for his safety, when his fury is powered out
like fire, and the rocks are thrown down? The answer to that question is
laid down, verse. 7. The Lord is Good, A strong Hold in the day of trouble. The
time it may be might be such a time as Amos 5. 13. It is an evil time, The
days it may be might be such as Paul speaks of Ephesians. 5. 16. The days are
evil. I but says the Prophet, The Lord is Good. The dangers many, and
exceeding Great, I but the Lord is a strong hold in the day of Trouble.
Excellent is that, Psalm. 46. 1. God is our Refuge, and our strength, a very
present help in Trouble. If a person had slain a man at unawarres he was to
flee unto one of the cities of Refuge, and the reason is given. Deuteronomy. 19. 6.
why God would have three of those cities in three seveverall parts of the Land,
Least the avenger of blood pursue the slayer whilst his heart is hot, and
overtake him because the way is long, and slay him. Therefore would God have
them in diverse places, because a man slaying another at unawares might be
near to one of those cities, and so prevent danger by getting into one of them
for sanctuary. Now if once a man were within the walls, or gates of one of
those cities of Refuge, then he was safe. Let the Avenger of blood follow as
hard as he would, and let his heart be as hot as it would, yet if once within
the city of Refuge, the man was safe. When the Avenger of blood pursued hotly,
a man was in present danger, but if he got but the city of Refuge over his
head, though the Avenger pursued at his very heels, yet the city of Refuge was
a very present help, in that time of danger. So says the Psalm, God is our
Refuge, our city of Refuge. Suppose troubles and dangers should pursue a man as
close at the heels as the Avenger of blood did the man slayer, it may be in
such a case of danger, there was no possibility of escape, yes that there were,
God is our Refuge, and our strength, a very present help in trouble, let
dangers be as present as may be, yet he is a very present help. There is an
All Sufficiency in God both for defense and offense. There is no danger so
great or present, from which his power is not able to rescue. No power so
great, which he is not able to crush, and break.

The safety of a strong Tower stands in two things. 1. That it is for Defense,
so as to keep an enemy off, and to defend a man within it from the danger of
enemies without. 2. That it is for offense, so as to hurt, and spoil an enemy
without. A Tower not only guards, and keeps a man safe, but it has ordnance
and ammunition, with which it keeps off, and beats off, and beats away
enemies. A weak person from a strong Tower may do a great deal of mischief
to a strong enemy. Abimeleck, and a sorry woman were an unequal match, what
was a weak woman to him? And yet a weak woman having the advantage of a
strong Tower, proved too good for him, for a woman from the Tower casts a piece
of a millstone upon abimelecks head, and brake his skul. Judge. 9, 53. Now such a
strong Tower is the Lord. He has All Sufficiency of strength to defend, free
and protect from all dangers whatsoever, and he has Allsufficiency of Power
to beat, and batter and spoil all such adversaries as shall assault any within
this Tower. He is a strong Tower, both to keep such safe as are within it, and
a strong Tower, able to batter with his cannon and ordnance such as shall offer
to assail and besiege it. He is such a Tower as that, Cant. 4. 4. Thy neck
is like the Tower of David builded for an Armory, wherein there hangs a
thousand bucklers, all sheilds of mighty men. In David's Tower there were
shields and bucklers for defense and protection, and there was Thalpijoth, an
Armory, a word that comes of Thalah to hang, and Pijoth, two edged swords, all
Instruments of offense, and weapons of death to do executions on enemies. so
that he that makes choice of God for his safety, goes wisely to work in
provision for his security, for he pitches upon a Tower, upon a strong Tower.
He is a Tower unquestionably sufficient for safety. This is an impregnable
fort. Psalm. 20. 1. The Name of the God of Jacob set thee on an high place.
Therefore Psalm. 46. 1. Deus noster Refugiam and virtus. Sunt quaedam refugia
ubi non est virtus, quo quisque cum fugerit magis infirmatur quam confirmetur.
Confugis ad aliquam insaeculo magnum, ut facias tibi potente^ ^micum, Refugiam
tibi videtur. Tanta tamen huius sa^^li incerta sunt ^^^ ut cum ad tale Refugium
confugeris plus ibi ^imere incipi^^. Non est refugium nostrum tale, sed
refugium nostrum virtus est. Cum illuc confugeimus, f^r^i erimus. August in
Psalm. 43.
God is our Refuge and our strength. Such a refuge in which there is strength.
There be Refuges in which no strength, to which when a man betakes himself he
is rather weakened then strengthened. Ahaz makes the king of Assyria his Refuge,
but he was not his strength, 2 Chronicles. 28. 20. The King of Assyria came unto
him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not. But God is not such a refuge,
he is our Refuge and our strength, the name of the Lord is a strong Tower.

2. In Running unto, and into this Tower, in betaking a man's self unto God,
there is safety. The Righteous Runs into it, and is exalted, or is safe, we
shall find it true in some examples. Iehoshaphat was in great danger, and in
great fear. 2 Chronicles. 20. 1. 2. Then there came some that told Iehoshaphat
saying. There comes a great multitude against thee, what that multitude was
we see verse. 1. And what does Iehoshaphat in this fear and danger? See verse.
3. 4. He set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all
Judah, and Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the Lord, even
out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek the Lord. And verse. 12. we
know not what to do; but our eyes are upon thee. Iehoshaphat and the people in
their danger, and their fear, run to this strong tower of the name of the
Lord, they betake themselves to God: and what was the issue? see it verse. 22,
23, 24. All the huge host of their enemies proves in heap of dead karcases,
when they came to the watchtower in the Wilderness, they then found that the
Name of the Lord which they had run unto, proved indeed a Tower of safety.
Hezekiah was in a great danger, and fear, Senacherib comes against him with an
army of an hundred fourscore and five thousand, sends him railing messages,
threatening letters: what course takes Hezekiah in this danger? He runs to
this strong tower, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20. For this cause Hezekiah the King, and the
Prophet Isaiah prayed, and cried to heaven. See also 2 King. 19. 1. 14. 15. All
this was running to this tower; and what was the speed, and the sequel? That
we find 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. 22. 23. Thus the Lord saved Hezekiah, and he was
magnified amongst all nations. So that Hezekiah ran to this Tower, and was not
only safe, but was exalted, and magnified. So that the Name of the Lord is not
only a strong Tower; but a saving Tower, and a man by betaking himself to it,
takes a wise course for safety and protection.

It serves to teach us what to do in case Act. 16. 30. Sirs, what must I do to
be saved? So in cases of outward danger, and trouble, men are ready to cry out,
Oh good sirs, what shall we do? what course shall we take? Is there any course
to be thought upon, and to be taken, that may be conducent unto, and wherein
we may provide for our safety? yes, there is a course and a way to be taken
for safety in the greatest fears that can befall us. I but what is that
course? and what may that way be? This is the course, The Name of the Lord is
a strong Tower, the righteous run unto it, and are safe. In fears and dangers
then make me unto this tower, get me unto and into it, and we take the right
course for our safety. David's heart was overwhelmed, full of fears by reason
of dangers, and he takes this course, Psalm. 61. 2. 3. I will cry unto thee
when my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the Rock that is higher then I, for
thou have been ashelter for me, and a strong Tower from the enemy. The course
to be safe is to be set aloft, to be placed on high, out of the reach of a
danger. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run into it, and
is set aloft. (...), that is, he is safe, because when a man is set aloft out
of the reach of a danger then he is safe. But how shall a man be set aloft? By
running into this Tower of Gods Name, Psalm. 46. 7. The God of Jacob is our
Refuge, is an high place for us, (...) a place to be set aloft in, the same
word that is here in the text. So that when a man runs unto Gods Name he is
in an High place, when in an high place he is aloft, and when he is a loft he
is Safe. It is strange to see how full of fears men's hearts are, when they are
apprehensive of dangers, and are sensible of approaching evils, and yet in the
mean time how little care they take, how little provision they make for their
safety, and security.

That same in the general was a wise course of them. Genesis 11. 4. Let us build
a city, and a Tower whose top may reach to heaven, least we be scattered abroad
upon the face of the earth. Thus far they went wisely to work, that being in
a fear they would provide for their safety, that being in a fear they would
build a tower for their defense. It is certainly a good piece of wisdom when
men fear troubles and dangers to fall a building of towers for safety. The
course in the general was a wise course, though in particular they plaide the
fools to think that their safety did lie in a tower of brick.

Thus far let us imitate their wisdom, as to work prospective work, and to
build a Tower into which we may be take our selves, to save our selves, from
the surprisall of evils and dangers, of which at any time we stand in fear.
Well, but what Tower should we build? Not a Tower of brick whose top may reach
to Heaven, but this Tower that Solomon speaks of, A Tower which is in heaven
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower. Let us make this our Tower, and make
to, and get into this Tower for our safety, when ever our hearts are in fear
of any dangers, when the men of Thebez were in danger of Abimeleck, see what
course they took, and how they provided for their safety. Judge. 9. 50. 51.
Then went Abimeleck to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it, But
there was a strong Tower within the city, and thither fled all the men, and
women, and all they of the city and shut it to them, and gate them up to the
top of the Tower. Mark, there was a strong Tower, thither they all fled, and
gate them up to the top of the Tower, and so they were safe from Abimelecks
rage, yea and from that Tower did a woman break the skull of Abimeleck. There
was a great deal of disparity, and odds between Abimeleck, and a poor weak
woman: and yet a woman in a tower may be too good for an Abimeleck. The Tower
fenced her from Abimeleck, and she from the tower banes, and brains him, and
crowns him with a piece of a millstone, that was so ambitiously and bloudily
bent upon a kingdom. It is a great deal of Advantage, and safety to a weak
woman to be within a Tower. Follow we their wisdom. If at any time we fear
dangers, lo here in this text a strong Tower. Thither let us flee, thither let
us run, let us shut it to us, let us go to the top of this Tower, the higher
the safer. And though dangers may come as nigh us, as Abimeleck did to those
men of Thebez, hard to the door of the Tower. Judge. 9. 52. yet this tower is a
place of defense, and of offense. There be not pieces, but whole milstones in
this tower, that can dash and crush all dangers in the head at the very door
of the Tower.

And that we may the better be stirred up to seek our safety when need is in
this Tower, consider these three things.

1. That though it be lawful, and requisite, to use all means, and outward
helps for our safety, yet there is no safety in any means, or helps till
this be done. There is a vanity in all means, and courses for safety, and they
prove but shifts, unless a man have first betaken himself to this Tower.
There is no safety in any means unless a man seek his safety in betaking him
to God: we shall see the truth of it in all those kind of Towers that men in
their fears do usually betake themselves unto, and put their trust in for
protection.

First, it is a great deal of confidence that men put in material Towers,
Castles, and strong holds, in time of danger and fear. Those people Genesis 11.
made account, that if they built them an high brick tower, they should be safe
from dispersion. And yet that tower saved them not from dispersion; yea, that
tower which they thought should save them from dispersion, was the very cause
of their dispersion. The men of Penuel, by reason of their tower, thought
themselves so safe, that they durst flout Gideon, but Judge. 8. 17. he brake
down their tower, and slew the men of the City. The strongest towers that men
have, are easily flatted, and beat down, when God is not their strong tower.
The City of Tyrus gloried much in the strength of her towers, Ezekiel. 27. 11.
The Gammadims were in thy towers, they hanged their shields upon thy walls,
round about. They had towers, and those towers were mand, and furnished with
stout and resolute Gammadims. Gammadims in their Towers. But though they had
such Towers, and Gammadims in their Towers, yet because they had not God in
their towers, because God was not their strong tower, therefore their strong
Towers, and their Gammadims could not keep out Nebuchadnezzar, but he came and
brake down her towers, Ezekiel. 26. 4* He shall set engines of war against thy
walls, and with his axes shall he break down thy Towers. It was a great
deal of confidence that Niniveh put in her strong holds. Nahum 3. 14. Fortify
thy strong holds, go into clay, and tread the mortar: The Prophet derides all
their care, and cost in their fortifications. It is a bitter sarcasme by which
he flouts the vanity of all the courses they should seek to secure themselves
from the Chaldeans. They had not made God their Tower, nor had not run into
that Tower, and therefore see what all their towers, and forts would come to.
v. 12. All thy strong holds shallbe like figtrees with the first ripe figs, If
they be shaken, they shall even fall into the mouth of the eater. Ripe figs
they drop down with the least concussion, with the least jog of the figtree,
and fall into the mouth of the eater. Just so easily should their forts, and
holds yield to the Chaldeans that longed to be eating, and devouring them. When
God is not men's strong hold, he shakes kingdoms, as a man would shake a fig
tree, and he gives a commandment to destroy strong holds, or the strengths of
a city. Isay 23. 11.

Secondly, It is a great deal of confidence that is put in stout men, in
goodly horses. When God is not sought unto, and he not trusted in as a man of
war to fight our battles, so many men but so many women. Nah. 3. 13. Behold thy
people in the midst of thee are women, no more heart, no more courage in them
then in women. And what safety in an Army of women? Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust in
charets, and some in horses. But an horse is a vain thing for safety. Psalm.
33. 17. The horse indeed is prepared against the day of battle. Pro. 21. 31.
But safety is of the Lord. The safety is not from the horse, for the horse is
flesh, and not spirit, Isa. 31. 3.

Thirdly, it is a great deal of confidence that men put in their wealth and
riches, Pro. 18. 11. The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as an high
wall in his conceit. Come what can or will come, thinks many a rich man, he
has money and wealth, and money answers all things. He conceives himself as
safe in the midst of his wealth, as if he had a Tower as high as Heaven, as
if enclosed within walls like Ierichoes, as high as heaven. He is immured
within his silver walls, and fortified within his golden towers, and he
thinks himself past the reach of all dangers: but if a man have not made God
his Tower, and be not gotten within that tower, those golden and silver towers
will afford a man no safety at all. Riches avail not in the day of wrath, Pro.
11. 4. It is true indeed, that at some times, and in some cases, The ransom of
a man's life are his riches, Proverbs 13. 8. And in some cases money is a
defense, or a shadow, Eccles. 7. 12. But when Gods wrath breaks out in sore
judgments, then money in another sense is but a shadow. It is poor safety that
it will yield in such a time, Zeph. 1. 18. Neither their silver, nor their
gold, shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lords wrath. Nay, it is
that which many times exposes a man to the more danger, as many a man's finger
is the sooner cut off for his gold ring, and many a man's throat the sooner cut
for his wealth. It is a certain thing, that in the Parisian massacre, many
that were Papists, were murdered, as well as Nec tantum Hugonoti occidebantur,
sed etia^ opulentiores qu^dam Pontificii, quorum opibus avari mililit^s inhi
abant, easque per n^fas rapiebant. Osiand. epit. cent. 16 l. 3. c. 69.
Protestants; not their faith, but their wealth made heretics and Hugonotes
of them. Their Riches were as dangerous to them, as their Religion was to the
protestants: it was foul heresy with some of those furies, for some men to
have money, and to be rich. Who escaped better in the desolation by
Nebuchadnezzar, than the poor of the land? Ier. 39. 10. He left the poor of
the people, which had nothing in the land, and gave them fields and vineyards
at the same time: There is more safety at such a time in poverty than in
riches. Poverty is sometimes a safer tower than Riches; and a poor thatcht
cottage more safe than a silver tower.

Fourthly, it is a great deal of confidence that men put in getting honors,
preferments, and high places; but the safety is not answerable to the
confidence. Some set their nests on high, Hab. 2. 9. and that upon this ground,
That they may be delivered from the power of evil. But a nest on high will not
deliver from evil. Some birds build their nests on high: but yet if the trees
cannot be climbd; they may be cut down. That same tree, Dan. 4. verse. 10, 11,
12. which Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, the height thereof was great, the
tree grew, and was strong, and the height reached unto heaven, and the Fowls
of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, they made their nests in the
boughs of that high tree, and so made their nests on high. But yet verse. 14.
see what the watchman said, Hew down the tree, and cut down his branches: and
where were those nests then? Then those nests on high, were laid low enough.
What safety in a nest on high, when the tree is hewed down!

Lastly, it is a great confidence that men put in their outward privileges,
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, Ier. 7. 4. that was the buckler
the Jews held out to fence off all blows, as if the Temple had been a strong
Tower to have saved them from all dangers, as if the Temple walls had been
Canon-proofe: and yet the Lord there tells them, that the Temple should be so
far from freeing them from wrath, that wrath should fall upon the temple it self
They conceived not a little safety in the altar. They thought Ariel the Lion of
God, the brazen Altar of sacrifice to be a brazen wall about them. But Isa. 29.
1. 2. Woe unto Ariel, that is, to the Altar, and to the Temple: Ariel shall be
so far from saving you from distress, that Ariel it self shall be
distressed. Ioab fled to the Altar in his fear and danger, and took sanctuary
there, and yet his doom was, Fall upon him there. The Prophet bids them, not
trust in lying words, Ier. 7. To trust in privileges, and to place security
in them against Gods Anger is to trust in a lie. And of trusting in outward
privileges, it may be said as Mic. 1. 14. The houses of Achzib shall be
Achzab, that is, a lie to the Kings of Israel. Thus there is a vanity in all
other courses, and confidences, besides this, and all the Towers besides this,
to which men betake themselves, are but paper Towers, paper Castles, and such
as will prove but towers of Babel, towers of confusion.

2 That the betaking of our selves to the strong tower of Gods Name; is that
which puts strength unto all means we use, and courses we take, and makes
them successful: This Tower strengthens all other towers: this makes them to
be strong towers: this makes them that they will bear a brunt, and a shock,
this makes strong holds hold out. David was feign often to betake himself to
holds and forts for his safety, as 1 Samuel 22. 4. and 23. And David abode in the
wilderness in strong holds, verse 29. And David went up from thence, and dwelt
in strong holds at En-Gedi. And we see that Saul could not get him, he was
safe in his holds, and fortresses. And how so? because as David dwelt in, and
betook himself to those holds, so he made God his hold, and the house of his
fortresses. Psalm 31. 3. David took forts and holds for his safety, but yet
he made God his tower, and strength, and not his holds, and so his safety was
from God, and not from his holds. 1 Sa. 23. 14. and David abode in strong holds
and Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hands. The
text says not, but his holds kept him out of Saul's hands, but God kept him out
of Saul's hands. So that David making God his hold, he was the strength of his
hold. See how David speaks. Ps. 18. 2. Thou art mine hold, and mine high Tower,
he does not say, En-Gedi is my strong hold, or the wilderness of Ziph is my
strong hold, but Thou art mine hold. And this was it that made the wilderness of
Ziph, and the holds of En-Gedi such strong holds, because he had made God his
hold, and his strong tower. The cave in which David was hid, and into which
Saul came, was a Cave in the wilderness of En-Gedi, and in that cave he found
shadow and shelter from Saul, and yet see how he speaks, Psalm. 57. 1. My soul
trusts in thee, yea in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge etc. we
see by the title of the psalm, upon what occasion it was made, when he fled
from Saul in the cave, and he says not, I trust in my Cave, in the shadow of
the cave, will I make my refuge, but my soul trusts in thee, In the shadow of
thy wings will I make my refuge, he made God his cave and his hiding place, and
thereupon his cave became a shadow, and a shelter to him.

It is lawful for us, and it is that we ought to do, to use all good means
for our safety in cases of danger, but yet the first thing to be done, is to
make God our strong Tower, and this is it which will make them means of
safety, mark that place, 2 Chapter 14. 7. let us build these cities and make about
them walls, and towers, gates, and bars. First they made God their Tower, as
appears in the words following, because we have sought the Lord our God, and
in the words before verse. 4. He commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, and when they had made God their tower, and wall of defense, then they
said, let us build and make Towers. And when they took this course, then they
went to work to the purpose. So they built and prospered, says the end of the
verse. This is the way to make all our counsels, projects, and courses for
safety, to prosper, and do well. So they built and prospered: that is, when they
had sought God, and had made him their strong tower first. First make God our
tower, and then build and prosper, then project, and prosper.

3. Consider what a miserable perplexity, confusion, and distraction of spirit,
it will be in a time of trouble to be fort-lesse, and Tower-lesse. Look in
what a case the Canaanites were. Josh. 2. 10. 11. For we have heard how the
Lord dried up the waters of the red sea for you, and what you did to the two
kings of the Amorites, etc. And as soon as we heard those things, our hearts
did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man because of you.
Look in what a case the Jews were, Isa. 7. 2. And it was told the house of
David saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim: and his heart was moved, and
the heart of his people as the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. How
sad is that passage. Ier. 30. 5. 6. 7. We have heard a voice of trembling, of
fear, and not of peace, ask now and see whether a man does travel with
child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins as a woman
with child, and all faces turned into palenesse? Alas, for that day is great,
etc. This is the miserable, and disconsolate condition of many men in the times
of their trouble. Now what ails them, what brings them into such distresses of
spirit. Poor men, they are Towerlesse, they have no tower to betake them to;
they are not run into this Tower of Gods Name, and therefore their fears do
rack and torture them, do even mad them, and make them out of their wits.
What are they better, Isa. 8. 21, 22. They are hard bestead, and fret
themselves, and curse their King, and their God, they look upward, and they
look downward; and which way soever they look, they behold trouble and
darkness. It would make a man pity Moab, to see him toyled and turmoyled with
his own distractions, Isa. 16. 12. He shall in his fears and perplexities of
spirit, try all conclusions for his safety. He shall go to his high place and
pray there, and shall weary himself, with trying what may be done there, and
shall go from thence with his heart as full of fears as before. His fears
shall gaster him as much as before he went to his high place. From his high
place he shall go to his sanctuary, and he shall pray there also. If the high
place, and prayer there, will not ease his heart, yet happily he hopes he may
do somewhat for his ease at the Sanctuary, and therefore thither he will go.
And when he has tried his sanctuary, how cheeres he then? Alas, still in as
bad a case as before, but he shall not prevail, neither his high place, nor
his sanctuary, nor all his prayers, nor devotions, can give his heart any ease
of his fears. So unconceiveably miserable is the distraction of those men's
spirits in time of trouble, that are not gotten into this Tower. Their fears
and terrors rack and rend their hearts in pieces, like so many wild horses.
And who then would be towerlesse in a time of trouble? Who would be to seek
of a Tower then? Who would have a tower to build then? and who would be out of
his tower then?

But now let a man be gotten into this Tower, and with what serenitie,
calmnesse, quiet of spirit, shall a man possess his soul in patience? He may
even laugh at sword, famine, pestilence, or any calamity. It is an incredible
thing to worldly men, that a godly man in such times should have his heart
without fear, without distracting, astonishing, stounding fear. It is a
riddle to them. Psa. 49. 4. I will open my riddle upon the harp. And what is
that riddle? verse 5. Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil? This is
therefore a riddle to men of the world, that a godly man should not fear in the
days of evil. But as very a riddle as they judge it, yet it is a sure truth:
and this is the reason, and the ground of it; because they are not found
towerlesse, and fortlesse in a day of evil, they are gotten within the gates
and walls of a strong Tower, and this puts their hearts into so sweet and
composed a frame. See Psalm 46. 1, 2, 3. God is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble: Therefore will not we fear, though the earth
be moved, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;
Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. To see the earth removed, to see mountains carried
into the midst of the sea, to hear the waters rore and be troubled, to see the
mountains shake, these are dreadful things to see and hear, things able to
move, melt, and shake the heart of the stoutest man that lives, with fear, and
yet says the Psalm, We will not fear.

Now whence came this strength, and incredible presence of spirit? From that
verse. 1. God is our refuge. Hence such freedom from consternation of spirit in
such prodigious hurly-burlies. Hence such confidence of heart in times of
dread. And this was Luthers Psalm, when he heard of great troubles and
broils that were up against him, Come, come, says he, no matter for them all,
let us sing the 46 Psalm, and let them do their worst: as if he had said, let
things go how they will, let dangers be what they will, why should we fear
so long as God is our Refuge, and our Tower? So happy, so sweet, so comfortable
a condition it is in times of trouble, to be within the walls of this
impregnable Tower. As we would dread to be under the torture of miserable
distractions, so take heed of being Towerlesse. As we would be blessed with an
invincible presence of spirit, so run unto, and run into this Tower.

Quest. Well then, but how may we so run into this Tower, as that we may be
safe? What is this running, and wherein stands it?

Answ. I conceive this Running to comprehend three things.

1. The Doing such Duties hy which we may get into this Tower. 2. The manner of
the Doing of them. 3 The Doing of such Duties which are to be done when
entered, and gotten into the Tower.
1. This Running implies the Doing of those duties which must be done to get
in, and to enter us within this Tower. And so this Running comprehends these
four things, 1. Knowledge. 2. Faith. 3. Repentance. 4. Prayer.


These be the four feet with which we must Run into this Tower to find
safety there, we must Run upon all these four.

1. It comprehends the Knowledge of God, as he has revealed himself in his
word.
First the knowledge of him in all his glorious attributes of his wisdom,
power, mercy, providence. We must know him to be a God so wise as can
Infatuate all the crafty counsels, and policies of enemies, to be a God of
such power that he is able to deliver, and defend all that do betake
themselves to him for succor, To be a God tenderhearted, merciful, and
compassionate to his people in their distresses, To be a provident God that
has the ordering and governing of all events, and occurrences here below. And

Secondly, there must be the knowledge of him in Christ.

A man that will Run to a Tower for safety, he must

First, know that there is such a Tower. Though there be a Tower, yet if a man
know not of it, or know not the way to it, he will never Run to it, for who
will Run he knows not whether.

Secondly, He must know that it is such a Tower as it is, of sufficient
strength for safety and defense, for if he know that there is a Tower, and do
know the way to that Tower, yet if he do not know it to be a Tower of
strength, a Tower of Defense, that is able to hold out an enemy, he will have
no heart to Run unto it.

Thirdly, He must know that there is a possibility of admittance and entrance
into that Tower: for though a man know there is such a Tower, and that is a
strong and a safe Tower, yet if he thinks when he comes to this Tower, that
he shall get no entrance, but shall have the Tower gates shut upon him, and
barred against him, he will never Run to that Tower.

Now Just so it is here.

First, When a man knows God, he knows there is a Tower.

Secondly, When he knows him in his attributes, he knows the Tower is
sufficient.

Thirdly, when he knows him in Christ, he knows there is an entrance to be had
into that tower. God out of Christ is a consuming fire. And who will Run into
the fire for safety; But he that knows God in Christ, he knows that by
Christ, we have access and entrance with boldness unto God, Ephesians. 3. 12. In
whom we have boldness, and access with confidence. And there is a great deal
of safety in the knowledge of God in the knowledge of God, in his Attributes,
and in his Christ. A man's safety we see lies in his Running to the Tower. He
Runs and is safe. And it is the knowledge of this Tower that sets a man a
Running to it. Hence we shall find safety attributed to the knowledge of the
Lord, Psalm. 91. 14. I will set him on high, I will exalt him, and so he shall
be safe. Why so? Because he has known my Name, for the knowing of God a right
was that which made him Run, and so he is exalted, and set on high. Then a man
is safe when he has gotten this tower to be his tower, when he has gotten God
to be his God. Now when we know God, we get him to be our God, and make this
Tower our tower. Ier. 24. 7. I will give them an Heart to know me, and I will
be their God. But on the contrary, an Ignorant person in a time or case of
danger cannot be in expectation of safety, and protection: for he knows not
this Tower, he knows not the way to this Tower. The King of Moab made a great
pudder in his fear, and did miserably weary himself between his high place
and his sanctuary, Isa. 16. 12. And why so? The labor of the foolish, of the
ignorant man, wearies every one of them, because he knows not how to go to
the city, Eccles. 10. 15. to the city of refuge, to the strong Tower. Suppose a
blind man had slain a man at unawares, what a case had he been in? There
was no remedy, but the avenger of blood must needs have dispatched him, because
he being blind he knew not the way to the city of Refuge. Every Ignorant man
is blind. How can a blind man Run to a Tower for safety, when by reason of
his blindness, he knows not one foot of the way. And an ignorant man not
knowing God in his attributes conceives him not so sufficient a Tower as may be
trusted to. He not knowing him in Christ, conceives the entrance impossible,
and the gate shut against him, and therefore Runs not to this Tower. As
therefore we would be able to Run to this Tower, so it concerns us to know
God, to know him in the attributes of his wisdom, power, mercy, providence,
that so we may Run to him as to a Tower that we know to be a strong Tower;
And to know him in Christ, that we may Run to him as to a Tower, we know we
may have entrance into it, Ioh. 10. I am the Door, even Christ is the Door of
this Tower by whom we must have entrance into it. As we would Run, so know
God. Knowledge is that which must inform us of the Tower, which must guide us
unto the Tower, which must encourage and hearten us to betake our selves to
this Tower. A man that will Run must not only have feet, but he must have
eyes. Knowledge is the eyes of the soul by which we must see both the Tower,
and the way to it.

2. This Running comprehends Faith.
To Run to this Tower is by faith to go to God, and by it to make him our
Tower for our safety. It is by faith to commit our selves to him as to a
faithful creator, who is the Savior of all men, but specially of those that
believe in him. 1 Timothy 4. 10. to put our selves under the feathers of his
wings, by an holy incumbency, to rest wholly upon him for safety, by an holy
dependence to hang wholly upon his power, and providence, and so to set our
faith on work upon his promises, as to make his power, providence, and
strength to be ours.

There is a great deal of safety in Gods Power. Gods Power is a Tower. 2
Samuel 22. 2. 3. The Lord is my Rock, my fortress, my high Tower. And after
repeating the same thing again, verse 32. 33. Who is, says he, a Rock save
our God? God is my strength and power. That which he said before, God is my
Tower, now he says, God is my Power. To teach that Gods Power is our Tower,
and that our safety lies in the power of God. There is a great deal of safety
in the providence of God; therefore it is called, The Secret of the most High,
Psalm. 91. 1. It is a secret privy Chamber, Isa: 26. 20. Enter into thy
Chambers. It is the secret of Gods Tabernacle, Psalm. 27. 5. The secret of his
pavilion, Psalm. 31. 20. Now what greater safety than to be within the secret
of the most high? to be shut up within the doors of those secret chambers? How
safe is he that is in the secret of Gods Tabernacle? Into the secret of the
Tabernacle might none come, but the high Priest once a year, Levit: 16. 2. If
a man had been there, how safe had he been from the Avenger of blood, or any
other that had sought his life? A man was safely lodged, that had been lodged
so. Such a safety is there under Gods Providence.

There is no question to be made, but there is safety enough in the Name of
God, in his power and providence; but all the question is, how we shall get
within the verge, and under the shelter of this power, and providence. Gods
Name indeed is a tower, but how shall we run into this tower? Now that is
done by faith in Gods power, and providence: Faith is the legs and feet by
which a man goes, yea runs to God, and runs into the tower of his power,
providence, and protection. Thus did David run to this tower, Psalm. 18. 2.
not only, the Lord is a Rock, a Buckler, a Tower, but the Lord is my Rock,
my Buckler, my high Tower. He makes this tower, his tower; this rock, his
rock: But how? My God, my strength, in whom I will trust. Thus by faith,
trusting on God, he made him his tower. Trusting to God, as our tower, is
running into this tower: Faith is the legs and feet of the soul, by which a
man runs to God, and runs into the tower of Gods power, providence, and
protection. A man cannot run without legs and feet: He that believes in
Gods power, and providence, he runs to the tower, and there is safety in such
running. Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith. It is spoken in a case of
hard times, and times of danger, when other men should seek to live by their
wits, by their shifts, one by this, another by that, and yet should not live
neither, the just in such times should live, and subsist: But how? He shall
live by his faith: he shall run to God by faith, by faith he shall cast
himself, his life, estate, and all he has, upon God; he shall by faith, put
himself under Gods wings, cast and throw himself into Gods arms, and so
making God his tower, by faith, shall find safety, and security from dangers,
when others with all their shiftings and sharkings, shall not subsist, but
shall be taken and surprised with the dangers of those times. Faith it makes
God any thing a man wants; faith does that in this life, that fruitio^ does in
the life to come; there a man has the fruition of God, and that fruitio^ of
God makes him all in all, makes him all that our hearts can desire: the same
does faith in this life. If a man want wealth, it makes God his portion: if he
want defense, it makes God his Buckler; if he want safety and protection, it
makes God his Tower: For by faith, relying upon his power and strength, a man
makes Gods power and strength to supply his exigents, and necessities. And he
that has Gods power and his providence to be his, he is as safe as he that is
in a strong tower: and therefore it is that safety is so frequently attributed
unto faith in Scripture, Look unto me, and be saved, Isai. 45. 22. and
therefore in a case of temporal danger much more, run unto me and be saved.
See Psalm. 22. 4. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted in thee, and were
delivered. They were safe, because they ran to a strong tower: But how did
they run? They trusted, says the Prophet, They trusted, they ran with all
their might unto this Tower by faith. Psalm. 9. 9, 10. The Lord will be a
refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble. True, may some say, God
is so indeed; but all the skill is to get into this place of Refuge, how may
that be done? See what follows, And they that know thy Name, will put their
trust in thee. First, a man must know this Name of GOD, and know what strength
and safety is in it. And then when he knows it, he must trust in it, and put
himself into it for his safety. Psalm. 37. 39, 40. There is the Tower of Gods
Name, and the Righteous man's running to that Tower, and his safety by his
running to it; The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their
strength in the time of trouble; there is the Tower. The Lord shall help them
and save them; there is the safety. Because they trust in him; there is the
running to the Tower. Consider that place, Isai. 26. 1, 2, 3, 4. There is a
strong City, We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls
and Bulwarks. What if a man get into that City? He shall be kept in perfect
peace, verse. 3. But there is no safety and peace, unless the gates be
opened, and a man do enter, verse. 2. How shall a man enter that he may be
within this City, and Tower, that is walled, and bulwarked with Salvation?
verse. 5. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting
strength.

The Lord he is a Rock, faith that puts us into this Rock, and so we become
safe. Prove. 30. 26. The Conies are but a feeble folk, yet make they their
houses in the Rocks. Those creatures are feeble, and fearful creatures, and
yet they subsist in multitudes. And how comes that about? Because when they are
pursued by dogs that are far too strong for them, they have their holds,
and burrowes in the Rock; and running into their burrowes, and into the rock,
when in danger of dogs, they are thereby kept safe: when once they are run
into the rocks, the dogs cannot come at them, nor meddle with them. Psalm.
104. 18. The Rocks are a refuge to the Conies. The rock, and their running to
the rock, saves them, though but a feeble folk. It is so in this case, Gods
people, it may be, are but a feeble folk, and great dangers may be toward
them; but now God he is a Rock, Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my Rock. Now their
wisdom must be to Run to this Rock, and to get into it: Now faith is that
by which we must run to, and burrow our selves in this Rock. And if we be
once burrowed in this rock, we are out of the reach of dogs and dangers.

A Dove is a poor, weak, silly creature; but when she is pursued by the
Hawke, if she flies to the rock, and gets but into the holes and clefts of the
Rock, then she is safe from the talons of the Hawke. So is it with Gods
people, they are safe in many times of danger: but how come they to be safe?
See Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rock; that is, that
art hidden and kept safe from the danger of thine enemies, by Gods power and
providence, as safe kept as a Dove is kept from the Hawke, that is gotten into
the clefts of the Rock; so that a man's safety lies in Being in, and Dwelling
in the clefts of this Rock. But how shall a man get into these clefts, and
come to dwell in them? A man must fly into them. Now a man cannot fly without
wings. Faith therefore is the Doves wings, by which he flies to these clefts,
and holes in the rock, and so is safe. It is said, Exodus 33. 22. by God unto
Moses, I will put thee into a cleft of a rock, and I will cover thee with mine
hand, while I pass by. So faith in Gods power, providence, promises, does put
a man into the cleft of this rock, and so a man is covered under Gods hand,
while dangers pass by: So that if a man would be safe, he must do in this
case, as Moab is advised to do in that, Ier. 48. 28. O ye that dwell in Moab,
leave the Cities, and dwell in the Rock; and be like the Dove, that makes her
nest in the sides of the holes mouth: So hear, O you that be in fear of any
danger, leave all carnal shifts, and sharking counsels, and projects, and
dwell in the Rock of Gods power and providence, and be like the Dove that
nestles in the holes of the Rock; by faith betake your selves unto God, by
faith dwell in that Rock, and there nestle your selves, make your nests of
safety in the clefts of this Rock.

Quest. But how may we do this thing, and what is the way to do it?

Answ. Do these three things:

First, set thy faith on work to make God that unto thee which thy necessity
requires, pitch and throw thy self upon his power and providence, with a
resolution of spirit to rest thy self upon it for safety, come what will
come. See an excellent practice of this, Psalm. 91. 1. He that dwells in the
secret place of the most High, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty;
that is, he shall be safe from all fears and dangers. I that is true, you
will say, who makes any doubt of it? But how shall a man come to dwell, and get
into this secret place, within this strong Tower? see ver. 2. I will say of the
Lord, He is my refuge, and my fortress; as if he had said, I will not only
say, That he is a refuge: but he is my refuge, I will say to the Lord, that is,
I will set my faith on work in particular to throw, devolve, and pitch my
self upon him for my safety. And see what follows upon this setting faith
thus on work, verse. 3. 4. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence, He shall cover thee with his feathers,
etc. So confident the Psalmist is, that upon this course taken, safety shall
follow. Our safety lies not simply upon this, because God is a Refuge, and is
an Habitation, but Psalm. 91. 9, 10. Because thou have made the Lord which is my
Refuge, thine Habitation, there shall no evil befall thee, etc. It is
therefore the making of God our habitation, upon which our safety lies; and
this is the way to make God our habitation, thus to pitch and cast our selves
by faith upon his power and providence.

Secondly, set thy faith on work to Hebr. 13. He has said, I will not fail
thee, nor forsake thee. Such as those, Psalm. 91. and many the like elsewhere.
Consider what God has said, and what he has promised in such cases, and
work thine heart to believe those sayings, to believe those promises, with a
special faith, as made, and directed to thy self. It is a great deal of
safety that may be had by this kind of running to the Name of God.

Gods Name is a tower, the promises of God are the out-workes to this Tower: If
a man cannot get into the Tower, yet if he can but get into the out-workes,
there is safety. For as out-workes are for the safety of the tower, so the
tower is the safety of the out-workes. If a man be but in the out-workes, if
they be assaulted, there will be succor and relief from the tower. If thou
can not, as thou think, get into God himself, yet get into the out-workes
of the promises, and there will be safety from the Tower in the outworkes.

God, he himself is the Tower, and the Rock, but the promises they are the
Clefts of the Rock. If a Dove fly to a rock from the Hawke, yet if when she
come there, there be no clefts, nor holes in the rock, alas for the poor
Dove, she lies at the mercy of the Hawke. But the Dove is before hand
acquainted with the clefts, and holes of the rock, and can go readily to them
in time of danger. God is a Rock, but now if there be no In-lets into this
rock, if no Clefts into it, if this rock be not opend unto us for safety, we
are never the nearer. This rock therefore is opend unto us by the promises:
the promises are the in-lets into it, they are the clefts, and the holds of the
rock; there is no getting into this rock, but by the clefts. He therefore
that would get into this rock, must be acquainted with the promises, and by
those promises, and by a particular faith in them, so get himself into God. As
the rock by the holes opens it self unto the Conies, and by the clefts opens
it self to the Doves for safety: so God by his promises of protection and
deliverance, opens himself to us for entrance, and safety. By a cleft the
Dove gets into the rock, by a promise believed with a special faith, does a
man get into the rock of Gods protection. It is good therefore for us
beforehand to be acquainted with the rock, and to know the clefts and
in-lets thereof, by which it may be entered, and against, or at a time of
danger, to enter them by a particular faith. The promises are the Doves
lockers, particular faith in those promises, is the making of the nest in those
lockers, in the holes by the sides of the rock. If no rock, no safety; God
he is a Rock. If no clefts in the rock, no safety; Gods promises are the
clefts of the rock. If no flying unto the rock, and nestling in the clefts, no
safety; faith is the running, the flying unto, and the nestling in the clefts
of the rock. By faith therefore burrow thy self in these holes, and nestle
thy self in these clefts of the rock, and then expect safety.

The Chickin in fear of the Kite, provides for her safety, by running, and
flying to the Hen, and by getting under her wings, and when she is there, she
is safe from the Kites claws. The promises of safety and protection, are as
the Lords wings: the way of safety is in case of danger, to run to the
promises, as under Gods wings, Psalm. 91. 4. He shall cover thee with his
feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust. How under his wings? and what
is it to trust under his wings? That appears by the words following, And his
truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler: Not only his Strength, and his Power,
but his Truth shall be thy Buckler. How his truth? Namely, his truth in his
promises. Thou by faith shall trust in the truth of his promises, and so his
wings and feathers shall cover thee; and that truth of his in his promises
trusted in, shall safeguard thee as a shield, and as a buckler. Faith in the
promises, puts a man under Gods wings, and feathers: Faith in the promises,
puts a man under that covert, and shelter of safety. See the truth of this, in
that of David, Psalm. 119. 114. Thou art mine hiding place, and my shield, I
hope in thy word. How does David make God his hiding place, and a Shield? By
hoping in his word. In what word? The word of promise, in which God had
promised to be an hiding place, and a shield unto him. And so David by faith
getting under the covert of a promise, makes God his hiding place, and his
shield.

Thirdly, get thy self by faith into All things are yours, and you are
Christ's, 1. Cor. 3. 22, 23. All things, that is, not only Cephas, Paul, etc.
but God himself, and Gods attributes, his Providence is yours to defend you;
his Power is yours to save you; his Mercy yours to deliver you: All yours,
when Christ yours: we cannot get into the Tower of Gods Providence and
protection, till we first get into Christ. A man that will run to a Tower for
safety, must run, 1. The right way, 2. To the door of the Tower, or else it
will be impossible to get in. If a man run, and run a wrong way, it is
impossible he should ever come into the Tower, or if a man run, and run not
to the door, he cannot break in through the Tower walls. Now therefore by
faith get into Christ: I am the way, Ioh. 14. and that in this sense; for no
access to God, but by Christ. And I am the door, Ioh. 10. and that in this
sense also, there being no entrance to God, but by Christ: so that by faith in
Christ, we run the right way; and by faith in Christ, we come to the right
door, and to have the door opened unto us, that we may get in. Herein lies
safety, Mic. 5. 5. This man shall be the peace, when the Assyrian shall come
into the land. Isa. 32. 1, 2. Christ shall be an Hiding place from the wind, a
covert from the tempest, as a shadow of a great Rock in a wearie*land; we must
seek our safety in the promises, and all the promises of God are Yea, and Amen
in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.

And thus by faith thus used, we run to this tower; and thus by this running,
we find safety. And therefore hence it is, that the same thing that is said
of God for our safety, is also said of faith. As here, and elsewhere God is
called a Tower; so also is faith compared to a Tower, Cant. 4. 4. Thy neck is
like the Tower of David. By her neck is meant faith. The neck joins the head
and the body together; and so faith joins Christ and the Church. Now this
faith is like the Tower of David. God is a Tower, and faith is a Tower; and how
so? because it is faith that brings us to God, that puts us within the walls
and gates of this Tower; and is that which helps us to that safety within
this Tower.

God is called our Shield, Psa. 84. 11. and 91. 4. and Faith is called our
Shield, Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all things, take the Shield of Faith. God is our
Shield, and Buckler, because by his power he shelters and defends us: Faith is
our Shield, because it makes God our Shield. As when a man runs to a Castle,
and escapes a danger, we may say, that his castle, and his legs were his
safety. God is not a Tower to such as are not towerd in their faith; he is
not a shield to those that want the shield of faith. The way to have God our
Tower, and our Shield, is to get the Tower and Shield of Faith.

And as we would have safety by Faith, and trusting in God, our care must be,
not only to get faith; but our endeavor must be, to increase and strengthen
our faith, so much as possibly we can. Every day be exercising, and setting
it on work; be advancing and improving it. The more faith, the more security;
the more security, the more confidence, and presence of spirit, in a case of
danger, Dwell deep, O inhabitant of Dedan, Ier. 49. 8. Our endeavor should
be, not only to dwell in this Rock, but to dwell deep: get such a measure
of faith, as that we may get a great depth within this Rock; make our
trenches deep, and get our selves deeply entrencht by faith. It is said of the
men of Thebez, Judge. 9. 51. that they not only fled into that strong Tower,
but that they got them up to the top of the Tower. So let us not only run into
this Tower, but get me up to the top of this Tower. This is done, when we so
exercise, and set our faith on work, as that we come to have confidence, and
assurance of Gods goodness to us in times of fear and danger. Faith growing
strong, and daily set on work on the promises, is getting up to the top of the
tower. Tower up on high into God by the growth, and increase of thy faith. The
higher, the safer. And thus we see how by faith we run to this Tower, and
what safety there is to be had by such running.

3. This Running comprehends Repentance.
As Sin is a Running from God, so Repentance is a Running to God. For Isa.
55. 5. Nations that know thee not shall run unto thee. How should or did they
Run? we shall see the exposition, and accomplishment of that prophecy, Act.
11. 18. Then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto life. By
Repentance therefore did they Run unto the Lord. And this is such a Running
as conduces to safety. The Righteous runs, namely by Repentance, and is Safe.
He humbles himself for his sins, mournes for them, and forsakes them, sets
upon a new course in righteousness, obedience and the fear of God, and so
finds safety and protection, Job. 22. 23. 25. If thou return to the Almighty,
thou shall put away iniquity far from thy Tabernacles, then shall the
Almighty be thy defense. There be two several parts of Repentance, and we
shall see that there is safety in Running to God by them both.

First, there is with a sorrow for sin, a forsaking and casting of it off. He
that will take a right course for his safety, must abandon all his sins, and
away with them, or else let him run as he will, he were as good sit still,
for he shall but run in vain, he shall not get into this Tower. The way to
run, and to get in for safety, is a thorough forsaking of all our sins and
lusts. See Isay. 33. 15. 16. He that despises the gain of oppressions, that
shakes his hands from holding of bribes, that does by bribes, and all unlawful
gains, as Paul did by the viper, that stops his ears from hearing of blood,
etc. He shall dwell on High, or in high places, His place of defense shall be
the munition of Rocks. That's the way then to dwell on high, to get a defense
within the munition of Rocks to purge the heart, and whole man from all our
lusts, and pollutions. If a man come with the gain of oppressions, with his
hands defiled with any injustice, with ears full of cruelty, eyes full of
adultery, the tower gate will be surely barred, and shut against such an one.
And when such shall come to the tower gate, and knock, and rap, and cry Lord
Lord open unto us, the answer they will meet withal will be Depart ye workers
of Iniquity. This gate will not be opened to workers of iniquity. As the Iron
gate that led into the city opened of it own accord unto Peter, Act. 12. 10.
so the gate of this tower of it own accord will shut it self against workers
of Iniquity. As of the New Jerusalem it is said, Apoc. 22. 14. 15. Blessed are
they that may enter in thorough the gates into the city, for without are
dogs, sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers; etc. So is it true of this
Tower. Blessed are all they that in a time of danger may enter in thorough the
gates into the Tower. It shall not be everyones portion, for dogs,
whoremongers, Idolaters, liars, etc. and all such kind of persons must make
account to be without, to be shut out, and not admitted into the Tower. God
will be no protector of such persons: but when men are purged, their hearts
and hands, their ears and eyes, their ways and lives are purged and washed
from their lusts, then they shall dwell on high, and the place of their
defense, shall be the munition of Rocks. There is a gracious promise of
safety and protection, Isa. 4. 5. 6. Upon all the glory shall be a defense.
And there shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat,
and for a place of Refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. All
comes to this, that the Name of the Lord should be a strong Tower for their
safety. But yet mark when this should be. verse, 4. When the Lord shall have
washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood
of Jerusalem from the midst thereof. Then there shall be a defense, a shadow,
a refuge, a covert from the storm, when there shall be a washing, and a
purging by the spirit of Judgment, and Sublation as Iunius renders it, then
will God shelter, and mightily protect them from all evils, and dangers.

A man that will be safe, must do two things.

First, He must Run to the Tower.

Secondly, He must enter, and get into

First, He cannot Run to the Tower for safety without Repentance. It is in
our running to this Tower for safety, as it is in the running of our christian
Race. Now how we must run our christian Race, see Heb. 12. 1. Let us run
the Race that is set before us. But mark what course must be first taken, let
us lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us. If a
man will run, it is no carrying of weights on his back: a man that will
run had not need be hampered, and entangled with any thing. A man that
runs so, will never get the prize, so in this case. A man that will get into
this Tower must run, running is a swift, and speedy motion. It is not a
snayles pace will serve. It is impossible to be safe unless we run, and
impossible to run unless we repent, for it is impossible to run if we
have weights on our backs, burdens on our shoulders, hamperments about our
heels, specially if fetters about our legs. A fettered man will run but ill
favouredly, it is more then he can do to go well. Now all lusts and sins
are so many weights, burdens, so many chains and fetters that cumber a man,
and hinder him from running, let us cast off every weight says the Apostle. So
here, if ye will be safe ye must run: if ye will run ye must cast of
every weight, that is, every sin, every lust that fetters and clogs you. Now
repentance is the casting those off. So that if no repentance no casting off
weights, if no casting off weights no running, if no running no safety. A man
that would save himself in this tower must so run to it as men in a fear,
and pursuit of the enemy, use to run to castles and forts. Men in such cases
throw away all burdens and carriages, they throw away their very Arms, and
their Garments, that they may be light and expedite to run. We see when the
Sirians were in fear of a danger, though a false fear, they sought their
safety by their flight and running away, and we see. 2 King 7. 15. All the way
was full of Garments, and vessels which the Syrians had cast away in their
haste. Because they would be sure to run fast enough, vessels and garments,
and all were flung away. If a man in the pursuit of an enemy would needs be
so foolish, as to carry a pack or a load on his back, and say with himself,
oh it is pity to leave such a thing behind, who would part with so good a
thing, etc. before he could reach the fort, the enemy would overtake him, and
and cut him off. His luggage world hinder his running and make him fall short.
So a man that will save himself in this Tower must throw away all his luggage,
and his baggage, must cast away all his lusts, and sins, which are so many
burdens and weights to clog a man that he cannot run fast enough, and soon
enough to this tower for safety. These burdens, and this baggage of our sins
and lusts, will inevitably expose us to danger. Let every one that Names the
Name of Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and let every one that runs
to the Name of God, and hopes to have the Name of the God of Jacob to set him
on an high place, let him depart from Iniquity, let every one that will Run
to the Name of God, let him first Run from Iniquity.

2. He cannot get into the tower without repentance. There is no safety till a
man get into the tower. A man that lies, and lives in any sin or lust, cannot
get into the Tower, though he do come to the Tower. The righteous man not only
runs unto it, but into it, and is safe. So that a man's safety is to get into
the tower. There is no getting into it so long as we are in our sins, we must
first get out of our sins before we can get into the Tower. It is with
getting into this, as into material towers and forts in time of war. In
times of war and danger, when men betake themselves to forts, and holds,
there is no man suffered to come into them that has a plague sore, or any such
dangerous infection. By no means is such an one admitted to come In, or if he
do thrust In at unawares, he is sure to be quickly turned out again. So
here, if a man come to the Lord for protection, if he fly to this tower of
his Name for safety, and come in his lusts, and his sins, and have not first
by repentance put them away, look how many sins, and how many reigning lusts
he brings, so many Carbuncles, and plaguesores he brings upon him. One
plaguesore will keep a man out, how much more will that man be kept out,
whose soul is as full of plague-sores, as Jobs body was full of boyles? If
therefore we would get into the tower, and so run as to be safe, first get
we our plague-sores cured, and get we all our pestilent tumors healed.

There is in repentance, as a forsaking and casting away a man's sins, and
lusts, Righteousness: the Righteous runs, says the text, and he is safe.
He must be a Righteous man that runs, and a righteous man that will look
for safety. This tower will be no sanctuary for unrighteous ones, but such as
have so forsaken their sins, as to lead a godly life, and to walk in
righteousness, they shall find safety in this tower, Pro. 11. 4.
Righteousness delivers from death, and in the day of wrath, which riches cannot
do. The gates of that city whose walls and bulwarks are salvation, they are
to be opened, that the righteous nation may enter, Isai. 26. 1, 2. David calls
God his rock, and his high Tower, Psalm. 18. 2. and he does it with the more
confidence, because he could speak that, verse. 23. I was also upright before
him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. They that can say so, may with
some confidence call GOD their high Tower. There is safety in obedience to
God, Prove. 1. 33. Who so bearkneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil. Obedience is a walking in Gods Name, Mic. 4. 5. We
will walk in the Name of the Lord our God. And obedience is a Running in the
ways of Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. I will run the ways of thy
Commandments; Who may run more to God, than they who run in his
commandments? Who shall be safer in the tower of his Name, than they who
walk in his Name? There is safety in the fear of God, Psalm. 34. 7. The
Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him. The garrison of
the tower is pitched about them. How safe was Solomon with that guard, Cant. 3.
7, 8. Behold his Bed, which is Salomons, threescore valiant men are about it,
of the valiant of Israel, they all hold swords, being expert in war, every
man has his sword upon his thigh, because of the fear in the night. Such is
the security of those that live godlily, religiously and holily in Gods fear,
Prove. 14. 26. In the fear of the Lord, that is, in a righteous, obedient,
holy, religious conversation, there is strong confidence. And his children
shall have a place of refuge. Gods Name will be a strong tower to him that
fears his Name. A refuge for him and for his children. In cases of fear, a
man's greatest care is for his children: a man that fears God, provides for the
safety of himself, and his children both. A man that fears God, shall get
himself, and his children both into the tower. There is safety in keeping a
man's self free from the sins of the times, and places he lives in: Freedom
from common iniquities, prepares for freedom from common calamities. We shall
find a great plague amongst the Israelites upon their sin of joining unto
Baal-Peor, the sword walks, and the plague walks, and lickes up twenty four
thousand, Numb. 25. 9. Now though the sword and the plague both did hew them
down, yet all were not consumed, there were abundance that were safe from that
judgment, that were exalted, and set so high, as that they were out of the
reach and walk both of the sword, and pestilence. And do but observe it well
who they were that God in his special providence protected from those dangers.
See Deuteronomy. 4. 3, 4. All that followed Baal-Peor, the Lord thy God has destroyed
from among you. All those men out of the tower, and those judgments finding
them towerlesse, swept them away, cut them off, and destroyed them. But you
that did cleave to the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this day.
Mark what it was that kept them safe, and alive, when the rest went to the pot
by thousands: when others polluted themselves with Idolatry and whoredom, they
cleaved to the Lord; and therefore when the Sword, and plague come, they are
within this tower, and so are Sword-proofe, and Plague-proofe; those
tower-walls were too high for the sword, and the plague to scale. Those kept
themselves free from the common iniquities of their times, and God kept them
free and safe from the common calamities of the times. Here is the way then
torun to this tower for safety. If in times of danger we would be safe, run to
the Name of God by repentance, and manifest we our repentance by turning from
all our sins, and lusts, and by walking in all righteousness, obedience, fear,
holiness, godliness of life, and cleaving close to God, when others desert and
forsake him: and in this running lies our safety; by this we both run unto,
and run into a strong tower of safety: It would make a man sick again to
see the idle and foolish confidences of most men in their fears; well, come
what will, or can come, they trust in God, and his Name, that they shall do
well enough, but yet in the mean time no repentance, no casting away their
sins, no reformation, no righteousness, obedience, no cleaving to the Lord;
Nay, on the contrary, nothing but provocation of God by their sins. Now what
a fond thing is it thus to deceive our selves? Psalm. 20. 1. The Name of the
God of Jacob defend thee, or set thee on high. It is true indeed, that it is
that Name of his, that must defend us, that must exalt, and set us on an high
place; but yet consider what little reason thou have to hope for any safety by
that Name: Art thou not a swearer, and a taker of that Name in vain? and do
thou think that that Name shall defend thee, which thou prophanest? Will thou
profane that Name, and think to be defended by that Name? Shall that Name
which thou abusest, be thy tower? Thou indeed professest that worthy Name, Iam.
2. 7. but by thy disobedient sinful life, dishonourest that worthy Name, and
is it likely, that that Name that receives dishonor from thee, will be a
defense to thee? Thou by thy lust, and loose courses, causest this name to be
blasphemed, and hopest thou for shelter under this Name? Thy lusts, thy
covetousness, thy drunkenness abuse and abase his name, and shall that name
exalt thee who abasest it? The Name of God is an holy Name, and shall we think
that this Righteous, and Holy name of the Lord, will be a Tower, Refuge, a
Sanctuary, for Adulterers, Swearers, Drunkards, Worldlings, and for such as
walk not in his name? The name of the Lord is a strong tower; but to whom?
What? to every loose, profane Godless person? No such matter. The Righteous
run unto it. I, and so it may be, the unrighteous run unto it too, but the
righteous run into it, and the righteous are safe. None get into it, none are
safe by it but the Righteous: they be only godly, Religious, repenting
sinners, to whom this name is a strong tower. If Rabshakeh had spoken truly,
he had spoken strongly, and unanswerably, Isa. 36. 7. But if thou say unto me,
we trust in the Lord our God: Is it not he whose High places, and whose
Altars Hezekiah has taken away? As if he had said, It is but a folly for
Hezechiah to trust in God, now he has provoked God. But now in this case, men
being guilty of abusing, and dishonouring Gods name, we may truly dash their
vain confidences. You say, in fears, and dangers, we trust in the name of God;
but is not this he, whose name ye pollute with your oaths? Is not this he,
whose name ye dishonor with your sinful lives? Assuredly, for unrighteous
persons, that lie and live impenitently in their sins, this name is no Tower,
but a fire, a dreadful burning, devouring fire, Isai. 31. 27. Behold, the Name
of the Lord comes from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof
is heavy, his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring
fire. His name is a Tower to the Righteous, but a Fire to impenitent sinners:
so that all unrepenting, and unreformed sinners flying to the name of God, do
but fly from one danger to another, out of one fire into another, Ezech. 15.
7. I will set my fire against them, they shall go out from one fire, and
another fire shall consume them. That name of God which shall be a Tower to the
righteous, shall be a Terror unto all ungodly and impenitent sinners.

4. This Running comprehends Prayer.
To Run to this Tower is by Prayer, to have Recourse to God, and therein to
seek and sue to him for help, and succor in time of danger, and distress.
Prayer is not only a Going, but a Running to the Lord. And it is such a
Running, upon which there follows safety, Psalm. 18. 2. The Lord is my high
Tower. But how will he get into that high Tower? He will Run into it. But how
will he run into it? verse. 2. I will call upon the Lord. So will he Run
into it. And what shall he be the better for running into it! So shall I be
saved from mine enemies, and so from all dangers. All which comes to this, The
name of the Lord is an high and strong Tower, I will by prayer run into it,
and shall be safe. And David tells us of it, as of an experimented truth,
Psalm. 34. 4, 6. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all
my fears. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his troubles. David was in fears, and was delivered from all his fears:
He was delivered by running into this tower, and he ran into this tower by
prayer. There be terrible times threatened, Joel 3. 15, 16. The Sun and the
Moon shall be darkened, etc. The Lord shall roar out of Sion, etc. and the
hearers shall shake: the hearing of such sad things was enough to make their
hearts shake. Alas, when such black days should come, what would become of
Gods people? how should they do at such a time? Well enough; But the Lord will
be the hope of his people, or the place of Repair, or the Harbor of his
people, and the strength of the children of Israel. Herein should they be
happy, that in such a time they had the name of God for their Tower of safety.
But how should they get or run into that tower, so as they might be safe?
That we may see by the like passage, Joel 2. 31, 32. The Sun shall be
turned into darkness, etc. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall
call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be delivered: So that as the name of the
Lord is a tower, so that tower must be run into; and the way to run into
that tower of the name of God, is to call upon that name: And he that runs
so, runs not in vain, it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon
the Name of the Lord, shall be delivered. When David's heart was overwhelmed
with troublesome thoughts and fears, he betakes himself to God, Psalm. 61. 3,
4. Thou have been a shelter, or a refuge for me, and a strong tower from the
enemy; and I will make my refuge in the covert of thy wings. And what course
takes he to do it? verse. 1, 2. Hear my cry, attend unto my prayer, etc. So
that by prayer he runs to the strong tower, and to the place of Refuge. Lead
me, says verse. 2. to the Rock that is higher than I; that rock is none
other, but that strong tower, verse 3. Both the Name of the Lord. That tower is
an high tower, Psalm. 18. 2. and that Rock is here an high Rock, the Rock
higher than I: and yet there is a way to get into the highest Towers; by
scaling Ladders, a man may get over the high walls of towers. This tower and
rock too high for David himself to get into, and therefore he sets to the
scaling Ladder, Lead me into the Rock, and into the tower that is higher than
I. Hear my cry, attend unto my prayer: So he makes prayer the scaling Ladder,
to get upon that rock, and into that tower that otherwise had been too high
for him; he gets that safety and deliverance, which otherwise but by prayer
unto God, had been impossible to have been obtained.

When David was in danger of Saul, see what resolution he takes up, Psalm. 57.
1. In the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be
over-past. We shall see in the title of the Psalm, that David was then in the
cave. It is said, 1 Samuel 23. 29. that David went and dwelt in the strong holds
at En-gedi; and this cave that now David was in, was amongst those strong
holds, as appears, 1 Samuel 24. So that David in the cave was in a strong hold;
and yet David thought there was little safety in that strong hold, unless God
himself were his refuge; and therefore says he, In the shadow of thy wings
will I make my refuge till these calamities be overpast. As if he had said, Lord
I am already in the cave and the holds, and in the shadow of it; but yet for
all that, I think not my self safe indeed, till I have made my refuge in the
shadow of thy wings: that is therefore the course I resolve, and build upon. It
was wisely done of him; and mark what course he takes to do it, verse. 2. I
will cry unto God most high. I will by prayer put my self under the shadow of
Gods wings: and mark what success should follow, verse. 3. He shall send from
heaven and save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. God
shall send forth his mercy and his truth. When we send prayers up to heaven,
God he will send help down from heaven: when we send forth our prayers and
supplications, God will send forth his mercy and his truth, his power, and will
set all his attributes on work for the effecting of our safety, and
deliverance. Indeed it is trusting, and so thrusting our selves under the
covert of Gods wings, in which our safety lies, as before we saw; and so David
takes that course, verse. 1. But yet David prays to God, as well as he trusts
in God. And unless we pray as well as trust, our trust will fail us: for we
must trust to God for that we pray for.

That same is an excellent passage, Isai. 5^. 1^. When the enemy shall come in
like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard against him; that
is, shall both defend from his violence, and shall also put him to flight. Now
that which is there spoken of an enemy, is true of any danger: when Pestilence,
Famine, etc. shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a
Standard against them.

Now what is that Spirit of the Lord? I know it is meant properly of Gods power
and might, as Zech. 4. 6. Not by might, not by my power, that is, not by the
might and power of man, but by my Spirit, says the Lord, that is, by my might,
and my power: So here, the Spirit, that is the power of the Lord, shall lift up
a standard against him. But yet if it be not meant also of prayer, which is
stirred up in the hearts of the faithful, by the Spirit, who is therefore
called the Spirit of Prayer, yet may we allude at least unto it, and say, that
when an enemy, or pestilence, or famine, shall come in like a flood, shall
come and overspread it self like a flood, and shall like a flood come
unresistably, the Spirit of the Lord stirring up prayer in his peoples heart,
shall lift up a standard against them: the Spirit of prayer shall shelter from,
and chase away such feared dangers. Prayer is often called, the Lifting up of
the hands; and Hezechiah has a phrase of lifting up a prayer, 2 King. 19. 4.
Lift up thy Prayer for the remnant that is left. Now when in case of danger,
Gods people can lift up a Prayer, then in that very thing does the Spirit of
God lift up a Standard against that danger. Therefore we shall see that prayer
is made the remedy against all dangers, and evil.

It saves from enemies, 2 Samuel 22. 4. I will call on the Lord, so shall I be
saved from mine enemies. It saves and diverts from oppressors, Isa. 19. 20.
They shall cry unto the Lord, because of the oppressors, and he shall send
them a Savior, and a great one, and he shall deliver them. It diverts and
saves from famine, Amos 7. 1, 2, 3. It is an Antidote against the pestilence, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13. 14. If I send pestilence among my people, if my people shall
humble themselves, and pray, I will heal their land. Numb. 16. 46, 47, 48.
Aaron burns incense, and the plague was stayed: this is the perfume that must
sweeten the air, and heal a land. When the fire of Gods wrath burns and
smoakes, it is the smoke of this Incense, and the burning of it, that must
quench the burning of Gods anger. Thus the Spirit of the Lord is that which
lifts up a standard against the danger of all evils, when he enlarges his
peoples hearts with a Spirit of prayer: And therefore we shall see that prayer
is not only a means, but a pledge of mercy, and safety coming; when God
gives his people a Spirit of prayer, it is the harbinger, and forerunner that
comes with the good tidings of safety and deliverance, Ier. 3. 19. But I said,
how shall I put thee among the children, and give thee a pleasant land? etc. As
if he had said, I have thoughts and purposes of mercy and deliverance toward
thee: It is in mine hand to deliver thee from thy captivity, and to bring thee
into thine own land again; but what course shall I take to effect and bring
it about? And I said, Thou shall call me, My Father. As if he had said, I have
bethought my self now, of a way how to compass it, I will power down a
Spirit: of Prayer upon thee, and thou shall call upon me, and call me Father;
I will give thee the Spirit of Adoption, by which thou shall in prayer cry,
Abba Father; and so then I will put thee among the children, and give thee an
inheritance, and seat you in your own country again. The sum of all is,
that God would give them a Spirit of prayer, which should be not only the
means, but the pledge and earnest of their deliverance. Prayer is the key of
the Tower-gate. Now when God takes away the spirit of prayer, when he does that
which Eliphaz charges Job withal, Job. 15. 4. Thou restrainest Prayer before
God; When, I say, God does restrain prayer, and take that spirit of prayer
from him, then God takes away the Key of the Tower gate, and that is a sign
that God does not mean that such a one shall get into the Tower: So on the
contrary, when God gives a man a spirit of Prayer, he gives him the Key of the
Tower gate. And the giving of a man that key, is a pledge of Gods intentions to
him for safety and deliverance from dangers and feared evils. God would never
give a man a key to open the gate, if he did not intend his entrance into the
Tower.

As then we desire safety in a case of fear, so get into this tower. He
that would get into this tower, must do two things; First, he must run to
it: Secondly, he must get the door or gate opened so as also he may run
into it. The way to do all these, is prayer: We run to it by Prayer; Prayer
is a running to this tower, and prayer is that which opens the gate. A man that
would enter in at a gate, must either knock at the gate, or he must take the
key, and unlocke it. Prayer is a knocking at the tower-gate, and such a
knocking, as knockes it open, Matthew. 7. Knock and it shall be opened unto you,
which is the same with that, Ask, and it shall be given unto you. Prayer is
the turning of the key, and the unlocking of the gate. It is said of the
Angel, and Peter, Acts 12. 10. that when they came to the Iron gate, that led
into the City, it opened unto them of its own accord. Look what the Angel
was to Peter, that is prayer to a man coming to the gate of the tower; the
gate of the tower will open of it own accord to a man that comes with prayer.
Let a man therefore in his fears, betake himself to this duty of seeking
God, as to a course of safety, Run to the tower by prayer, Knock at the
gate by prayer, unlocke the door, and get entrance by prayer, Psalm. 20. 7, 8.
Some their Charets, and some their horses, but we will remember the Name of
the Lord our God, They are brought down, and fallen, but we are risen, and
stand upright. There is more safety in Remembering the Name of the Lord, than
in Charets and Horses: They that put their safety in their Charets, and their
Horses, may come down, and fall low enough, but they that remember the name of
the Lord, they rise, and stand upright. It is a man's safest course then by
far, to Remember the name of the Lord. But what is it to Remember the name of
the Lord? That is, by prayer to run to the Lord, Ion. 2. 7. When my soul
faynted within me, I remembered the Lord. That course Jonah took in the fears
and faintness of his Spirit, to remember the Lord. But what means he by
Remembering the Lord? that he shows in the words following. And my prayer came
in unto thee into thine holy Temple. Prayer then is the Remembering the name of
the Lord, and Remembering the Name of the Lord is the course of safety.
Remembering the Name of the Lord is Running to the Tower of Gods Name, and he
that Runs into it he is safe. And yet how little is this course thought upon
by men in their fears! Every thing is done, but that which should be done, and
that is last done, if done at all, which should be first done. The prophet tells
them, Isay 22. 5. of a sad day that was coming upon them, a day of trouble and
perplexity, of breaking down the walls, and crying to the mountains. And
what course take they? They look in that day to the armor of the house of the
Forest, verse. 8. They veiw the breaches of the city, and break down houses
to fortify the wall, verse. 9. 10. But all this while no looking to God from
whom the evil came, nor seeking unto him who could defend them from that
evil, verse. 11. Nay in that day God called to fasting and praying, verse. 12.
and in that day they look to the armor of the house of the forest, and so
look to that, that they look not to God, so look to that they give themselves
up to their jollities, and merriments, as if more confidence were to be put in
the Armor of the house of the forest, in their ditches, and fortifications,
then in Running by prayer unto the strong Tower of the Name of the Lord. That
is the folly and madness of men, to neglect this course which so much conduces
to their safety. Look we to God, what ever we look to, and look and seek
to God first, before we look to any means though never so lawful, hopeful,
and helpefull.

Object.

Answ. So Run that ye may obtain. It is not enough to Run, but a man's
care must be So to run that he may obtain the price, and the crown. Men
may Run, and yet not obtain the crown, because they Run not So, So as
they should, and must do that will obtain the crown. So is it in this
running for safety, So run that ye may obtain. A man may run, may pray,
and yet not obtain safety. It is not enough therefore to Run, to pray,
unless he Run, unless he pray So, that is, So as he must pray that would
obtain safety. The prayer therefore that would obtain safety it must have
these two qualifications.

First, it must be Instant, earnest, fervent Nineveh knew, and therefore when
he hears of the danger they were in, he presses his subjects not only to
prayer, but to crying prayer. He says not, let men pray, but let men cry, nor
that only, but let men cry mightily unto God. Ion. 3. 8. He saw that if there
were any hope of safety by running into this Tower, that it must be by running
with all their might: if there were any help for them by prayer, it must be
by earnest instant vehement prayer. It is one thing to say a prayer, another
thing to pray a prayer. Iam. 5. 17. Elias prayed in his prayer, as the words
are rendered in the margin of the New translation, (...). It is translated, he
prayed earnestly. Then a man prays earnestly, when he prays in his prayer.
That may be a prayer materially, which formally is no prayer, and a man may
have a prayer, and use a prayer, and yet not pray in his prayer. When he
prays only with his tongue, is only verbal, and formal, he prays not in
his prayer. Formal prayer is not prayer Formally, because that which gives
form and being to prayer, is that a man pray in his prayer. And that is done
when prayer is instant, earnest, fervent. And such prayer it is that is
effectual, that prevails much. Jam. 1. 16. when a man prays in his prayer,
such prayer is such a running as will be effectual, and prevail much to get a
man into, and to keep him safe in this Tower. The way to prevail with men
from whom we fear danger, is to take a course first to prevail with God. Genesis
32. 28. Thou have power with God, and with men, and have prevayled: that is,
thou have had power with God, and have prevayled with him, thou shall therefore
also have Power with men, and prevail with them. But how came he to prevail
with God? Jacob wrestled with him, as we see in the story. And what was a
special thing in that wrestling we shall see, Hos. 12. 3. 4. By his strength
he had Power with God. That was one way by which he had power with God. By
his strength, by the strength of his faith. But there was another way, verse. 4.
Yea he had Power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and made supplication
unto him. He prevailed by prayer, but it was not perfunctory, and formal
prayer, but it was wrestling and weeping prayer, instant and earnest prayer.
He wept and made supplication. Some in their dangers and fears can weep,
their fears wring tears from them, but it is not tears will prevail without
prayers. And some may pray, and make supplication, but it is not prayers
without tears will prevail, Prayers and Tears, weeping prayers, weeping
supplications are the prevayling prayers for safety: wrestling prayers are
preuayling prayers with God, and prevayling with God is the way to prevail
with men. So did Jacob run into this tower, and was safe. These prayers and
tears so prevayled that Esau instead of killing falls to kissing of Jacob.
The king that is not able with his ten thousands to meet with him that comes
against him with twenty thousands, whilst his Adversary is yet a great way
off, sends an Embassage, and desires conditions of Peace, Luke 14. 31, 32. Now
in cases of fears and danger, our prayers to God are Ambassadors for peace,
and safety. Now as these Ambassadors act their cause such is our speed If
these Agents do their business coldly, and only for form, there is little
peace and safety to be hoped for by their Embassage. But if we would have
peace and safety by their Embassy, they must go to work as those, Isa. 33. 7.
Behold their messengers shall cry without, the ambassadors of peace shall
weep bitterly. The messengers must cry, the Ambassadors weep, and weep
bitterly, that will prevail for peace, and safety, from danger. Their
earnestness, vehemence, fervency, and their tears, these must be the
rhetoric and oratory, by which they must prevail Prayer is running unto God,
but so Run that ye may obtain, so pray that ye may prevail for safety. So
pray, with such instance, with such fervency, with such earnest contention of
spirit, as that ye may find entrance into this tower, God was David's Tower,
and thus he used to get into this tower, not only by prayer, but by this
earnest prayer, he prayed as men use to run in case of danger, with all his
strength, Psalm. 61. 3. Thou have been my strong Tower, from the enemy, and so
I hope thou will be still, what course takes he to get into that tower? verse.
1. Hear my cry O God, verse. 2. from the ends of the earth, etc. He runs to
the Tower not only by prayer, but by earnest, and crying prayer, Psalm. 119.
145. 146. I cried with my whole heart, I ran to the Tower with all my might,
and force, I cried unto thee, save me. It is crying prayer, that is saving
prayer. Knock, and it shall be opened unto you, Matthew. 7. A man pursued by an
enemy, running to a tower, if he find the gate shut, how knockes he? He
knockes as loud, as he can, he knockes with all his might, knockes and beats
at the door, as if he would beat the door open. His life lies upon it, and
therefore he knockes not gently, and easily, but lays on with all his might.

Secondly, It must be Constant, else no by prayer. So run that ye may obtain
safety by running, that is, run constantly, and hold on in prayer without
weariness, or sloathfulnesse. Jacob not only wrestled, but he wrestled all
night, and would not let the Angel go till he blessed him. He did not wrestle
about or two and then give over, but he held out wrestling, and so prevayled
againsl Esau, and was fafe from him. It must be constant as well as Instant
prayer, by which we must get into the Tower. Knock and it shall be opened
unto you. A man that will get into the Tower, must knock at the gate, and as
he must knock instantly, and earnestly, so he must knock on, and not cease
knocking, till the door be opend. He must knock as Peter knocked at the
door, of Mary's house, Act. 12. 13. He knocked at the door of the gate, and
though they do not presently open, yet he gives not over knocking, but verse.
16. Peter continued knocking, and then the door was opened. David joined both
together in his prayers, Instancy and Constancy, Psalm. 55. 17. Evening and
Morning, and at noone will I pray; and cry aloud. He would pray, and cry, yea,
and cry aloud. He was Instant. He would not do it once or twice, and then
set down and lay it aside, but Evevening, Morning and at Noone, he would be
assiduous in the duty, every day he would make it his mornings work, his
evenings work, and his noones work to. And he would hold out, and not faint,
nor throw up, but this course he would go on in, till the Lord should hear
his voice. He was constant, and why would he hold on this constantly in this
duty? Because, verse. 18. He has delivered my soul in peace, from the battle
that was against me. As if he had said, I have heretofore been in great
dangers. In those dangers I earnestly, and constantly sought God by prayer. I
ran unto the Tower of his Name, and I was exalted, and found safety: and
therefore I will now do so again, I will pray and cry aloud, I will pray
instantly, I will pray evening, morning, and at noone, I will pray constantly.
The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the Righteous runs into it, want has
Run, or does sometimes run, but he Runs, he is always running, he
makes it his constant work, he goes on setledly in that course, and so is
exalted. And so much forth is fourth thing in which this running consists, and
for the first point also. The doing of those duties by which we may get into
this Tower.

The Second general point, is the manner Runs. The Righteous walks not,
goes not, they are but slow motions, but he Runs. Running is a motion of
speed, a motion of have. Jonathan commands his lad saying, Run find out now the
Arrows that Ishoot, and shooting an arrow beyond him, he cried after the lad,
Make speed, have, stay not. 1 Samuel 20. 36. 38. That is to Run, to make speed,
to haste, and not to stay. The Righteous man then runs to the Tower, that is,
he does not only use all these forenamed means, and take those courses for
his safety, but he sets upon them with speed, and makes haste to the use of
them. He not only believes, but he makes have to set his faith on work, He
not only repents, but he speedily, and quickly goes about that business, he
out of hand in the first apprehensions of danger, sets upon the humbling of his
soul, and the reformation of his ways, and walking in obedience to God. He
not only betakes himself to prayer, but does it presently and without
delaying, sets upon the course that may make for his safety. He Runs, he
speedily sets this course on foot, for fear of being too late, and least the
danger should overtake him before he be Towerd. So that he that will go
wisely to work, must take these courses speedily. As in that case the Apostle
speaks, 1 Corinthians 9. So Run that ye may obtain, so in this, so Run
that ye may obtain safety. So it is, so hastily, so speedily, so quickly.
Running is a swift, speedy, and an accelerated motion of the body. So should a
man that seeks safety go to this Tower, as Lot went to Zoar, Genes. 19. 22.
Haste thee, escape thither. Implying that his escape did not only lie in going
out of Sodom, nor in going unto Zoar, but in his Haste from the one, and in
his Haste to the other, as if no Haste, no escape. When the plague was broken
out in the camp of Israel, Numbers 16. 46. 47. Go quickly, says Moses to
Aaron, and Aaron goes, and mark how he goes. He ran into the midst of the
Congregation. That should be our pace for our own safety, which was his pace
for the safety of others. A quick running pace. That's the pace that men
pursued by an enemy use, fear is as wings to their bodies, they run full
speed to a fort, where they may get shelter. Ier. 48. 28. O ye that dwell in
Moab leave the cities, and dwell in the Rock, and be like the dove, etc. now
how goes the dove to the Rock when she is pursued by the hawke? See by that
Isay 60. 8. who are those that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their
windows. A dove is naturally swift of flight, swift of wing, no foul swifter,
but specially she flies swift when she flies for her life. Her ordinary flight
is like the clouds, but fear makes her flight swifter. And thus David when he
saw a storm and a tempest coming, he does not only wish wings to fly away,
and to escape it, but he wishes doves wings, Ps. 55. 6. Oh that I had wings
like a dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest, I would hasten mine
escape from the windy storm, and tempest. As if no way to escape a storm, and
a tempest but with a doves wings. It is not any wings, they must be doves wings
that must do it: the swiftest wing is needful in such a case. It must be a
Doves wing, and a Doves swift flight that must get into the holes, and clefts
of the rock. A man's escape lies upon a Doves wings: and sure it is, that our
safety lies not more in the duties doing, than in this manner of doing them
with speed. Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies, I fly unto thee to hide me,
Psalm. 143. 9. A man that would be safe from enemies, and the danger of them,
his safety indeed lies in being hid with God, in being hid in that Tower; but
yet he that will be hid in it, must take a course to get into it: He must run
into that Tower, he must fly to God, I fly unto thee to hide me. Running is
a swift pace, but flying is a swifter motion. As God has Wings for safety and
shelter, Psalm. 91. 4. so must a man have wings for speed and swiftness, that
will make his refuge under the shadow of those wings: and there is great reason
of making speed and haste in the work.

Delays are dangerous in cases of this nature. As soon as ever Moses knew
Aaron go quickly; and Aaron runs with all the speed he can, Numb. 16. and
yet all this speed notwithstanding, there dye fourteen thousand, and seven
hundred of the plague, before Aaron could make atonement, and quench the fire.
What if Aaron had stayed till next day, till the next week? What if he had
slighted the danger? Tush, the plague is but now begun, it may be it may prove
nothing; it may be, after a few days it may cease again, let us try a little
while, and first see what it will do, and if it do rise to any height, then I
will take the censer, and make atonement. If he had thus foreslowed, and
delayed the time, what a dangerous thing had it been to Israel? Israel had
been in danger to have been eaten up with the plague; and where one dyed, there
might have died a thousand. Aarons delay had been Isreal's present death. When
Gods wrath is once out, and once up, it hastens, and makes quick and speedy
executions, it dispatches men apace; and if they have not made haste to get
themselves within the tower, that will make haste to destroy them. The two
women that did lift up the Ephah, Zech. 5. 9. they had wings, the wings of a
Storke, and the wind was in their wings; to show the haste and speed with
which that judgment should be executed. The wrath of God, when it breaks out,
may be named as that child was, Isai. 8. 3. Maher-shalal-hash-baz, It makes
speed to the spoil, it hastens the prey. And therefore in case men make not
haste into this tower, they are but undone, and gone men. It was wise counsel
the Egyptians gave Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 7. Let the people go, will thou first
know that Egypt is destroyed? As if they had said, Danger, and great danger is
toward us, let us not delay to take a course for our safety, and put it off
till it will be too late, till we be destroyed: And their course and
practice afterward was a wise course, Exodus 12. 33. And the Egyptians were
urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for
they said, We are all dead men. They saw they were all in danger of death, if
they did not hasten to take a course for their safety, and therefore they are
urgent to send away the people in haste. Haste, says the Proverb, makes
waste; but here it is otherwise, haste prevents waste, and want of haste makes
waste. It was Lots fault, that he lingered in Sodom, Genesis 19. 16. And whilst
he lingered, he made not the haste he should have done; loath he is to leave
Sodom, and how much danger his lingering and delaying exposed him unto, the text
implies, Whilst he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, etc. the Lord
being merciful unto him, and they brought him forth, and set him without the
City. The words imply, that if the Lord had not made more haste than he did,
and if he had not snatched him as a brand out of the fire, he had lingered till
the fire and brimstone had been about his ears. It is a very dangerous thing
then to linger, and not to run, and make haste to this Tower.

It is a great deal of safety that is in the speedy doing of these duties:
Our The more haste, the worse speed; but here it is contrary, the more haste,
the better speed: the more haste, the more safety. When Abigail, and her
family, was in danger of David, that he had sworn the destruction of Nabal,
and all his family; so soon as she is informed of the danger, she takes a
course to prevent it: the Text says, she was a woman of a good understanding;
and as she showed herself to be so in other things, so in this one thing, as
much as any, that she goes speedily about a course of safety, 1 Samuel 25. 18.
Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, etc. And verse. 23. And
when Abigail saw David, she hasted, etc. And see what she got by it, verse. 33.
For in very deed, as the Lord God of Israel lives, which has kept me back
from hurting thee, except thou had hasted, and come to meet me, surely there
had not been left unto Nabal, etc. He says not, except thou had come to meet
me; but except thou had hasted, and come to meet me; she might have come to
meet him, and have met him too late. As if he had said, thou may thank
thine hastening to meet me: thine haste has been thy safety. If therefore a
man in the apprehension of danger, have any provident thoughts for his own
safety, let him not only take the course prescribed, but let him do it with
speed. As Christ said to Judas in that, so say I to thee in this case, That
thou do, do quickly, the sooner the safer. It is great wisdom to send
Ambassadors of peace, whilst the adversary is yet a great way off, Luke 14.
32. If a danger and a fear be remote, and far of, it is good to provide
with the soonest for safety. It is the fashion of the Spaniard, if he sees a
fray at the further end of the street, though it be an whole streets length
off him, yet to draw his weapon presently: he will be sure to look to one, and
will not be to seek for his safety if the danger should draw nigher him. So
if we see the Lord drawing, and unsheathing the sword of his wrath in the
Pestilence, or any other judgment, take a course presently for safety,
presently be betaking thy self to the tower: though the danger seem to be
far off; specially do it, if the danger be near you, at the doors, Matthew.
24. 33. Men's security, and love of the world so besots them commonly, that they
are not so sensible, and apprehensive of dangers as they should be; and
therefore no haste with them but good. If they go toward the tower, it is at
the best but a foot pace; yea but a snayles pace, they walk on leasurely, and
lingringly; they do not run full speed, as if their safety lay in their
speed; whilst men want the Doves wings it is an adventure whether ever they
will get under Gods wings.

The third and last general point is, the

1. Have a care to keep our selves within Numb. 35. 26, 27, 28. If the slayer
shall at any time come without the border of the City of his refuge, whither
he was fled, and the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the
City of his refuge, and the revenger of blood kill the slayer, he shall not
be guilty of blood, because he should have remained in the City of his
Refuge, until the death of the high Priest. So a man that is gotten into this
Tower, under Gods protection, is safe and sure, so long as he keeps him. But
if he think those courses too strict in which he must walk, to keep himself
under that shelter, and will adventure to step out, and take some liberty that
God allows not, he being out of the borders of the Tower, if he meet with a
clap, and come short, he may thank himself, because he should have remained
within the trenches and walls of the Tower. In the shadow of thy wings will I
make my refuge, until these calamities be past, Psalm. 57. 1. He shall cover
thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou trust, Psalm. 91. 4. How
safe is the Chickin under the Hens wing? but if the Chickin will be wandering,
and going out, then no wonder if she become a prey to the Kite, soon may the
Chickin be in the Kites Claws, when she is from under the Hens wing. That
therefore must be a man's special care, when once he is gotten under Gods
wing, to keep close to him, and to walk close with him. If we will be too
bold to give our selves unallowd liberties, look not for safety in such a
course.

When men have a strong hold, and Castle, yet they so trust not to it, but they
keep watch and ward. If they within the tower should grow secure, and
negligent, especially if they should fall to drinking, and drunkenness, how
easily might an adversary without surprise them, and turn them out of their
hold, or put them to the sword? A man gotten into the Tower of Gods Name, must
keep his watch in the tower: if we grow secure, and loose, we cannot expect
assurance of our safety; our safety lies very much upon our watchfulness
over our own hearts and ways, after that we be gotten into this tower.

Being within the Tower, have a care

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S HONOR.

OR, GODS FAVOVRITE, Published By Ier. Dike, Minister of Epping.

Ioh. 15. 15. I have called you friends.

August. epist. 121. In quibuslibet rebus humanis nihil est homini amicum sine
amico.

flower

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for I. Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Sun, in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S HONOR.
Iam. 2. 23. And he was called the friend of God.


THe Apostle in this Chapter undertakes the correction of two great evils which
were it seems too common amongst those Christian Jews, to whom he writes this
Epistle.

The first was that mentioned, verse. 1. Their having of the faith of Christ
with respect of persons. In reproving of which he continues to the end of the
thirteenth verse.

The second evil was that, mentioned verse. 14. A vain boasting of faith,
where

The first is taken from a comparison of

The second is taken from the impossibility is, may be, and will be
manifested. It is with faith, as it was with Christ. He could not be hid.

A Faith that can keep house, and skulk, and lie close is not a right bred
Faith, verse. 18.

The third is taken from an Absurdity.

The fourth is taken from an Adjunct Dead Faith. How can he be a living
Christian whose Faith is Dead? That is laid down verse. 20. How can a Dead
Faith bring a man to life.

The fifth is taken from a comparison Abraham, and Rahab. In the example of
Abraham, there be these things considerable.

First, He lays down his proposition, Abraham was justified by a working
faith, verse. 21. For that is the meaning of those words, and the Apostle by
works understands faith, which has works, as appears by that, verse. 18.
Thou have faith, it is a naked and empty faith without works. I have works,
that is, faith which breaks forth, and manifests it self in works: when
therefore the Apostle says that Abraham was Justified by works, he means,
that his faith, by which he was justified, was not a naked faith empty of
works. That hand of faith by which he laid hold on Christ, as it was an
apprehending, and an applying hand, so was it an acting, and a working hand.

Secondly, he proves that Abraham's faith

Thirdly, He calls such vain boasters See thou not how faith, etc. And two
things he would have them consider.

1. That Abraham's faith did work faith, and that his faith did concur unto
his works, that they might be right, and pleasing to God, for without faith
it is impossible to please God, Hebrews 11. 6.

2. That his faith was made perfect

Fourthly, He concludes that which he had laid down at first, That Abraham
Genesis 15. 6. for by the works of Abraham it appears that faith, of which Moses
there spoke was not a sloathfull, but a working faith. And that faith of
Abraham's he sets forth by another consequent, that followed upon it besides
that which is specified in the Testimony of Scripture, for take the words
together, and Abraham's faith is set forth by two special things that followed
upon it.

The first was his Justification. Abraham believed, and it was imputed unto him
for righteousness.

The second was, the favor and And he was called the friend of God. He was
called, that is, he was, and became the friend of God. So Matthew 5. 9.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the sons of God, that
is, they shall be the sons of God.

From the words then, we may learn this point.

The great Honor, and Happiness of the faithful. The Honor of the people of
God. They have the Honor, and the Happiness to be Gods friends. Abraham was
the father of the faithful, and he is three several times honored in
Scripture with the Title of Gods friend: once here in this Text. Another time,
2 Chronicles. 20. 7. And gave it to the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever. A
third time, Isay 41. 8. and that by God himself. And thou Israel art my
servant, the seed of Abraham my friend. And therefore so often given to Abraham
the father of the faithful, that it might haereditarily descend upon all the
children of faithful Abraham. That as amongst the German Nobility, every son
bears the title of his fathers Honor, so in this case, all that are his
children are also Heirs of his Honorable Title. All the children as their
father, friends of God. Therefore not peculiar to Abraham alone, but given to
others in Scripture also. It is given to Moses, Exodus 33. 11. And the Lord
spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend. It is given to
the disciples, Ioh. 15. 14. 15. Ye are my friends. Henceforth I call you
friends. I have called you friends. Not only I will call you friends, but I
have called you friends, as implying, it was usually his manner of compellation
to call them by that Name, when he spoke to them, of which we have an
example, Luke 12. 4. And Isay unto you my friends, fear not. There is an
intimate, entire and mutual friendship between Christ, and the faithful. He
is their friend, They are his friends. He cheeres them up by that name, Cant.
5. 1. Eat O friends, Drink, yea drink abundantly O beloved. They are
therefore friends, and not only friends, ordinary and common friends, but
Beloved friends.

This is not every ones portion to have a share in such Honor, and favor.
Look upon men in their natural condition, and they are strangers to God, and
God a stranger to them, there is no acquaintance between God and them. They
are strangers as from the Life of God, Ephesians. 4. 18. so strangers from the
covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. and strangers to God himself, for both go
there together, strangers from the covenants of promise, and without God in the
world. They are born strangers, Psalm. 58. 3. The wicked are estranged from the
womb. And so they live strangers, there is no more familiarity, and
acquaintance between God and them, then is between strangers that never saw,
or heard each of other. God is such a stranger to them, that if he do offer
them any manner of acquaintance, they shake him off as a stranger, Job. 20. 14.
15. They say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, what is the Almighty? They use him as a stranger, they wish him to be
gone, they care not for, nor desire his acquaintance, they desire to be rid
of him. And therefore God carries himself as a very stranger to them. And as
men are not well pleased, when strangers are brought into their houses, whom
they know not who, nor what, nor whence they are: so is God highly displeased,
when such persons are brought into his house, and that because they be
strangers, Ezekiel. 44. 7. Ye have brought into my Sanctuary strangers,
uncircumcised in heart. God had as lieve have their room as their company, as
we use to say of mere strangers to us: Such is the condition of men by nature.
But contrarily of the faithful it may be said, as Ephesians. 2. 19. Now therefore
ye are no more forrayners and strangers. What are they then? not only as
their fellows; But fellow citizens, etc. But they are more, they are the
friends, and acquaintance, the beloved friends, and favorites of God.

Nay, look upon men in the state of nature, and they are in a worse condition
then strangers. It is condition bad enough to be strangers, to have no
acquaintance with God, but it is worse to be Gods enemies, to have God our
enemy, and to be enemies to him. And that is the case of a man in his natural
condition, God and he are enemies: Therefore the Apostle instances in both.
Colos. 1. 21. You that were alienated, and enemies, you were strangers, but
that's not All: ye were worse, you were enemies to God, you hated God and God
hated you, you opposed God, and God opposed you, there were hostile affections,
dispositions, and carriages between God and you, such was your natural
condition. And that is the misery of natural men, they are Gods enemies: but
this is the honor, and happiness of the godly, that they are the friends of
God. There is no relation between God and his, but there is honor and
happiness in it. Sometimes they are called his people, and he their God. To be
Gods people and subjects, is an honorable and happy thing, Psalm. 144. 15.
Happy is that people, whose God is the Lord. It is an happy thing to be Gods
people. For they are a people nigh unto him. Psalm. 148. 14. Sometimes they are
called the servants of God. It is an honorable and happy thing to be Gods
servants. Happy are thy servants, says the Queen of Sheba, of Salomons
servants 1 King. 10. 8. And if an happiness in being Salomons, how much more
in being Gods servants? David seems to count it more honor to write himself,
The servant of the Lord, than the King of Israel. The 36. Psalm has this
Title, A Psalm of David, the servant of the Lord: I find not any Psalm with
that Title, A Psalm of David, the King of Israel. Now if such an honor and
happiness to be the servants of the Lord, nay, if such an happiness and
honor to be the people and subjects of the Lord, which is not so near and
close a relation, as to be his servants; for to be the Kings servant, is more
than to be his subject: how great honor, and happiness is it then to be the
friends and favorites of the King, and God of Heaven? The which happiness and
honor, that it may the better appear, consider the benefits and privileges
that follow thereupon. They are these.

First, Communion with God, and Christ: Communion: there is a great deal of
sweetness, and excellent contentment in a friend, by reason of communion,
Prove. 27. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of
a man's friend, by hearty counsel. The communion that is between friends, is
an Ointment, and a Perfume that rejoices the heart. And when a man finds a
true friend, he finds honey, Prove. 25. 16. Have thou found honey? that is,
have thou found a friend? But why says he, Have thou found honey? Because of
the sweetness that is in communion with a friend. What is sweeter than honey?
Judge. 14. 18. Nothing sweeter than honey to a man's taste, and nothing sweeter
than a perfume to a man's smell: and a friend has the sweetness of both, of
Honey, and a Perfume. Now the godly having God for their friend, they have
communion with him, sweet communion with him, such sweetness in their
communion with this their friend, as is above the sweetness of honey, such as
rejoices the heart above all ointment and perfume. Look what communion is
between hearty and entire friends, such there is in all points between God and
the faithful, by virtue of their friendship between God and them. Communion
between friends, stands commonly in these things:

In Communication of their secrets mutually secrets. Indeed to a stranger, with
whom a man has little or no familiarity and friendship, or to one from whom
his heart is alienated, and estranged, a man will not communicate his secrets,
no not common and trivial matters, that are but matters of ordinary course.
But where there is friendship, and inward entireness, there the bosom secrets
are disclosed and imparted: the very secret cabinet is unlockt and set open,
for a friend to look into; friends have all things common, common secrets, Job.
19. 19. All my inward friends abhorred me. The words are, All the (...). Chrysostom.
in Ephesians. hom. 9.
men of my secret, that is, my special friends to whom I communicated my
secrets. A friend is another self. Now a man cannot conceal any secret from
himself; and therefore not from his friend. And therefore when David would
describe that communion which was between him and his friend, he sets it out by
this, Psalm. 41. 9. Mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted. A man will
trust his friend with his bosom secrets. Thus is it between God and the
faithful, being once his friends, he will have sweet communion with them, in
revealing, disclosing, and manifesting his secrets unto them, Psalm. 25. 14.
The secret of the Lord is with those that fear him. Prove. 3. 32. His secret is
with the righteous, 1 Cor. 2. 16. We have, that is, we know the mind of
Christ, Luke 8. 10. Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of God, the very Arcana Imperii: and upon this ground it is given, because
friends of God. It is some favor and privilege to be of the Kings Court; but
it is a far greater to be of the Kings Counsel. Courtiers they know
somewhat more than those that live in the remote parts of the land; they know
the Kings person, his common courses and actions, better than forraigners in
other countries, and better than country people do, that dwell far off in
the same kingdom, who do not belong unto, nor follow the Court: but what is
that to what a privy Counselor knows? The king acquaints them with special
secrets, with the mysteries of state. They that are his Privy Counselors,
they know his mind, they are not only of the Court, but of the Counsel also.
Hypocrites and carnal persons, that live in the Church, and under the
ministry, they do know many truths that Heathens, and such as live not under
the means, know not; but yet they are but of the common sort that follow the
Court. It is the privilege of the godly, that they are set at the Counsel
table, where the very secret mysteries of the kingdom are disclosed. It is
something which is spoken, Psalm. 45. 15. They shall enter into the Kings
Palace. It is somewhat to be Courtiers, to be outwardly members of the Church;
but yet this is not all the privilege of the faithful, there is a further
matter, Cant. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his Chambers: they come not
only into the King Palace, but into the Kings Chambers. The Kings chamber is
the place of greatest secrecy, 2 King. 6. 12. Elisha the Prophet that is in
Israel, tells the King of Israel the words thou speak in thy bedchamber.
The King has brought me into his Chambers: he has revealed and imparted unto
me the secrets of his heart, made them known to me in his privy chamber. So
that the privilege of the godly is, that they are not only of the Court, but
of the Counsel; they do not only know the Kings face, but the Kings heart,
and the secrets in his breast. Nay, the godly are not only of the Court, and
the Counsel, but they are the choice and peculiar friends and favorites of
God. It is said of Zabud that he was principal officer, and the Kings friend, 1
King. 4. 5. He was Solomon's favorite; and a favorite is more than a
Counselor, and is acquainted with those secrets that every ordinary
Counselor knows not, even with Cabinet secrets. All Gods people are Zabuds,
Gods friends and favorites; and therefore God communicates his secrets to
them. Abraham is here called Gods friend, and see how God speaks of him, Genesis
18. 17. Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I will do? As if he had said,
Abraham is my friend, and therefore I may not conceal my mind from him. It
will not stand with the laws of friendship to hide my purpose from him. Ioh.
15. 15. Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not what his
Lord does; but I have called you Friends: and so I will use you as friends. But
how? In entertaining communion with you, and communicating my secrets unto you:
For all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you. See
what a privilege follows being the friends of Christ. When friends do
conceal secrets each from other, and communicate only some trifling common
things one to another, it is a sign of a crazed, and a loosened (...)
Chrysostom. ubi supra.
friendship, not of a true entire love, but only of an artificial personated
complementall kind of love, only for fashion sake, to hold ends together; but
true friendship makes a man communicative of his greatest and choycest secrets.
It had some strength in it which Delilah spoke to Samson, Judge. 16. 15. How
can thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? that is, when
thou will not disclose the secrets of thine heart to me, as appears verse. 17,
18. she therefore concludes, his heart was not with her, because he told her
not all his heart. But now Gods people, being his friends, the Lords heart is
with them, and therefore he tells them all his heart, the very deep secrets
of his heart, 1. Cor. 2. 7. - 12. Ephesians. 1. 7-9. When once men have God for their
friend, he will not be dainty of his secrets, but will communicate them unto
them. And the more inward and entire the friendship is, the greater secrets he
will communicate unto them. All his Disciples were his friends, and therefore
John 15. 15. he made known unto them all things he had heard of his Father. But
yet there was one Disciple, which was the Disciple whom Jesus loved, Ioh 13.
23. and he leaned on Jesus bosom. John was that Disciple that was his special
beloved bosome-friend: and therefore when Peter desired to know that secret,
which of them it was that should betray him, he beckned to John, that he
should ask, who it should be of whom he spoke, Ioh 13. 24. Peter knew he was
his bosome-friend, and therefore the likelier upon asking, to come acquainted
with that secret; and upon his asking it is revealed to him, verse. 25. 26. Nay,
John being the bosom friend of Christ, he did not only when on earth use him
as a friend, in communicating special secrets to him, that not to the rest;
but after he was ascended into heaven, did still use him as his bosom friend,
in revealing to him greater secrets and mysteries than to any of the rest: To
him he revealed all those mysteries and secrets which are comprehended in the
book of the Revelation, The Revelation of Jesus Christ, etc. And he sent and
signified it by his Angel unto his servant John, Apoc. 1. 1. But why unto
John? Why not unto Peter? Why not unto some of the rest? Because John was the
Disciple whom he loved; John had lien in his bosom: and therefore being his
bosom friend, he should have the honor and the favor to have these bosom
secrets imparted unto him. Special secrets revealed to John, because John a
special friend and favorite: yea when men are special friends indeed, God
will whisper in their ears, and discover such secrets to them, as not to
others. It is said, 1. Sam. 9. 15. That God told Samuel in his ear of Saul's
coming, a day before he came: A man will whisper in his friends ear, and
tell him a secret that other shall not know; so does the Lord deal with his
friends: he has his secret whisperings with his Saints, and tells them
secretly in their ears, that which every one shall not know. So Christ dealt
with John, in discovering Judas to be the traitor; he spoke it not out, but
secretly whispered that in his ear which he speaks to him, Ioh. 13. 26: The
rest of the Disciples heard it not, as appears verse. 28, 29, If Christ had
spoken that in the hearing of all the Disciples, that he spoke to John, they
might easily have understood our Saviors meaning in his speech to Judas: And
so still does God deal with the godly, which were his friends, he secretly
reveals that in their ears, which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard,
nor has entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for
them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Indeed men of the world, they believe not that
a godly man has any such privilege as to be acquainted with Gods secrets more
than themselves; they measure a godly man by themselves, and therefore say in
this case, as Eliphaz spoke to Job in that case, Job. 15. 8, 9, 11. Have thou
heard the secret of God? What know thou that we know not? What understandest
thou that is not in us? Is there any secret thing with thee? But yet a godly
man does know that a worldly man knows not; he does understand something that
is not in him: there is some secret thing with him, and he has heard the
secret of God, which he has not heard. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, Psalm. 25. And this is the first thing in which their communion
with God stands, namely, his communication of his secrets unto them, being his
friends.

Communion between friends stands in Consultation. A man when he is in a pinch,
or straight, and knows not well which way to wind, or turn himself, whither
goes he for counsel, advice, and direction, but to his friends? And wherein
does or can a friend show greater love, than in communicating unto him the best
advice, and counsel that he can? No man consults with strangers, or enemies,
neither do nor will such give a man counsel in his need, what is the best
course to be taken? Prove. 27. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so
does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel, or counsel from the
heart, from the soul. A friend he gives hearty counsel, counsel from the
heart, and that which comes from the heart, goes to the heart: and the
sweetness of a friend, his ointment, and perfume never smells so sweet, as in
his hearty counsels. See how David speaks of him whom he had taken for his
faithful friend, Psalm. 55. 14. We took sweet counsel together; not only
counsel, but sweet counsel. In those sweet counsels there was the sweet
ointment, and sweet perfume that rejoiced the heart. There is a great deal of
sweetness in friendship by reason of communion in this kind. There was a
wondrous entire friendship between David and Jonathan, The soul of Jonathan
was knit unto David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul, 1 Samuel 18. 1. He
was a true and a close friend to him. And see wherein he showed himself a
friend unto him indeed; in nothing more than in his counsels. See 1 Samuel 19. 2,
3. and 1. Sam. 20. through the whole chapter. When David was in danger and
streights, Jonathan gave him counsel and advice what to do in those
streights: therein he showed himself a friend, and did a true friends office
unto David. And thus does God show himself a friend to his people, and thus
he communicates himself to them in the sweet counsels he gives them. He
gives them counsel from the heart; their pinches and exigents are many times
very sore, they know not which way to wind, or turn themselves. In such
streights they go to God, as to their friend, and they ask counsel of him,
and he gives them counsel, and so advises and directs them, that their hearts
are eased, and a way shown them how to extricate themselves out of their
difficulties. David was much disquieted and troubled in his spirit about that
case of the prosperity of the wicked, and the afflictions of the godly, Psa.
73. His feet were almost gone, his steps had well-nigh slipped, verse. 2. His
heart was grieved, and he was pricked in his reins, verse. 21. He goes into the
Sanctuary, to ask counsel of God, and God did give him counsel, Thou
hold me by my right hand, thou shall guide me with thy counsel, verse. 23,
24. God in this perplexity so counseld him, that his heart was eased. We find
David in a perplexity of spirit upon an harder case than this, Psalm. 13. He
was under a desertion, God seemed to forget him, and to hide his face from him;
and see verse. 2. How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in
mine heart daily? David calls all his thoughts and wits to counsel in this
straight, sets all the powers of his soul on work, for the clearing of this
question, he takes counsel in his soul long, and his heart is daily
disquieted, and full of heaviness: And yet in the end of the Psalm we find
his heart eased, and the case cleared to him. But how came it so? surely by
that very way that is specified, Psalm. 16. 7. I will bless the Lord, who has
given me counsel, my reins also instruct me in the night seasons. Though
Gods people at one time may say, How long shall I take counsel in my soul?
yet they shall have cause to say at another time, I will bless the Lord who
has given me counsel. Though at one time they are pricked in their reins,
Psalm. 73. 21. yet at another time their reins shall instruct them. That Is the
happiness of Gods people, that howsoever they may have pinching exigents, and
streights, that may make them with Iehoshaphat, say, Lord, we know not what to
do, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. yet they have a great, and a good friend in heaven, that
fails them not, but as he is mighty in counsel, so he is ready in his
counsels, and will counsel them what to do in all their streights. An hard
case it is, when a man's spirit is in streights, to be friendlesse, not to have
a friend with whom a man may consult, and into whose bosom he may empty and
power out his heart; but it is the happy condition of the godly, that in their
streights they have him who is the mighty God to be their friend, and
counselor, Isai. 9.

Communion between friends, stands in society, cohabitation, dwelling
together; (...). Arist. Ethic. 8. c. 3. (...). Id. Ethic. 8. c. 5.
friends desire to live and dwell together, as much as may be, that they may
have as much occasion as may be of showing, and expressing their love each to
other. When Barzillai the Gileadite had showed himself so true a friend to
David, he was loath to part with him, he desired his society, so as to have
him live with him; Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in
Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 19. 33. Friends always desire the presence of their
friends: for howsoever as the Philosopher observes, that distance of place
dissolves (...). Arist. Ethic. 8. c. 5.
not friendship, yet notwithstanding it hinders the many acts of friendship
that cannot be exercised between friends in their absences, and distances
each from other; and therefore the dearer friends are, the nearer they desire
to be, to be under the same roof. And thus does God show himself a friend in
this communion; though his dwelling be in the highest heavens, yet he will
come down to them, and dwell, and make his abode with them, Ioh, 14. 23. If any
man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Such an abode as to take up
our dwelling with him. Happy is that man, that is Host to such Guests: And
that is the happiness of the godly, who having the Lord to their friend, are
also sure to have him for their Guest, not a guest for a night, and so away;
but a guest that will make his abode with them.

Communion between friends stands Coambulation, and Confabulation, in
conversing, in walking and talking together. Friends take great delight in
communion of this kind, Psalm. 55. 24. We walked together, we had a great
deal of chat and friendly talk together. Can two walk together except they
be agreed? Am. 3. and so can two be agreed and knit together in the bonds of
love and friendship, but they will walk together? It is that which exercises
and increases love, and friendship. And thus does God vouchsafe communion with
the godly being his friends. He will as a friend come walk and talk with
them. He takes turns with them in his walks and galleries, Cant. 1. 17. Our
galleries are of fur, yea as one friend fallen in company with another is so
tied that he knows not how to part, and come away, so Cant. 7. 5. The king is
held, tied or bound in the galleries, as if the Lord were loath to leave those
walks in his ordinances, in which he converses with his people. He calls out
his friends to take a walk with him, Cant. 7. 11. Come my beloved, let us go
forth into the fields, let us get up early into the vine yards, let us see if
the vine flourish. Come let us walk out together into the fields, let us have
a walk into the vineyards. And as they commune with the Lord in the secret of
their souls, so God does commune with them by his spirit, he has his sweet
and secret conferences, and Colloquies with them: Genesis 17. 22. The Lord left
off talking with Abraham, Genesis 18. 33. And the Lord went his way as soon as
he had left communing with Abraham. Exodus 31. 18. And he gave unto Moses when
he had made an end of communing with him, two Tables of Testimony. And see in
what a familiar manner the Lord used to talk with Moses, Exo. 33. 11. And the
Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his friend. And
though no man may come near to Moses, in that special privilege of
familiarity, yet in that measure and proportion the Lord vouchsafes unto all
his Saints these familiar and friendly conferences in a special manner.

Fifthly, communion between friends stands in mutual friendly visitations. One
friend Mary went to Elizabeth to visit her at her house in the hill country.
And so God has his times when he makes his visits with his people. Ioh. 14.
23. We will come unto him, Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor
thou bear unto thy people, O visit me with thy salvation. As if he had
said, Lord remember me to be one of thy friends, and vouchsafe me some such
gracious friendly visits, as thou usest to afford to thy friends, and
favorites. He shows his friends hearts by his visitations, sheds his love
into their hearts by the Holy Ghost, gives them sweet assurances of his favor,
filles their hearts with peace, he comes and brings them the hidden manna, and
the white stone, brings his friendly tokens with him.

Sixthly, Communion between friends mutual feasting, and banqueting each with
other. Friends will invite each other, will call their friends to their tables,
and will go to their friends tables. Psalm. 41. 9. My familiar friend that eat
of my bread. He therefore used to have his familiar friend at his table, and to
feast him with his good cheer. So God deals with his people, and holds
communion with them of this kind. Apoc. 3. 20. If any man will open unto me,
I will come in unto him, and I will suppe with him and he with me, Canticles
5. 2. Eat O Friends, and drink abundantly O beloved. Look what sweet
communion friends have together in mutual feastings each of other, such sweet
spiritual communion vouchsafes the Lord to his people.

Lastly, there is yet another expression David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 41. And
they kissed one another, and 2 Samuel 19. 39. David kissed Barzillai. So of
ancient friends used to express their friendly love each to other. And thus
does God express his communion with his people: as they kiss the Son. Psalm.
2. and Cant. 8. 1. When I should find thee without, I would kiss thee, so
does the Lord kiss them as his friends, Cant. 1. 1. Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth. That's a great Honor and Happiness. It is an honor, and
a favor to kiss the kings hand, but when once we are the friends of Christ,
the friends of God, he gives us not his hand, but his lips, his mouth to kiss.
And thus in those things the godly have commnnion with God, and this communion
they have by being his friends: and this is the first benefit we have by
having him our friend.

The second benefit by having God their friend is, Boldness and Familiarity of
Access to God in all our wants and necessities. When God is once our friend,
we may with an holy boldness, and familiarity come into his presence, and
make known our wants unto him: when God is a man's enemy, or when God is but a
stranger to a man, he cannot be so bold with him. It is the rule we live by
amongst men. If a man be our enemy, though we stand in need of him, and he
might be beneficial to us, yet we will not, we cannot have the face to be so
bold and familiar with him, as to acquaint him with our necessities, because
being our enemy, we conceive he will but despise us, and be glad of an
occasion that he may look darkely, and angrily upon us. Nay if a man be but
a stranger unto us, though there be no unkindnesse, or quarrel between us,
we cannot endure to make bold with him. If we be put upon it, our plea is,
Alas he is a mere stranger to me, he is one with whom I have very slender or
no acquaintance at all, he will wonder I should make so bold with him. But now
if a man have a special friend with whom he is inwardly well acquainted, if
he want his help, his counsel, his good word to speak for him, he can
without any ado make bold with him. A man we use to say, may be bold with his
friends. And who should a man make bold with but with his friends? The case is
so here, whilst God is our enemy, or a stranger unto us, we cannot have the
face, or the heart to go to him in our wants, and to make our cases known
unto him: we think that he may well give us such answer as Isaac gave to
Abimelech and the rest that came with him, Genesis 26. 27. Wherefore come ye to
me, seeing ye hate me? what mean you to come to me who am your enemy, who am
at the easiest a stranger to you, in whom you have no manner of Interest? Did
ye not hate me, says Iephthah to them. Judges 11. 7. And why are ye come
unto me, now when ye are in distress? And such answers our misgiving hearts
will tell us, we may expect, when we are enemies to God. But when once we are
Gods friends, then we may boldly go to him, and make our minds known to him.
Heb. 4. 16. Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Gods people
therefore may not only go, but go boldly to the throne of Grace. But whence
comes it that they may do it? Even from hence, because they are the Lords
friends. It is the privilege of Gods friends that they may go boldly into his
presence, Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness, and access with confidence
by the faith of him. In Christ we have this boldness, because in and by him,
we come to be the friends of God. It is a bold part for a man to go to his
neighbor, at midnight, when he is in his bed, the doors shut to, and to
disturb, and raise him then out of his bed; Lu 11. 5. 8. but yet this excuses
all, he is his friend to whom he goes, which of you shall have a friend and
shall go unto him at midnight, and shall say friend, lend me three loaves? It
is a bold part for a man in his Journey to come at midnight to a friends house,
and yet he to whom he comes blames him not, but goes out at that time to make
provision for him, and this makes him swallow all, Luke 11. 6. For a friend of
mine in his journey is come unto me. It was the friendship that was between
them that makes the traveller so bold, as to come at that time of night, and
put him to such trouble. Friends may make bold one with another. And it is the
happiness of Gods people being his friends, that they make holily bold with
God. Their coming to him is never troublesome.

The third benefit by having God their Assurance and certainety of speed in
all their lawful and convenient suites, and prayers they make to God. To be
bold, and not to be welcome is to little purpose, but to be bold, and welcome
both that is a great matter. Gods people cannot be so bold as welcome, as one
friend uses to say to another. It will not stand with Humanity, and with the
laws of friendship for a man to deny his friend any thing, a man knows not
how to say his friend nay; friends, whilst they ask they command. And when a
friend asks, his friends answers, you may command me any thing. And therefore
when God bids his people ask of him, he as one that speaks in a friends
language, to show as the power and force of prayer, so also the force and power
of friendship, bids them also command him, Isa. 45. 11. Ask of me, and
concerning the work of mine bands, command ye me, for friends petitions are
commands. God once being a man's friend, his petitions being rightly qualified,
he may be sure God cannot say his friend, nay, but he will do for him what
ever his hearts desire is. After Ionathans soul was knit to David, and that
he loved him as his own soul, and had made him his choice, and dear friend,
see how he speaks to David, 1 Samuel 20. 4. Whatsoever thy soul desires, I
will do it for thee, or, say what is thy mind, or what thy soul speaks, or
thinks, and I will do it for thee. And so afterward David to Barzillai, when
he had shown himself so true a friend unto him, 2 Samuel 19. 38. Whatsoever
thou shall require of me, that will I do for thee, such a prevalent power
has a friend in his suites, and desires to his friend, that as Zedekias said
to the princes, Ier. 38. 5. The king can deny you nothing, so one friend can
deny another nothing. Zabud 1 King. 4. 5. was the kings friend, how could then
the king deny him any thing? It is the privilege of the kings friend to have
the kings ear. The kings ear, and the kings hand, are both open to the kings
friend, and favorite. If Zabud be Salomons friend, Solomon can deny him
nothing. If a friend ask, though he seem to ask unreasonable, and
unseasonable things, yet such is the commanding power of friendship, that a man
is necessitated to gratify him.

That same Lu. 11. 9. And I say unto you, ask, and it shall be given you,
seek, and ye shall find, etc. is but an inference upon all that which is laid
down in the four former verses, in which he presses to prayer upon the ground
of assurance to speed. As if he had said, pray, and ye shall be sure to
speed. But why shall we be sure? because God is our friend. Amongst men friends
prevail with their friends, and therefore God being your friend, you shall be
sure also to prevail with him. He takes his argument from a comparison of the
less to the greater, and there be diverse arguments couched in those words, to
assure men of speed in their prayers, they being Gods friends.

The first is this. If so be that a man will not deny his friend asking a
petition, or

The second argument is this. If a at midnight. verse. 5. when it must needs be
a trouble to him, when his children are at rest, and the door shut, verse. 7.
yet for all this prevails with his friend, and speeds in his suite. How much
more then will God grant the suits which his friends make to him, to whom no
time is unseasonable. All times to God are seasonable, he is as ready at one
time as at another. God is ready at all times and hours. His court of audience
is always open. His doors shut at no time. It is not with God as with men. To
men a time of petitioning may be unseasonable, because it may be.

First, a time of his own necessary relief

Secondly, He may want power at

Thirdly, He may have business, and occasions of his own, his own

Fourthly, He may be taken up with David will pray thrice a day, Psalm. 55.
17. If David will be so often at leisure to pray, God will be as often at leisure
to hear. With my soul I have desired thee in the night. Isa. 26. 9. yea David
will pray at midnight, Psalm. 119. 62. To come in the night, specially at
midnight is unseasonable to man, not so to God. Morning, evening, noone, night,
midnight, any time is a seasonable time with God. Come when you will, Gods
door, and Gods ear is always open. What assurance of speed gives this to
those that be Gods friends? A man will help his friend at midnight, when he
is in bed, he will rise to pleasure him, though he come unseasonably, and will
not God therefore much more help his friends that can never come unseasonably
to him? we may not imagine, that men can be more kind and friendly to their
friends, then God is unto his.

The third argument is this. If a friend they ask for their own necessity?
The friend here in bed might have answered his friend at the door thus, if
thou thy self, or any of thy children had wanted bread, I would not have
denied to have given thee what thou ask, but in as much as thou ask for
one that is unknown to me, take it not ill that I do not gratify thee in this
thing that thou desire. But yet we see here is no such answer. Such is the
power of friendship, that it binds a man to do for his friends friend, though
a stranger to him. And if it bind a man to do for his friends friend, how
much more for a friend himself? And if humane friendship be thus obligatory,
that it will make a man do for a stranger, for a friends sake, then how much
more is that divine love of God powerful to make him do for his people they
being his friends? God loves not his friends, less then a man loves his.

The fourth argument is this. If a friend be content to give those loaves to
his bed with his children, though the door be shut, yet for all that he rises,
and gives him what he needs, though with so much trouble to him; if I say a
friend will do this for his friend, which he cannot do without so much
trouble, then how much more will God grant the petitions of his people which
are his friends, who can without any the least trouble that is perform what
they desire of him? will a friend amongst men, help his friend though it be to
his own trouble, and the trouble of his? then how can it stand with Gods love
to his friends not to help them when he can help them without any trouble at
all? shall friendship between man and man be more prevalent then friendship
between God and his friends? God is not troubled with sleep. He that keeps
Israel neither slumbers, nor sleeps, Psalm. 121. 4. And all that wait upon him
in heaven are waking, they cannot be disquieted, the gates and doors of heaven
are never shut, it is no trouble at all therefore to God to help. Suppose it
were a trouble to God to gratify his people in their prayers, yet why should
not he do as much for his friends, as one friend amongst men will do for
another? A friend will help his friend though it be to his trouble; and
therefore though it were with trouble to the Lord, why should it be thought
that he will not help his friends? And if he would hear them, and help
them, and do for them that they ask, though it were to his trouble, then how
much more may they be assured that he will give them what they ask, when it
is no trouble at all to him? If a man should desire his friend that he might
fetch water at his pond, and he should deny him, would not all men condemn
him, that he should refuse to gratify him in that which might be done with so
little trouble to him? Now the Lord he can do the greatest, and the hardest
things we ask with more ease then man can do the easiest: we cannot with
that ease say to a friend, take that Deus omnia creavit facilimo opere, Dicendo
scilicet, ut non plus nego^^ deo sit in creatione, quam nobis in appellatione.
Luther in Genes. 1.
thou ask, that God can give the greatest thing we ask. God without any
trouble at all can give the greatest thing we ask. In the creation of the
world God said, let there be light, and there was light. He created the world
by his word, He said, To show the easiness of the creation to him. It was no
more to him to make the world, than it is to us to speak a word. Nay, with
more ease than we can speak did God make the world; for we cannot speak
without the help of God, In him we live, move, and have our being, Act. 17.
But he is Independent, All-sufficient in, and of himself, needing no help, or
assistance from any other: and therefore easier for him to make the world, than
for us to speak. And if God with such ease created the world, then with how
much ease can he make good our petitions? Even just with the same ease, Luke
7. 7. Only say the word, and my servant shall be healed. What an easy thing
is it for God to speak a word? If therefore a friend will do for his friend,
though with his very great trouble, disease, molestation and disquiet, then
surely God being our friend will not deny us what we ask, in as much as he can
do it with as little trouble as the speaking of a word. It is little he will
do for his friend, that will not so much as say a word for him. Certainly,
God will both speak and do for his friends.

The fifth Argument is this. If a friend that at first refuses his friend, and
puts him off with excuses, Trouble me not, etc. yet after is by his friend
overcome, how much more will God who invites us, calls upon us to seek him,
and promises to hear us when we pray? shall a denying friend be overcome,
and shall not a promising God be prevailed withal? It were strange if God,
bound by his promise should not be more prevailed withal by his friends, then
a man that has made no promise, but a flat denial. And mark upon what ground
the denying friend is prevailed withal verse. 8 I say unto you, though he will
not (that is, if he will not) rise and give him because he is his friend, yet
etc. That implies that our Savior made account that that was a special motive
to work upon him, because he was his friend, and that that were enough to
make him grant his desire, it is troublesome, it is unseasonable, etc. but yet
I must yield, it is my friend that asks. In all which passage we see how
many strong reasons our Savior brings to assure us* that God will grant our
desires, and they are grounded upon this, that we are the friends of God. This
is therefore the great privilege and benefit of being Gods friends that they
shall be sure to speed with God when they seek to him. Indeed many times in
cases of necessity a man shall find but poor help from his friends, Prove.
19. 7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him, how much more do his
friends go far from him? he pursues them with words yet they are wanting
unto him. But it is not so with God, he ownes and agnizes his friends in their
necessities, he will not be wanting to his friends. Do but see what Christ
has done for his friends. John 15. 13. greater love has no man then this,
that a man lay down his life for his friends. Did not Christ make dainty of
his blood, of his life for his friends? and shall we think that he will be
straight handed, or straight hearted to them in smaller matters? That friend
that will lay down his life for his friends, will he deny his friends his
purse? will he deny them three loaves? no such matter. They shall be vvelcome
though they come at midnight. So happy a thing it is to have God for a friend.
It is an happy thing when a man has a faithful friend to whom he may break
his mind when his heart is troubled. It is an ease to disburdon ones mind into
the bosom of a friend, though he cannot help us, and give us remedy against
our grief. How much more then is it an happiness to have God for our friend,
into whose bosom we may disburde^ our minds in prayer, when he is such a
friend as will make good the prayers of his people, and help them in their
needs. How many prayers do many make to God, how many petitions put they up,
and yet speed not? How many beg three loaves, and yet get not one; and what is
the reason? they have not God their friend, they are none of Gods friends, and
therefore their speed is suitable.

The fourth benefit the godly have by defense and protection in all cases of
wrong, injury and oppression, at least pity, and compassion, and a
fellow-feeling with them in their troubles: yea such a pity and compassion as
will stir up God to stand to them, and by them in all their afflictions, so
it is with friends amongst men. If a man see his friend in misery, and trouble,
his heart earnes toward him, and his soul bleeds within him, and all his
thoughts and wits Adversas vero res far difficile esset sine eo qui illas
gravius etia^ quam tu ferret. Cicer. in Lelio.
are vvorking to take a course for his help and relief. See how Job speaks,
Job 19. 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends. But why
should he call upon his friends to pity him? see the reason. Job 6. 14. To him
that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend. It is a friends part,
and duty to be compassionate to his friend in his extremity, and when friends
do not so, it is a sign that they forsake the fear of the Almighty, as there
Job speaks. We see when Jobs three friends heard of all the evil that was
come upon him, they come every one from his own place, for they had made an
appointment together to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him, Job 2. 11.
That was a friendly part, so should friends do, and so will friends do. Prove.
18. 24. There is a friend that sticks closer than a brother. And therefore
well might Job complain of it as a strange case, Job 19. 19. All mine inward
friends abhor me, and Job 16. 20. my friends are my scorners. Your friend will
not only have compassion but if it be in his power, he will stand to, and by
his friend to maintain his cause, and his right against all such as would
wrong and abuse him. A man's blood rises when he hears or sees his friend
wronged, and many a man loses his life in his friends quarrel. Mark how David
speaks to Abiathar, 1 Samuel 22, 23. Abide thou with me, fear not, he that
takes thy life shall take my life also, as some Translations have it. And thus
is it with the people of God being his friends: God will have compassion upon
them in all their afflictions, his friendly heart will have a fellowfeeling
with them in all their miseries. Isay 63. 10. He was turned to be their enemy,
and he fought against them, but before that he was their friend, till by
their sins they made him their enemy. And when he was their friend, then it
was otherwise, ver. 9. in all their affliction he was afflicted. God as a
friend sympathized with them in their sorrows, yea and he will friendly stand
to them, and by them in all their wrongs, he is a friend that sticks closer
then a brother. When Paul was imprisoned, Acts 23. 11. The Lord stood by him
and said, fear not. The Lord as a friend came to him in prison, as a friend
encouraged him, and animated him therein, making good Salomons proverb, Prove.
27. 17. Iron sharpens Iron, so a man sharpens the countenance of his friend.
When a man is dejected, disconsolate and sad of countenance, if his friend come
to him, and comfort and cheer him with words of consolation, it refreshes his
spirit, and puts such life into him as makes his countenance lightsome. Thus
the Lord as a good friend comes to Paul in prison, and cheares his spirit, and
sharpens his countenance. It was no friendly part of those, 2 Timothy 4. 16. At my
first answer no man stood Paravit animum adversus vinculalaturum opem. Cum
primum crepuerit catena, discedet. Senec. ep. 9.
with me, but all men forsook me. Those that professed themselves Paul's great
friends durst not own him when he was convented before Nero, there his friends
failed him, but yet verse. 17. The Lord stood with me and strengthened me, God
showed himself a faithful friend to Paul, he did go to the bar with Paul,
and stood with him there, and strengthened him there. And to this purpose is
that worth the noting, that when our Savior was to hearten and encourage his
Disciples against the fear of persecutions he calls them by the name of
friends, Luke 12. 4. And I say unto you, my friends, be not afraid of them
that kill the body, etc. As if he should have said, you shall meet with a
great deal of hard measure in the world, you shall be persecuted to the very
death, but yet be not afraid of these persecutors. And why not afraid? I say
unto you my friends, be not afraid. You are my friends, and therefore I will
not be wanting unto you, I will stand by you, either to deliver you, or to
strengthen you, and at last to right you in all your wrongs. And so when the
Lord would comfort and encourage his people against the fear of their
adversaries, and their wrongs, and when he would terrify the enemies of his
Church, he does both upon this very ground, that he is his peoples friend, and
they his. See Isai 41. 10, 11, 12, 13. what encouragements unto his people not
to fear, and what terror to their enemies, and see upon what ground, verse. 8.
But thou Israel art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham
my friend. And therefore fear not, you are the seed of my friend, and
therefore I will help you, assist you and protect you, and take your part
against your enemies, and will be severely revenged upon all such as oppose
you, and oppress you. Such an advantage there is in being the seed of Gods
friend. And therefore Iehosaphat when he was in fear and danger pleads with
God by this very argument, 2 Chr. 20. 7. Thou gave this land to the seed of
Abraham thy friend for ever. Thou gave this land to thy friend, and to his
heirs: now therefore Lord maintain the cause of thy friend, and the title of
thy friend. If a man see his friend wronged, and others offering injuriously to
thrust him out of his possession, and inheritance, it concerns a friend to
maintain his friends right to the utmost, therefore says Iehoshaphat, Lord
stand for thy friend, take thy friends part, and maintain thy friends right.
If a man see his friend wronged and others offering to thrust him out of his
possession and inheritance, it concerns a friend to maintain the right of his
friend, and his heirs to the utmost, therefore Lord stand to thy friend, and
maintain the possession thou gave to thy friend. And surely herein the Lord
fails not, but he stands close to his friends. Indeed men do not always
stand close to their friends, Psalm. 38. 12. My lovers and my friends stand
aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar of. The Samaritans when it
went well with the Jews, would claim kindred of them, and profess great
friendship to them, but when things went cross with them, and they were in
streights, then they would have nothing to do with them. But it is not so with
the Lord, he is not such a friend. The rich has many friends. Prove. 14, 10.
and Prove. 19. 7. All the brethren of the poor do hate him, how much more do
his friends go far from him? he pursues them with words, yet they are
wanting to him. That is indeed the common course of the world, but the Lord he
is like that true friend, Prove. 17. 17. A friend loves at all times, yea God
loves at no time more then when his people are most friendlesse. And I say unto
you my friends, fear not, Luke 12. 4. why does he call them friends then more
then at other times, why friends now he speaks of persecution? Certainly to
show that he will never be a greater friend, and that he will never show
himself more a friend unto them then when men shall show most malice and
enmity against them. He shows greatest friendship when men show greatest
enmity; Christ will stand by his friends in their greatest pleasures. The
Apostle John was the beloved Disciple, whom Christ made his special friend.
And John carried himself to him as a faithful friend again, when Christ was
in the high Priests hall John was with him there, and when Christ hung upon the
Cross, John stood by him there, John 19. 26, the Disciple standing by whom
Jesus loved. He showed himself a friend to Christ, that would not forsake him
then, but would be with him, and stand by him to the last. Just such a friend
does Christ show himself to his people, he will not forsake them in their
troubles and leave them in their extremities, but he will stand by them to the
last, he will stand by them at the bar, he will stand by them even on their
crosses, when they hang there, he will stand by them when they stand at the
stake. The Martyrs found this true, they ever found God most friendly when
their enemies used them most currishly: what made them so cheerful and
comfortable in their solitude when kept from all company? God their friend he
visited them and kept them company in their prisons, he did with them as with
Joseph, Genesis 39. 20, 21. Joseph's master took him and put him in prison, and he
was there in prison, but the Lord was with Joseph, and showed him mercy. God
was with Joseph, in the prison with Joseph: what a true friend was Onesiphorus
to Paul, that he sought out Paul, and came to him in prison and often refreshed
him. It was a true and kind friends part indeed that he did, 2 Timothy 1. 16,
17. So kind a friend is God to his servants, he finds them out in their
prisons, comes to them, visits them often, refreshes them often. Their prisons were
nasty stinking places, how was it that they were able to abide them? See the
reason Prove. 27. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the
sweetness of a friend. The sweetness of this friend that visited them kept
them company, and refreshed them in their prisons and dungeons, made their
prisons and dungeons sweet, made them Paradises and delectable hortyardes, as
Algerius Act. and Mo.
that Italian Martyr calls the leonine prison from whence he wrote that
comfortable letter of his. The sweetness of such a friend perfumes prisons and
dungeons, and overcomes the nastinesse and noysomnesse of them. If God be with
us who can be against us? if God be our friend who shall be our foe? or what
matters it who be our foe? this is one of the benefits and great privileges
we have by being the friends of God.

The fifth benefit the godly have by having God their friend is friendship with,
and service of all the creatures. Whiles we are Gods enemies we have all the
creatures for our enemies: the Angels are our enemies, Psalm. 35. 5, 6. Let the
Angel of the Lord chase them, let the Angel of the Lord persecute them. Men,
even such as in nearest bonds to us are bitter enemies to us. Tit. 3. 3. Living
in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. Our own hearts and
consciences are at enmity with us, never quiet, but ever pinching and vexing
us, nothing but clamouring and brawling against us. There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God, Isai. 57. 21. yea the beasts of the field are enemies to
us, Levit. 26. 22. If you walk contrary unto me, I will send wild beasts
amongst you which shall rob you of your children. If you be enemies to me, I
will make the beasts enemies to you. But when once we are friends with God,
and he is become our friend, then all his servants become both friends and
servants unto us. The Angels become our friends, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the
Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivers them. A man's
enemies become his friends, Prove. 16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes even his enemies, his deadly professed enemies, to be at peace with him.
The rest of the creatures become his friends, Job 5. 8. I would seek unto God,
I would seek to be friends with him, but what shall be gotten by it? Amongst
other things, that verse. 21, 22, 23. Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the
tongue, neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes: at
destruction and famine shall thou laugh, neither shall thou be afraid of the
beasts of the earth, for thou shall be in league with the stones of the field,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Yea God will make a
covenant for his people with the beasts of the fields, and with the fowls of
Heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground, Hos. 2. 18. Yea all these
shall not only lay aside their enmity, but shall be ready to be serviceable
to them. When Ahab and Iehosaphat had made a league of friendship each with
other, see how Iehosaphat speaks to him, 1 King. 22. 4. I am as thou art, my
people as thy people, my horses as thy horses. So when once God, and we are in
league of friendship, he will say unto us, my servants are your servants, mine
Angels are your Angels, mine hosts are your hosts, my creatures are your
creatures, Al things are yours, 1 Cor. 3. 21. And all things shall work
together for good to them that love God, and are his friends. If a man be a
traitor and the Kings enemy, every man not only estranges, but sets himself
against him? but let the King but pitch upon a man to make him his friend and
favorite, how then does every one seek to him and smile upon him, and happy is
he that can ingratiate himself with him, and do any service to him that is the
Kings favorite. A man that is once the Kings friend shall be sure to want no
friends, no respect, no service, Zabud was the Kings friend, 1 King. 4. 5. and
who then would not be a friend to Zabud, full glad was he that could be
Zabuds servant. So if once we be Gods friends, God will raise us up friends
enough. Eliphaz his argument was good, Job 22. 21. Acquaint thy self now with
him, and be at peace. Get to be Gods friend, and one of his inward
acquaintance. Well, suppose we do, what shall we get by it? And thereby shall
good come unto thee. And this good amongst the rest that the creatures shall
be in a league of friendship with thee. Indeed some creatures there are that
the more we are Gods friends, the more they will be our enemies, yea therefore
our professed enemies, because we are Gods friends, Satan and his sworn
servants will be the more bitter enemies against us because God ownes us for
his friends, as Esau hated Jacob for the blessing. But yet the Angels in Heaven
that rejoice at the conversion of a sinner on earth, and that he becomes
friends with God, all good men, and the creatures will be our faithful
friends, yea and many times he will make wicked men do his people many a
friendly turn, or at least will make their emnity beneficial, and
advantageous to them. And these be the benefits that Gods people have by having
God their friend. Come we now to the uses of this point. And they are these.

The honor and happiness of being to get this happiness of being the friends
of God. Zabud was the Kings friend, 1 King. 4. 5. Now when people saw how
familiar Zabud was with the King, what communion was between him and Solomon,
how he communicated to him his secret counsels, how potent he was with him in
all suites, how close Solomon stood to him upon all occasions, how serviceable
all the Courtiers and Subjects were to him, did they not, think we, all
think his condition happy? Did they not secretly wish, Oh that I were in his
case, oh that I were as Zabud is, that I had the Kings heart, the Kings ear,
the Kings hand as he has? And if they had known of any project, of any course
by which they might have advanced themselves to Zabuds condition, would they
not speedily have set upon it? would they not have strained and tentred their
wits to the utmost? would they have spared for any cost, or pains, to have
gotten into Zabuds condition? We now therefore seeing what the happy condition
of Gods people is, that they are Gods friends, and have all those great
privileges thereby, how should it stir up our hearts to look, and labor
for this happiness of being Gods friend. And that so much the rather,

Because God may have, and has many friends at once, that are his inward
entire

Because there be projects and courses not, their policies speed not, they do
not compass the thing they desire, but for the getting of Gods favor, and
friendship, there be ways to be used that will surely do the deed, and will
work us in to be Gods friends, and favorites.

What then be those ways by which

First, the way to get in with God is by Col. 1. 21. Now God of his infinite
mercy though he be the party wronged, and offended, yet he is pleased thus
much to forget himself, and to stoop thus low, as not only to offer us peace
and friendship, but he entreates and beseeches us to be reconciled, and
become friends, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then if we will believe the Gospel, and the
words of Reconciliation, that's the chief condition that God requires, and upon
that he will take, and own us for his friends. That's here in the text, Abraham
was called the friend of God; a great honor, but how came Abraham by it?
Abraham, says the Apostle, believed God, and he was called the friend of God.
So that by faith Abraham became Gods friend. So Ioh. 16. 27. The father
himself loves you, God is your friend, and takes you for his friends, and why
so? Because ye have believed that I came out from God. Christ has made an
atonement, and a reconciliation by his blood, faith lays hold on that
reconciling blood, and so God and we become friends. Col. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23.
You that were enemies has he now reconciled in the body of his flesh through
death. If ye continue in the faith. He that will get in with God must do
these three things.

1. He must get in with Gods favorite. That is the way to get the Kings
friendship, yea any ordinary man's friendship. If a man honor and regard the
favorite, and get in with him, and be gracious with him, and he will procure
a man the Kings favor, he will bring him in with the King: it is not possible
to have the Kings favor and be out and at odds with the favorite. So here,
If we would get in with God, and be his friends then get in with his favorite.
The Lord Jesus Christ is Gods favorite, Zech. 13. 7. He is called Gods
fellow-friend. Awake O sword against my shepherd, and against the man that is
my fellow, or my fellow-friend, as the word may be translated: the Disciple
whom Christ loved lay in his bosom, John 13, And Christ is in the bosom of
his father, Ioh. 1. 18. He is his bosome-friend and favorite, and as to his
bosome-friend communicates all his bosom secrets to him, John 5. 20. For the
Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself does. Now then
get but in with Christ, and be gracious with him, and then we shall be sure
to be friends of God, he will presently smile upon us and accept of us for his
dear friends. Sometimes Gods people after they are made friends, do that
which may make God fall out with them, and frown upon them. Now when it is so,
it is Christ that makes us whole again, 1 John 2. 1. If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he it is that by
his Advocation mediates our cause with God, and sets us in joint again, and
makes all well again between God and us. And as it is he that does repair
and heal all breaches between God and us after we be friends, so it is that
must first bring us into acquaintance and favor with God. Christ is Gods
fellow-friend, and Christ and his people are fellow-friends, Cant. 5. 16. The
Church calls Christ her fellow-friend, This is my beloved, and this is my
friend, or my fellow-friend, as some translate it. And Cant. 2. 10. Christ
calls his Church his fellow-friend, Rise up my love, or my fellow-friend, as
some read it. It comes from a word that signifies to feed, and so signifies
such friends as feed together at one and the same table, that live fellowly,
and familiarly together. Now then the only way to become Gods friend is to
become a fellow-friend with Gods fellow-friend, be a fellow-friend with Christ
who is Gods fellow-friend: and that is done by faith, by believing we become
his friends, and so the friends of God falling in with his favorite by faith.

He that would be Gods friend, must care to please God. Amongst men they that
will seek friendship with others, must be careful to please those whose
friendship they seek. He that is ambitious of the friendship of his betters,
must endeavor to please them; where there is no observance nor care to please,
there friendship will never close. It is so in this case, we cannot be Gods
friends, till we lay to please him; If once we can but please him, he will be
graciously pleased to be our friend: please him, and he will make our enemies
our friends; and therefore he himself will be our friend much more. Now faith
is the way to please him. Enoch had this testimony, that he pleased God; but
without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. Faith then is that
which pleases him, and pleases him so much, that upon it he will be friends
with us.

He that will be Gods friend, must be a child of Abraham. Abraham was called
Abraham. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; and so, I will be thy
friend, and the friend of thy seed. They must be of Abraham's seed that will be
in the number of Gods friends. How come we to be the seed of Abraham? That we
see Romans 4. 16. There is a seed which is of the faith of Abraham, which is the
father of us all. When we have the faith that was in our father Abraham, and
when we walk in the steps of that faith of our Father Abraham, Romans 4. 12.
then we are the seed of Abraham: look what makes us the seed of Abraham, that
makes us as Abraham, the friends of God: and so faith making us Abraham's seed,
makes us Gods friends. We must be Abraham's children, the children of Gods
friends, before we can be the friends of God. Now faith is that by which we
come to be the children of Abraham, Gal. 3. 7. Know ye therefore that they
which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. This day is salvation
come to this house, for so much as he also is the son of Abraham, said our
Savior of Zacheus: so soon as he believed, he was a son of Abraham; and so
soon as a son of Abraham, a friend of God.

By Repentance: sin is that which causes Ier. 3. 1. Yet return again to
me, says the Lord, as if he had said, Do but repent, and we will be friends,
and all shall be well again. When two friends are fallen out, three things must
be done to make them friends again. 1. First, there must be a meeting: for if
they keep asunder, and one decline another, and will not come each at other,
they will never be friends: but if they will be friends, they must meet. So
when God and we are out, unless he and we meet, we shall never be friends.
Now repentance that makes a man's stout and proud heart come down, makes him
come out to meet God, Am. 4. 12. Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Then there
is a possibility of friendship and reconciliation, if by repentance we go
out to meet the Lord. And when we go out to meet God, God will come forth to
meet us; and he will meet us, as Esau met Jacob, Genesis 33. 3. 4. Jacob bowed
himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother, and
Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him,
and so became friends with him. So when we come out to meet God, and bow, and
humble our souls before him, he will run to us, and embrace us, and kiss us
in token of hearty friendship, and reconciliation, Luke 15. 20. When he was a
great way off, but making toward him, his father saw him, and had compassion,
and ran, and fell on his neck and kissed him. 2. Secondly, there must be an
acknowledgement on the offenders part, of his error, that he has done
amiss, that he is sorry, and grieved, and that if it were to do again, he
would not do it. Though a man have done another wrong, and have made a friend
an enemy; yet upon his submission, and fault acknowledged, all is healed, and
the breach made up again: yea, our Saviors commandment is in such cases,
that there should be an hearty redintegration of love and friendship. Luke 17.
3. 4. If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if he repent,
forgive him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven
times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive, and
be good friends with him. Thus is it much more with God, though we have sinned
and offended many a time against him, yet if we come with submission, and
acknowledgement, Gods friendly and fatherly heart will come off. If thou have
sinned against God, and trespassed against him many, and many a time, yet if
thou turn to him again and say, I repent, he will assuredly forgive thee, and
will be good friends with thee. We may not imagine, that God will in this case
require more of us than he will do himself: If he require thus much of us,
whose mercies are but drops to his Ocean, what will he do, who is the father
of bowels, that has multitude of bowels, Isai. 63. 15. and the God that
multiplies to pardon, Isai. 55. 7. God is quickly friends with an humbled
soul, if he sees a man droope, and mourn for having offended, he is very
inclinable to entertain terms of friendship with such an one. 3. Thirdly,
there must be a closing with such an one against his common enemies, and an
hating and opposing of them. This very thing closes men's hearts many times in a
strong league, and bond of friendship. So here, if we would be Gods friends,
we must fall out with our selves, with our lusts, and maintain an opposition
and an hatred, even a deadly feud against them. Now this repentance teaches a
man to do. True repentance makes a man to fall out bitterly with himself,
filles him with a mortal vindictive hatred against his lusts and corruptions.
And when the Lord sees that, he then resolves that such an one whom he sees so
cordial an enemy to his enemies shall become his friend. And thus by Repentance
are we made the friends of God.

Thirdly, by obedience to God, and his Commandments. It is true that it is
faith that first makes God and men friends, but after faith has knit that band
of amity between God and us, that friendship is increased and more and more
confirmed by yielding God obedience, Job 22. 21, 22. Acquaint thy self now
with him, and be at peace, seek to be friends with God, and get inward
acquaintance with him, not only get peace, but labor to grow such friends
with him that thou may be of his familiar acquaintance. That's the thing,
thou will say, that thou would feign do, but thou would know how that
may be done. Mark therefore what follows in the next words, Receive I pray
thee the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. If thou
would be acquainted with God be acquainted with his word, lay that up in
thine heart, and yield obedience to that in thy life. And so Christ tells his
Disciples, John 15. 14. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.
By your obedience you shall manifest your selves to be my friends, and by this
means you shall increase, advance, and Ea est jucundissima amicitia, qua^
morum similitudo conjugavit. Cicer. offic. 1.
confirm that friendship that is between us. Amongst men there is nothing so
conciliates men's hearts, so glewes and soders men's spirits as a similitude and
conformity of manners and dispositions: when there is a suitableness of men's
spirits and inclinations they quickly close, and so the Philosopher observes
that a special conciler of friendship is a likeness according to virtue. So
it is here, when (...) Aristot.
there is in us a conformity to Gods will, and a conformity to his nature, that
we are holy as he is holy, merciful as he is merciful, pure as he is pure,
walking in all obedience and purity of life; it much increases the friendship
between God and us. That as Solomon speaks, Prove. 22. 11. He that loves
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the King shall be his friend. So
much here, he that loves pureness of heart, and pureness of life, that is
pure as God is pure, for that holiness, and purity the King of Heaven shall
be his friend. Yet God is good to Israel, even to the pure in heart. Psalm. 73.
1. God is a good friend to such, and a true friend to them though they may have
many back friends in the world.

Fourthly, by our love to God. Amongst has friends must show himself
friendly. Prove. 18. 24. So a man that Quaeris quo modo amicum cito facturus sit
sapians? Dicam. Hecaton ait, ego tibi monstrabo amatorium sine medicamento,
sine herba, sine ullius veneficae carmine: si vis amari, ama. Senec. cp. 9.
will further engage his friend to him, and kindle his affection to him must by
offices, and expressions of friendship still gain his friendship more and
more. Friendlinesse makes friends more friendly, Ioh. 14. 23. He that loves
me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him. Not that we love God, or
Christ first, and then he loves us; He loves us first, as the Apostle
speaks. It is not therefore meant of Gods first love, or Christ's first love
that he shows to us, but of after and following Acts of his love. He loves
us and is our friend: now if we show a friends love to him, he will add
further degrees of his love, or he will love, that is he will vouchsafe us
further expressions of his love, as Christ there explaines himself, I will
love him, and manifest my self to him. So that upon our friendly love to
Christ, though he loves us before we love him, yet he will more clearly
manifest and express his friendship to us.

Fifthly, by a frequent use of the duty of prayer. A man that desires another
man's friendship must be often in his company, must have converse with him, and
frequent conference with him. It was a near bond of love and friendship that
was between David and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 18. 1. The soul of Jonathan was knit
with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. But how and
upon what grew this friendship, how came Jonathan so to affect David? see the
beginning of the verse, And it came to pass that as David had made an end of
speaking unto Saul. He was in David's company, he hears him speak and sees a
sweet spirit in him, and thereupon he is wonderfully taken with him. If David
had not been in Ionathans presence, and company: if Jonathan had not seen him
and heard him speak, he had never been so taken with him as to make him his
choice, and dear friend: but now when he is in Ionathans company, and there
speaks in his audience, it came to pass that as he had made an end of
speaking, that the soul of Jonathan was knit unto the soul of David. In that
converse that Jonathan had with David was his heart knit to him. It is so here,
in prayer a man converses with God, has conferences, and soliloquies with him,
and so by the often frequenting of Gods company, and conversing with him he
grows into acquaintance with him. See how Christ speaks to his Church, Cant.
2. 14. Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance comely. A praying countenance is comely in Christ's
eye, and a praying voice is sweet in his ear. And as he desires to see that
countenance, Let me see thy countenance, and as he desires to hear that
voice, Let me hear thy voice, so when he does hear that sweet voice and see
that comely countenance, he is wonderfully taken with it, falls exceedingly
in love with it, Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished mine heart my sister, my
Spouse; thou have ravished mine heart with one of thine eyes. Thou have wounded
mine heart, or thou have taken my heart out of me, (...), as the Greek has
it. Thou have unhearted me, as a friends heart lives Been quidam dixit de amico
suo, dimidium animae meae. Nam ego sensi animam meam, and animam illius unam
fuisse animam in duobus corporibus, and ideo mihi horrori erat vita, quia
nolebam dimidius vivere, and ideo forte mori metuebam, ne totus ille
morreretur, que^ multum amaveram. August. Confess. lib. 4. cap. 6.
in his friends bosom, it is gone from himself unto his friend. Thou have
taken away mine heart from me with one of thine eyes. If one eye did it, what
would both have done? All serves to show how Christ's heart is won in prayer,
that look as soon as David had made an end of speaking, Ionathans heart went
out of himself, and his soul was knit with the soul of David, so after a
faithful soul has done speaking in prayer, Christ's soul is knit to his
soul, and such converse makes Christ love a man as his own soul. Nothing
more knits and rivets the heart of Christ and a Christian together in a league
of sweet acquaintance then conversing with him in the duty of prayer. In this
duty God and his people take acquaintance one of another, and grow into a
familiarity each with other. See Zech. 13. 9. I will say it is my people, and
they shall say, The Lord is my God. I will take acquaintance with them, and
they shall take acquaintance with me, I will own them, and they shall own
me, and there shall be a mutual stipulation of friendship, and familiarity
between us. Well, but when shall this be done? mark the words immediately
going before, They shall call upon my Name, and I will say etc. This
intercourse of kindness, and familiarity shall be in and upon the duty of
prayer. In and upon that shall there be these mutual friendly passages, and
owning each of other. Yea if at any time we do that which may cause God to
fall out with us, and to look strange upon us, yet prayer is a special means
to work us in with God again, and a godly man prays himself friends with
God. The Apostle Peter he advises married couples to love each other, and to
live together in conjugall friendship, that their prayers may not be
interrupted, 1 Pet. 3. 7. And so a man may wish them to pray together that
their loves be not interrupted. As love will keep prayers from interruption,
so prayers will keep love from interruption. As it is true, keep friends that
you may pray, love that you may pray; so it is true, pray that you may keep
friends, pray that you may love. Prayer is that which will keep them friends.
But sometimes it may be, there may be some breach between man and wife. It is
possible there may be some interruption of their love, there may be a rupture
in conjugall friendship. What is to be done then? let both go together to God
in prayer, and he will set all in joint, and send them from him better friends
then ever. Prayer will make up such rupture again. So is it in this case:
Prayer will prevent an interruption of our friendship with God; or if we do
that which may cause a rupture, yet if we do but go to the Lord in prayer,
and seek earnestly to him in that duty, he will at last be friends with us
again, and send us better friends from him then before. Prayer will pervert,
and will heal ruptures in this blessed friendship.

Thus now we see how we may come to get this honor and happiness of being
Gods friends, and therefore now let us seriously set upon this course, and make
trial of these conclusions. I pray thee, says Eliphaz, acquaint thy self
with him, and be at peace with him, thereby shall good come to thee, Job 22.
21. All this good of communing with God, of boldness with him, of speeding in
the petitions, of defense and assistance in time of troubles, of peace and
friendship with the creatures, all this good shall come to thee upon friendship
with God. So much good, how ambitious should it make us of this honor of being
Gods friends? How many waste their very estates out of a desire to have the
friendship and favor of the great ones of the earth, and yet hardly get, or
more hardly keep it when they have done? Many a man is undone with the
friendship of great ones, and loose by it, and many times bring their houses to
ruin by it, but this friendship is for good, there is gain by it, never did
or shall any man loose by it, by having God for his friend. There be three
times in special that a man shall find it to stand him in stead to have God
for his friend, and to be in the number of his friends:

First, at the Time of the Sacrament: when God will bid none welcome to his
Table but his very friends. The Sacrament is a feast, and it is a feast that
God makes only for his friends, and if a man thrust in that is none of his
friends, his welcome is like to be thereafter. If a man make a feast, it is for
his friends; no man will invite, much less welcome his enemies to his table.
If a man's enemy should be so impudent as to thrust in at a feast to his table,
a man could not but lowre upon him, and give him sour looks, if not sour
words; a man would be stark sick of him to see him at his table. And do we
think that God will smile upon, and cheer up his enemies at his Table? Indeed
amongst men, if a stranger comes to a man's table that has relation to some
friend from whom, or with whom he comes, we will in civility give him
courteous entertainment; but if he be a mere stranger that comes we know
not whence, and goes we know not whither, we will not be forward to entertain
such an one: but if an enemy, we cannot brook his presence, nor the sight of
him. And though we will welcome strangers for our friends sake, yet so will
not God: every man must come to Gods Table by virtue of his own interest in
God. If a man come a stranger to the Lords Table, God will look upon him as a
stranger, and if a man come as an enemy, God will look as an enemy upon him.
Who would go to another man's table if the good man will not welcome him, and
bid him eat and fall to? and what should a man do at the Lords Table, if God
will not bid him welcome, and cheer him up, and bid him eat? But now at such
a time when a man goes to the Lords table, it is good being Gods friend. Gods
friends shall be sure to be bid heartily welcome, and they shall be sure to
find friendly welcome indeed. Take, eat, says Christ: I but who be they that
be called upon to eat? That we see Cant. 5. 2. Eat, O friends, and drink,
yea drink abundantly, O beloved. There was one Math. 22. that came in to that
supper without his wedding garment; and what was his welcome? friend how came
thou in hither? Indeed he is called by the name of friend, because happily he
would needs seem to be so; or else it is only used as a word of course, as
we use to speak to a stranger and say, My friend, but yet though he had a
friends title he had but a foes welcome. And such welcome must they look for
that being not Gods friends will be impudently thrusting into the Lords Table.
Oh happy man whom Christ shall cheer up in the Sacrament, and bid him eat and
drink, and tell him that he is heartily welcome to him. Would we then have
this happiness? look to it then, and labor for it to be of the number of his
friends. Christ's friends and only they are and shall be welcome to him. A man
is not fit to go to the Sacrament if he be not friends with his neighbor, and
before he come he must seek to be friends, Math. 5. 23, 24. And therefore
much more concerns it men to be Gods friends, to be in terms of friendship
with God before they come to the Sacrament.

Secondly, in a Time of common calamity. Luke 21. 25, 26. Upon the earth
distress of nations with perplexity, men's hearts failing them for fear, and
for looking after those things which are coming upon the earth. When such a
time shall come that men's hearts shall fail them for fear, how happy shall
they be that shall have a friend in Heaven, that shall not fail them, when
their own hearts fail them? At such a time what will a friend in Heaven be
worth to a man in such a case? The saying is that a friend at Court is better
then a penny in a man's purse. To be sure at such a time, a friend in heaven,
and to have God in Heaven to be our friend is better then all the money in a
man's bags. When such times of distress, and calamity come, God still exempts
some from common calamities, Luke 21. 36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
pass. Therefore when those things should come to pass there should be some
that should be counted worthy to escape them. And who are they likely to be?
Surely none likelier then Gods friends. If God will hide, and exempt any, he
will do it for his friends. Abraham was called the friend of God. God tells
Abraham of a sore calamity that should befall his posterity. Genesis 15. 13. Know
of a surety that thy seed shall be a strangers in a land that is not theirs,
and shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years. But how
then will God deal with Abraham his friend? verse. 15. Thou shall go to thy
fathers in peace, thou shall be buried in a good old age, Thou art my friend,
and therefore I will take an order to hide thee, that thine eyes shall not see
that calamity. When Israel destroyed Jericho, and put all to the sword, Josh.
6. 25. yet Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive and all her family. And what was
the reason that he exempted her, and hers from the common calamity? Because she
was Isreal's friend, and showed her self a faithful friend to them in the
business of the spies. So when God brings a general calamity upon a place,
and a people, he looks out in such a place who are his friends, and takes order
for their safety, and exemption of them from the common danger. A man that has
friends must show himself friendly, Prove. 17. 17. And herein the Lord shows
himself friendly in taking special care for the safety of his friends in the
cases of common danger. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, Prove. 18. 10.
And they that get into that Tower they are safe what ever comes. And who be
they that have admission into that Tower? The righteous run into it, and are
safe. The Righteous are Gods friends, and the gate of that Tower stands open to
Gods friends. God provides a Tower, and a place of refuge for his friends. None
can look for admission into that Tower but such as are the friends of God. In
a time of danger, how great a privilege is it to have the liberty of entrance
into that Tower? As we prize that, so prize this privilege of being the
friends of God.

A third time is the Time of death. When death comes, that turns a man out of
them, then will God stick closest to them, and that which parts a man and his
dearest friends in the world shall join them and their best friend together.
Death parts not God and his friends, it does but bring them home to their
friends house. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ which is best of
all, Philip. 1. Death makes a dissolution of soul and body, but this
dissolution makes way for a blessed union with Christ. All things are yours
says the Apostle, death is yours, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. Death theirs? what
privilege is that? is not death any man's? no. Wicked men, death is not theirs;
but they are deaths, Let death seize upon them, Psalm. 55 15. Death feeds upon
them. Psalm. 49. 14. But for godly men that are Gods friends, death is theirs,
theirs to do them service, theirs to do them the best good turn that was
ever done them, to open the door into their best friends house, to bring them
to the presence of their friend after whose society so long they have longed:
for they that have lived Gods friends shall die Gods friends, and God will be
their friend in, at, and after their death for ever. So happy it is to have God
and Christ our friends. And therefore as our Savior speaks in that case, Luke
16. 9. And I say unto you, make to your selves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when you fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations; So in this case, I say unto you, make to your selves friends of
the God of Heaven, and the Lord Christ his Son, that when ye fail, and all
your friends in the world fail, and death shall part you from all other
friends, and shall turn you out of house and home, they may receive you into
everlasting habitations. All this considered be we awaked, and stirred up to
make God our friend.

God having honored us so highly as to make us his friends, let it be our care

First, In making worthy of Gods acquaintance, and friendship. A man that is
entertained into the friendship, and familiarity of men of rank, and quality,
they being pleased to honor him with their friendship, he will be wondrous
careful to carry himself suitably. If he carry himself basely, men of
fashion will discarde him, and shake him off as a fellow unworthy of their
friendship, because the dishonor of his courses will reflect upon them his
friends. How careful think we, was Zabud to carry himself nobly,
honorably, and fairly, that so Solomon might not have any impeachment by him?
If Zabud being Salomons friend should have gone to hedging and ditching, to
plough and cart, specially if he had been an haunter of alehouses, a
drunkard, a potcompanion, would Solomon still have entertained him into his
friendship? would he not rather being ashamed of him, have cast him off?
Therefore questionless Zabud was very careful to carry himself worthy of the
honor of the Kings friendship, and to do nothing that might misbeseeme and
unbecome the man that was the Kings friend. Thus must it be with us, if Gods
friends. If God have honored us so much as to make us his friends, then be we
careful to keep in with God, and to walk so worthy of this honor as that
God disclaim us not. What? Gods friends, and be debaucht drunkards? Gods
friends, and profane ones? Gods friends, and unclean persons? suite such
carriages with such an honor? God is not ashamed to be called their God, Heb.
11. 16. and to be called their friend, but if they had been such kind of
persons as those, he would have been ashamed of them. This is the next way to
make God ashamed of us, and utterly to cast us off for being his friends. God
will own no such for his friends; yea there is nothing that more dishonours
God, and moves him more to displeasure then this, when such as profess
themselves his friends shall walk so basely, as that he suffers by it. If a
man have a friend that he makes much of, that is of his inward acquaintance,
and he behave himself basely and dishonestly, do not that man's enemies lay
his friend in his dish, and twit him with him and say, This is your friend, the
man that you are so familiar and inward withal? And thus is God dishonored
when men shall take occasion by the evil lives of such as profess themselves
Gods friends, to say, oh these be the men that be Gods friends, these
forsooth be the Lords favorites. And when God suffers such dishonor by us,
what can we look for but to lose his friendship? how can we hold in with
him, and think he should own us for his friends, when we cause dirt to be
flung into his face? Gods friends must be of another manner of carriage then
so. Abraham was called the friend of God. That was Abraham's honor; and what
must Abraham's carriage then be? See Genesis 17. 1. I am the Almighty God, and I
have called thee my friend, walk before me, and be thou perfect, or upright
and sincere. I have honored thee to be my friend, do thou honor me who am
thy friend.

Secondly, Have a care to deal seriously, and in good earnest with God in
being friends with him, and loving him as a friend should be loved. Hearty
love, and friendship will maintain hearty love, and friendship. There must be
an (...) between friends, a reciprocation of affection, a counter-loving
between friends, that must keep them knit together. That is the Soder, the
Caement, the Glue that holds friends fast together, Prove. 18. 24. He that has
friends ought to show himself friendly, namely if he mean to keep his
friends. He must answer love with love, he must retribute love for love,
meet love with love. A friend should be loved with a friends love. A friends
love is hearty, and durable.

First, it is hearty. It is not in cringes, congies, phrases, courtship, and
complementall Deuteronomy. 13. 6. If thy friend which is as thine own soul.
Therefore a man's friend is as his own soul, Prove. 18. 24. A friend is nearer
then a brother, 1 Samuel 18. 1. Ionathans soul was knit to the soul of David,
and he loved him as his own soul. Such love as this is knitting, and sodering
love, and when a friend is loved thus, he will hold friendship with us. But if
a man seriously and in good earnest offer friendship to another, and he sees
no return, no reflection of love and like affection, only some outward fair
carriages, some respective formalities, some formal visits, and invitations,
but the man's heart closes not with him, he will happily for some respects hold
fair, but yet he makes him but a friend for his credit, but will have another
for his counsel, and secrecies. Here such a man though he earnestly desired
friendship, yet finding not that knitting love that should be between
friends, he gives over to woo a friend that at best will be but a friend with
his reserved distances, and so lets his friendly affection die, and gradually
quench, and go out. If he must be only a friend for a turn, to put some
credit and respect upon another, or to accommodate him only with some
conveniences, but the heart of the man holds off, and goes another way, such a
man has in such a case the wisdom to have done, and let such an one go.

Secondly, a friendly love is a durable, continuing love, Prove. 17. 17. A
friend loves at all times. Not for a time till he has (...). Aristot. Rhetor.
2. Amicitia quae desinere potuit, nunquam vera suit. Senec.
his fill, and his glut, and then falls off, and gives up, but at all times,
Prove. 27. 10. Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake thou not. If a
man have chosen a friend upon whom he sets his heart, and he perceives his
friends affections to slake, to chill, and at last to fall quite off, this
unglues and dissolves the joint of friendship.

Now thus it is in this case. God has made us his friends, and therefore he
must have a friends love from us, we must show our selves friendly to him.

First, our love to him must be an hearty Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thine heart, with all thy soul, Luke 10 27. This will keep us in Gods
friendship and keep him our friend. But if we complement with God, and hold
fair with him in the outward performance of the duties of his worship, will
pray, will come to Church and hear, and receive Sacraments, and will profess
our selves the friends of God, because it would otherwise turn to our
discredit and disgrace, to be out with, or strangers to him If we make him our
friend only for our ends, to serve a turn upon him, have him our friend for
our credit, respect, profit, but yet make him not our friend for our counsels
and comforts, but will have the world, our profits, our pleasures for our
choice friends, and our hearts close, and go with them, God will do in this
case, as any wise man would do. Any man so used can have the wit to see how
the world goes, and can return complement for complement, but never put such
an one into the catalogue of his friends, neither will he let out his heart
and affections to such an one, nor have hearty and entire communion with such
as with familiar friends. And so will the Lord do, if men complement with him,
if he be not unto them as their own soul, if men's hearts be not knit unto
him so as to love him as their own souls, he sees that their love is not
hearty and serious, he will shake them off, and keep aloof, and keep distance
as well as they do, they shall never have Abrabams honor to be called the
friends of God. Those the Prophet speaks of. Isai. 58. 2. and Ezekiel. 33. 31,
32. They hear thy words, but they will not do them, for with their mouth they
show much love, but their hearts go after their covetousness, those were
pretenders of friendship, but God saw them to be formal complementers, and he
kept his heart as far from them, as they kept theirs from him.

Secondly, our love to God it must be durable, we must love him for ever.
Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake thou not. He is our friend,
and the friend of our father Abraham, he must be loved at all times, he must
never be forsaken. If we once let fall our affections to God, and let the
stream of them run another way, he will have done with us, and we loose a
friend of him. We see it is so with friends amongst men: if a man have had ever
so dear a friend in the sweetness of whose society he has been much
delighted, and their hearts have been close knit, yet if he see his friend
begin to be remiss, and that he sits loose, and communion is entertained
with another, with the neglect, and a slighting dis-regard of the first, yea
with an exclusion of him, what follows but a slaking of his affections thus
slighted, excluded, and neglected? In like manner, if God sees our affections
cooling, and slaking, and new acquaintances taken up, and we and our new
friend, never well but when together, and closely together, and himself scarce
minded or looked after, God will in such a case casheere us, and out us, he
will have nothing to do with such slippery, leviculous, and fickle fancied
friends. We shall go for him, as good lost as kept. If therefore we would keep
in with God, and hold friends with him, love him with a friends love, with an
hearty and a lasting durable affection.

Thirdly, Have a care to make much of Gods friends. Be a true, and hearty
friend to all Gods friends. A man that either is or means seriously to be, and
continue another man's friend, will be kind and friendly to all his friends,
and will make those his friends whom he sees to affect for his choice friends.
Great was the friendship that was between David and Jonathan. And Jonathan
being David's friend, David shows a great deal of kindness unto Mephibosheth
for Ionathans sake. On the other side, this is that which will separate very
friends, or as Solomon speaks in that case, chief friends, Prove. 16. 28. When
a man shall slight, and set light by his friends friends, especially if he
shall oppose and hate those whom he cordially affects. We will not, we cannot
close kindly with those that slight our dearest friends, though they seem to
desire our friendship ever so much, it is a provocation to enmity, and cannot
but breed ill blood. Now thus it is here: all Gods people are his friends; if
we would hold in and maintain friendship with God, we must be friends, kind
and cordial friends to them. Many talk of being Gods friends, and yet are but
backe-friends unto, and slighters of his friends: they look coyly, and
strangely upon them, cannot afford them a good word, do scorn and abuse them,
and yet they will needs go for Gods friends. But how can this be? Judge by
your selves. Let a man make a common practice of wronging and abusing your
friends, and will you count such your friends, and will you hold friendship
with them? Nay, though you have counted them your friends before, yet upon such
carriage you will let fall affection to them. Christ calls his Spouse his
fellow-friend, Cant. 2. 10. now lay the case there. A man's wife is his dearest
friend. Is there any man so witless, and so silly to hold friendship with any
though professing ever so great a desire of it, so long as he sees such to
slight his wife, and to dis-regard her, or to use her as an enemy: well then,
and think ye that Christ will ever have or hold any friendship with you so
long as you abuse, and scorn his best and dearest fellow-friend, his Spouse?
Think that Christ is as true to his, as we are, or can be to our friends.

Fourthly, Have a care, and take heed of comportment with his enemies. As
friends Eadem velle and eadem nolle firma Amicitia est. Hieronym. ad Ruffin.
Eadem cupere, eadem odisse, eadem metuere homines in unum cogunt. Salust.
that will hold in must have common friends, so they must have common enemies.
We our selves will not take him for our friend that is entire and inwardly
familiar with our professed adversaries, we will not have communion with him that
has communion and correspondence with our enemies. Friends communicate their
secrets to their friends, and how shall a man trust him with his secrets, who
being a friend to his enemy will communicate them to him again. Zabud was
Salamons friend. Solomon had three special enemies, Hadad, Rezon, and
Jeroboam, 1 King. 11. And this last Solomon sought to kill: now if Zabud went
to hold in with Solomon, it had been no wisdom in the world for him to hold
intelligence, or correspondency with any of these, it had been enough to have
lost Salomons friendship for ever. But Zabud being Salomons friend, his wisest
course was to be a professed enemy to all these, if he were then living at that
time. Let a man set ever so good a face upon it, and make ever so deep
protestations of love, yet if he close and knit with our professed enemies,
we can have the wit not to trust him nor to judge him any of our trusty
friends. It is so in this case; If we hold comportment, and entirenesse with
Gods enemies, he will soon have done with us, and leave us to our new
acquaintances, he will shake us off, he will trust us for none of his
friends. Take heed of closing with Gods enemies, whether they be persons or
things. Take heed of closing in friendship, and falling into familiarity with
wicked persons. We know how Iehu pincht Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. when he
made a league of friendship with Ahab, Would thou help the wicked, and love
them that hate the Lord? As if he had said, what? Thou Gods friend, and close
with Gods enemies? The Jews malignantly charged our Savior, that he was a
friend of Publieanes and sinners, because he took occasion by common converse
with them to do them good, but otherwise he was no friend to them in their
sinful courses, he delighted not in friendship, and familiar society with
their persons. Now if he had so been a friend to Publicanes, and sinners,
they had had some thing justly against him. If we be Gods friends, we must in
this sense take heed of being friends to Publicans and sinners, of being entire
friends and companions of sinful, and ungodly persons. We know how the Jews
dashed Pilates good intentions toward Christ, when he would have stood his
friend to let him go free, John 19. 12. If thou let this man go, thou art not
Caesar's friend, and we see how it wrought with him verse. 13. When Pilate heard
that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the Iudgement-seate,
etc. Rather then he will give the least suspicion that he was not Caesar's
friend, he will not be Christ's friend. If thou be his friend, thou art none
of Caesar's friend. It is so here also. If thou be a friend of wicked and
ungodly ones thou art none of Gods friend, he will renounce thee for being any
of his friends. If thou will be Gods friend thou must make Gods enemies thine.
Thou must do as David, Psalm. 139, 21, 22. Do not I hate them O Lord, that
hate thee, and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thee? I hate
them with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. As if he had said, Lord
thou have honored me to be one of thy friends, and therefore I have made
thine enemies mine.

Take heed also of friendship with wicked things. Every lust is an enemy to
God. The misorder of the flesh is enmity against God. Romans 8. 7. He says not,
it is an enemy, but it is enmity it self. And if the wisdom of the flesh be
enmity against God, what is the folly of it? Every lust is an enemy to God, and
enmity to God. An enemy may be reconciled, but enmity cannot be reconciled.
If therefore we close with our lusts, and make them our friends, it will
utterly crack friendship between God and us. If we hold friendship with
them, we loose it with God. See how the Apostle speaks. Iam. 4. 4. Ye
adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. Love of the world is adultery. An adulterer that sets his heart
upon an harlot, and makes her his friend, cannot be a friend to his wife,
because there is aviolation of conjugall love and friendship. Any lust carnal,
or worldly fostered, and made a friend, and a favorite lust will make us turn
enemies to God. Take heed therefore how we suffer our hearts to cleave to any
lust, friendship with our lusts, and friendship with God will not stand
together, but if we be friends to the one, we must be enemies to the other.

Fifthly, Take heed of too much absence from God, and of discontinuance of
acquaintance, converse, and familiarity with him. Some things do dissecare
amicitiam, choppe friendship asunder, and some things do dissuere, unsow and
unrip it. Now long absence from friends, and discontinuance of converse, and
familiarity, and letting fall the performance of friendly offices; though these
choppe not friendship a sunder, yet they do by degrees unrip it. And though
there be no quarrel or unkindnesse, yet mere absence when it is overlong,
and mere discontinuance of friendly visits, colloquies and the like
intercourse of kindness will abate and slake affections, and by degrees let
them die. An overlong absence of friends each from other and silence or
letting fall (...). Arist. cib. lib. 8. cap. 5.
such salutations, friendly compellations, and conferences that use to be
between friends, are things as the Philosopher observes, that dissolve
friendship. Every act of love and expression of friendship increases, and
setles friendly love. Lay a side mutual visitations, and conferences, and
without a quarrel friendship will decay. And hence is the proverb of Amicitia
Academica, university friendship, that holds only for a time. Scholars in the
University are many times great acquaintance, very familiar loving friends, but
afterward when they come to be dispersed abroad into remote parts each from
other the grow strangers one to another, because being far and long absent
one from another, and intercourse of friendship ceasing in mutual visits,
walkings and talkings together their acquaintance dies. The case is the same
here: Absence from God, disuse and discontinuance of communion with him, not
frequenting Gods company, and the not often resorting to him and speaking to
him will let our acquaintance fall with him, will dissolve our friendship with
him. It must be our care then to maintain our friendship and acquaintance
with him by our frequent communion and converse with him, by often and daily
visiting of him: be often at his house, be frequent in praying, hearing,
reading, and meditation: be frequent in thy soliloquies with him. God meets
those that remember him in his ways, Isai. 64. 5. That is, in his ordinances
which are the ways in which God walks, and is to be met with. Visit those
ways and walks, and there often meet with God: the more this is done, the
better and firmer friends shall God and we be, and the more disuse and
discontinuance, of those things, the less friendship. Many would be in the
number of Gods friends, and yet seldom are at his house, and seldom in
private with him, seldom visit him, except it be at a pinch when they know not
how to shift it. Alas this will not go, nor serve the turn amongst men. If
one profess great and more then ordinary friendship to another, and yet never
speaks to him but when he meets him at the Church, or at market, never comes
at his house, never visits him, sits with him, nor has any private conference
with him, no man will judge such a man a friend. A good quiet peaceable
neighbor may he be, but not an entire friend. If we would maintain
acquaintance with God, we must come often to him, and be often in private
with him, and the more the better. True it is, that there is a wisdom and
discretion to be used amongst friends amongst men. Though a man have a good
friend that loves him dearly, yet a man may be troublesome to him and
burdensome to him by coming too often to him. A man may have his fill even of
a good friend indeed, Romans 15. 24. If I be somewhat filled with your company.
Indeed Honey is sweet, and the company of a friend sweet, but if a wisdom be
not used, a man may be so filled with honey that he may surfeit with it, his
stomach may be so overcharged with it that it may grow loathsome. And to this
end is Salomons counsel useful, Prove. 25. 16, 17. Have thou found honey? eat
so much as is sufficient for thee; that is, have thou found a good friend? do
not cloy and over-cloy him with thy society, least he grow weary of thee;
Withdraw thy feote from thy neighbors house, or let thy foot be seldom, that
is, not over-often in thy neighbors house, least he grow weary of thee, or
least he be full of thee, and so hate thee. A man may loose his friend, as by
too much absence, so by too much presence. But now it is not thus with God, we
cannot visit him so often, nor come so frequently to him as to cloy him, or to
be cloyed with him. The oftener we come to him, and be with him, the welcommer
shall we be, and the sweeter will this honey grow. Eat this honey as often and
as much as God bids us eat of it, and we shall never surfeit, it shall grow
loathsome on neither side.

Sixthly, Take heed of treachery against God, and playing false with him. There
is nothing so disunites, and disjoynts friends as that does. There is nothing
so cuts a friend to the heart as that, and so soon cuts asunder the bonds of
friendship. Psalm. 55. 12, 13. For it was not an enemy that reproached me, then
I could have borne it, etc. But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide and
mine acquaintance. And Psalm. 41. 9. Yea mine own familiar friend in whom I
trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me. Obad.
7. They that have eat thy bread, the men of thy bread have laid a wound under
thee. There is a great deal of wisdom, and canonical Truth in that
Apocryphal passage. Ecclus. 22. 21, 22. Though thou drewest a sword at thy
friend, yet despair not, for there may be a returning to favor: if thou have
opened thy mouth against thy friend fear not, for there may be a
reconciliation: except for upbrayding, or pride, or disclosing of secrets or a
treacherous wound, for for these things every friend will depart. When out of
fickleness of spirit a new friend is chosen, and that not only with the
desertion of the old, but besides there is a great deal of treachery and
underhand false dealing with a spice of malignity: this will unsoder the
closest friends, this will separate very friends indeed. So here: Gods best
friends may have, and often have their faylings, upon which God many times may
give them some round language, and may make him fall out with them, but yet for
all that he will keep friends with them still. But if men begin once to fall
off from God, and shall choose some other new friend, so as an imputation is
cast upon God, as if the new choice were better, and errors and false
religions are so embraced as that there is an undermining of the truth with
some tacke of malignity; this is treachery, this is a treacherous wound, Ierem.
3. 20. Surely as a wife treacherously departes from her husband, or as the
original has it, from her friend, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O
house of Israel, says the Lord. This the Lord cannot digest. Seldom do we
see such ever recover friendship with God again. Apostasy is treachery, and
it is that which God takes so unkindly, and lays it so to heart, as he knows
not how to swallow it. It is that we see amongst men that makes an incurable
rupture of friendship.

Seventhly, Take heed of doing that which thou know will vex, anger, and
provoke the Lord. That Is the next way to loose any man's friendship. If I know
the doing of such a thing will vex and provoke a friend, and yet vexed let him
be, I am resolved I will do it, this will shatter friends asunder, friendship
cannot hold in such a case. This is a dissecation, a chopping, and cutting of
friendship asunder. So when we know that such a thing will vex, and anger God
whose friends we say we are, and yet will do it; this will soon sunder God
and us; and of a friend will make him turn our enemy, Isai. 63. 10. But they
rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy,
and he fought against them. How many are there that will needs be of Gods
friends, and take themselves to be wronged to be otherwise conceived of, and
yet use him most unfriendly, stick not to do that which they know will
deeply displease him. How many say that they be Gods friends, and yet wound
and stabbe and tear God in pieces by their horrid oaths? To such may it be
said, as Absalom spoke to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16. 17. Is this thy kindness to thy
friend? Is this friendly dealing to stabbe thy friend? He that will stabbe a
friend, does he not stab and wound friendship? God is wounded, stabbed, and
pierced by men's oaths and blasphemies, as it is said of the blasphemer, Levit.
24. That he pierced God. And how comes God by these wounds, who gives him
these stabbes? Surely the Lord may take up those words, Zech. 13. 6. These be
the wounds with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. Now was it not
enough, that Christ was wounded for our transgressions. Isai. 53. but that men
will profess themselves his friends, and yet wound him with their
transgressions, and their piercing blasphemies? I will not, nor dare not say
that such as these are Gods friends, but yet even such as do thus, do say of
themselves that they are his friends. And what! you Gods friends, and profane
and blaspheme Gods Name? you Gods friends? nay the devils rather. But suppose
you were his friends, could it be possible that your friendship should hold
when his blessed Name is so horribly abused by you? No such matter, but a
friend so used by doing that you know will vex him, wonder not at it, blame
him not to see him prove your bitter enemy.

It is a point of great comfort to Gods friends. Why weepest thou, says
Elkanah to Hannah, am not I better to thee then ten sons? why art thou sad in
the want of friends in the world? Is not God thy friend; and is not he better
to thee then all the friends in the world? As he has no friends that has not
God for his friend; so he wants not friends, that has the Lord his friend, he
is the best be friended man in the world.

It is matter of terror to all their enemies If thou let this man go, thou
art not Caesar's friend, say they to Pilat. That was false, he could not have
showed himself a better friend to Caesar then in being a friend to Christ. And
the better friend to Christ, the better friend to Caesar, And the better friend
Pilat had been to Christ, the better friend he had been to himself, and had
found Caesar also the better friend to himself. He gave Christ into their
hands for fear Caesar should not be his friend, and yet for this act by Gods
justice he after lost Caesar for being his friend; If thou let him go, thou
art not Caesar's friend. Nay, if thou do not let him go, thou art not Gods
friend. Nay much more should Pilat have feared to have wronged him being Gods
friend. If thou wrong him Pilat, and put him to death, thou put to
death the dear friend of God. Have thou nothing to do with that just man,
says his wife in her message to him on the bench. And surely upon this very
ground it had bin wisdom for him to have done nothing against him because he
was Gods friend. It is not safe to provoke God by the abuse of his friends. God
will make such smart as wrong his friends. That same passage is worth our
marking, Numb. 12. 8. With Moses will I speak mouth to mouth; that is, face to
face, as a man speaks with his friend, Exodus 33. 11. Wherefore then were ye
not afraid to speak against my servant Moses. As if he had said, you know
Moses is one of my familiar friends, and why then were you not afraid to speak
against my friend. Do ye think I will suffer my friend to be abused? do
ye think that I will not see my friend righted? Certainly I will make you
know what it is to speak against my friend. And we see what Miriam got by it in
the story, verse. 12. Let her not be as one dead of whom the flesh is half
consumed, when he comes out of his mothers womb. That was it she got by
speaking against Moses the friend of God. And if so dangerous but to speak
against Gods friends, what is it then to persecute, to shed the blood and take
away the life of Gods friends? Gods people are his friends, and therefore let
their enemies take heed how they wrong them. That will be the plague of such as
are enemies to Gods friends that is threatened against the enemies of Jerusalem,
Zech. 14. 12. Their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet,
and their eyes shall consume away in their holes, and their tongues shall
consume away in their mouth. God will rot those hands, those eyes, those
tongues that shall abuse themselves in the abuse of his friends. So dangerous
it is to be enemies to Gods friends.

FINIS.
THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S CONVERSATION: OR, A life in Heaven, Handled upon Phil. 3.
20.

Published By Ier. Dike, Minister of Epping.

MATT. 24. 28. Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together.

Prosper. Sent. Duas in toto mundo civitates faciunt duo amores. Jerusalem
facit amor dei, Babyloniam amor saeculi. Interroget ergo se quisque quid amet,
and inveniet unde sit civis.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for I. Rothwell, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Sun, in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1639.

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S CONVERSATION:
PHILIP. 3. 20. But our conversation is in Heaven.


THe Apostle in the words before-going gave the Philippians a special item,
and a caveat to take heed of following many false brethren that lived amongst
them outwardly professing the same Gospel with them, but were indeed enemies
of the cross of Christ. And that his counsel might take the more place with
them he gives them some reasons why they should be many of them. And they are
specially two.

The first is taken from their manners They make their belly their God, they
glory in their shame. They be muddy minded fellows, that mind and seek only
after earthly things, verse. 19.

The second is from their end hereafter. Whose end is damnation, verse. 19. An
end suitable to their course, for he that sowes to the flesh shall reap of
the flesh corruption, yea damnation. Hell is heaven good for such that look
after such glory, that serve so base a god as their gut. And whither should
their souls go but where their minds have been? Their minds were bent
downwards, and what wonder their souls should go downwards too? And this
description of these wicked men is illustrated by a contrary description of
true and holy Christians, But our conversation is in Heaven: This description
stands in opposition to the former in both members:

First, in regard of their manners. Their But our conversation is in Heaven.

Secondly, In regard of their end, verse. Their end is damnation, but our end
shall be glory and immortality, in the words following to the chapters end.

Now this twentieth verse contains specially two things:

First, a Christians conversation. Secondly, a Christians expectation. A
Christians life, and a Christians hope.
First, his life is described two ways: First, as it were negatively, by way
of contrariety, implied in this adversative and cross particle, But: which is
as much as to say, But our life, and conversation is not like theirs, our
conversation is contrary to theirs. Secondly, Positively, It is Heavenly, Our
conversation is in Heaven.
Secondly, his hope and expectation. He lives in heaven with an hope, and daily
expectation of Christ's gracious coming from Heaven to glorify him. But this I
mean not to meddle with. For the first: A Christians life is described
negatively. But our conversation, etc. From whence we may observe these things.
That though the evil examples of wicked men have great force to corrupt, and
poison others, yet godly and gracious hearts will keep themselves free from the
defilement of their pitch, and from the infection of their poison. For many
walk of whom I have told you often, etc. verse. 18. Though many, even
Multitudes multitudes as Joel 3. 14. have their conversation on earth, are very
belly-gods, earth-wormes, muck-worms, yet our conversation is in heaven. If
other persons, and families will run a whooring after strange Gods, yet
Joshua and his house will serve the Lord. Josh. 24. 15. But as for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord. It was an evil generation in which Noah lived,
Genesis 6. 11. 12. The earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with
violence, all flesh had corrupted his way upon earth. And yet Genesis 6. 9. Noah
was a just man, and upright in his generations. There never lived worse
generations then in Noah's time. The great praise of Noah is not so much that he
was a just man, as that he was just and upright in his generations, in vile
and wicked times that though he lived in corrupt times, and generations when,
as some think, Idolatry was set up, and Gods worship was corrupt, and men's
manners and life's were miserably corrupt, yet in those generations he was just
and upright. It is an hard thing for a man to be hayle and sound in a corrupt,
and unwholesome air. To live in the Fennes and Marshes, and yet not to be
sick and crazy, it is an argument of a strong and good constitution indeed. To
be good when all men are good, is not so great a matter. When goodness and
godliness is in fashion, though it be very rare and seldom that so good a
fashion comes up, yet when it does come in fashion, many may seem to be good
and godly, if it be but to be in the fashion. But when goodness and religion
is quite out of fashion, and is as ridiculous as a dress, and a wear out of
fashion, then to be good, godly, and religious, that's the great matter indeed,
that is the thing that is praiseworthy, and commendable indeed. And so it is
with such as are godly indeed. They will be godly in the midst of ungodly
generations, they will be upright in the midst of corrupt generations. Noah
was upright in his generations. It is no wonder to see fresh fish in fresh
waters, but all the wonder is to see fresh fish in the salt sea. This world is
often compared to the Sea in Scriptures, and it is not only a salt sea, but a
dead sea like the lake into which Sodom and Gomorah were turned, in which they
say no fish can live but die so soon as thither they come. But godly men are
such as not only keep fresh in the salt, but keep alive in the dead sea.
There is a great deal of poison and pestilence in the evil example of others,
especially when it is universal, and spread like an epidemicall plague, but yet
true grace is an antidote, a spiritual Amulet that preserves in times of
universal infection, that as in that case, Psalm. 91. 7. so in this it may be
said, A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand,
but it shall not come nigh thee. The privilege of the primitive believers,
Mark 16. 18. They shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing,
it shall not hurt them, is and should be still the spiritual privilege of
believers, that a principle of living grace should so preserve them, that
deadly things, deadly poison, the deadly poison of other men's evil example
should not hurt them, Hos. 4. 15. Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not
Judah sin. Nay more then so, Hos. 11. 12. Ephraim compasses me about with
lies, and the house of Israel with deceit, but Judah yet rules with God, and is
faithful with the Saints. It is amongst others one special note of pure
religion, as the Apostle calls it, for a man to keep him self unspotted of
the world, Iam. 1. 27. There be religions that will give a man leave to wallow
in any mire and puddles of the world; but pure Religion, and powerful Religion
keeps it self not only from the puddles, and kennels, but from the very spots
of the worlds mire. Grace to a Christian is as the sap to the bows growing on
the tree; so long as a bow grows on the tree, and receives sap from the root,
so long it receives no wet, though the rain fall often upon it; but when a
branch is cut off from the tree, and the sap dried up, then the dew and the
rain soakes and sinkes into it, and it soon rots with the water soaking into
it. It is so with Christians that have the sap of grace from Christ their
root: that sap preserves them from the taking in of such moisture as would
breed rottenness. There is not a better evidence of a man's sap, and life
from Christ then his not receiving in of rotting moisture from the examples of
such as he lives amongst.

Mark yet further, That the behaviors and carriages of Gods people must be
diverse and different from, yea they must be flat opposite, and contrary to the
courses of the men of the world. Their conversation is earthly, But our
conversation is in Heaven. A Christian he must not only swim cross the
stream, but quite against the stream. They be dead fish that are carried
down the stream. But our conversation is in heaven. There be two Buts in
Scripture. There is one But that is an ilfavored But. Such as that is, Apoc. 2.
4. But I have somewhat against thee that thou have lost thy first love. There
be that have many good things in them, But they have some foul fault, or other
withal that marres all, that is a dead Fly in the Apothecaries ointment. He is
an honest man, But he is too worldly, But he is too hasty, etc. Such a But is a
disgrace, and a dishonorable blurre to a man. There is another But, and that
is when a man's life is such as crosses and thwarts the corrupt and evil
courses of other men. Others are earthly, But our conversation is in heaven;
others are loose and leude, But we are holy and religious. And such a But as
this puts honor, and credit upon a man; the first blurres, but the second
graces a man. There be too many that have the first But which crosses their
religion, and Christian profession; there be but a few can hit this last But,
which crosses and thwarts the corrupt and sinful courses of the world. But
this is that which a Christian must do, his ways and courses must be cross
and contrary to the vain, foolish, and sinful courses of men of the world.
They mind earth, we mind heaven. There is a great difference and distance
between Heaven and earth, so great a difference and distance should there be
between the life of a Christian, and of men of the world. Nay that is not all,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ye are all the children of light, and the children of
the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness, etc. There is not only a
difference but a contrariety between day and night, light and darkness. There
must be as great a contrariety between the ways of godly and worldly men, as
between day and night, light and darkness. Christians should be as the
Antipodes to other men. Indeed Pope Zachary condemned and deposed Vingilius a
Bishop in Bavaria for Morn. Mist. Progress. 27.
heresy, because he affirmed, That there were Antipodes, that there were men
in the world whose feet were contrary, and Paulus secundus virtutis ac
literarum ^so^, qui bonarum ar^ium studiosos, imo cos qui nomen ipsum Academiae
vel se^io, vel joco nominess^n^ haereticos pron^^^^ vit. Pl^t. in v^^. Pauli 2.
over against ours in these parts of the world. Such another heresy as it was
wont to be amongst the Friars, to dissent from Thomus, and to speak Greek;
yea it was heresy to be learned men, and studious of good arts. Now as the
Pope held it heresy to say there were Antipodes, so many it may be may think
it little better then heresy to teach that Christians should be Antipodous to
the sinful courses of the world. But yet so it is, and so it must be, that
Christians must be Antipodes to the men of the world. So much does our
Saviors reason imply, Luke 12. 29, 30. And seek not ye what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind, for all these things
do the people of the worldseek after. Which very reason implies an Antipodous
disposition that should be in his people to the courses of the people of the
world.

And hereupon it was that God would have the sacrifices of the Israelites such
as were contrary and cross to Egyptian religion. Look what the Egyptians
honored for their Gods, that Israel must sacrifice to God, as Beeves, sheep,
Goats, etc. Those which were the Egyptian deities were the Israelites
sacrifices. And therefore Moses tells Pharaoh that they must go out of Egypt
to sacrifice, least they should offer that which was an abomination to the
Egyptians, Exodus 8. It could not but be an abomination unto them to see those
things to which they offered sacrifice to be offered up in sacrifice. The
heathen in their worships did worship toward the East. God therefore so
appointed the placing of the Tabernacle and the Temple, that whosoever came to
worship him should look toward the West, as if God would have his people as
contrary to the people of the world as the West to the East. The Egyptians eat
little or no flesh of beasts, save of Swine, and God in special prohibited the
Jews the eating of Swines flesh. The reasons of it are:

First, that which may be employed in the word here used in the text, (...),
conversation or Citizen-like behavior, as Beza translates it. The word
implies, that godly and wicked men be members of different Incorporations.
Worldly men's City and Incorporation is here, Godly men have here no abiding
City, their City is in Heaven. The godly are from above, wicked men are from
beneath. John 8. 23. Ye are from beneath, I am from above. The godly are not
of the world, John 8. 23. Wicked men are the men of this world, Psalm. 17. 14.
It is their character, Men of the world, which have their portion in this life.
Now we see that different Cities and Incorporations which are in different
Kingdoms have not only different, but contrary customs, laws, orders,
fashions, habits, and usages. Godly and wicked men being of different
Incorporations, no wonder that there must be not only a difference, but a
contrariety in their courses and carriages. Heaven and earth, nay heaven and
hell should not put them farther asunder then their manners, and behaviors
then they should be. Lo the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be
amongst the Nations, says Balaam of Israel, Numb. 23, 9. They dwelt not alone
in regard of their situation, not as we in this Kingdom in an Island cleft
out, and cleft off from all the world, they were environd, and neighboured
round about with many Nations, but they dwelt alone in regard of their
Religion, and Commonwealth, in regard of their manners and ways in which they
were different from, and contrary to other Nations.

Secondly, that same, Tit. 2. 14. Christ has redeemed us to be a peculiar
people to himself. Peculiar people must have peculiar courses, peculiar ways.
To what end has God made them a peculiar people? That the Apostle shows, 1
Pet. 2. 9. That you should show forth the virtues of him that has called you.
It is impossible to show forth the virtues of Christ, and to follow the vices
of the world: yea it is impossible to show forth the virtues of Christ, but a
man must walk in a cross and opposite carriage to the vices of the world.
Christ's virtues are opposite and cross to the vices of the world, peculiar
people must express those virtues, and therefore it cannot be but such as are
Gods people should have their courses, and behavior different from and
opposite to the world. Because Christ has made the godly a peculiar people to
himself; upon this ground, he looks for peculiar carriages at their hands,
contrary to the courses of the world. The Arabians and other heathens had a
fashion and a custom in their mournings for the dead to cut themselves, and to
make themselves balde: now God he forbids his people to conform to those
fashions of their neighbor heathens, and mark upon what ground he does it
Deuteronomy. 14. 1, 2. The Lord has chosen thee to be a peculiar people to himself,
ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the
dead. As if he had said, you are a peculiar people in my love, therefore I will
have you a peculiar people in your carriage, I will not have you conform your
selves to heathenish courses and customs, no though it be but in matter of
cutting your hair, but I will have you cross their courses, and customs. And
if God would not allow them a conformity to the heathens in a matter of cutting
their hair, then much less in matters of greater weight and moment, then much
less in covetousness, worldliness, common swearing, drunkenness, and
uncleanness.

It serves to reprove those that profess Romans 12. 2. Be not conformed to this
world. And he tells us, Gal. 1. 4. that Christ gave himself that he might
deliver us from this present evil world. If we be delivered from this
present evil world, how do we conform our selves to this evil world? If
we be conformed to this world; how are we delivered from this present evil
world? Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed. Such as be
transformed should not be conformed to this world. If men be transformed by the
renewing of their minds; then they must not be conformed to this world. If
conformed to this world, how appears it that we are transformed?
Transformation, and conformity to the world cannot stand together. It is an ill
sight to see a man transformed into the Image of Christ, conformed to this
world. Urge many with this argument, you are Christians, and have in your
baptism stipulated, and solemnly covenanted an inconformity to this evil
world, you must not conform to the sinful ways, and vanities of profane
persons. Tell them that thus and thus men of the world do, from whom
Christians should be different, and to whom Christians should be contrary, and
what is men's answer? even that in a manner which the Israelites gave Samuel,
when he dissuaded them from having a King, 1 Samuel 8. 20. Nay, but we will be
like other Nations, or as the Jews said in their hearts, Ezekiel. 20. 32. We will
be as the heathen, and as the families of the Countries. So say what can be
said, men are resolved to do as others do, and not to be unlike others. In an
ill sense it was that the Jews were contrary to all men, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. They
please not God, and are contrary to all men. But in a good sense a man may be
contrary to men of the world, and not displease God therein. Nay he may so
much the more please God, by how much he displeases the World in his
contrariety to it.

It serves to show, that it is no wonder

Secondly, a Christians life is described Positively. Our conversation is in
Heaven. Thence learn this point:

That the conversation of a godly man, and of a true Christian is in Heaven.
That whiles he dwells on earth, he lives in Heaven. He says not, our
conversation shall be in heaven, but it is in heaven. It is now in heaven for
the present. Though for a time godly men have their habitation on earth, yet is
not their conversation where their habitation is, but their habitation and
commoration on earth, and their conversation above in heaven, John 17. 11 These
are in the world, and verse. 14. They are not of the world. In the world for a
time, in regard of their local abode, and commoration, but not of the world,
in regard of their conversation; because they have their conversation is in
Heaven whilst they live here on earth. As they are from above John 8. 23. so
they live above; as they are from Heaven, so they live in Heaven. And therefore
Dan. 7. 18. they are called, the saints of the high places, as those that have
their conversations above in high places, even in the highest Heavens. And Dan.
8. 10. they are called the host of Heaven, and the stars of Heaven. The
stars have their light, and influences here on earth, but they have their
seat and motion above in the Heavens. And in this regard they are said not
only to have their conversation, but their habitation in Heaven, and are said
not only to live, but to dwell in heaven. We find Revel. 13. 6. 8. two
several sorts of inhabitants dwelling in two several regions. Dwellers in
Heaven, Dwellers on earth. The dwellers on earth they worship the beast, they
receive Antichrist; but the dwellers in Heaven they are blasphemed by him.
Dwellers on earth are none other but earthly minded Christians, who though they
had the name of Christians, yet had earthly minds, and earthly affections, and
therefore are said to dwell on earth. But who were they that dwelt in Heaven?
Not the Saints gloriously blessed in Heaven, but see who they be, verse. 7. To
make war with the Saints, and to overcome them. So that they who dwelt in
Heaven were those Saints against whom Antichrist made war, and whom he
overcame. Now he could not make war with the Saints in glory, nor overcome
them, therefore by these that dwell in Heaven, is meant Gods faithful Saints
and people here on earth, that should oppose Antichrist; and therefore these
are said to dwell in Heaven, because of their heavenly conversation, because
they had their conversation in Heaven whiles they lived on earth. Look where a
man's conversation most is, there a man may be said to dwell, and therefore
they are said to dwell there, because their conversation is most there. David
desires Psalm. 27. 4. that he may dwell in the house of the Lord. and Psalm. 84.
4. Blessed are they that dwell in the house of the Lord. But now no man did
dwell in the Temple, why then does David desire to dwell there? True, no man
did dwell there, but yet in regard of their continual frequenting the Temple,
their daily resorting thither, and their attendance there upon holy services,
they are said to dwell there. So no man whilst he is here on earth can be
literally said to dwell in Heaven, but yet because the conversation of the
godly is most constant, and frequent in heaven, they trade for heaven, they
deal for heaven, they confer for heaven, they walk for heaven, they think,
speak, do, they eat, drink, sleep, wake, live, and die for heaven; what
ever they do, they do it with an eye to heaven, therefore they are said to
dwell in heaven. We shall find the Church in the book of the Revelation
called heaven, so Apoc. 12. 1. Now why is the Church called heaven? Not only
because it has its original and descent from heaven, but because all the true
members of the Church have their conversation above in heaven, and their life
in the Church is a life in heaven. As Jerusalem which is the mother of us all
is above. Gal. 4. 26. So the way of life is above to the wise, to avoid from
hell beneath. Prove, 15. 24. And as the way of life is Above, so the way of the
life of the Saints is above, because they walk in the way of life which is
above. Hell is beneath: the way of the Saints is, that they may depart from
hell beneath. The way to depart from hell beneath is to live above in the upper
region to live in heaven, to have our conversation there. So that a godly man's
conversation is above; that is, in Heaven, which stands in opposition to Hell
beneath.

How can godly men, living here on

They may be said to have their conversation

First, in regard of their head Jesus Col. 3. 1. If ye be risen with Christ:
yea not only to be risen, but to be ascended, and set in heaven with Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 6. He has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
heavenly places. They that be raised up, and sit in heavenly places, they are
certainly in heaven. But how come we now already to sit in heavenly places?
See what is added, made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. We
sit not there only in regard of right, but in some sense in fact, because we
do it in Christ our head. Such is the union between Christ and the godly,
that what he did, they did in him. When Christ was crucified, we were
crucified in him and with him, Galat. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ. When
Christ was quickened, all believers were quickened together with him, Ephesians. 2.
5. He has quickened us together with Christ. When he was raised up, all
believers were raised up together with him, Ephesians. 2. 6. And when he ascended
into heaven all believers ascended with him: and now that he lives, and sits in
heaven, all believers live, and sit in heaven with him, doing it in him who is
their head. For Christ ascended into heaven, and sits there not as a private
person; but as the head of the Church in the Name of all the elect, and
therefore that action is to be accounted theirs. As when an inheritance is
given to many brethren in a far country, the elder brother goes and is
enstated into the possession of it in the name of all the rest: all the rest
that are absent, are possessed of the place as well as he that is bodily
present there. It is in this case as it is between the head and the members of
the natural body. Though all the body be under the water, yet if the head be
above the water, we use to say, that the man is above the water. So though the
faithful be here on earth, yet Christ their head being in heaven, they may
also be said to be in heaven. Thus then the godly are in heaven because they be
in Christ their head who is in heaven, John 17. 24. Father, I will that they
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. The which as they shall at
last personally and locally be: so also in this sense they now be whilst on
earth, as having taken possession, and a seat in Heaven in Christ their head.

Secondly, in respect of their faith by Romans 4. 17. that he calls those
things that be not as if they were, so likewise the grace of faith it makes
things to be which are not; that is, which are not to sense, and are not seen
with the eye of sense, and nature. Therefore, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the
subsistence of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. The
grace of faith does give a nullity to things that are, as namely to the
afflictions, miseries, and mortality of this life, it makes these things be as
if they were not. It makes afflictions to be no afflictions, it makes miseries
to be no miseries, 2 Cor. 6. 9, 10. As dying, and yet behold we live; as
chastened, yet not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, etc. Now as
faith gives a nullity to things existent, and makes things which are, not to
be. So on the contrary it gives a subsistence to things not being, and makes
those things to be which are not. Thus did the faith of the believers under
the old Testament make Christ to be crucified unto them before he was
crucified, or come into the world. He was to their faith a lamb crucified
from the beginning of the world, who was not indeed crucified till the latter
end of the world. And thus are we by faith already in heaven, though here yet
on earth. This is that, Heb. 10. 34. Knowing that you have in your selves a
better substance in the heavens. How could they have that substance in
themselves, and in the heavens, when they themselves on earth? By the work of
faith which makes things to come to be already present. A substance in
themselves, and yet a substance in heaven, because they themselves already in
heaven by their faith. I live by faith; says the Apostle, and the just shall
live by faith. A Christian lives by faith, and faith lives altogether above in
heaven; faith lives always above upon Christ, and with Christ. And therefore a
Christian must needs live in heaven, because he lives by that which lives
altogether in heaven.

Faith puts the soul in possession of heaven, whilst the body is here on
earth. It is with a Christians faith in this case, as it was with Jacobs in
that, Genesis 48. 22. Moreover I have given unto thee one portion above thy
brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my Sword, and with
my Bow. Which is not to be understood of any thing that was past, and already
done; but he speaks prophetically of that which should afterward be done by
his posterity, which his faith made to him as already done, as if he had now
already conquered, and taken possession of it. He speaking the language of
faith speaks of a thing to be done, as past and done already. So faith gives a
man possession of heaven whiles he is on earth, and so makes him live in
heaven whiles he is here on earth.

Thirdly, in regard of their hearts and affections, their loves, delights, and
desires. Neque n. praesentior spiritus noster est ubi animat, qua^ ubi amat,
nisi sort putetur esse magis ubi invitus tenetur, and necessitate, quam quo
sp^n^e f^r^ur. and alacri vol^nte^e (...) a^l^^. d^o. (...), Chrysostom. ad Ephesians.
hom. 5.
affections, desires and delights are in heaven, and so their conversation is
there. A man is not so much where his body is, as where his heart is. And a
man's heart is not so much where his body is, as where his love and affections
and desires are. Love and desire carry a man's heart thither where the things
loved and desired are. Where the treasure is, there is the heart, Matthew. 6.
Where the treasure is that is loved and desired, there the heart is which
loves and desires. A man is not so much said to be any where so much in
respect of position of place, as of disposition of affection. And the soul is
not where it lives, but where it loves, yea there it lives where it loves. Thus
therefore have the godly their conversation in heaven, because they have their
hearts there, their affections are raised, and mounted up into heaven, they
mind heaven, and heavenly things; their desires, and longing affections are
altogether there. So much is here employed in the Apostles opposition. They mind
earthly things, but our conversation is in heaven. The opposition one would
have thought should rather have run thus, they mind earthly things. But we
mind heavenly things, but in stead of this he says, our conversation is in
heaven. So that to have a man's conversation in heaven is to mind heavenly
things, to have his heart, and affections in heaven. What this conversation in
heaven is we may see, Col. 3. 1. 2. Seek the things that are above. Above?
where is that above? In heaven, above in heaven where Christ sits at the right
hand of God. And verse. 2. Set your affection on things above. Still above, a
Christians thoughts and affections are still above, and so he converses above
in heaven. Thus had Abraham his conversation in heaven. Heb. 11. 10. He looks
for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. How looked
he for that City? with much affection and desire, verse. 14, 16. They seek a
Country, they desire an heavenly Country. Thus Abraham and the Patriarchs had
their conversations in heaven by having their minds after heaven. Excellent is
that description of the Church, Cant. 3. 6. Who is this that comes or ascends
up out of the Wilderness like pillars of smoke? The world is a wilderness, a
Christian he is coming up out of the wilderness, he is always ascending up
out of the wilderness, he is raising, and lifting up his heart into heaven, and
he ascends like pillars of smoke. Smoke we see arises, and ascends in the
form of a pillar, and it goes upward to heaven. So a Christian has his heart
alienated from the world, he is ever ascending up out of that wilderness; and
such are the desires, and affections of his heart after heaven, that they
ascend up like smoke, like pillars, elations, and liftings up of smoke to
heaven. When the Israelites set Ai on fire, Josh. 8. 20. The men of Ai looked
behind them, and they saw and beheld the smoke of the City ascended up to
heaven. So such are the affections and desires of the godly after heaven, that
their affections reeke and smoke, and go up in pillars of smoke to heaven.
Now when thus the soul of a man is lifted and carried up into heaven, in his
affections and desires; when his heart thus reekes and smoakes toward heaven,
then is a man's conversation in heaven. Phil. 1. I desire to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, which is best of all. Now when a man's heart has continual
risings and heavings up heavenward, when a man's spirit aspires, breathes,
pants after the presence of God in heaven, then a man may be said to have his
conversation in heaven. See Jacobs expression, Genesis 49. 18. O Lord, I have
waited for thy salvation. It is with Gods people as with wayters: a wayter he
stands without at the gate, or door of the house, but his heart, his desires
are within doors, he represents to himself his being within, his speech,
discourse, carriage and behavior there, and so is within whiles he is without.
So is it with godly men, they wait for salvation, wait for heaven, and though
yet whiles here they be without, yet in their minds, affections, and desires
they are within.

The woman that John saw. Apoc. 12. 1. had the Moon under her feet. The godly
live above the Moon, above all sublunary things. These things are beneath
their affections, their affections are aloft above the Moon, and they that
have the Moon under their feet, are in an higher region then the earth; they
have their conversation in heaven, by having their affections above all earthly
things.

Many when they are in the public assemblies, and at a sermon hearing the
word, yet they may be said to have their conversation in their shops, and in
their fields, because their hearts, minds, and affections be there. So in this
case, the godly may be said to be in heaven whilst on earth, because there be
their hearts and affections. The godly may be said to be in heaven whilst they
are on earth, as the Israelites were said to be in Egypt whilst they were in
the wilderness. Act. 7. 39. They returned into Egypt. I, but they never came
back into Egypt, how then is it said that they returned into Egypt? They
returned, says the text, into Egypt in their hearts. Because their hearts
affections and desires were in Egypt, therefore they are said to return into
Egypt. They returned in their hearts, and with their hearts, though not with
their feet. So the godly, though on earth, yet they are in heaven, and have
their conversation there, because they be gone up thither in their hearts and
affections. This people, says the Prophet, draws nigh unto me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me. So here, on the contrary, This people
is far from me with their bodies, but their hearts draw nigh unto me, and
are continually in heaven with me.

And as they are thus in heaven by their affections and desires, so unto this
head may be joined, that they are in heaven in regard of their meditations,
and contemplations. He that ascends, and frequently goes up into heaven, may be
said to have his conversation there. Now by meditation a Christian has his
ascensions into heaven, by it he goes up, and there surviews the joys and the
glories in A more po^e^ as^ende^e. Anima quae (...), and (...) te^per pl^teu^*
ecclest^s Jerusalem. August.
heaven, and so in that regard he converses in heaven. Moses did not go bodily
and personally into the land of Canaan, but yet see Deuteronomy. 34. 1, 2, 3, 4. And
Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the Mountain of Nebo to the top
of Pisgah, and the Lord showed him all the Land of Gilead unto Dan, and all the
Land of Judah to the utmost Sea, and the South, etc. And the Lord said unto
him, This is the Land which I swear unto Abraham, etc. I have caused thee to
see it with thine eyes. So that when Moses went up into Mount Nebo, and there
saw all the Land to the utmost Sea, he was in a manner in Canaan. Meditation is
a Mount Nebo, and from the top of that Pisgah God shows his people heaven, the
glory and the joys of it, and so they converse in Canaan, being in that
Mountain top. When Daniel was in Babylon, Dan. 6. 10. He opened his window in
his chamber toward Jerusalem, and looked that way, and so in his meditations
was in Jerusalem, and conversed there whilst he was in Babylon: So by
meditation a godly heart opens a window toward heaven, and looks thither,
and so converseth in heaven when he is on earth. A godly man is so conversing
in Heaven when he is on earth, as Paul conversed at Colossus when he was at
Rome. How Paul was at Colossus being at Rome we see, Col. 2. 5. For though I be
absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your
order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ. He was present with them
in spirit, and by contemplation represented unto himself the assemblies of the
Colossians, and beheld their holy order, and rejoiced therein. So the godly
though they be absent from heaven in their bodies, for whiles we are in the
body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. yet in their spirit, that
heavenlier and diviner part, they are by meditation ascended thither, and there
they behold the face of God, and the blessedness of the Saints in glorious
communion with him.

Fourthly, they are in heaven here, because heaven is here in them. What shall
they have in heaven for the maine and substantials that they have not here?
That they have here differs from that they shall have hereafter, not in kind,
but only in degree. They have the happiness of heaven here. That they have the
happiness of heaven here will appear in five things:

First, it is a great part of the happiness Math. 18. 10. In heaven their
Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in Heaven. That is a
great part of the happiness of heaven to the Angels, the seeing and beholding
of Gods face in Heaven. That is to be in heaven, and to have the happiness of
heaven, to behold the face of God and to see him. And so is Christ's happiness
after his resurrection set forth Acts 2. 28. Thou shall make me full of joy
with thy countenance. And thus David sets out the happiness of heaven, Psalm.
17. 15. As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness. And so the
Apostle sets it out, 1 Cor. 13. 12. We shall then see face to face. A great
part also of the happiness of heaven is in having fellowship and communion
with God. That communion which the Saints have with God in heaven, is the very
heaven of heaven, the maine happiness of heaven. Now this happiness have the
Saints here on earth in their degree. Here they see Gods face. Stephen saw
heaven opened, and Christ standing at the right hand of glory; so also do all
Gods people with spiritual eyes see heaven opened, and see Gods face, Math. 5.
8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: not only hereafter,
but in this life; not only shall see God, but do see God. Gods face is to be
seen in his ordinances. Seek my face, Psalm. 27. Lord thy face will I seek.
And as his face is to be sought, so his face is to be seen in his ordinances.
See how David speaks, Psalm. 63. 2. my flesh longs to see thy power, and thy
glory, so as I have seen thee in thy sanctuary, 3. John 11. He that does
evil has not seen God: he says not, he shall not see, but has not seen.
That implies, that good and godly persons they do see, and have seen God in
the Word, Prayer, and Sacraments. Godly people see God, and behold his face,
Apoc. 22. 4. And they shall see his face. But when is it they shall see it? Lay
the latter end of the former verse to it, And his servants shall serve him, and
they shall see his face. That is, even then when, and whilst they serve him,
even in their services in Prayer, the Word, and the Sacrament. In these holy
services Gods servants see his face. And so also they have heavenly and sweet
fellowship with God, 1 John 1. 3. Our fellowship is with the father, and his
Son Jesus Christ. Cant. 1. 4. The King has brought me into his chambers: not
the King will bring me into his chambers, but he has brought me in. It is
spoken of that sweet and secret communion which the Saints here have with God.
The public assemblies are Gods house, and his Palace, but heaven is Gods
chamber. Now the godly are not only admitted into the public assemblies unto
holy duties, but in the public assemblies in the duties of praying, hearing,
and receiving the Sacrament, God takes them into his chamber, into heaven in
regard of that sweet and secret fellowship that he vouchsafes the^ in holy
duties. And so they being in Gods chamber, in Gods privy-chamber, in his
bedchamber, Also our bed is green; where are they but in Cant. 1. 16
heaven? They that have their conversatio^ in Gods chamber, in his very
bedchamber, they have their co^versation in heaven. And thus the godly here
seeing Gods face, here having communion with God, they have here in degree the
happiness of heaven.

Secondly, the happiness of heaven stands in the peace of conscience, and joy
in the holy Ghost. This is heaven, and he that has this in him has heaven in
him, and he that has heaven within him may be well said to be in heaven, Romans
14. 17. The Kingdom of God, and so the Kingdom of heaven is peace, and joy in
the holy Ghost: where these are, there heaven is. That look as on the
contrary, where there is an accusing conscience that filles the heart with
fears, affrightments, horror and anguish, there are the very flashings of
hell fire, and such a man may be said to be in hell, in the belly of hell, as
Ion. 2. so here where there is joy of the holy Ghost, sweet peace arising from
faith, and the assurance of Gods love in pardon of sin, there is heaven; and
such a man truly lives in heaven. The joys of heaven in Scripture are often
set forth by a feast, Luke 14. 15. Blessed is he that eats bread in the
Kingdom of God. And so the rich man saw Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, that is, he
saw him at the blessed feast in heaven, set at Gods Table in an high place next
to Abraham, as John leaned in Christ's bosom at the last supper, John 13. 23.
Thus also is the peace of a good conscience set forth, Prove. 15. 15. by a
feast. A good conscience is a continual feast: what is it to be in heaven, but
to be as at a blessed feast? at a blessed feast are they that have peace of
conscience, as they are that are in heaven. Here is a sitting, a lying in
Abraham's, nay in Christ's bosom. And therefore we shall see the same thing
spoken of peace, and joy in this life, that is of that peace and joy that is in
heaven. What is the peace that is in heaven? At the utmost no more can be said
of it, then that it is a peace that passes all understanding. And so much is
said of the peace of God, and the peace of conscience that here the Saints have
on earth, Phil. 4. 7. The peace of God that passes all understanding. This
peace they have here transcends all comprehension. No understanding is able to
understand the comfort of the peace of a good conscience, it passes all
understanding A man's understanding can understand great comfort, it must needs
therefore be a great comfort indeed which no man's understanding can conceive.
If a man would strive to covet, no covetous man can covet more riches then his
understanding can conceive. If a man should strive to be ambitious; no
ambitious man can desire more preferments, and honors, then his understanding
can conceive. The conceiving of the understanding is the utmost bounds of all
desires. But the peace of God surmounts these bonds, It passes all
understanding. A man strives to get a good living, to get a good revenew, and
maintenance, now I can easily understand how much thou gettest. It may be
twenty pounds, or an hundred, or a thousand, or an hundred thousand by the
year, I can easily understand all this. Nay if it were as many thousands by
the year as there be hairs on thine head, which no man has, yet all this I
can easily understand; but now I cannot so much as conceive with mine
understanding the worth and happiness of the peace of a good conscience. This
passes all understanding, not only the understanding of men, but the
understanding of Angels. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man the things that God has prepared for them that
love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. It is spoken not of the joys of heaven, but of the
comforts of the Gospel which it brings to the conscience, as appears by the
context. Now thine eye, says Chrysostom, has seen many things, and thine
ear heard more then thou have seen, and thine heart can imagine more then
thou have heard; and yet, neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither can
it enter into thine heart to imagine what God has provided for thee in the
peace of a good conscience. A man may suppose what he could imagine, he might
imagine a man to have a thousand worlds if there were so many, and to have the
command over all the men in the world. A man may imagine that he has Kings and
Princes to serve him, you may imagine a man to live millions of years without
sickness, without grievances without any discontent; ye may imagine such a
man, but ye can never imagine what is the happiness and comfort of that man
that has the peace of God that passes all understanding. What now can be said
more of the peace in heaven? So likewise what is the joy that is in heaven,
what kind of joy is it? It is a joy exceeding glorious, an unutterable,
ineffable, unspeakeable joy. Such is the very joy that Gods people have in this
life. There is a twofold joy. A joy of faith here, and a joy of fruition
hereafter. Now as the joy of fruition is glorious, is unspeakeable; so is the
joy of faith here, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Ye believing rejoice with joy unspeakeable,
and full of glory. What more glorious thing can be spoken of the joys of
heaven? what can a man have in heaven more then glorious joy? more then
unspeakeable joy? the grace of joy is a glorious joy. They that have glorious
and unspeakeable joy where live they but in heaven? It is true there is some
difference between joys here, and in heaven. Now this joy is in us, then we
shall be in it, now this joy enters into us, then we shall enter into it,
enter into thy masters joy. All the difference is only the measure and the
degree, there we shall have more, but it is all of one kind. Thus the Saints
have heaven within them, and so having the happiness of heaven here, they have
their converse in heaven.

Thirdly, a great part of the happiness of heaven is in those blessed raptures
of all eternities. They shall be taken up with the contemplation of their own
happiness, now they shall be so taken up with these things that they shall
have blessed ravishments of their spirits in these contemplations. That look
as the damned in hell under the sense of present wrath, and in the
contemplation and expectation of the eternity of it, and under the fear of
future wrath are swallowed up in despair, in horror and consternation of
spirit, a thing that adds extremely to their hellish torments, so there is a
thing in the happiness of heaven contrary to that, and that is
incomprehensible glorious ravishments of Spirit in the contemplations of their
present, and view of their eternal blessedness. Now even thus have the Saints
on earth an happiness like that in heaven. For the Saints on earth have their
raptures, their heavenly ecstasies, and ravishments of spirit. Luke 9. 29. As
Christ prayed, the fashion of his countenance was changed, and he was
transfigured. So Act. 10. 9. As Peter prayed he fell into a trance, and saw
heaven opened. Nay Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 3, 4. was rapt, was caught up into the
third heavens, caught up into paradise, and heard words which were not lawful,
or possible to be uttered. A man caught up into heaven, he is in heaven, and
truly converses in heaven. So Apoc. 1. John was ravished in spirit on the
Lords day, either in the time of his prayers or meditations on that day. Thus
had all these their raptures, and ecstasies. And though these were all
extraordinary cases, and not common to all Gods people, yet are not the godly
without raptures of spirit in their kind. They have their spiritual
transfigurations, and in their prayers and meditations when they have their
hearts in special manner enlarged; they have their spirits rapt and caught up
into the third heavens, and there have sweet and comfortable converse with God
above. He that knows what special enlargements of heart are in holy duties,
knows better by experience what these ravishments mean, then any man knows
how to express them.

Fourthly, it is a great part of the happiness from the chafe, there the
sheep are separated from the Goats. To live and converse in the company and
society of wicked and ungodly men, and to see their filthy conversation, their
conversation in hell, it is a little piece of hell, it is a living in the
suburbs of hell. It is to a godly heart, a kind of hellish torment. 1 Pet. 2.
7, 8. vexed his righteous soul from day to day, vexed, or tormented. It is the
same word that is used of the rich man being in the torments in hell, Luke 16.
But whether a man be tormented or not, it is the having of a man's conversation
in hell, to live familiarly and to converse in inward familiar society with
ungodly and profane persons. To be all one with them, and to take delight in
their company is for a man to have his conversation in hell. To have ones
conversation in drunken houses, with drunken persons, to have ones conversation
with swearers and godless persons, what is it better then conversing in hell?
Now this is an happiness in heaven, that there a man is separated from all
familiarity, company, and society of ungodly ones. There is no Canaanite in
that house of the Lord, there is no hurtful beast in that mountain of the
Lord. And this is a great part of the happiness of heaven. It is to live in
heaven to live separated from wicked ones. And thus here have the godly their
conversation in heaven by living separated from ungodly ones in the world.
Though this separation be not a local separation, yet it is a moral
separation, a separation in manners, in affection, in society, and this moral
separation prepares for that local separation. And thus are Gods people in a
manner in heaven, and have their conversation there by not having conversation
and society with such as have their conversation in hell. It is in heaven to
live separated from evil ones.

Fifthly, it is a great part of the happiness of heaven, that there a man has
Math. 8. 11. Many shall come from the East, and the West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God. There the Saints of God
shall have blessed society each with other, shall rejoice together in communion
each with other. There shall be an happiness not only in communion with God,
but also in communion with the Saints. And it is an unspeakeable sweetness
that shall arise from the society of the Saints in heaven. This happiness and
comfort have the godly here now begun on earth. It is an heavenly contentment,
an heavenly delight that they have in, and from the society of Gods people. All
my delight is in the Saints on earth; Psalm. 16. 3. I am companion of all them
that fear thee, Psalm. 119 63. Thus by delighting and rejoicing themselves in
the society of the Saints, sorting with them, and conversing with them in the
duties of the communion of Saints they do live in heaven, and have their
conversation there. It is to have ones conversation in heaven to have
conversation with the Saints in the duties of their communion.

Fifthly, the godly live in heaven whilst Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, now they that live holily, and obediently on earth they do Gods will
on earth as it is in heaven, and they that do Gods will on earth as it is in
heaven, they live as they do that be in heaven, and they that live like the
spirits in heaven they have their conversation in heaven. They may be truly
said to have their conversation in heaven that live an heavenly life, and they
live an heavenly life that live an holy life. What be the men that be in
heaven? All men that are in heaven are Saints, holy persons. Now then when men
be Saints they be inhabitants of heaven. The Apostle makes a distinction of
bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 40 There are celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial. So
I may say, there are celestial hearts, and there be hearts terrestrial. Now
when men have holy hearts, set upon holiness, sanctified spirits, and lives
conformable to Gods will and truth, such holy hearts are heavenly and
celestial hearts, and when men have celestial spirits then they live in
heaven. A maine thing in heaven is the perfection of holiness, that there the
Saints shall be perfectly holy. Now therefore the more holiness we have, the
more we are in heaven. The way to live in, and to converse there now, is to
live an holy life. Saints on earth, as David calls them Ps. 16. are already
Saints in heaven, Saints that have their conversation there. The Turks if they
see a mad man, they honor him as a Saint, and judge him a Saint; as one that
has his mind abstracted from, and elevated above things below, as one who in
his spirit converses with God. But many amongst us are in another extreme. If
we see a man a Saint, one of an holy godly life we count him a mad man. Turks
honor mad men under the notion of Saints, we hate and despise Saints under the
notion of mad men. But let men despise holiness, and scorn Saints as they
please, yet he that will go to heaven hereafter must live in heaven now; and
he that will live in heaven now, must live an holy, a godly and obedient life
to God. This is to have our conversation in heaven to have such a conversation
as that, Phil. 1. 27. Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel, then is
our conversation such as becomes the Gospel, when such as, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But
as he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation. The Gospel is from heaven, it tends to heaven, an heavenly
conversation therefore becomes it. An holy conversation is an heavenly
conversation, an holy conversation is a conversation in heaven.

As then we would approve our selves true Christians indeed, so let us thus
have our conversations in heaven; let us live above, let us live on high. If a
Christian have his conversation in heaven, as we would show our selves to be
true Christians, so labor for a Christians conversation. A Christians
conversation is a conversation in heaven, and when we have our conversation
there, then we may truly say, we are Christians. How can we say that we are
Christians, if we have not a Christians conversation? And how can we say that
we have a Christians conversation when we have not our conversations in heaven,
where all true Christians have their conversation? How can we say that we have
a Christians conversation, whilst our conversations are on earth? up therefore
up into heaven, live and converse there. Volemus sursum, let us fly upward, as
Augustine somewhere reports that his mother Monica said in a kind of trance
when she was near her death. And there be diverse reasons to persuade, and
press us to it.

First, there is nothing that a Christian Math. 6. Our father which art in
heaven. Our mother in heaven, Gal. 4. 26. (...). Chrysostom. in Philip. 4. hom.
13.
But Jerusalem which is above is free which is the mother of us all, Heb. 12.
22. The heavenly Jerusalem. Our elder brother and head is in heaven, Ephesians. 1.
20. He raised Christ from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places. Our Country is in heaven, Heb. 11. 15. If they had been
mindful of that Country from whence they came, they might have had
opportunity to have returned; but now they desire a better Country, that is,
an heavenly one. Our Inheritance is in heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 4. To an Inheritance
reserved in heaven for you. Our mansion house is in heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
Our substance is in heaven, Heb. 10. 34. Ye have in heaven a better, and an
enduring substance. Our hope is in heaven, Col. 1. 5. For the hope that is laid
up for you in heaven. Now if all these be in heaven where should we be but in
heaven also? All these in heaven, and what then should our hearts be out of
heaven? Our head, our house, our hope in heaven, where should our hearts be but
where our head it, where our house, and our hope is? Since all these in heaven,
lift up your heads ye everlasting gates, mount up your hearts and your
affections into heaven, and have your conversations in heaven by having your
hearts there.

Secondly, it is an excellent preservative Noah lived in corrupt times, and yet
was a just and an upright man in those times. How came he to save himself
from the corruptions of those times? The text says, Genesis 6. that Noah walked
with God. God he is in heaven, he that walks with God he converses in heaven,
and so Noah by having his conversation in heaven saved himself from the
corrupt conversations of the men on earth. What a number of those that
professed themselves Christians in the Apostle Paul's time, did live like
Epicures, that made their belly their God; minded nothing but earthly things,
as appears in the verses before this text. Now why was not the Apostle and the
rest of the faithful carried away with the stream of those times? The reason
was in this, But our conversation is in heaven, we live not as they, we are
not corrupted, and infected with their manners, for our conversation is in
heaven. And so they having their conversation in heaven were saved from the
infection of those belly-gods, and mucky companions, that had their hearts and
minds on the mucke of the earth. As in a common contagion of pestilence when
the very air is infected, if a man could live in the upper region of the air,
he would be above the reach of the infection, So when there be infectious
pestilences of heresy, idolatry, ungodliness, and licentiousness reigning in
the world, if a man have his conversation above in heaven he lives in a region
free from those infections, and so is preserved. As on the other side, when a
man has not his conversation in heaven, he is in danger to be carried away
with any error, or corruption whatsoever. When Antichrist was to come into the
world, he should corrupt the doctrine of the Gospel, he should corrupt
religion, and worship; he should set up idolatry, and all that was naught. And
yet as vile corruptions as he should bring in, there were a number of people
that should receive him, and swallow all his corruptions, should yield to all
his idolatries, and embrace his religion. Well, but what kind of people
should they be that should do it? See Apoc. 13. 8. And all that dwell upon
earth shall worship him, that is, All such Christians as had not their
conversations in heaven, but on earth, that were worldly earthly hearted people
they should receive Antichrist, and his religion, and turn Idolaters thick
and threefold. So that an earthly hearted Christian, that is a dweller on
earth, and has not his conversation in heaven, he is in preparation for any
religion. Come what will come, he is ready to be any thing, to do any thing;
come Popery, come Idolatry, come Antichrist, come any thing, nothing comes
amiss to such an one. He that dwells on earth will worship the beast, and will
do it without any great reluctation too. We see there, verse. 7. that
Antichrist makes war with, and persecutes the Saints of God. And what was the
quarrel? because they would not receive Antichrist, and his religion. But how
came it about that they were thus preserved from worshipping him, and receiving
his religion? That we find verse. 6. They dwelt in heaven, they had their
conversation in heaven, they were an heavenly minded people, and so the
Antichristian pestilence could not fasten upon them. But all that dwelt on the
earth worships him. An earthly hearted man is a fit piece of timber to be
framed to any thing that is naught; ye may hew a Papist, an idolater, a
superstitious sot out of him. He will be any thing before he will loose any
thing. It is a very heavy, sore, and sad judgment of God to be given up to
embrace Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2 11, 12. For this cause God shall sond them
strong delusions that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned.
See how Solomon speaks of an whore, Eccles. 7. 26. I find more bitter then
death the woman whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands: who so
pleases God shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her, and
Prove. 22. 14. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit, he that is abhorred
of the Lord shall fall therein. When a man is given up to the love of an whore,
it is a sign that he is abhorred of God, and that therefore God lets him fall
into that deep pit to break his neck; and on the contrary a mercy of God for
a man to escape that ditch. So it is a special mercy of God to be saved, and
preserved from the whore of Babylon, as to be given up to the embracements of
that whore, it is a sad sign that God abhorres a man, and precipitates him
into that deep pit, to break his neck. It being so sad a case, it concerns
every man to look well about him, that he may be preserved from that danger.
Lo then here is a special preservative; dwell not on earth, dwell and
converse above in heaven, and this will preserve thee from falling into that
deep and dangerous ditch.

Thirdly, every man says he would feign conversation in heaven, and an
expectation of a Savior from heaven. And first a conversation in heaven before
an expectation of a Savior from heaven. Many profess an expectation of a
Savior, and so of salvation from heaven, but in the mean time have no regard
to a conversation in heaven. Now in vain is a man's expectation of a Savior
from heaven, who has not his conversation in heaven. The conversation in
heaven is the comfortable ground of the expectation of a Savior from heaven;
for mark the words, From whence we look for the Savior. The Savior is not
only looked for, but mark from whence he is looked for. From whence then is
he looked for? from heaven. I but from what heaven? our conversation is in
heaven, from whence we look for the Savior. Therefore the expectation of the
Savior is only from that heaven in which a man's conversation is. So that if
no conversation in heaven, then no ground for a man comfortably to expect
Christ's coming from heaven, because by the context it appears, that they
only can comfortably expect Christ's coming from heaven, who have first had
their conversation in that heaven from whence they expect him a Savior. So
then either have thy conversation in heaven, or else from that heaven thou
can not look for a Savior, nor in that heaven have salvation. A sure thing
it is, that he that has not his conversation in heaven here, shall never have
his habitation there hereafter. And as sure it is, that every one that truly
desires to have his habitation in heaven hereafter, now here already has his
conversation there. If we have not our conversation in heaven now, how appears
it that we have a desire indeed to live in heaven hereafter? If ye have a
true desire to live in heaven hereafter, why then make ye not all the haste
ye can to be in heaven now? As Joshua speaks to them, Josh. 18. 3. How long
are ye slack to go to possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers
has given you? So I say, if ye have any mind in good earnest to dwell in
heaven for ever, how long are you slack to take possession of heaven now, why
are ye not in it already? why are ye so long out of it? why have ye not your
conversation there, where ye profess ye desire to have your habitation for
ever? That man has no true desire to heaven that does not now converse in
heaven. No conversation in heaven now, no habitation in heaven hereafter.

Fourthly, It is a sweet and comfortable Colos. 3. 1, 2. If ye be risen with
Christ seek the things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God, set your affections on things above: that is, If ye be risen with Christ,
set your affections above; for those words, If ye be risen with Christ, have
reference also to the words in the second verse. As if he had said, ye can
never set your affections above, nor seek the things above, unless ye be
risen with Christ; you must be first risen with Christ before you can have
your conversation in heaven. And if you do once set your affections above, and
so have your conversation in heaven, then ye give a good evidence that ye are
risen again with Christ. So that a man that has not his conversation in
heaven, by having his heart and affections raised up into heaven, he is like
to that Demoniacke, Mark 5. that had his dwelling and his conversation amongst
the graves and sepulchers. An unraised Christian is still in the grave, and a
man that has not his conversation in heaven is an unraised Christian, he is
not risen with Christ. The Apostle tells us that a true Christian must be
planted into the likeness of Christ's resurrection. Romans 6. 5. They that be
spiritually raised, must be raised like as Christ was raised. A resurrection
that is not in the likeness of Christ's resurrection is not to be trusted to.
Some are raised only in the likeness of Samuels resurrection: it was not
Samuel himself, but only a spirit which the witch of Endor raised in the
likeness of Samuel. Diverse seem to be true Christians, as if they were raised
from the dead, but they are no better than hypocrites in the likeness of true
Christians. Some are raised in the likeness of Lazarus his resurrection. John.
11. 44. he was indeed raised, but yet he was to die again. Too many rise in
the likeness of his resurrection, of whom it may be said, clean contrary to
that which the father spoke of his prodigal son, Luke 15. 32. This thy
brother was dead, and is alive again: but of them, These were alive, and are
dead again. Such is the resurrection of Apostataes, and back-sliders. But now
a man that would be raised aright, must be raised in the likeness of Christ's
resurrection, he must be raised like as Christ was raised. How was that? The
third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended into heaven. Christ after
he rose from the dead, he ascended up into heaven, and has his abode there.
So a man that is raised in the likeness of Christ's resurrection must do, he
must rise and ascend into heaven. Then a man is planted into the likeness of
Christ's resurrection, when he ascends into heaven, then he is ascended into
heaven when he has his conversation in heaven. And so a man that has his
conversation in heaven is planted into the likeness of Christ's resurrection,
and has also thereby a comfortable evidence that he is risen with Christ. For
indeed none can rise in the likeness of his resurrection, but those that are
raised by the power of his resurrection.

All this therefore considered, be we stirred up to approve the truth of our
Christianity by the heavenlinesse of our conversation, by living now where we
desire to live for ever hereafter, by living like Daniel, Saints, Dan. 7. 18.
Like the Saints of the high ones, or high things, or places. What should the
Saints of high things do, minding these low things here on earth? What should
the Saints of the high places do conversing in these low places on earth. Some
low thoughts as of the earth, become not the Saints of the high places. Saints
of the high places should have their conversation in high places. There should
be a suiteablenesse between men's conditions and conversations. If God have
called them to the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, If he have called them
to be of the Saints of the high Phil. 3. 14.
places, then let them live on high, and have their minds and affections on
high: let them have their conversation in high places. Indeed in one sense it
is a sin to Romans 12. 16. Bonum est sursum habere Cor, non tamen ad seipsum,
quod est superbiae, sed ad Deum quod est obeduntiae. Prosper, sent.
be high minded, and it is forbidden, Mind not high things, but in this sense
it is a virtue and a grace to be high minded, and we are commanded to do it,
Col. 3. 2. Mind the things above, mind high things. It is the same word that
is used in the verse before this text, which mind earthly things. Though we
may not be Proudly high-minded, yet we may and must be heavenly high-minded.
Such an highmindednesse will prove us to be right bred Christians indeed. We
shall find that God twice promises Abraham the multiplication of his seed:
once Genesis 13. 16. And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that if
a man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.
And again, Genesis 15. 5. Look now toward heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou
be able to number them, and he said, so shall thy seed be. In the first place
he compares Abraham's seed to the dust of the Ponam semen tuum quasi pulverem
terra, etc. Infra deus jube^ Abrahamu^ numerare stellas, Illic igitur
posteritatem, Abrahae comparat stellis, and luminibu^ coeli; hic autem pulveri
terrae. Significatur autem his similitudinibus duplex Abrahae posteritas, una
terrenae, and corporalis, Altera coelestis, spiritualis and aeterna. Luther. in
Genes. 13.
earth; in the last to the Stars of heaven. Luther from thence observes the
shadowing out of the double seed of Abraham; one earthly and bodily, another
spiritual and heavenly. And indeed the Scripture tells us of a double seed of
Abraham, Romans 9. 7, 8. The children of the flesh, and the children of the
promise. The children of the flesh, happily shadowed out by the dust of the
earth; the children of promise, by the Stars of heaven. Now sureit is, that
we cannot be children of God, except we be children of Abraham. If we be
children of Abraham, we are sure to be heirs, Romans 4. 14, 16. All Abraham's
seed are not children, and heirs, Romans 9. How may a man know whether he be of
those children of Abraham that shall be heirs? By this, if he be of the seed
that is like to the Stars in heaven. That seed that is like the dust of the
earth, that Christian that is but carnal and earthly, he is not a child of
Abraham that shall be an heir: but that seed that is like the Stars of
heaven, such Christians as are spiritual and heavenly, they shall be heirs,
because they are the right bred seed of Abraham. The Saints, Dan. 7. 18. are
called the Saints of the high places. And so Dan. 8. 10. they are called the
Host of heaven, and the Stars. They are Saints of high places indeed when
they are Stars in heaven, and the Host of heaven. Now when we are Stars in
heaven, then indeed we are the right seed of Abraham, true Christians indeed.
But now, when are we Stars in heaven? Then when we have our conversation in
heaven. Men that have their conversation in heaven, they are Stars in heaven,
the glistering lamps and lights of heaven, that shine as lights in the midst
of a crooked generation, Philip. 2. 15. they are the Host of heaven. And they
that are Stars in heaven, they are the true Christians indeed, the right seed
of Abraham: look upon the Stars, so shall thy seed be. What comfort is
there in being the dusty seed of Abraham, as now all the reprobate castaway
Jews are at this day? but to be the Starry seed of Abraham, that is honor and
comfort indeed. And then we are the Starry seed of Abraham, when we be Stars
in heaven, when we have our conversation in heaven.

But how then may one come to

If a man would have his conversation

First, he must get his heart loose from Psalm. 131. 2. I have behaved my self
as a child that is weaned of his mother, my soul is even as a weaned child.
Hanna had vowed Samuel unto God, that he should have his whole converse in and
about the Tabernacle in Shiloh. But yet she brought him not presently thither,
but she first weaned him, 1 Samuel 1. 22. Hannah said, I will not go up until
the child be weaned, and then I will bring him up that he may appear before
the Lord, and there abide for ever. And verse. 24. When she had weaned him,
she took him up with her, and brought him unto the house of the Lord in
Shiloh. Ill would Samuel have abode at Shiloh, and have had his conversation
there with Eli, if he had not been weaned from his mothers breast. If a man
sometimes do chance to make a step up to heaven, yet if he be not weaned
from the world, he will never long abide there, nor have his converse there,
his heart will be hankering and lingering after the worlds breast, he will
quickly come down again, that he may be sucking that Milk. The Apostle
compares the love, cares, and thoughts of the world to weights, Heb. 12. 1. Let
us lay aside every weight. They are weights that hold, and keep down the
heart from rising up to heaven, or pluck down the heart from heaven, if it be
raised up toward heaven. A man that will have his conversation in heaven must
first have his heart lifted, and raised up into heaven, it must first be there
before it can converse there. Now how can the heart lift and raise up it self
into heaven, if it be clogged with a company of weights; if it could raise it
self upwards, yet these waights would soon pull, and weigh it down again.
An Eagle flies toward heaven, Prove. 23. 5. But if an Eagle had waights fastened
to her legs, she could not fly at all, much less toward heaven. If
therefore we would converse in heaven, we must first sore up into heaven; and
if we would mount, and fly up into heaven, we must first get loose from
these weights, get our hearts loose and free from the love and cares of this
world. Yea these are not only weights, but they are as Bird-lime to those
wings upon which we should mount up to heaven. Worldly things are
entanglements, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that works entangles himself with the
affairs of this life. A Bird that is entangled with a snare, that is entangled
with lime-twigs cannot fly up aloft; and the love and cares of the world do
entangle the spirit of a man, so as he cannot raise it up into heaven. And he
that cannot raise up his heart into heaven, cannot have his conversation there.
First, get we our hearts to be estranged from the earth, and then we shall
the more willingly converse in heaven. That man will hardly come to live in the
country, to have his abode and conversation there, that has not first weaned
himself from the City, so long as his mind is to the City he will hardly
like to lead a Countrey-life. When once David had got his heart off from the
world, see how spiritually and heavenly minded he was, Psalm. 119. 19, 20. I am
a stranger in the earth, he had alienated his heart and estranged his
effections from the world, and see what follows, Hide not thy Commandments
from me, my soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at
all times. We see the Patriarchs were heavenly minded persons, had their
conversation in heaven, Hebr. 11. 16. Their minds were upon an heavenly
Country, but yet first, verse. 13. they confess they were strangers, and
pilgrims on earth. They had estranged their hearts from this world, from the
earth, and so made way to have their conversation in heaven.

Secondly, ye must do as our Savior Math. 6. 20. Lay up treasures in heaven.
Make heavenly things your treasures, hoard up there and lay up there as much as
may be, and then ye shall soon have your conversation there. Then the
conversation is in heaven when the heart and affections are in heaven as we
saw before. The way to have the heart in heaven, is to have the treasure there,
Math. 6. 20, 21. Lay up your treasure in heaven; for where your treasure is,
there will your hearts be also. As if he had said, Get your treasure into
heaven, and you shall easily get your hearts into heaven; for if the treasure
be once in heaven, the heart will soon be in heaven too; for the heart and
the treasure will be undivided. What is the reason that many have their
conversation on earth, but because they lay up their treasure on earth, and
they make these earthly things their treasures? So if treasure were laid up in
heaven, and heavenly things made our treasure, our conversation would be in
heaven, for the heart would follow and run after the treasure. Make Christ
thy treasure, make him the welbeloved of thy soul, make him the pearl of
great price, prize him so as to count all earthly things as dung and dross to
him, and Christ in heaven being made our treasure will draw our hearts up into
heaven. And when the heart is drawn up into heaven, the conversation is there.
Look where the Loadstone is, that way it draws the iron. If the Loadstone be
beneath, it draws the iron downward; if it be above, it draws the iron
upwards. Pitch our Loadstone in heaven, make Christ our Loadstone, and then our
hearts will up apace into heaven, as men's hearts go so fast downwards, because
their Loadstone is in the earth.

Thirdly, he must get an intrinsecall principle of grace into his heart, that
may bent of his spirit may be to heavenward, to be heaving and lifting upwards,
Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. By that phrase is
expressed the strange desires of a servant to his wages, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. Thou
shall give him his hire, for he sets his heart upon it, or he lifts up his
soul unto it. Look now how a servants heart is lifted up to his hire, how he
sets his heart upon it, how his mind runs upon it, so such a frame of Spirit
should a man get, that his heart should be lifting up it self to God, and
Christ, and heavenly things, that though a man may have some diversions, and
some occurrences that may put his heart off heaven for a time, yet those
diversions no sooner over but a man's heart should be upon heaven again, and
never well but when it is set that way. The needle of the compass being once
touched with the Loadstone, though by some violent shaking it may be carried to
this and to that point of the compass, yet if once that violence cease, it
ceases not till it turn to the North-point, and rest there. So if once a man
had his heart touched with Christ, though a man may have troubles, and
distractions by reason of secular employments, yet the heart would quickly be
upon heaven again, and not be at rest till it were pitched that way again. Get
therefore a sanctified frame of heart, and then thou will be thinking of
heaven, minding of heaven, talking of heaven, trading for heaven; yet that will
make thee use thine earthly calling with an heavenly mind, that what ever thine
employments be, yet thy mind shall be running on heaven, and so thy
conversation shall be in heaven. There is a great deal of difference between
heavenly thoughts that may be cast into a man's heart, and heavenly thoughts
that breed in, rise, and spring out of a man's heart. A man may have heavenly
thoughts cast in his heart, and yet not have his conversation in heaven. Many a
worldly man may have thoughts and mindings of heaven, thrown or cast into his
heart, God may cast such thoughts sometimes into his heart: and it may be a
good sermon may so far work upon him as to put some thoughts of heaven into
him, but all this while this is no conversation in heaven: these are but
thoughts in their hearts, but not thoughts of their hearts. But now when such
thoughts are thoughts of the heart, they are bred in the heart, and the heart
it self raises them and brings them forth, then in such thoughts a man has
his conversation in heaven. Now then only does the heart breed and raise such
thoughts of it self, when the frame of it is sanctified, when there is a
principle of grace in it. The fire that is come down from heaven burning in it
causes heavenly thoughts to ascend like pillars of smoke. Fire does not more
naturally cause smoke to arise, and ascend upwards toward heaven, then grace
in a sanctified heart causes the thoughts of it to make ascensions into heaven.
When a man has a sanctified frame of heart, what ever he is doing, what ever
his employments, what ever his discourses are, still he is minding heaven.
That look as it is with a man that has a worldly frame of heart, so soon as
he wakes in the morning, presently before his eyes be well open, he is thinking
of the world; when he eats and drinks, still the world is in his mind, when
he walks, rides upon the way, still his mind is upon his penny, upon his
profit; yea when he sleeps, he dreams of the world, and of his gain: let
him be at his prayers, yet in prayer his heart is upon his shop, his
customers, his market, his barnes, and his sackes; let him be at a sermon,
where he seems to sit very attentively, and yet then his heart goes after
covetousness, Eze. 33. 31. Let him come to the Lords Table, yet there the
world, and his heart cannot sunder. Now what is the reason that this man so
truly has his conversation in the world, has his thoughts thus continually
upon the world? Because he has a worldly frame of heart, and the frame of it
being earthly these earthly vapors breed out of it, and it is restlesly
raising these earthly muddy thoughts. So now in this case, if a man once have a
sanctified frame of heart that would thus breed heavenly thoughts, that what
ever he were about, yet his thoughts would be upon and in heaven. When he
awakes in the morning, he would awake as David did, Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake
I am still with thee: so soon as mine eyes are open, mine heart is in heaven
with thee; God and heaven are first in my thoughts so soon as I awake. David's
thoughts looked up to heaven and to God next his heart. When he sits at table to
eat and drink, he has some such thought as that Luke 14. 15. Blessed is he
that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. When he lies in his bed, and it
were time he were at his rest, He prays in his bed, Psalm. 6. 6. He meditates
of heaven in his bed, Psalm, 16. 7. he conferres in his bed, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. he
sings in his bed, Psalm. 149, 5. When he is in the works of his calling, in
the employments of the world, even when at the hottest, yet his heart has its
looks to heaven, he has an eye still to heaven, Psalm. 123. 1, 2. Unto thee I
lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the heavens, behold as the eyes of
servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto
the hands of her mistress, etc. I know the text has another sense, I do only
allude to it. Ye shall see Ladies Wayting-gentlewomen, and mayds, they wait on
their Ladies with their work in their hands, they are following their work,
but yet ever and anon they are casting their eyes to their Ladies, and still as
they are working, have an eye to them: so it is with a man that has a
sanctified gracious frame of heart, he is following his earthly and worldly
business, but yet ever and anon he is lifting up his eyes, and his heart to
God in the heavens, still his heart is looking that way, as Daniel in Babylon
opened his window, and looked toward Jerusalem. And as an earthly man in an
heavenly business of prayer, hearing, and receiving the Sacrament will have an
earthly, so he in an earthly business, in his shop, in his field, at his plow,
will have an heavenly heart, and so converses in heaven in the very heat and
midst of secular employments. Such a man as he rides by the way, as he
walks with company will have conference, and discourse that shall evidence an
heart in heaven. Yea an heart sanctified has such a bent toward heaven that
his heart is in heaven, in his very sleep that he often has sweet dreams of
heaven, and things belonging to heaven. Thus if a man get once such a
sanctified frame of heart, he shall be sure to have his conversation in heaven.

Secondly, this serves to condemn two sorts of persons, and convinces them to
be

First, It shoales out all profane, irreligious, Christians. We have a great
many that live like heathens, profane swearers, neglecters and contemners of
holiness, and all holy duties of obedience, drunkards, unclean persons, and
the like; and yet these would think themselves much wronged if a man should
call the truth of their Christianity in question Well then, put it upon this
trial, try them by a Christians conversation. He that is a Christian is of a
Christians conversation. He that is of a Christians conversation, has his
conversation in heaven. Now I appeal to such men's consciences whether their
conversation be in heaven or not, whether they live with such holiness, and
obedience for the kind of it, as the Saints in heaven do. Thou have a swearing,
an unclean, an adulterous conversation, a drunken conversation, thou have thy
conversation amongst Godless profane persons, thy conversation in Alehouses,
Whore-houses, and such like. Now I say, let such men's own consciences judge
whether such a conversation be a conversation in heaven. Surely such a
conversation is rather a conversation in hell. Cursing and blaspheming is the
course of the damned in hell. Thy conversation is as far from being in
heaven, as hell it self is from heaven. A Christians conversation is in
heaven, therefore they are no true Christians that have their conversation in
hell. What is living unholily, uncleanely, drunkenly, vitiously but living
hellishly? Therefore such men's own hearts must needs tell them that they are
as far from being true Christians, as they are from having a Christians
conversation.

Secondly, It shoales out all earthly mind earthly things, and he opposes a
conversation in heaven not only to a voluptuous conversation, but to the
minding of earthly things. So that a minder of earthly things is as far from
a conversation in heaven, as he that is a voluptuous belly-god. And mark that
he says of them both that their end is damnation. Not only whoring,
drunkenness, and gluttony, but minding of earthly things will also damn a
man's soul, and bring him to hell too, as well as they. So that minders of
earthly things are no better Christians then they. Outward formalities of
religion may stand well enough with earthly-mindednesse, and men may go to
hell with both. Well, but yet these will needs be true Christians, there is no
remedy; let them therefore be put to the trial. A true Christians conversation
is in heaven, if then they be true Christians, then is their conversation there
also. But where is their conversation? Are not their minds, affections, and
conversation wholly on the earth? What is it they mind? earthly things. What
is it their hearts are habitually taken up withal? earthly things. What is it
they continually speak and discourse of? earthly things. Come into their
company, and put the question to them that our Savior put to the two disciples
going to Emmaus, Luke 24. 17. What manner of communications are these that ye
have one with another as ye walk. Can they answer as they did, verse. 19.
Concerning Jesus of Nazareth. No, but concerning Sheep, and Oxen, bargains,
farms, prizes, of commodities, etc. Their breath like the breath of a dying
man smells earthly, John 3. 31. He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and
speaks of the earth. And he that speaks of the earth, and minds the earth,
he is of the earth, and he is in the earth, up to the hard ears in the
earth, and has his conversation altogether on the earth. That look as the
Apostle speaks of those false teachers, 1 John 4. 5. They are of the world,
therefore speak they of the world. So of these on the contrary. They speak
altogether of the world, they think altogether of the world, they altogether
mind the world, and therefore they are of the world, and they dwell on earth.
They are like moles always working in the earth, and underground. How are
these true Christians that are enemies to Christ's cross? There be many says
the Apostle in the 18 verse of this chapter, that are the enemies of the cross
of Christ. Certainly such are no true Christians. But who be they that be
such? verse. 19. Quamdiu terra es in terram ibis. Quamdiu lingis terram? Amando
terram lingis utique terram, and efficeris eius inimicus de quo dicit Psalm. and
inimici ejus lingent terram. Aug. sermon. de Temp. 141.
who mind earthly things. These men lick the dust, and therefore as Augustine
descants upon that text, Psalm. 72. 9. They are amongst the enemies of Christ.
To be sure, they are such as put themselves under the serpents curse, Genesis 3.
14. Because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, upon thy
belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat. They lick dust, and eat dust,
and lie and wallow in the dust, yea in the dirt of the earth, and yet these
will needs be true Christians. Is this to have ones conversation in heaven? He
that has his conversation on earth, has not his conversation in heaven; and
he that has not his conversation in heaven is no true Christian. This is one
sure evidence of a man that has his conversation on earth, that if he might be
at his choice he would be content to have his abode and habitation on earth
forever; yea and would give God a discharge forever, for laying any claim to
heaven, so God would but assure him of a perpetuity here. Too many there be of
the profane Cardinal of Burbons mind, who would not give his part in Paris
for his part in Paradise. It is with too many in this case, as it was with
those, 1 Chronicles 4 23. These were potters, and those that dwelt amongst plants,
and hedges. There they dwelt with the King for his work. The meaning of that
place is to show the baseness of some of the Jews that when liberty was
proclaimed for their return to Jerusalem where they might have enjoyed the
freedom of their own Country, and religion, yet because they got their
living with making pots for the King of Babylon, they thought themselves well
as they were, and they rather chose to stay under the hedges of Babylon, and to
live hedge-roagues there, then to go to Jerusalem where they might have lived
freemen, and have enjoyed the ordinances of Gods worship. The holy Ghost brands
them for base persons. And so it is with many, might they but abide here for
ever, with what they have, they had rather live here under the hedges of the
Babylon of this world, then be at the pains to go to the heavenly Jerusalem.
A sure sign where their conversation is, their conversation proclaims what
kind of Christians they be. Earthly minded Christians then, are no true
Christians, they have not their conversations in heaven.

But we have many good thoughts of

It is not to be denied but that worldly

First, their thoughts of heaven are but flitting thoughts, they come and go,
and Ier. 4. 14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee. They shall
have lodging, not only a bed for a night, but they can stay seven years
together with thee, and thou never think their company troublesome. But when
thoughts of heaven come into thine heart, there is hardly a bed, or a nights
lodging to be had for them, that is too too long, but it may be thou salutest
them, and then give them their pass, and so fare them well. Such thoughts
are no arguments of a conversation in heaven.

Secondly, It may be these thoughts of accidental, they come by chance, not
studied, purposed thoughts, but only such as chop in by the by. The thoughts
of heaven that a man has that has his conversation in heaven, are intended
thoughts, purposed and studied thoughts, he sets himself to think of heaven,
and the things of heaven.

Thirdly, It may be these be fruitless thoughts that leave no manner of
impression on the heart. It may be thou have some thoughts of heaven but the
way of these thoughts in thine heart are as the way of an eagle in the air, as
the way of a serpent upon a rock, as the way of a ship in the heart of the
Sea, Prove. 30. 18. What impression leaves an Eagle in the air? what impression
does a serpent leave upon an hard rock, or what impression does a ship leave
in the heart of the sea? Just such an impression as thoughts of heaven leave in
thine heart, that is just none at all. They leave not such a work behind them
as to make thee look ere the more after heaven, they leave no such work as to
make thee ere the less earthly, thou art as earthly and eager after the love
of the world, after these thoughts as ever thou wast before. It is not so with
such as have their conversation in heaven. Their thoughts and mindings of
heaven are such as leave strong impressions behind them, such as make them take
more pains for grace, for Christ then before. Therefore see how the Apostle
joins these two together Col. 3. 1, 2. The setting of the affections upon
things above, or the minding of things above, and the seeking of things above.
They then that mind things above, and have their thoughts upon things above as
they should have, they seek things that are above. Their mindings and
thinkings of heaven are such as work strong Impressions in them, as make them
industrious, laborious in the serious seeking of heavenly and spiritual
things. A thought of heaven that makes a man wish for heaven is a fruitless
vanishing thought, but a thought of heaven that will make a man work for
heaven is the thought of the man that has his conversation in heaven. Thy
thoughts at best set thee but a wishing, and not a working for heaven, and
therefore these thoughts prove not thy conversation to be in heaven.

This serves to answer the common

FINIS.

