A COVNTERPOISON AGAINST COVETOVSNES: In a Sermon preached at Pauls-Crosse, May
23. 1619.

By IER. DYKE Minister of Gods word at Epping in Essex.

PSALM. 119. 36. Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not unto
covetousness. August. in Psalm. 128. Auaritia opus est mali hominis, homo ipse
opus Dei. Et quid vult Deus? Occidere in te quod ipse fecisti, and saluare te
quem ipse fecit. ANCHORA SPEI printer's device of Robert Milborne

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to be sold at his shop at the
great South door of Paul's.

1619.

A COVNTERPOYSON AGAINST COVETOVSNES:
LVKE 12. 15. And he said unto them, Take heed and beware of covetousness.
NO better fared it sometimes with our Lord himself in his ministry, then it
now daily does with us his servants the ministers of the Gospel: and no better
with us then it did with the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33. 31. His auditors sat before
him as the Lords people, they heard his words, they would not do them, their
hearts ran after their covetousness. Such is the dunghilly disposition of many
hearers, that even then their hearts are most eagerly bent upon their earthly
intentions, when Gods ministers labor most of all to call them off, and to
raise them up to heavenly contemplations. It was just thus with an auditour of
our Saviors in this present chapter; whilst this blessed seeds-man, even the
Lord of the field himself was committing his seed to the earth, behold some
falls upon thornie ground. Whilst our Savior was laboring to prepare men
for an eternal, here was one whose heart ran after a temporal inheritance,
and amidst our Saviors heavenly, his thoughts are taken up with an earthly
business. Nay he cannot rest there neither; he does not only mind earthly
things, as they, Philip. 3, but this sore breaks out in his lips: for, verse
13. One of the company said, Master speak to my brother that he divide the
inheritance with me. This earthly minded man cannot be content with those,
Ezechiel 33. 31. to have his heart run, but that which is worse, his tongue
must run too; and that which is yet the sore of all, even then when our
Savior is employed in the dispensation of the word, even then is he thus bold
with a saucy importunity to trouble and interrupt our Lord in this sacred
service. How iump and just is this fellows faith and religion with thousands
of our times, who will uphold it for a truth, that a minister may do God better
service in taking up quarrels between neighbors, and composing differences
between parishioners, then with all his pains in preaching. This is right to
call Christ from dividing the word to the dividing of an inheritance. Oh
master, you might do well to cease this trouble to your self and this great
multitude, to make an end of your Sermon, and to come and end a difference
between me and my brother; you shall do a work of charity, and a neighbourly
good office between us, you may save a great deal that may otherwise be
idly spent in law. Ridiculous folly! As if so be the saving of the purse
were to be preferred, were to be regarded, before the saving of souls.

Well, but what is our Saviors answer? His answer is:

First particular, verse 14. He said unto him. Secondly more several, verse
15. He said unto the^.
1. His particular answer is a personal check to this man's importunity and
demand both: He said unto him, Man, who has made me a Judge and a diuider over
you? And so he answers not the fool according to his folly, refuses to
gratify him in this his unseasonable and unlawful request.

2. His several answer is to the whole multitude: And he said unto them, Take
heed and beware of covetousness, verse 15. And thus our Savior does answer
the fool according to his folly, and takes occasion by his folly to teach the
whole multitude wisdom. The root of this man's folly was covetousness: the
strong savor where of our Lord sented in this his unseasonable request. Christ
therefore lays the axe to the root of the tree, and smites at the maine
radical corruption of his heart. And so answers him not according to his
Desire, but according to his Need. Therein following Gods own rule, Ezech.
14. 4. that he that comes to the Prophet with a question, what ever his
question be, should be answered not according to his curiosities, but according
to his necessities; he must be answered according to his Idols, he must hear
roundly and plainly of that sin whereof he was chiefly guilty. Thus deals the
Lord here. And not only so, but of his poison makes triacle, and prescribes a
blessed preservative against that pestilence wherewith this man's heart was
infected. Such was his happy handinesse and dexterity, to make evil the rise
and hint of good, and to extract heavenly light out of the darkness of an
earthly heart.

And thus we see in brief how these words frame and fall in with the body of
the text.

The words themselves are a Caution against Covetousness. In the which we have
three things considerable.

1. The manner of the caution. Take heed and beware. 2. The object of it. Of
covetousness. 3. The persons warned to beware. And he said unto them.
1. The manner of this caution lies in the Duplication thereof. Take heed and
beware. Not take heed alone, nor beware alone, but both take heed, and
beware. Now what means this double fence? might not a single item have served
the turn? Certainly he that tells us that we must be accountant for every
idle word, would not himself be guilty thereof. Somewhat therefore there is in
it that the cautio^ is doubled; yea not only doubled, but in a manner trebled,
in as much as the second word seems to have a double weight above the first.
(...). The first word implying an ocular wariness, an eye watch; the second,
an hand watch, a kind of manual, if not a martial and presidiary guarding of
a man's self. Mark, 8. 15. Christ giving his disciples warning of the leaven of
the Pharisees, uses two words also, but yet the latter there seems to be of
no greater force then the former. It is but (...). But here not only the word,
but the weight is doubled, (...), Take heed and beware. As if he had said, to
paraphrase the text, not to mend the translation, Watch and ward, nay watch and
guard, and defend your selves from the sin of covetousness. Well. What may
all this mean now? It seems to argue these particulars.

1. A wondrous strong inclination in our corrupt natures to this sin. If our
affections were not violent and headstrong, a single reyne would have served to
have courbed and bridled us in. If we were not eagerly bent thereon, what
should need pikes and halbards to keep us off?

2. A wondrous great danger in the sin. If it were not a deep and a
dangerous bog, a slighter fence might have served, this double pale might have
been spared. Prou. 4. 14. 15, you have an whole heap of prohibitions against
the ways of wicked men: Enter not into the path of the wicked, go not in the
way of evil men; avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, pass away. What
means this frequent and vehement iteration, and inculcation of one and the
same thing? It serves to teach both our pronenesse unto, and the peril in
those ways. Just so it is here. Our Saviors vehemency in forewarning us,
argues the more then ordinary peril of this sin. This double caveat argues
more then a single danger therein.

3. A wondrous careful watch that we should keep over our own hearts, that
at no time they be ouercharged with the covetous cares of this life. Since our
inclination is so great, and the danger no less then it, our watch should be
proportionable to both, double and double. Some dangers are avoided by the bare
espiall, it is enough (...) to see them. But here not only eyes, but weapons
are required; here we must (...), not only have our eyes in our heads, but our
weapons in our hands. The danger of the sin and inclination of our hearts
thereto being so great, here it is true, that Abundans cautela non nocet. If
this which is double in precept, were quadruple in practice, it were all little
and little enough.

2. Point; the object of the caution. What it is whereof we must take heed and
beware: take heed and beware of covetousness. Covetousness is the sin then,
of which our Savior here forewarnes us. A sin, I make no question but has
often been witnessed against in this place. Give me leave also to add my
testimony, that so in the mouth of many witnesses, yea of a cloud of witnesses,
this truth may stand.

We have here then a watchword against covetousness: Take heed and beware of
covetousness. A sin indeed that ill beseemes, and in no wise will suite with
the profession of the name of Christ. Let every one that calls upon the name
of the Lord, and upon whom the name of the Lord is called, depart from
iniquity, 2. Tim. 2. 19. but especially from that iniquity which has cast
upon riches, otherwise Gods good blessings, the reproachful title of the riches
of iniquity, Luke 16.

Our conversation must be as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. But how may that
be done? Heb. 13. 5. ye have a comment to that text. Let your conversation be
without covetousness. When our conversation is without covetousness, then is
our conversation as becomes the Gospel.

Our conversation? nay our very communication must be free from it. Ephesians. 5.
3. Fornication and all uncleanness, and covetousness, let it not be once
named amongst you, as becomes Saints. It becomes Saints to walk as becomes the
Gospel; they then walk as becomes the Gospel, when both conversation and
communication are free from covetousness. So speaks Paul of covetousness as
David of idols, Psalm. 16. 4. I will not make mention of their names with my
lips. If the name, how much more should the thing be odious? Our conversation?
our communication? yea our very cogitations should be free from it. It is the
brand of those brute beasts that are made to be taken and destroyed, of cursed
children, 2. Pet. 2. 14: that they have their hearts, and so their thoughts
exercised to covetousness.

Take we a view of all the Saints and servants of God, whose memories, whose
graces, yea and whose sins are recorded in holy writ; see if you can find me
one of all that blessed company, that was ever blemished with this filth, that
was ever defiled with this mire. Indeed once Noah was overtaken with the love
of wine, never with the love of the world. Once Lot was twice incestuous, never
covetous. Once David was besotted with the flesh, never bewitched with the
world, but even in the top of the worlds happiness acknowledges himself a
stranger and a pilgrim, 1. Chron. 29. 15. Once Peter denied his master, but
yet it was not the love of the world (for he had denied that before he denied
his master, in forsaking all,) but the fear of the world that caused him to
slip into that sin. Zaecheus indeed before his conversion had been a covetous
pinching prolling publican; but no sooner does he take Christ by the hand, but
the first thing he does is to shake hands with his covetousness. Christ that
has bid us beware of it, will much more himself take heed and beware of
dwelling in that heart, where that sin dwells. If he whip not this money
merchant out of the temple of our heart, it will keep and bar out him for
taking any possession there.

Now what, think we, may be the reason that these forenamed Scripture-saints,
though they had their other both infirmities and gross sins, yet were still
free from this? Seems it not to advise thus much? That grace and religion may
better stand with once-acted adultery, incest, and drunkenness, then it can
with that habitual iniquity of covetousness? David's adultery, Noah's
drunkenness, Lots incest, these were actual sins but once acted, they were
no habitual evils in them. A man may fall into these sins, and yet not be an
habituated sinner. But a man cannot properly be covetous without an habitual
continued evil disposition of the soul. Now this is a sure rule, that grace
may stand with some actual though gross sin, being but once slipped into
(though but one actual sin does shrewdly wound and weaken grace:) but
whether grace and a good heart can stand with a continued habitual
wickedness, there is the question, if so be a question.

Hence happily therefore has it been, that diverse of the Saints of God when
they have been to justify their integrity, and make good their reputation,
have evermore been especially careful to free themselves from the imputation
of this sin, and have shaken off not this dust, but dirt and filth from off
their hands and feet. Thus Samuel in his apology, 1. Sam. 12. 3. So Jeremy,
Ier. 15. 10. Woe is me my mother, thou have borne me a contentious man that
strives with the whole earth; I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent
to me on usury, yet every one does curse me. Well he thought they might have
cursed him, had he been guilty of that cursed sin; but he shows the worlds
iniquity by his own honesty, and his own honesty in being free from the
fruits of that sin of covetousness. So Paul Acts 20. 33. I have coueted no
man's silver, nor gold, nor apparel. Now why purge these men rather from this
then from other sins? why purge they not from adultery, whoredom,
drunkenness? but specially, and in a manner from covetousness? Surely because
full well they knew, that of all other sins this is that which most staynes
and blemisheth good report and honest reputation, and stands in greatest
opposition to the life and truth of grace.

For where this sin gets head, it eats out the heart of grace, by eating
all grace out of the heart. While some have lusted after money they have erred
from the faith. 1. Tim. 6. 10. Nay they have not stayed there, but have fallen
from the faith. 2. Tim. 4. 10, Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this
present world. It so fares with earthly minds as with the earth in which are
the mines of silver and gold; of all earths they are observed to be the most
barren; and of all hearts such are the most fruitless, the most graceless.
Therefore in the parable the cares of this life are compared to thorns;
thorns choke the good seed. As well may a man look for an harvest in an
hedge, as for grace in a covetous heart. These covetous desires are the seven
ill-fauoured empty ears that eat up the full and good ears. These are the
caterpillars, and grasshoppers, the canker and palmer worms that consume the
green herb of grace in the field of the heart. The dampes of the earth do not
more quench fire, then the love of the earth dampes grace. And indeed no wonder
that this sin is such an enemy unto grace; for it is an enemy unto, and a
scorner of the means of grace, the preaching of the word. Ezekiel. 33. 31. They
sit before thee, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them. What was
the reason? Their heart runs after their covetousness. But that is not all,
behold yet a greater abomination then this. It teaches men not only to
disobey, but to despise, and mock at the word. Luke 16. 14. And the Pharisees
also who were covetous heard these things, namely our Saviors Sermon against
the service of Mammon, and what was the success? And they derided him.
Covetousness is a profane sin that seateth a man in the chair of
pestilence, in the scorners pew.

We find a prohibition, Pro. 23. 6. not to eat of a covetous man's bread. A
reason is secretly couched in that epithete there given him: Eat not the bread
of him that has an evil eye. He has an evil eye, which makes him wish a man
choakt, when he bids, much good may it do him. Such evil and counterfeit
welcome should make a man take little pleasure in table-friendship and
familiarity with him. But yet there is a greater reason then this, that should
make us shy of his converse, namely the fear of the defilement of his pitch.
Covetousness is a defiling sin, Mark 7. 21. 22. Thefts, covetousness,
these come from within, and defile the man. Yea it so defiles, as that in that
regard we should avoid over familiar converse with him. And upon this ground
does Paul forbid eating his bread; 1. Corint. 5. 11. If any man that is called
a brother be covetous, with such an one no not to eat.

The world would feign hold that doctrine of venial sins still; and though
Popery it self which first hatched that distinction, do rank this amongst
their mortal sins, yet would men have it but a venial triuiall offense. For
a man to be an adulterer, a fornicator, I hope the world is not grown to that
desperate pass yet; but I may add, to be a swearer, and a drunkard, these are
counted, and indeed they are heinous abominations. But for a man to be
covetous, this is slighted over as a matter of nothing. I he ordinary language
of the world is, He is a man somewhat with the hardest, a little with the
nearest, a little too much for the world, but yet a marvelous honest, a
wondrous good man. Now in good truth were it not ridiculous to say so of a
thief? of an adulterer? Why not then as ridiculous to say so of the covetous?
For as honest a man as the world makes him, yet God still ranks him amongst
the most heinous and transcendent transgressors. Besides those places, Mark 7.
21. 22, and Ephesians. 5. 3. 5, consider these two places, 1. Cor. 5. 11. 1. Cor.
6. 9. 10. In both which places ye shall find the covetous in the midst of the
throng crowded up on both sides with fornicators, idolaters, sodomites,
thieves, drunkards, reuilers, and extortioners. God would let us see by his
companions with whom he sorts him, what to think of his honesty. Nay yet to
help the matter, and to let you see the full honesty of this sin, note it,
and with horror note it you that are guilty, that the Apostle makes it a
Symptom, and sign of a reprobate sense. Twenty and two of them are there in
all, and this is set in the fourth place, Romans 1. 29. Wherefore God gave them
over to a reprobate mind. But how appeared it? Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness. Thus how light and
slight soever this sin be in the worlds esteem, yet behold how weighty and
ponderous it is in the balance and scales of the Sanctuary.

I doubt not but most men's judgments will subscribe to this truth, but
conscience is not so soon wrought to obedience, and the truth will sooner be
confessed then practiced; therefore to bring men to the practice of this
confessed truth, I will commend to your Christian considerations these three
particulars.

1. What covetousness is. 2. The Danger of it. 3. The Remedies against it.
1. What covetousness is. This is a point so much the rather to be enquired
after, because though a covetous man will acknowledge covetousness to be a
sin, yet by no means will he acknowledge himself to be covetous. So that a
man may say of the covetous man as Luther speaks of an hypocrite, that he is
tale monstrum quod est simpliciter impeceabile, a sinlesse kind of monster that
by no means will be borne down to be guilty. An adulterer, a drunkard, a
swearer, these sinners and sins are easily discovered, easily convinced,
these openly wear Satan's cognizance, these are palpable impieties. But this,
it is a sculking iniquity, it will needs be a virtuous vice, a gracious sin.
Paul has a phrase, 1. Thessal. 2. 5. (...), colored covetousness, or as our
new translators, the cloak of covetousness. It is a coloring, and a cloking
sin. It is a sin that wears the cloak and livery of thrift, providence,
good husbandry, honest care for a man's own, without which a man is worse then
an infidel. It is fit therefore that this false color and complexion be
washed off, and that this monster be vncloked and uncased, that his evil
favored, but natural lineaments, may appear.

There be two words then in Scripture which seem to express the full nature
of this sin.

1. This word in my text, (...). 2. That word of Paul, 1. Tim. 6. 10, (...).
Love of money.
1. Some define it by the first, to be a desire of having more. But yet with
their good leaves I desire to have somewhat more in the definition thereof; for
every desire of having more is not covetousness. A man may pray Agurs prayer
without covetousness. A man in a low and mean condition may desire of God
with condition to have his estate bettered, and yet not be covetous. Others
therefore add, and make it to be an inordinate desire of having more, by
unjust and unlawful means. But that is too favorable, for then should none
be covetous but unjust getters of goods. A man may be covetous, and yet get his
goods without fraud, oppression, and cosinage. Therefore not to trouble you
with many, me thinks that of Augustine hits the nail on the head above all
Auaritia est plus velle quam sat est. Aug. de lib. arb. l. 3. c. 17. Quid est
auaru^ esse? Progredi vltra quam sufficit.
others: Covetousness is the desire of more then enough. To desire beyond the
bounds of sufficiency, to seek for more then a man may pray for, Give us this
day our daily bread, to seek and labor for superfluities, this is
covetousness. A man, I take it, may be said to have enough, when he has such
a portion Tantum autem sat est quantum sibi exigit naturae in suo genere
conseruandae modus. August.
and sufficiency of these outward things, as that he has wherewith to live
plentifully, as also both to train up his liberally for the best employments,
and to leave his liberally according to their callings and conditions. I think
such a man may be said to have enough, and what is more is of sin. No sooner
does a man step over the hedge and pale of sufficiency, but he is presently
in the wide, wild, and boundless champian of covetousness.

2. The second word is (...), the love of money. And thus a man may be covetous
in the inordinate love of that which he has, though he go not beyond the
limits of sufficiency. There is a covetousness in scraping, that may be
(...), and there is a covetousness in holding, that may be (...). There is a
covetousness in rapacitie, that comes from a desire of more then enough. There
is a covetousness in tenacitie, that comes from an immoderate love of that we
have. (...) has a large paw to get and gather more then enough. (...) that is
like the man in the Gospel with the withered hand, whose sinews are so
shrunk up that he is not able to reach forth his hand to any work of piety
or pity. The first is more properly the rich man's covetousness; with the
second may a poor man be covetous. I am not so precise in my distinction, but
that these two may be confounded; for indeed the first cannot be without the
last, though it be possible the last may be without the first. So that lay both
these together, and we have the nature of this sin. It is an inordinate love
of, and a desire after these outward things beyond the bounds of sufficiency.
Now besides the inward, pestilent, and venomous nature thereof, there be
certain outward symptoms, in which as in so many plague-sores it breaks
forth and discouers it self. They among many others are these:

1. That Ioh. 3. 31. He that is of the earth, is of the earth, and he speaks
of the earth. His breath like a dying man's is ever of a strong earthy savor.
His language is, Psalm. 4. Who will show us any good? Corn and wine, sheep and
oxen, marketable and merchantable commodities are evermore the subject of his
discourse. It is ever market, and exchange time with him. Seldom or never with
the virtuous woman, Pro. 31. does he open his mouth with wisdom, neither is
the law of grace in his lips. That look as it is said of the righteous man,
Psalm. 37. 30. 31. The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his
tongue will talk of judgment, for the law of his God is in his heart; so may
it be said of the covetous, His mouth will speak of worldliness, and his
tongue will talk of earthlinesse, for the love of his god is in his heart.
There is earth at his heart, and his very breath smells of it. Their Egyptian
garlic which they have swallowed rises in their stomachs, and makes them to
belch, and to bring up a filthy stinking unsavory Nam si sacrificem summo
Ioui, Atque in manibus extateneam vt po^riciam: interea loci, Si lucri quid
detur, potius rem diuina^ deseram. Plaut. in Pseudol.
breath.

2. He keeps a court of Faculties in his conscience, he can give himself a
Dispensation to be free from any duty of Gods worship and service, if it be to
serve his own turn. He is none of your precise Sabbatarians. He scruples not
to lose Sermons, to travel to show and sell his wares as well on the Sabbath
as other days. It is no trouble to his conscience to bargain and barter upon
the Sabbath as familiarly as upon any other day. He esteems his country Church
every whit as great a conuenience as the City Exchange, where he may meet
many of his neighbors, and dispatch many businesses at once without a further
trouble of going to their several houses.

3. He is sometimes homo omnium artium, a man of many callings and professions,
he will have an iron in every fire, an hand in every business, and even
ouerloades himself with a multitude of employments. He will needs be a
temporal pluralist, will have as many farms as he has fingers, will be a
Minister and a Physician, a city merchant, and a country farmer; and so
pesters and clogs himself with a multitude of business, that he has but a
little time for sleep, and none at all for God, but what his covetousness to
save a tweluepenny mulct will afford him.

4. He is sometimes again a man nullius artis, a man of no calling. He gives
over his multitude of farms and employments, not out of conscience, but out of
a desire of greater ease and security. For conscience though it forbid
encombrance, yet it requires employment. But he flies from one extreme to
another, from many callings and employments to none at all, and betakes
himself to a course wherein he may live with less faith and greater security.
From hyring of farms he falls to letting of money, and so comes to be of the
number of those men, of whom if ten in an hundred chance to go to heaven, yet
an hundred to ten are sure to go to hell.

2. Thing the danger of covetousness. We have here a double caution against
this sin. As is the caution, so is the danger, double. Yea this double
caution implies the danger, if not the double danger. This sin therefore is
doubly dangerous.

1. In the sins it breeds. 2. In the punishments it brings.
1. For the sins it breeds. It is a mother iniquity that gives life to many
a foul sin. Ten Commandments has almighty God given us, and this is an
universal breach, and breaker of them all. Indeed there is no sin but it may
be said to break them all, for he that breaks one is guilty of the breach of
the whole Law, James 2. 10. because one sin does prepare and habitually
dispose the mind to any sin. But this does actually transgress them all.
Please you in brief to run them over, and see how.

1. Commandment, Thou shall have none other gods before me. But the covetous
Mammonist he has Non adoro, inquit. Quare? quia teipsum non inflectis, and
incuruas? multo magis adoras per facta, and res ipsas. Haec enim est mayor
adoratio, and vt discas vide in Deo. Quinam enim eum magis adorant, ijne qui
solum stant in precibus, an qui faciunt eius voluntatem? Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. hom.
18
other, and he serves other gods then the God of heaven, even gods of the
earth, gods of metal, idols of silver, and idols of gold. That as the Prophet
complains of the Jews, Ier. 2. 28. According to the number of thy cities are
thy gods o Judah, so may we complain of the covetous: According to the number
of his bags, nay of his pence, is the number of his idols. And therefore no
marvel that the Apostle, Colos. 3. 5. calls covetousness idolatry, and
Ephesians. 5. 5. the covetous an idolater. For though he sacrifice not beasts to
his idol, yet that which is worse, he sacrifices his soul and himself; and
though he fall not down upon his knees and pray not to his silver, yet as the
profane Atheist has said in his heart, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1: so the
covetous Mammonist says in his heart, This is my god; he says to his wedge,
Thou art my confidence, Job 31. 24. And howsoever his covetousness enjoin him
sorer and sharper labor, more dangerous and desperate adventures then ever God
requires in his service, yet is it willingly and cherefully obeyed, and
obedience is better then sacrifice, 1. Sam. 15. 22: yea it has both obedience
and sacrifice. Hab. 1. 16 They sacrifice unto their net. His golden idol has
the love, confidence, trust, affiance, and obedience of Et inter alia eius
nomina quod Pecuma vocaretur. Et Pecunia, inquiunt, vocatur eo quod eius sint
omnia. O magnam rationem diuini nomims? Sed nimirum hoc auaritia Ioui nomen
imposuit, vt quisquis amat pecuniam, non quemlibet Deum, sed ipsum regem omnium
sibi amare videatur. Qualis ergo ista theologia debet esse sapienti, vbi rex
deorum eius rei nomen accepit quam nemo sapiens concupiuit. August. de Ciuit.
Dei. l. 7. c. 12.
his heart; which are the things the first Commandment claims for Gods part.
The goddess Pecunia was one of the idols of old heathen Rome, and Money (as
Augustine reports) was one of the many names their Jupiter had. Every Mammonist
is a professor of this paganish religion: if at least it be not worse to give
unto money the worship of God, then unto God the name of money. The fond
Israelites made them an idol of the Egyptians jewels, and then dance about it,
(one calfe about another) and sacrifice unto it, and say, These be thy gods o
Israel. Such a calfe, such a sot is the covetous; when he has scraped together
the worlds jewels, he makes them his idols, and says in his heart, These be
thy gods, o my soul, to whom thou owe thy love, service and affectionate
obedience. And so makes himself a gross and notorious transgressor of this
first Law.

2. Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc. A
commandment that enioynes the purity of Gods outward worship, commands
maintenance, and forbideth the corruption thereof. But in this is he as foul
as in the former. This corruption of the heart has ever been that which has
vshered corruptions into Gods Church and worship. Therefore are these two
joined together. Esaias 2. 6. 7: Their land was full of silver and gold, and
there was none end of their treasures: Their land also was full of idols, they
worshipped the work of their own hands. It is no wonder that covetousness in
the breach of the first, should prepare and make way for the breach of the
second Commandment in gross idolatry. What made Demetrius run roaring and
rauing about the streets of Ephesus, and crying, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, but merely the love of his purse? Sirs, ye know that by this craft
we get our goods, and that craft brought in great gains unto the craftsmen It
was the great gain that made Diana so great, and made him make so great noise
for her. What brought in the device of the hook with the three teeth, 1. Sam.
2. 13. but this hooking and catching sin of covetousness?

What made the Temple in our Savior time a den of thieves? Even that sin
that made the Priests thieves, the same sin that made Judas a thief. It was
the covetousness of the Priests that admitted the money changers and the oxen
into the Temple. They cared not with what corruption they filled Gods house, so
that they might thereby fill their own houses and purses. But this is most
clear in the Romish Synagogue, which has hewne out the principal pillars of
her superstition out of this rock of covetousness. Purgatory, Jubilees,
Indulgences, all these came out of Judas his bag, all coffer and kitchen
doctrines. The doctrine of the Church treasure in the merits of supererogating
Saints, a mere device to bring treasure into their Church. Masses for the
dead, an invention to bring in masses of wealth to the living. Praying for the
dead a very trick to prey upon the living. And what turned the keys of the
Church into picklockes, or picke-purses rather, but their abominable
covetousness? Eggs of the same cockatrice, brats of the same hag, are steeple
and temple brokerage, absolution for solutions, impropriations, tenpound
reading stipendaries that have less learning then they have living,
sacrilegious detention, and fraudulent purloyning of the Church salary.
Covetousness brought in, and covetousness holds in these plague-sores and
botches of the Church.

It was not for nothing therefore that when the devil would have wrought our
Savior to idolatry, that he first of all labored to poison him with
covetousness, thinking to make covetousness his shooinghorne to idolatry. He
takes him up into an high mountain, from thence shows him all the kingdoms
of the world with the glory of them, and all these will he give him if he will
fall down and worship him. The devil knows it is easy to draw on an heart
corrupted with covetousness, to the most corrupt worship that may be. And though
the devil sped not with our Savior, yet with Demas he did, who, if Dorotheus
be Doroth. de vitis, etc.
of any credit, turned from the faith of Christ to be an Idol Priest of
Thessalonica. A foul, a fearful fall. But whence might he take it? Paul tells
us, 2. Tim. 4. 10. Demas has forsaken me, and has embraced this present
world. How easy is it to make him the devils Priest, that is once Mammons
Chaplain? What religion or false worship will not that man embrace, that has
once embraced this world? The world is like the whores of Midian, with whom no
sooner an Israelite can be familiar, but he shall be entised to the sacrifices
of the dead, to the sacrifices of Baal-Peor. To marry the daughter of a
strange god is a gross transgression of this Law. And yet how many stick not
to wed to the Canaanites, and so get not thorns in their sides, but in their
consciences, and all because their hearts are first wedded to the world?

3 Commandment, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
Alas, the covetous man thinks this a very vain Commandment. Now fie upon
such preciseness. What! may not a man for his advantage, to put off his
commodity, help him self now and then with an oath? He thinks this
needless scupulositie. Nay and yet behold a worse abomination then this. Paul
calls covetousness, colored covetousness, or the cloak of covetousness,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. Now though in the former Commandment it sticks not for gain
to corrupt religion, yet here for advantage it will paint with religion, and
put on a religious cloak or habit. Thus did the covetous Pharisees profane
Gods holy name, while they devoured widows houses under the color of long
prayer, Math. 23. 14. There was covetousness colored with religion. Certainly
Gods holy name is not more abused by profane covetousness, when it must be
made a broker to help off base commodities, then it is by seeming-religious
covetousness, when men use religion for a silver hook, and profess it as the
Shecemites received circumcision, Genesis 34. 23. Shall not their flocks, and
their substance, and all their cattle be ours? So, shall not their custom and
their countenance be ours? Only let us make a show of their religion, for this
is a maine principle in a covetous man's Catechism, that gain is godliness,
1. Tim. 6. 5. and therefore cares not to make a show of godliness to bring in
gain: that so in a profane sense he may say with himself, Godliness
(pretended) is great gain. But such with the Pharisees shall receive the
greater damnation.

4. Commandment, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day. The covetous man is
of Pharaohs religion. He thinks religion makes men idle. The people are idle,
therefore they cry, Let us go sacrifice, says Pharaoh, Exodus 5. The covetous
man thinks the rest of the Sabbath to be but idleness. It is a day lost in a
week, seven weeks and an half in a year. Oh how it grudges the wretch to
spare God so much time! Therefore they cry, Amos 8. 5. When will the Sabbath
be gone that we may sell corn? Nay he has not the patience now to stay so
long. He cries not now, When will the Sabbath, but when will the Sermon be
done? Covetousness was modest in Amos his days, it would then stay marketting
till the Sabbath were done. It is now grown more profligate and impudent, and
dares impropriate as Gods tenthes in the second, so Gods seauenths in the
fourth Commandment. What makes many keep their Sabboths in their saddles, and
not so much as to keep Sabbatum asinorum in the bare rest from labor, but
their covetousness? What is the reason that many Lawyers chambers are in
Sabbath afternoones better filled with Clients, then many country Churches are
with people, but covetousness? This, this is that sin that turns Gods
Sabboths into Sabbatum Tyri, the Sabbath of Tyrus, Nehe. 13. 16. that brought
fish and all wares, and sold on the Sabbath. Jerusalem was troubled with
fish-merchants on the Sabbath. And many towns and cities in this kingdom are
troubled with flesh-merchants, wine-merchants, ale and beere-merchants, cup and
tap-merchants; and what breeds these trouble-townes but covetousness? He
that is greedy of gain troubles not only his own house, but a whole town,
a whole city. And was it better in this your honorable City till your worthy
Nehemiahs opposed these Tyrian Sabbatarians, and set themselves religiously and
zealously to the suppression of Mammons solemn service in the public
shambles, and private temples of Bacchus? Now honored be their memories that
first begun that good work, and no less theirs that do and shall continue it.
What greater honor can this renowned See, and famous City have, then in their
joint care and zeal to preserve Gods holy Sabboths from those foul
profanations which covetousness and the love of filthy lucre has invented?
Those Jews, Amos 8. cried, When will the Sabbath be gone that we may sell?
there was some kind of honesty yet in their covetousness. But there is a
brood now that cry, When will the Sabbath come, that we may sell ale, beer,
and tippling commodities? They long for the Sabbath, not that they might enjoy
God in the public assemblies of his Saints, but that the sons of Belial may
have their assemblies, and guzzeling Randevous in their houses and cellars. Now
compare the sin of Amos his times with the sin of ours, and it is but light
in comparison of ours. They broke the Sabbath but in thought and desire, in
word at most; but our men grossly profane it by making it both Sabbatum Tyri,
and Sabbatum Bacchi at once, a marketting and a iunketting, a selling and a
swilling day both. And yet as light as their sin was, see what an heavy
threatening is denounced against them, Am. 8. 8. Shall not the land tremble for
this, and every one mourn that dwells therein? And shall the land tremble for
the lighter, and not much more for the heavier sin? How great cause have we
to beg of God to give all such whom it concerns (whether governors of the
Church, or commonwealth) zeal and resolution to maintain Gods honor in this
point? that in stead of trembling and mourning there may be joy and rejoicing
to all good hearts in the flourishing of Gods ordinances. Let me add one thing
that may add encourageme^t to this work. Nehemiah after the report of his care
for the Sabboths reformation, prays on this manner, verse 22. Remember me o
God concerning this. Lay Nehemiahs Memento to Gods Memento, lay Gods
commandment and Nehemiahs prayer together: Remember thou keep holy the
Sabbath, says God; Nehemiah remembers it, and then prays, Remember me o God.
They with comfort and confidence may pray to God to Remember them, who with
courage and conscience Remember him and his Sabboths. But if we forget his
Sabboths, then God has sworn by the excellency of Iaacob, Surely he will
never forget any of these works, Amos 8. 7.

5. Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother. That which Moses speaks
of Leui in a good sense, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. He said to his father and mother, I have
not seen him, may be said of him in an ill sense: He has an evil, a blind
eye, that will not see, and a deaf ear that will not hear, when parents
necessities crave relief and succor. He thinks it no transgression to rob
father and mother, Pro. 28. 24. Nay, he thinks it no transgression to sterue
father and mother. It was the Pharisees divinity, Matthew. 15. 4. 5. 6. It was no
matter how empty the parents bellies were, so their Corban were filled. As if
so be the smell and smoke of the sacrifice were sufficient to fat them. This
sin was before noted to be a sign of a reprobate sense, Romans 1. 29. and well
it may, for verse 30. another sign is, Without natural affection. Even this
sin stupifies the bowels of nature, and makes men deny that debt which God,
and even corrupt nature does call for. This is that sin that made the heathen
long since complain of those ungracious births that Filius ante diem patrios
inquirit in annos. Ovid.
thought their lives too long from whom they had their lives. Oh, says good
Abraham, that Ismael might live in thy sight. But many a covetous Ismael
speaks like a profane Esau, Oh that the days of my fathers mourning were
come; not that he would mourn, but only as heirs use to do whose tears we
Haeredis lachrymae.
know are grown prouerbiall.

6. Commandment, Thou shall not kill. But covetousness is a cut-throate, a
bloud-sucking horseleech. To that height often grows the thirst after gold,
that it makes men thirst after blood. One of the Prophets calls Babel,
gold-thirstie Babel. And all that know Babel, know her to have been no less
blood-thirstie then gold-thirsty. Yea she is taxed for both, Hab. 2. 8. 9. This
Solomon notes, Pro. 1. 11. 12. 13. Come with us, we will lay wait for blood,
and lie privily for the innocent without a cause, we will swallow them up alive
like a grave, even whole as those that go down into the pit; we shall find
all precious riches and fill our houses with spoil. And verse 19. Such are the
ways of every one that is greedy of gain, he would take away the life of the
owners thereof. Therefore, Ezekiel. 22. 13. Covetousness and blood are joined
together. Ahab will have Naboths vineyard, or he will have his blood. Judas was
both covetous and a murderer, and therefore a murderer because covetous. He
sold not his master so much out of an hatred of him, as originally out of the
love of the thirty pieces. Covetousness is a bloody sin, and if the hands
be not defiled with blood, it is the law and not conscience that keeps them
clean.

7. Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery. What licenseth the public
stews at Rome, and those styes of Curtezans but the Popes Corban, and the huge
reuenew of crowns they bring to the Popes purse? It is the inordinate desire
after gain that foundeth that bestiall abomination of brothelry. It is not so
much the lust of the flesh, as the lust of the eyes, that causes such to be
given over to that brutishness. How many violate their matrimonial faith and
chastity, and the covenant of their God, allured more with the adulterers
purse, then with his person? How many a chaste Danae admits an adulterous
Jupiter descending in a golden shower? How many unchaste persons force
themselves to a single life merely to avoid the charges of married condition,
and lie frying in the flames of their own scorching concupiscence, and so do
offer up themselves unto Moloch, in the fire of their burning lusts?

8. Commandment, Thou shall not steal. But as the world has stolen his heart
from God, so sticks he not to steal from men. This Commandment makes him an
arrant thief. Judas is called a thief, Ioh. 12 6. and why a thief, but
because he was covetous? Therefore our Savior (Mark. 7. 22.) ioynes thefts and
covetousness; and Paul, 1. Cor. 6. 10. ioynes thieves and covetous persons
together, as near and neighboring sinners. False dealing, it is a breach of
this commandment, it is a fruit of this sin. Ier. 6. 13. Every one is given
to covetousness: they all deal falsely. Oppression, it is a breach of this
commandment, it is a fruit of this sin. Prou. 28. 16. A Prince destitute of
understanding is a great oppressor, but he that hates covetousness shall
prolong his days. See how oppression and the hatred of covetousness are
opposed.

We have here a whole crowd of abominations all forbidden in this law, as
defrauding, ouerreaching, cosining one another in mutual commerce, in buying
and selling, extortion, enclosures, depopulations, sacrilege, impropriations,
detention of the laborers wages, engrossers, corne-hoorders, those Mercatores
humanarum calamitatum, together with that foule-fangd sin of usury, that indeed
now bites no longer, but is turned Evening wolf, that swalloweth the bones,
and leaves not till the morrow. And whence, think ye, come these litters of
snakes and vipers? Lo, this is the dunghill in which they breed: A covetous
heart is the womb that conceiues them, the mother that gives breath and being
to them all.

9. Commandment, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
But as in the former he scrupled not at false dealing, so neither in this
sticks he at false accusing. Therefore Luke 3. John ioynes these two together,
Accuse no man falsely, and be content with your wages. Not to be content, is a
fruit of covetousness; and he that is couetously inclined, will not stick,
in hope of gain, to strain so far as a false accusation comes to.
Flatterers they sin against this commandment, and covetousness teaches men
to flatter. Jude 16. Whose mouths speak proud things, having men's persons in
admiration for advantage. Covetousness makes men flatter in hope of gain, as
dogs fawn for crusts. Knights of the Post with their hackney consciences, what
breeds those hellish monsters but this monster of covetousness? What makes
many Lawyers make so little conscience of pleading for a naughty, or against a
good cause, manifest transgressions of this law, but because they see their
Clients come to them, as Balaks messengers to Balaam, with the reward of
divination in their hands? The deceit of Balaams wages makes them they care not
to what Balak they do retain.

10. Commandment, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. What may a
man have that he couets not? Were his hands as nimble as his thoughts, he must
live like another Adam in the world by himself, no man near him, no man with
him. He has a chymicall heart of his own. In his wishes he turns all into
gold. He wishes the whole earth had been mines and Indies. He cannot look
upon heaven, Non aspicit coelum tanquam coelum, sed omnia putat esse pecunias.
Chrysostom. ad 1. Cor. hom. 9.
which yet one would think might put him by his earthly thoughts, but with a
wish it were gold too. He is just like the Cardinals of Pope Benedict the 12.
who being thereunto moved, refused to make more Cardinals, unless he could
withal make another world; for this was scarce sufficient (said he) for his
Cardinals in present being. He could find in his heart with Alexander to weep
heartily that there are not, and that he enioyes not more worlds.

But especially if we take the affirmative of this commandment as some, to be
Contentment with a man's condition, then is there no man a more direct
transgressor then is the covetous, who out of a disco^tent with his own estate
as not sufficient, enlarges his desires as hell, to covet his neighbors
house, ox, ass, servant, substance, goods, lands, or whatsoever else is his.

Thus we see the first part of this danger, and have found the covetous a
transgressor of every of Gods laws. Go now, go silly souls, and fondly bless
your selves, and think your case good because you are free from the black
crimes and foul sins of the world, and that you have no other sin, you
hope, but only you are a little covetous. None other? Thou need not, that
art guilty of it. This is a seminary of all sins, this breaks all Gods laws*
There is no villainy, no impiety, no iniquity to which this may not dispose
thine heart and hand. It is easy to make a covetous man an Atheist, a Papist,
a periurer, a profaner of Gods Sabboths, an iron-boweld wretch, a murderer, an
adulterer, a thief, a false witness, or whatsoever else the devil will.

2. The second danger follows, and that is in the punishments which it brings.

Heavy and woeful are those judgments which Gods threatens against this
sin. Woe unto them that join house unto house, Isa. 5. 8. We unto him that
increases that which is not his, Hab. 2. 6. Woe unto him that couets an evil
covetousness unto his house, Hab. 2. 9. See how God thunders out woes thick
and threefold against this sin. Indeed the covetous blesses himself, Psalm.
10. 3. but in the same Psalm and verse, the Lord abhorres him. Yea he so
abhorres him, that he even smites his hands at him, Ezekiel. 22. 13. I have
smitten mine hands at thy dishonest gain. Yea he so abhorres him, that he not
only smites his hands at him, but smites at him with his hands, Isa. 57. 17.
For his wicked covetousness I am angry with him, and have smitten him. But see
we a little in particular what those punishments are wherewith God smites him.

1. God often smites him in his body. That hunger, and hardship, and
restlesnesse wherewith he wearies and wears out his poor carcass, is but a
whip of his own making, but God also lashes and scourges him with his
scorpions: Job 20. 20. Surely he shall find no quietness in his belly. What
got Gehezi by his rich booty? The plague of leprosy upon his body, 2. Kin.
5. 27. What got Achan by his great prize? A great heap of stones upon his
body, Josh. 7. 26. So Balaam got a sword in his bowels, and Judas an halter
about his neck, the gains of many a corne-hoorder, and the just end of many a
wretched oppressor. And what got Ananias and Sapphira by their project, but a
miserable and sudden end? He that hates covetousness, shall prolong his days,
Prou. 28. 16. but these had their days shortened for this sin. Many a fair
day might they have lived, if they had kept themselves free from this foul
sin. Now let Judas while he swings in his halter, boast of his thirty
pieces. Now let Balaam boast of his wages. The reward of divination was sweet
in his eye, but let him tell us how sweet is the Israelites sword in his
bowels. Now Gehezi go bless thy self with thy talent of silver, and thy two
changes of raiment, but yet tell us whether is better the body or raiment? So
just it is, that he that will covet Naamans silver, Naamans raiment, should be
clothed, should be plagued with Naamans leprosy.

2. God smites him in his goods. And that which is his god, his heaven, his
happiness, God makes a curse, a cross, a plague unto him. God plagues him in
his goods, either in denying him the use, or in depriving him of the possession
of them.

1. In denying him the use of them, Eccles. 6. 2. God gives him not power to
eat thereof. All the use he has of his riches, is but to behold them with his
eyes, Eccl. 5. 10. The plague of the Prince of Samaria is upon him, who saw
great plenty and abundance, but might not taste of it. All the good he has of
his riches, is but for his eye. His back and his belly are often in his greatest
abundance pinched and pined; and that pleasure which his eye has, is but a
miserable pleasure too; for the eye is not satisfied with silver, Eccles. 4. 8.
They are but Homines ad metalla damnati, no better then the miserable Indians,
worn out in the mines under Spanish tyranny. Their drink increases Et mayor
acquisitio fit ei mayor accessio paupertatis. Na^ quo plura accesserit, eo
plura concupiscit. Quo ergo plura contupiscit, eo magis fit pauper. Qui enim
plura concupiscit pauperior est. Quum ergo centum talenta habeat non est valde
mendicus, mill enim cupit. Quum aute^ mill acceperit tum magis fit pauper.
Non amplius mill vt prius, sed december millium se dicit egere. vide plura Chrysostom.
ad 1. Cor. hom. 14. (...). Chrysostom. ad 1. Cor. hom. 15 Etiam si cellae
penatiae impofueris clauem, si ostium, si vectem, frustra facis omnia qui
auaritiam pessimum latronem intus incluseris, and qui potest omnia expor^are.
Id, ibid.
their thirst, their riches their poverty, their abundance their want. Job 20.
22. In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits, even in straits
of want in the midst of his fullness. And herein is the covetous the most
miserable of sinners. For other sinners yet, though they lose the pleasures of
the life to come, yet do they enjoy some kind of pleasure in this life: but the
covetous, as God will deprive him of the future, so he depriues himself of the
present world, and so enioyes neither.

2. But it may be, the fool thinks this no misery; God therefore depriues him
of the possession, and strips him clean of all his goods. God has a worm to
smite their gourds, he has vermin to consume their Manna gathered and hoorded
up against his commandment. This sin leaves a man's whole substance with Gods
curse, which shall make his bags like his desires, bottomless, and so shall
all run out. Job 20. 20. 21. He shall not save of that which he desired, there
shall none of his meat be left, therefore shall no man look for his goods.
The covetous man has many a one that gapes after his goods, but God often
deceiues and disappoints them all; his goods are often gone before himself. He
has swallowed down riches, he shall vomit them up again, God shall cast
them out of his belly, Job 20. 15. Greedy gourmandizing trenchermen, that
swallow their meat down whole, and as never knowing when they have enough, do
still lay in and lay on, do so oppress their stomachs, that nature is feign
to seek its own ease by vomiting. When men will be rich, and cannot wait
Gods leisurely distribution, and never know when they have enough, but with
Behemoth think to draw up all Jordan into their jaws; they do so oppress
themselves, that God gives their estate a vomit, and causes these greedy guts
to regurgitate those morsels so rauenously devoured. Excellent is that place,
Ier. 17. 11. He shall leave his riches in the midst of his days. It is an
hell to him to leave his riches in the end of his days, but God will bring him
early to his hell, He shall leave them in the midst of his days. But what
shall become of him then in the end of his days? The words following tell us,
And at his end he shall be a fool. God will make him a poor man, and a fool
both. He shall lose both his wealth and his wits; for whose wits would not
crack to lose his god? God is just, and therefore makes them a prey unto
others who have preyed upon others. See Hab. 2. 6. 7. 8. Woe unto him that
increases that which is not his: how long? and to him that loadeth himself
with thick clay. Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee? and
awake that shall vex thee? and thou shall be their prey. Because thou have
spoiled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee. God will
spoil these spoylers, and he which has been praedo minoris, shall himself be
praeda maioris, as Augustine speaks. In Psalm. 38.


3. God smites him in his posterity and children. He cares not to deprive
himself of an inheritance in heaven, and all to leave his children an
inheritance on earth. What makes him lay about him? what makes him thus take
on? He is desirous to raise his house, to make his children gentlemen, men of
place and regard. But alas he deceives himself, and the issue befooleth him.
As the father was a rich beggar, so the children prove poor gentlemen.
Covetousness raises not, but ruins houses, Hab. 2. 9. 10. Woe unto him that
couets an evil covetousness to his house. For he that is greedy of gain
raises not, but troubles his house. He coueteth an evil covetousness to his
house, that is, by his covetousness he brings evil upon his house. But what
evil? verse 10. Thou have consulted shame to thine own house; not honor, not
greatness, but shame, even the shame of beggary, and the shame of ruin, and a
dishonorable downfall. Covetousness leaves the children heirs of a curse as
well as of goods, for his goods are an execrable thing, accursed goods. The
leprosy of Naaman claue not only to Gehezi, but to him and to his seed for
ever, 2. King. 3. 27. What got Gehezies seed and posterity by their fathers
covetousness? What other hereditaments they got I wot not, sure I am they got
a filthy hereditary leprosy. For Gehezies covetousness is his seed plagued
with leprosy. For many a covetous fathers sin is his posterity plagued with
beggary. He has not power to eat of his own goods, Eccl. 6. 2. I but the
more he spares, the more his child heirs. So would one think indeed, but yet
it proves otherwise; for not his child, but a stranger eats thereof. I but
what becomes of his children then? Either taken away with fish-hookes, Amos 4.
2. a fit plague for the fathers sin; or else, Job 20. 10. His children shall
flatter the poor. See what his gentlemen come to. To that miserable base
beggary shall they come, that they shall be glad to flatter a mean man for an
alms, and faune upon a poor man for a crust. How ordinarily is prodigality
heir to covetousness? and the prodigal heir scattering that in a few days
that the covetous father was gathering many years, how quickly is he brought
to the trough? how soon brought to flatter and faune for husks and hogs
meat? Oh consider this you that color this iniquity with the complexion Noli
parcere thesauris caducis, thesauris vanis. Noli sub imagine pietatis augere
pecunia^. Filijs inquis meis seruo. Palliare se volunt, and dealbare vt quasi
propter filios videantur seruare homines quod propter auaritiam servant.
August. de dec. Chord. c. 12. Filijs meis seruo. Haec est vox pietatis,
excusatio iniquitatis. Id. in Psalm. 38. Habeo filios quibus laborem. No^ est
hoc filios amare sed porius necare. Nolo te talem patrem sentiant filij tui,
nolo sic prouideas. Id. hom. 48.
of honest care for your children, I entreat you as Job did his wife, Job 19.
17. even for the childrens sake of your own bodies to take heed and beware of
covetousness. As you fear the leprosy of Gods curse, and the canker of his
vengeance upon your children, so take heed of leaving them heirs of such
goods as covetousness has scraped together. Leave them heirs of such goods
as withal they may be heirs of Gods blessing. Take heed of transmitting over
to them such a cankred inheritance as may disinherit them of all. Were it not
that covetousness makes men without natural affection, I should hope this
argument might prevail.

4. But yet the worst danger of all is yet behind. If God in his patience do
forbear in these, yet in the fourth place without fail will God plague him in
his soul. It is a soule-plaguing sin, not only in regard of the inward
tortures and cares wherewithal his soul is so distracted, that the abundance
of the rich will not suffer him to sleep, Eccl. 5. 12: Nor yet in regard of
the continual torment his insatiable desires put him to, whereby he is like a
man sick of the dogged appetite, ever in hunger and thirst without
satisfaction; and his vexation little easier then the rich gluttons in hell;
who was ever in a burning desire after that drop of water which should never be
granted him. Not only in these, but in a far worse respect is it a
soule-plaguing sin, in that it excludes the soul from God and heaven. Hab.
2. 10. Thou have sinned against thine own soul. Wherein? In disinheriting it
of heaven. Ephesians. 5. 5. The covetous man has no inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ, and of God. He that is thus greedy of inheritance on earth, yet loses
all Vis esse haeres terrae, sed non habes in coelo haereditatem. Studium ponis
vt alijs relinquas haereditatem, teipsum autem priues? Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. hom.
18.
inheritance in heaven. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. Know ye not that the unrighteous
shall not inherit the kingdom? Be not deceived; neither thieves, nor covetous
shall inherit the kingdom of God. Indeed the covetous blesses himself, Psalm.
10. 3. and with no less then the hopes of heaven, but he is deceived. For what
is the hope of the hypocrite though he has gained, when God takes away his
soul? Job 27. 8. How should this awaken men to take heed and beware? What
though thou gain the whole world by thy covetous courses, yet what shall it
advantage thee to gain the whole world, and to lose thine own soul? He that
purchases the whole world with the price and loss of his soul, will find but
a biting and a smarting bargain of it. He must needs be a loser by the
bargain, for he loses God, heaven, happiness, his soul and himself. Among
all thy gains thou art sure to have hell into the bargain. What ever thou
gainest, Satan will be sure to gain thy foul.

Now then, o thou covetous man, be pleased a little to look over these Items,
and sum up thy gains. Auarus semper in rationibus: A covetous man is much in
his counting house. Among other thine accounts be so good as to look over
this. Inprimis by thine oppression, fraudulent and false dealing, thou have
gotten so many pounds. Item by thine usury and extortion so many hundreds. Item
by thy bribery so many thousands. Well, what is the whole sum? The total
sum is, the curse of God upon thy body, the curse of God upon thy goods, the
curse of God upon thy children, the curse of Gods eternal vengeance upon thy
soul. Now in good sooth, and are not these goodly gains? would they not set
any man's teeth on watering? Yea but it may be these are but idle scarcrowes,
the figments of Preachers idle brains. No, no. God has sworn twice in one
prophecy, Amos 4. 2. Amos 8. 7. to make them good. God can no more be forsworn
then he can cease to be God. If he do forbear the infliction of the temporal
plagues, yet shall it be abundantly recompensed in the heavy weight of eternal
torment.

And thus have we seen the double danger of this sin, which may both serve
to verify the Apostles saying, 1. Tim. 6. 10. That the desire of money is the
root of all evil, of all evil both of sin and punishment; as also to
terrify our dead hearts, and make them awake to take heed and beware of
covetousness.

The third thing follows. The remedies and preservatives. What are we the
better to know our disease remedies therefore are these.

1. That which we find, 1. Ioh. 5. 4. This is the victory that ouercometh the
world, even our faith. Faith ouercometh not only the fear of the world in
threatening, but the love of the world in entising. The root of this root of
all evil is commonly diffidence and distrust in Gods all-sufficient
providence. This makes men so greedily and eagerly provide for themselves,
because distrustfully they imagine that they are left to the wide world, as
shiftlesse and fatherless children. So much implies our Saviors speech,
verse 28. of this Chapter: How much more will he cloth you o ye of little
faith? Our great cares come from our little faith. Greater faith would lessen
our cares. This remedy Paul teaches Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 11. O man of God
fly these things, namely those foolish and noisome lusts which drown men in
destruction and perdition rising from the love of money. But how may we fly
them? Follow after righteousness, godliness, faith. The soul in which this
grace has residence, shall find it an heavenly amulet or plague-cake to defend
it from the poison of this sin. For faith not only purifies the heart, and
so purges out this dross, but it also satisfies the heart, by making God its
portion whereby the infinite desire of the soul is filled, which nothing can
satisfy but the fruition of the infinite God. He alone that fills heaven and
earth and all things therein, he alone can fill the boundless desires of the
soul. Only faith makes him ours. And the soul having made God hers by
faith, she ceasseth to seek satisfaction from the temporal, and finite
creatures. Faith is a chymicall grace. As covetousness is an earthly Alchymist
that turns gold into God, so is faith a divine Chymicke that turns God into
gold, silver, and whateuer the heart wants and desires, Job 22. 23. Eritque
omnipotens lectissimum aurum tuum, and argentum viresque tibi. Sic Iun.
24. 25. If thou return to the Almighty, then shall thou lay up gold as dust,
and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks, yea the Almighty shall be
thy choice gold and silver, and strength unto thee. Would we have our fill of
gold and silver, so as we would have our thirst quenched? Let us make God our
portion by faith. He that by faith has made God his gold, shall never through
covetousness made gold his god. Temporal things can no more fill the heart,
then spiritual things a chest. The world can no more fill the heart, Mundus
circularis est, cor quadratum; circulus quadraturam implere non potest.
then a circle can a square. God alone is he that can satisfy the soul, on
whom the soul having laid hold, it then holds it self well apaid, and then,
and never till then sings with David, Psalm. 16. 5. 6. The Lord is the portion
of mine inheritance. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea I have
a goodly heritage.

2. Sobriety and temperance, sober affections in the use of these earthly
things. For though covetousness and prodigality be two extremes, yet oftentimes
covetousness is but subordinate to prodigality; and men's prodigal and
intemperate courses, makes them couetously scrape that together which may be
serviceable to their lusts. Many have brave, or base minds rather, they must
flaunt, and cut it out in apparel, furniture, household, attendance. Pride must
have this thing, and delicacie must have that; pleasure calls for this, and lust
for that. Which inordinacies of theirs being costlier then their own estates
can bear, then covetousness instructs them to lay the burden upon others.
These intemperate affections crying like horse-leeches Give, give, they teach
covetousness to cry Take, take; and so by injustice, exaction and oppression do
seek maintenance and exhibition for their pride and luxury out of other men's
estates, and other men's maintenance which is for their bare necessities, must
be rauened up to serve their inordinate and hellish voluptuousness. Hence
comes it that the poor Tenant is racked to maintain the Landlords dogs,
hawks, and coaches; the poor Tenants back stripped, that their dead walls
may be richly clothed; the poor Tenant can scarce go in good russet on high
days, because the Landlord, like the rich glutton, must fare deliciously, and
go in purple every day. Moderation breeds contentation: contentation preserues
from covetousness. He that is content with his own, will never put forth his
hand to wrong another.

3. Set bounds and a stint to thine estate, and learn to know when thou have
enough. Covetousness is a desire of more then enough. Therefore do men still
desire more, because they think they have not yet enough. He that would be
relieved against covetousness, must first seek to stint his desires; a man
shall never stint his desires, till his estate be stinted. Men's estates are not
so much increased by their desires, as their desires are made endless by their
estates boundless. If Esau had been as honest in other things as in this, he
should never have deserved the brand of a profane person. As profane as he was,
I could wish this lesson were learned of him. As profane as he was, he was an
honester man in this, then thousands that now live. Will ye hear how like an
honest man he speaks? Genesis 33. 9. I have enough my brother, keep that which
thou have to thy self. Behold how far he is beyond the honesty of the
Harpyes and cormorants of our times, that never knowing when they have enough,
are ever fixing their kites claws and their gryphons talants upon their poor
brother Jacobs goods. Four things are specified, Pro. 30. 15, 16. that never
say, It is enough: to which we may add a fifth, namely a covetous heart that
knows no stint of its own desires and endeavors. The way to prevent this
immoderatio^, is to see when we are well, when we have enough. A point being
determinable, why make not men conscience to determine it? God forbids the
King, Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17. to multiply horses to himself, and greatly to multiply
his silver and gold; and yet who has greater uses of, and fairer pretenses for
these things then Princes have? If a King may not multiply above that which is
enough for a King, what prerogative have inferior subjects to have estates
boundless? We can say of others, They have enough, if they can see. If we can
see when others have enough, why do we ouerlooke our own estates? This is an
evil covetousness, when men are ever lading themselves with thick clay, and
have neither the hearts nor the grace to set down an Hucusque to answer Gods
Quousque, Hab. 2. 6. an Hitherto to Gods How long. For this very sin were the
Jews threatened, Isa. 2. 6. 7. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people, etc.
because their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of
their treasures, any end of their chariots. Enough, we say, is as good as a
feast. And what should a man do feasting or feeding when his belly is full? The
purse must know a measure as well as the belly. And then it will be as easy to
fill men's eyes as their bellies. Not that men having enough, should give up
their honest callings, and receive in no more; but having enough, should lay up
no more, but make the ouerfloate of their cup serviceable to the maintenance of
Gods worship, and the relief of his poor Saints. Take this course, and be
covetous if thou can. Let your conversation be without covetousness, Heb.
13. 5. What help may we have hereunto? And be content with things present.
Contentation preserves from covetousness. Then, and never till then, will a
man's heart be contented when he has enough, and knows he has enough, and is
resolved not to go further then enough.

4. Free thy self from a false opinion of riches. The conceit which men have
of riches, is false. They think riches lies in Having much. They are deceived.
Anim' hominis dives, non arca appellari solet, quamuis illa sit plena, dum te
inanem video, diuitem non putabo. Cicer. Parad. 6.
God is called Rich in Scripture, not for money, but for mercy; not for having
goods, but for doing good, Rom 10. 12. He that is Lord over all, is rich unto
all that call upon him. Wherein is God rich? Not in being Lord over all, but in
doing good unto all that call upon him. So that I would not forbid men to be
covetous of riches, so they would be covetous of true and durable riches. Covet
true riches, and spare not. Covet to be Rich in God, Rich in faith, Rich in
good works. The more covetous of these riches, the happier is thy soul. This
was the fools error next my text, that conceived Riches to be all in Having,
and not in Doing good. Therefore it is added in the closure of that parable, So
is every one that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in God. So,
that is, as very a fool as was he.

5. Climb up mount Nebo, and from thence take a view of Canaan, and little
list and love shall thou have to the wilderness of the world. Get a piercing
eye in meditation to see the invisible God, the glory and beauty of heaven;
and therewithal shall we find our affections so inflamed, that they shall
easily slake and cool in regard of earthly things. Oh shame that we that
profess the hope of an inheritance with the Saints in light, should lavish out
so much of our precious time, of our precious life, and the strength of our
affections in the so eager pursuit of the trash of the earth. View well that
heavenly Jerusalem on high, that City which is of pure gold, Apoc. 21. 18.
whose street is also pure gold, verse 21. and in comparison of that City,
thou shall say of all earthly felicities as Hiram said of the cities which
Solomon gave him, 1. King. 9. 13. They pleased him not: and he said, What
cities are these which thou have given me, my brother? And he called them, viz.
in indignation, the land of Cabul unto this day, that is, a dirtie, a mirie
land. Heaven is our land of Canaan; fix we our eye and heart thereon, and the
earth will not please us, it will be a very land of Cabul, a dirtie, drossie
land in our eye. Oh fond thing for us that hope for the milk and honey of
Canaan, to long and lust after the stinking garlic and onions of Egypt. Oh
fond thing for us that hope for a crown and kingdom, thus to abase our selves
to lie raking in the kennels of the earth. Thus if men would but seriously
meditate, and work up their thoughts and hearts to the love of the treasures of
heaven, it would soon breed in them an holy neglect, if not a contempt of this
present world. This remedy our Savior teaches, Matthew. 6. 19, 20, 21. Lay not
up treasures for your selves on earth, etc. as if he had said, Take heed and
beware of covetousness; and then follows, But lay up treasures for your selves
Nemo enim potest nisi cogitare de thesauro suo, and quodam cordis itinere
diuitias suas sequi. Et sicut ecclesiam praecessit caput eius, sic Christianum
praecedat cor eius. Eamus ergo hinc ex qua part possumus, sequetur totum
nostrum quo praecesserit aliquid nostru^. Aug. sermon. de diverse. 44.
in heaven; and then, Where our treasure is, there will our heart be. Our Head
is in heaven, what do our hearts on earth then? Let Head and heart be together.
The same remedy Paul teaches Timothy among many others, 1. Tim. 6. 11, 12. O
man of God fly these things, namely the covetous desires of the world. But how
shall that be done? Lay hold of eternal life. The faster hold we take of the
world to come, the looser hold shall we have of this world, and the less hold
shall this world have of us. For this makes men hold so fast on, and in this
life, because they have so slack an hold of the life to come. This made
Abraham dwell in tents in the land of promise, not raising cities or making
great buildings, because he looked for a City having a foundation whose
builder and maker was God, Heb. 11. 9. 10. And thus David seems to weane his
heart from the love of the earth, Psalm. 17. 14. 15: having before spoken of the
men of this world who have their portion in this life, he subioynes, I will
behold thy face in righteousness, and when I awake I shall be satisfied with
thine image. As if he had said, I neither envy nor desire their happiness, my
teeth water not after their delicates, I long alone after that sweet satietie
which I shall have in the society of the glorious Trinity at the day of my
blessed resurrection. And so much for the remedies; and so much for the object
of the caution.

3. Third point remains. The Persons warned to beware. And he said unto them.
Unto them? Unto whom? See the first verse of the Chapter, There was an
innumerable multitude of people, in so much that they trod one upon another.
And he said unto them, even to this whole and huge multitude, to them all, one
and another, Take ye heed and beware.

Covetousness is an Epidemicall disease, an universal plague from which no
sort is free. He said to them, even to them all. Ier. 6. 13. For from the least
of them, even to the greatest of them every one is given to covetousness.
There is no sort or condition of persons free from this pestilence. Some sins
are particular to some callings, as to the Ministry, to the Magistracy alone;
some peculiar to some conditions, as to the rich or to the poor alone: but
this poison infecteth all ages, callings, conditions, sexes, persons. Therefore
now Christ speaks not as verse 1. to his disciples, but preaching against
covetousness he speaks to them all, He said unto them, Take heed and beware.
I conceive our Saviors auditory to be much of the nature of this present
assembly; and I conceive this present assembly to be a mixed company of all
sorts and conditions: and therefore as Christ said to them, so I say to you,
even to all, and every of you, Take heed and beware of covetousness. But
because hearers commonly are like over bashful guests, that either fast, or
feed not so liberally as they should for want of a caruer, give me leave
therefore to take this office upon me, and to lay upon every man's trencher what
may best suite, though not with his tooth, yet with his necessity.

1. And first, according to the rule of well ordered charity, to begin at home;
and as our Savior began his sermon in this Chapter, He began to say to his
disciples first of all; and as the Prophet in taxing this sin, Ier. 6. 13. to
begin with the Priest and the Prophet; let me advise you of the tribe of Leui,
who are to teach others the contempt of the world, to take heed of the love of
the world your selves. Above al men take you heed, and beware you of
covetousness. It is an irregularitie, and an offense against Saint Paul's and
Saint Peter's Canons, 1. Tim. 3. 3. Not given to filthy lucre, not covetous, and
1. Pet. 5. 2 Not caring for the flock for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.
Ye are the light and the eyes of the world: If our light prove darkness, how
great will that darkness be. This sin will put out our eye, and eclipse our
light. Zach. 11. 17. The foolish sheepheards right eye is threatened to be
darkened. This is one sin that will bring that plague upon us. This is a
besotting, blinding, and infatuating sin. Isay 56. 11. These greedy dogs can
never have enough, and these sheepheards cannot understand, for they all look
to their own way, every one for his advantage, and for his own purpose. In
the verse before he had complained that they were dumb dogs, that they could
not bark. What made them dumb dogs? They were greedy dogs that could never
have enough. Dogs that are ever feeding and gnawing their bones, have neither
list nor leisure to be barking, and keeping the house. What was the reason
these sheepheards could not understand? They all looked after their own way,
and for their own advantage. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. They are two
contrary Cures so infinitely distant each from other, as no court of Faculties
can give a dispensation to serve both. We cannot be Gods Ministers, and Mammons
chaplains. I will use no other argument to urge this caution upon you, then of
Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 11. O thou man of God fly these things. Which
very phrase seems to have a strong argument couched under it, in that he
calls him the man of God. Why says he not as at other times, o Timotheus,
but o thou man of God, but that his calling might be a monitour to him to make
him wary and heedfull? We find mention, Psalm. 17. 14. of the men of this world,
and Luke 12. 30. of the people of this world. Now this phrase, Thou man of God,
me thinks it stands in opposition unto those. As if he should have said,
Thou art not a man of the world, but a man of God, and seek thou great
things for thy self? Seek them not, Ier. 45. 5. O man of God fly these
things, for after all these things seek the people of the world. Luke 12. 30.
It becomes not the men of God to be men of the world. Indeed, I confess, the
men of the world have put an Egyptian trick upon the men of God; have taken
away, I would but the straw alone, and yet still call for the full tale of
brick both in preaching and hospitality: and having by their sacrilege made
the Ministry bare and penurious, and forced many to such shifts for their
liuelihood as carry an appearance of this sin, then they cry us down to be
inhospitall, illiberall, and covetous. But yet for all this I could wish that
the men of God, by joining not house to house, but parish to parish, did not
give the men of the world too just cause to clamor against them for their
covetousness. Pluralities, multitudes of Cures, multiplicity of Benefices,
Absence from our flocks for our own ends and advantages, City Lectures with
the neglect of country charges, all these have a shrewd suspicious appearance
of this evil, and makes the men of the world speak broadly, and say that
none are more covetous then clergy men. Wherefore o ye men of God fly these
things, Take heed and beware of covetousness.

2. Ye honorable and reverend Magistrates and Judges, who are not only men of
God, but upon whom God has put his own name, I have said ye are Gods. Psalm.
82. take ye heed also and beware of covetousness. So Iethro would have Moses
his Judges to be qualified, Exodus 18. 21. Men fearing God, dealing truly,
hating covetousness. These are well joined together, for it is not possible
they should deal truly in the place of justice, that do not hate
covetousness. I neither do nor can accuse any of our reverend Judges as guilty
of this sin, or any such as commonly attend it when it sets foot into the
judgment seat, such as are injustice, bribery, corruption, raising favorites
upon the ruins of honest causes and men, etc. But only as one this day in
Gods room, I am bold to beseech and advise your wisdoms to take heed and
beware thereof. And that so much the rather, because this sin will make you
such as I dare not name. But the Prophet Isay dares, and does, Isay 1. 23. Thy
Princes are companions of thieves. Why so? Not for taking of purses on the high
way, but for taking bribes in their chambers: For every one loves gifts, and
follows after rewards; they judge not the fatherless, neither does the
widows cause come before them. That is true of the judgment seat, which
Augustine speaks of kingdoms, that magna regna sine De Ciuit. Dei. l. 4.
cap. 4.
iustitia, are but magna latrocinia. This sin will turn Guild Hall into a
Shooters hill, and Westminster Hall into a Saris-bury plain. Her rulers love
to say with shame, Give ye, Hos. 4. 18. And what difference between give ye,
and deliver ye? Indeed give ye is not so dangerous by the law as deliver ye;
and give ye goes often in chains of gold, while deliver ye lies in fetters of
iron: but in the Court of conscience, and before Gods tribunal, there is no
difference between theeuery and bribery. For the same commandment that
forbids theeuery forbids bribery, yea and forbids it under the name of
theeuery. That word Hos. 4. 18. translated rulers, Iunius and the margent of
our new Translation read shields. Such indeed should men be that are in place
of justice; they should be shields to shelter and defend their poor brethren
in their right and innocence. But if once these shields shall love and desire
to be gilt, these shields will be turned into spoiling swords. God shield you
therefore ye reverend Judges from covetousness. Walk in justice, speak
righteous things, refuse the gain of oppression, Isay 33.
shake your hands from taking of gifts, shake them as Paul shook off the
viper, think them no less dangerous, let them do no more hurt then the viper
did him, stop your ears, and shut your eyes from seeing evil. There be three
sins in Scripture which are called peccata ingentia, huge or mighty sins. You
shall find them all three together, Amos 5. 12. and the middlemost of them is,
They take a bribe; And well is it placed between the other two, as that which
indeed gives life to both the other. For why do they afflict or oppress the
just? They take a bribe. And what mischief follows upon it? They turn aside
the poor ^n the gate from their right. Take heed of this sin as of a mighty
sin, yea as of a burning sin that will consume all, for fire shall consume
the tabernacles of bribery, Job 15. 34. Let therefore neither gain nor rewards
be the remora to the ship of justice, let it sail speedily; Currat lex, let
justice have a quick course. Iethro was not pleased to see causes hang from
morning to evening, it would have grudged him far more to have seen them
hang from year to year: worst of all it would have angered him to have seen
causes used as unconscionable Chyrurgions use sore legs, hold them long in hand
not for the difficulty of, but for the gain of the cure. Oh that your wisdoms
would think of some course no less for speed then integrity in justice, that
a good cause might not be tired and wearied out with long suite, and that a
man's right recovered by law might not be as costly as what is bought by
purchase.

3. It will not be an unseasonable caveat to all inferior Lawyers, to advise
them also to beware and take heed of covetousness. I may speak to you as the
Apostle speaks to the Corinthians with a little change of his words. 1. Cor.
6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Now there is utterly a fault amongst you, even amongst you
Lawyers, not because ye go to law one with another, but because many of you out
of a covetous desire of gain, do encourage men that have bad causes to go to
law with others. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather sustain ye not the
loss of a little dishonest gain? Nay ye your selves do wrong, and do harm,
and that to your brethren, whilst out of a squint respect to your own gain,
you stick not to plead such causes as you know to be weak and unjust. Know
ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived. Neither covetous nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.
The Apostle adds, And such were some of you. I would I might not speak in the
present tense, and say, And such are some of you. I speak not this as if I
came hither to maintain a foolish faction between Colleges and Innes of
Court; God forbid that we should stand upon this holy ground with such filthy
shoes; but I speak it out of a desire of the peace of your own hearts: to
the which I dare refer my self, and make them the judges, whether ye be
guilty of this sin, yea or no.

For while with Absalom ye say to every man, his cause is good, 2. Sam. 15. 3.
See, thy matters (says he) are good and righteous; and this, says the text,
he did to every man, and so stole away the hearts of the people: whilst, I
say, with Absalom ye tell every man, his cause is good; and so steal away, not
the hearts, for them ye lose at last, but the goods of the people, are ye not
covetous?

Whilst with Tertullus for your sees, you care not to plead against Paul,
against an honest man's cause, Clientes sibi omnes volunt esse multos. Bonine an
mali sint, id haud quaeritant. Res magis queritur quam clientium Fides,
cuiusmodi clueat. Plaut. in Menaec.
are ye not covetous?

Whilst with the men of Abiezer, Judge. 6. ye will plead for Baal, will for
your gains plead in public Courts of Justice for base debauched adulterous
drunkards presented and indicted for their notorious irregularities, and plead
for their honesty too; I will not say, Are ye your selves honest? but I dare
say, Are ye not grossly covetous? Oh take heed of this covetousness; and above
all fees and incomes in the world, tender your peace with God. In whose name
and fear, I beseech you to make a conscience of pleading every cause. When an
ill cause comes to you for counsel, say that of it plainly, which the buyer
of his commodity speaks dissemblingly, Prou. 20. 14. It is naught, it is
naught. It is not so great a sin for a chapman to say of a good commodity,
It is naught, it is naught, as for a Lawyer to say of a naughty cause, It is
good, it is good. Make a conscience of pleading against a good cause. Let not
covetousness make your wits, skill, learning and tongues, isntrumental to
injustice. Neither be Tertullists to plead against Paul, nor Abiezrites to
plead for Baal. Will ye plead for Baal? Let Baal and Belial plead for
themselves. How think ye to have the Lord Jesus for your Advocate, that dare
be pleading advocates for Baal and Belial? Therefore all Lawyers, Take heed and
beware of covetousness.

4. I commend this caveat to all Church-patrons: Take ye heed also and beware
of covetousness. What is the reason that our Church groans under the heavy
burden of so many insufficient ministers? Nothing more then the covetousness of
Church-patrons, who while they look more at the gifts and gratuities in the
hand, then gifts and graces of the heart, stick not to bring into Gods
Sanctuary those for Levites to divide the word, who in good truth, give them
their due, are not worthy the place of Gibeonites to cleave and divide wood,
and draw water, unfit for the meanest service of the Sanctuary. Me thinks Judas
his halter should make you afraid of Judas his question, Quid dabitis? What
will ye give? God gave him an halter. Take heed lest while you ask the same
question, God do not give you the same answer. For certainly this sin makes
you as very thieves as ever was Judas: and what can a thief look for, but the
halter? You are every whit as bad as Judas. He sold the Head, you sell the
members; he the shepherd, you the sheep; and the same sin that set him,
sets you on work too, the sin of covetousness. As bad as Judas? Nay in some
respect ye are worse then he. Not that I am of that heretical opinion of the
old Cainites, of whom Augustine makes Lib. de Haeres. ad Quodvultd.
mention, who held that Judas betrayed Christ out of a good and an honest mind,
as foreseeing that infinite good which his passion and death should bring to
mankind. No, I know he was a murderer and a thief; and yet I say, that you
are worse then he. He sold but the body, but you sell souls, and so make your
selves guilty of the sin of that execrable filth of Babylon, whose merchandise
(Apoc. 18. 13.) is not only pearls, linen, scarlet, etc. but also the souls
of men. Judas by his barter made but the potters field, you by yours make
Christ's field, Christ's Church, an Aceldema, a field of blood, while for your
wicked pecuniary respects, in stead of barking dogs to keep, you put in
ravening wolves and sleepie greedy dogs to kill Christ's sheep. Now as you
fear to have your hands besmeared with the gore of souls, and as you dread
that heavy account which must be given for soule-bloud, so all Church-patrons
take heed and beware of covetousness.

5. Me thinks, in the next place, whilst this sin is thus complained of, I
should hear Landlords, and men that live on Offices, saying to me as the
Publicans to John, Luk, 3. 12. What shall we do? If covetousness be thus foul a
sin, how then, and what then shall we do? To whom I give the same answer that
John did to the Publicans and the soldiers both, Exact no more then is
appointed to you, and Do no man violence, be content with your wages. Take heed
and beware of covetousness, Take heed of exaction, Take heed of oppression,
Take heed of racking your rents, Take heed of tentring your poor Tenants.
Grind not the faces of the poor; vncloathe not their loins to cloathe your
dead walls. Many Landlords are like Darius, Dan. 6. 16. he prays God to help
Daniel, but in the mean time sends him to the Lions den: so many oppressing
Landlords, they cry, God help, but in the mean time play the Lions. God has
sworn by his Holiness, that he will takeaway such oppressors with thorns, and
their posterity with fish-hookes, Am. 4. 2. God will serve them as Gideon
served the men of Succoth, Judge. 8. 16. whom he did tear with the briers and
thorns of the wilderness. It is but justice that their flesh should be torn
off with briers, who were thorns and briers to tear off the flesh of others.
Tantum ergo natum est vt loca non sufficerent quae solebant, and quaerebat
consilium miser, non quomodo erogaret quod plus natum erat, sed quomodo
reseruaret. Aug. sermon. de diuit. 28.
Ye find a rich man immediately after my text, whom the Lord calls Fool:
Fool this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. Wherein lay this man's
folly? In that he took care not to lay up for good uses, but to lay up for
voluptuous uses that surplusage of estate which God had given him. Now mark
what Augustine infers hereupon: If he be a fool which lays but up his own
goods, Vos inuenite ei nomen qui tollit aliena, find you out a fit name for him
that takes away another man's. What name then may we find out? Solomon fits them
with a name, Eccles. 3. 18. Viderem hos esse illis bestias; so Iunius; not
fools, but beasts. And what beasts may they be? Kine of Bashan, Amos 4. 1.
that is with the easiest. Therefore Zephanie and Nahum make them wolves,
evening wolves, Lions, Lions whelps, roaring and ramping Lions, Zeph. 3. 3.
Nah. 2. 11. 12. Beasts they are, beasts of prey, that live ex rapto. Not only
kine of Bashan, that by oppression trample under foot, but devouring wolves,
not only trampling but tearing beasts. How fairly were this Island blessed, if
it were as clear rid of these as it is of other wolves? How happy were it if
these Cannibals were amongst the savage Indians? How well, if these man-eating
beasts might be used as was Nebuchadnezzar, turned to grass? Dan. 4. 30. He
was Volunt nunc comparcere micas in alendo misero Lazaro, cum prius effuderint
in epulonem omnes opes suas. Dederunt enim episcopis arces and civitates, ac
nimis splendide, ac laute habuerunt eos. Nunc cum isti alendi sunt qui vere and
fideliter docent, vix micas alioqui perituras eis concedunt. Luther. in Genesis 21.
driven from men, and did eat grass as the oxen.

6. I may not here let pass such as are guilty of sacrilege, impropriators
of Church livings, together with close and cunning defrauders of the
Ministry, Take ye heed and beware of covetousness. There is nothing so
sacred and inviolable which this Harpy dares not seize upon. The patrimony of
the Church is exhausted, and they that have enough otherwise will not let go
their Church livings. They whose forefathers fed and fatted the rich gluttons
of Rome, think now the crumbs that fall under their tables too much for the
poor Lazarus of the Gospel. They must needs have this one feather in their
peacockes tail. How should they maintain that port and pomp in table,
apparel, idle and prodigal expenses, if this borrowed, what if I had said this
stolen feather, were repayd the Church again? Covetousness plucked this
feather, and covetousness holds this feather, and tells covetous
Impropriators, that it is fitter that Gods Ministers should want maintenance,
then that their horse heels should want litter. To all such persons may that
be spoken innocently which the unprofitable servant to his master spoke
wickedly: Master, I knew that thou were an hard man, and reapedst where thou
sowedst not. Is not this the case of Impropriators? Are they not hard men that
reap where they sow not? If we sow spiritual things, what right, what reason
has Covetousness to thrust her sickle into our harvest, and to reap our
temporal things? The world is wondrous busy about the disquisition of the
tenure of Tithes by what right they are due, and many are cunninger in this,
then in the maine fundamental articles of their religion; but nevertheless in
the mean time there is a more necessary Quaere forgotten, to wit, by what
right Impropriators detain Church maintenance. Let that case be canuased in
the Court of conscience, and if God shall there determine on their sides, we
have done; much good do it them. I know I do but beat the air, but yet Israel
must know his transgressions, and Iaacob his iniquities, and covetous ones
hear of their impropriations.

There is also another sort of sacrilege in the close purloyning and filching
ministerial dues, which covetousness has taught false fingers to use. The
Pharisees are taxed in the Gospel for covetousness, and yet it were happy the
world had but the Pharisees honesty. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of God. Alas, how many think to go to heaven, that yet come far
short of a Pharisees righteousness? Luke 18. 12. I, says the Pharisee, pay
tithe of all that ever I possess. In which speech I should have feared he had
lied, had not our Savior elsewhere acknowledged so much of their preciseness
in tithing even unto mint and cummin. The covetousness of the Pharisees was an
honest covetousness unto the Church-robbing and Church-pilling covetousness of
our days.

7. It were endless to follow covetousness into every shop and profession:
therefore last of all, All, of all sorts, one and another, high and low, rich
and poor, old and young, take heed and beware of covetousness. Take heed of it
in your mutual dealings in buying and selling: abuse no man's simplicity,
abuse no man's credulity, take not the advantage of any man's necessity, but
remember the speech of an heathen, Genesis 23. 15. The land is worth four hundred
shekels of silver. Take no more for a commodity then it is worth. We use to
say in another case, Caveat emptor, let the buyer beware; but here I say,
caveat venditor, let the seller beware and take heed of covetousness. Take
heed of false balances, of a weight and a weight, Prou. 20. 10: of a weight
for the hall, and a weight for the stall; of a weight to sell with, and a
weight to seal with; of a weight to sell with, and a weight to buy with. Let
no man go beyond his brother, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. with swearing, protesting, and
with terms of kindness, for God is the auenger of all these things. Every trade
is called a mystery. It were to be wished that in every mystery, there were not
a mystery of iniquity found out and practiced by the iniquity of
covetousness. It were a shame to send Christians to school to learn honest
dealing of Turks, and yet they boast that we are a form beneath them for
honest and square dealing. I will rather send you to that rule of nature and
equity, the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, Math. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, even so do ye to them. Buy a^ ye would sell,
sell as ye would buy, and in all you dealings take heed and beware of
covetousness. A^ you love God, and would be loath to break his holy
commandments; and as you fear God, and would be loath to suffer his heavy
judgments, the curse of God upon your bodies, the curse of God upon your
goods, the curse of God upon the fruit of your loins, the curse of his
everlasting vengeance upon your souls, so Take heed and beware of
covetousness.

FINIS.

