A SERMON PREACHED AT the Public Fast. TO The Commons House of Parliament.
APRIL. 5th. 1628.

By IER. DYKE Minister of GODS Word, at Epping in ESSEX.

ROMANS 13. 11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out
of sleep.

Obticescant ergo linguae dioentium, manducemus et bibamus, cras enim moriemur.
Prorsus et vos respondete, et dicite. Ieiunemus and oremus cras enim moriemur.

Aug de Diuersis. Sermon. 120. Qui aut abundantia nimia, aut securitate vitiantur
desinunt esse perditi, cum destiterint esse securi.

Salu. de prouid. lib 6. LONDON: Printed for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to be
sold at his shop in Paul's Church yard, at the sign of the Gray Hound. 1628.

TO THE HONORABLE Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament.
I Know my self and mine own unworthiness too well, to be so far in love
with any thing of mine own, as to think it worthy public view. That which
once Augustine spoke of himself in humility, I must say of my self in truth:
Sermon. de Diuersis. 32.
Quis sum ego? Homo sum vnus de multis, non de magnis. And I know the truth of
Saluians observation. Contra. Auarit. lib. 1.
Omnia dicta tanti existimantur quantus est ipse qui dixit, et qui legunt non
tam considerant quid legant quam cuius legant, nec tam dictionis vim atque
virtutem quam dictatoris cogitant dignitatem. So that upon these grounds I had
great reason to have for-borne the Publishing of this Sermon. Yet again, some
reasons there were that were preualent with me, to put it forth. First, that I
might a little enlarge some things that streights of time would not in the
delivery, permit to be meddled withal. Secondly, it was my desire to leave a
Monument, and to give a public testimony of my thankefulnes to the Honorable
House, for your so fair acceptance, and recompense of so weak, and unworthy a
Service, as was done you in this Sermon. Lastly, endeauours in this kind have
a blessing from God, and want not their success: I easily foresee to how many
censures I expose my self by this course, but I have set up my rest with him.
Saluian. contr. Auarit. lib. 4. (...)
Sufficient nobis in hac part sanctorum sensus et Iudicia, quibus idem
sentientibus atque nos certi profecto sumus Deum ipsum sentire nobiscum:
Pravorum hominum sensus aut parvi aestimandi sunt, aut nihil omnino faciendi.
If I find acceptance with those that be good, and hereby may do any good, I
have enough. The God of Heaven guide and bless you in all your weighty
deliberations, and make you an happy healing Parliament, to make up all the
breaches of the Land.

Yours humbly devoted. IER. DYKE.

HEB. 11. 7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet,
moved with fear, prepared an Arc, to the saving of his House.


IN the latter end of the former Chapter, the Apostle had exhorted unto
perseverance in the faith. To press this home the better, he shows the
excellency of the grace of Faith.

That he shows 1. By the excellency of it, in it self considered. Verse. 1, 2,
3. 2. By a Cloud of witnesses, by the examples of all their forefathers in
both the Worlds, the World before, and after the Flood.


By all those examples giving them to understand that all the goodly things
that their Fathers had, or did, they were beholding unto faith for them. It is
the Apostles purpose in this Chapter to set the garland upon the head of faith,
and for the making of this garland, he picks and gathers all the most choice
and godly flowers that grow scattered through the garden of the Scriptures,
and so crowns Faith therewith, to make it a lovely, and an amiable grace in
the eyes of all.

This seventh verse contaynes the example of the Faith of Noah, who was the
last Patriarch of the old, and the first of the new World. In the verse we have
considerable, two special things. 1. Gods gracious goodness and mercy to
Noah, In giving warning. Being warned of God.
2. Noah's great wisdom in taking warning.


This wisdom of his is set forth in three degrees, 1. He believes the warning
given him. By Faith being warned, etc. 2. He fears it: Moved with fear. 3. He
makes good use of the warning, and thereupon follows the Counsel of God.


For God did not only give him warning of the danger, but gave him also
counsel, and direction, how to secure himself from the danger, and he taking
the fair warning, takes also the good counsel, and prepares an Arc: And all
these be three degrees of one and the same thing, each issuing and flowing out
of other. God gives warning therefore. 1. He believes. 2. His faith, breeds
fear of the calamity approaching. 3. His fear breeds a care of the
preservation of himself, and family. Why builds he an Arc to save his house?
Because he feared: Why does he fear? Because he believes Gods warning: God
warnes him, therefore he believes: He believes therefore he fears: He fears
therefore he prouides against a rainy day, and takes a course to hide
himself, and his family in the day of wrath. For the first: Gods mercy and
goodness to Noah. Being warned of God.

The old World was grown to an horrible hight of iniquity. The Children of
God, the posterity of ^h, made mongrell matches with the daughters of men, the
posterity of Caine. Those mongrell matches brought forth a monstrous brood, who
defiled, and polluted the very earth. God saw the earth so defiled with their
villainies, that he determines to bring such a judgment upon the earth, as
should not only sweep those monsters from off the earth, but such an one as
should lay the earth a soake, and should wash and wrince it from the filth and
defilement wherewith they had corrupted it. God having set down this
determination, he does not presently put it in execution; but first acquaints
Noah with his purpose, and gives him warning of it, and that to this end, that
he might give the world warning. For as God by immediate revelation, gave Noah
warning; so Noah by preparing the Arc, gave the World warning of a judgment
coming, and that unless some course was taken to prevent it, they were all in
danger to be swept away with a Flood; from which course of Gods: Learn.

Gods fair dealing in the administration, and execution of Justice: Seldom or
never does God bring general judgments upon a people, but he gives them fair
warning. He does not strike men at unawares, and suddenly surprise them,
without any notice given of his purposes. Ezech. 33. 3. When the sword comes
upon the Land, he must blow the Trumpet, and warn the people. The Prophet
verse 7. Must hear the Word at Gods mouth, and warn them from him. Yea, so
careful is God that it be done, that if in case it be neglected, he threatens
to reckon sharply with those whom he betrusts with that office, verse. 8. God
will require blood at such men's hands. God does not snatch up the sword into
his hand, and presently cut men of; but Psalm. 7. 12. First, God whets his
sword, bends his bow, makes it ready; prepares the instruments of death. And
all this whetting time, the time of making ready, and preparing, is a warning
time. God whets, and makes ready in men's sight, and in men's hearing, that the
very noise of his whetting, may give them warning of his intentions. And Deuteronomy.
32. 41, 42. God first Whets his Sword before it devoures flesh; and God first
takes hold on judgment, before his judgments take hold on men.

God lived by his own rule, and by the same Law, he gave his people in their
wars. Deuter. 20. 10. 13. He would not have them fall foul presently upon
their enemies, but they must deal fairly with them. And it was the benefit of
this Law, that the wise woman of Abel challenged at the hands of Ioab, 2. Sam.
20. 18. and blames him that he was come to swallow up, and never according to
the ancient Law of Arms gives them any parley, or warning of his purposes. So
fairly deals God in his infinite goodness with men, before he comes to
swallow up, and to destroy; he first gives warning, and offers fair quarter.
Therefore, Hos. 5. 8. God blows the Trumpet before he draws the sword; not a
Trumpet for an Alarm, and for the battle; but a Trumpet to give warning that a
battle is like to come. God has his warning pieces; and his murdering pieces:
God never discharges his murdering, till he have discharged his Warning ones.

The King of Syria his plot and policy, was suddenly and at unawares, to
surprise the King of Israel. 2. King. 6. 8. He would go covertly, and closly to
work least the King of Israel having intelligence of his design, he might
thereby frustrate his action. God goes not so covertly to work, but as one
that would be willing to be kept off, and put by, he himself gives
intelligence of his intentions, he does aforehand acquaint men with his
projects. Ier. 18. 11, Behold I frame evil against you, and devise a device
against you. Thus God deals, and gives warning.

1. That if it be possible, men might be brought to (...) Repentance, as might
prevent the threatened e^. Ier. 18. 11.

2. That he may provide for the good of his own. Sometimes God will deliver
some of his people from (...) calamity. Sometimes he will have some of them
^dergo it. In reference to both, he gives warning.

1. To such as shall be delivered in the day of wrath: (...) wrath should come
without warning, it might ^de of Gods own people, from under covert, and (...)
they might prove a prey to the judgment. Exodus ^. 18, 19. God had a purpose
that many of the Egyp^s servants and Cattle should escape, and not be ^ayne,
in that terrible storm of fire and hayle. God ^erefore gives warning of the
storm, that so they ^ight be housed that should escape. If they had had (...)
warning, they had heene abroad in the fields; and (...) in the fields when the
storm came, they had pe^ht inevitably. God has a purpose in a storm to (...)
some of his, therefore he gives them warning that they may get an house over
their heads before the storm come. What had Noah been better then all the
rest of the ungodly World, if God had not given him warning: God warned him
that he might be safe in the evil day. When judgments come, and are walking
abroad, God would have his people within doors, in their Chambers, their
doors shut upon them. Is. 26. 20, 21. and therefore to this end gives them
warning. 2. In reference to such as shall undergo common calamity, God gives
them warning that they may lay in, and lay up that which may support and uphold
them in the time of distress. God would have the demeaner and behavior of his
people in the day of calamity be different from other men's. He would have them
be of erected spirits, free from those distressing perplexities, that others
shall be swallowed up withal. Therefore he gives warning that so they may
gather that which may strengthen them at such a time: certainly if God should
give no warning, there would be little difference seen and discerned between
the righteous, and the wicked; between him that serves God, and him that
serves him not. Mal. 3. 18. Little difference would be seen in their
carriages under the pressures of calamity: You should see Every man with his
hands on his loins, as a Woman in travail, and all faces turned into
palenesse. Ier. 30. 6. God would have his people have more blood in their
faces, then the common sort will have in such a time. God would not have Faith
and Religion so pale faced, and so white liuer'd, as ciuility, and morality,
will be at such a time. Therefore God gives them warning, that so their
provisions may be such against the day of evil; as that their carriages may be
masculine, beseeming God and Religion.

3. That God may be justified, and clear, when he judges. Psalm. 51. 4. Talis
non vis flagellari cum mundo, aut flagellatus murmuras sub flagello? Serve
male, fecisti quod Dominus iussit, qui ne vapulares, ista flagella ante tibi
praedixit? August. de tem. Barb.
God does it to gag, and to muzzle the mouth of iniquity; and to put to silence
the cauelling ignorance of foolish men. What can be pleaded against the justice
of Gods proceedings, when God may say to men, as Reuben to his brethren. Genesis
42. 22. Did not I warn you, saying, sin not.

Quest. How does God give warning of wrath, and judgments coming?

Ans. 1. God gives warning many ways.

1. By extraordinary, and immediate Revelation. Thus was Noah here warned of
God, (...). The same word that is used of the warning given to the wisemen
Math. 2. 12. (...), warned of God. God in a dream immediately warned them. And
thus were all the Prophets warned of God, of the judgments that were to come
upon the Jews, and other Nations. And thus specially is that to be understood.
Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reueales his secrets
unto his servants the Prophets. God by the extraordinary revelation of his
spirit, gave them warning what he meant to do. Thus God made known to
Nebucadnezar what should come to pass afterward. Daniel 2. 29.

2. By prodigious signs, and strange wonders, both in Heaven and earth. God
calls his work of judgment, a strange work; and a strange act. Isa. 28. 21.
And when God does these strange acts, and works of national judgments, he
gives warnings many times thereof by some strange precursory signs and
prodigies: Commonly some strange praemonitory signs fore run, strange
executions of justice: We have a text for it. Luke 21. 11. Great earthquakes
shall be in diverse places, and famines, and pestilences, and fearful fights;
and great signs shall there be from Heaven: And so it came to pass before
the destruction of Jerusalem by a prodigious comet, and other fearful sights
God gave them warning of their approaching ruin.

We shall seldom find any calamitous time to have befallen this kingdom
which has not had a fore-warning given of it by some prodigious things such as
was the rayning of blood at York, sometime before the Danes entrance into the
Land, and others many of the like nature, as they know well that are but any
thing seen into our Chronicles. And what inconvenience can it be to
conjecture, that God by that prodigious blazing Star, Anno 1618. gave the
churches warning of the heavy and lamentable times that have since ensued, and
yet happily are to ensue. God had a strange work, and a strange act, to do,
and he gave warning of it by as strange a blazing Star as had bin seen in
many ages. God speaks by all such signs, and therefore we read of the words
of Gods signs and wonders, Psalm. 105. 27. so the words are originally. And so
of the voice of his signs, Exodus 4. 8. If they will not hearken to the voice
of the first sign. Therefore Gods signs have words, have a voice they speak
not only to our eyes, but to our ears also. They are not only to be gazed
upon, but to be hearkened to, Psalm. 106. 7. Our fathers understood not thy
wonders in Egypt, Gods wonders then have a language, and they are not only to
be looked upon, but their language must be understood. Now their words are
Monitory words, their language is a Monitory language, and they give us warning
that some great judgments are at hand.

3. God gives warning by the Ministry of the word. Though Gods ministers have
not an Oraculous warning by Immediate Revelation; yet they may see an evil in
the causes, as a storm in the black clouds, and by considering, and comparing
things present, with things past, and looking into Gods ancient ways may see
in the general that mischief is coming, and so from God give warning. Elisha
has his sword as well as Iehu, and Hazael. 1. Reg. 19. 17. And when Elisha
vnsheathes and brandishes his sword, it is a fair warning that the sword of
Iehu, and Hazael are at hand. God cuts down by his Prophets, and slayes by the
words of his mouth. Hose. 6. 5. before he bringes in enemies to kill and
slay, and when his Ministers are killing and slaying it is a warning sign that
enemies shall come to do the like. So Jeremy roots out, pulles down,
destroys, and throws down Kingdoms. Ier. 1. 10. And when Jeremy begins to
pluck up and destroy, it is an ill sign that Babilonians, and other nations
are coming at hand to do the same work. Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven; and so whatsoever ye root out on earth shall be rooted out in
heaven; is not only true of an extraordinary and prophetical Ministry, but of
the ordinary standing ministry of the Church, when Ministers go to work Claue
non erante, and follow the rules and grounds of the word. The watchman gives
warning. Eze. 33. 3. but how? if he blow the trumpet, and give warning. When
Gods watchmen blow the trumpet, then God gives warning. Specially then are the
warnings of Gods Ministers to be taken as warnings from God, when God shall
stir up the hearts of his servants every where in all parts, and places of a
kingdom far distant, and remote each from other, to give warning to a
Kingdom. That look as it is an argument of the divine authority of
prophetical Scripture, that the Prophets though they lived in diverse places
and ages of the world, yet they so al agreed in one and the same truth as if
they had all spoken by one mouth. Hence Luke. 1. 70. As he spoke by the mouth
of his holy Prophets. There were many Prophets yet but one mouth, they all so
agreed that though there were diverse persons, yet but one mouth, as he spoke
by the mouth, not the mouths of his holy Prophets which have been since the
world began. So here, when God does stir up his servants in all parts of a
kingdom, and sets them all on work as with one mouth to give warning of
wrath, it may be taken for no less then a divine warning from God himself.

4 God gives warning by his administration, and dealing with other nations, and
Churches. Gods rods are not only smarting rods to them upon whom they are, but
they are monitory and warning rods to those upon who^ as yet they are not. Zep.
3. 6. 7. I have cut off nations, I have made their streets wast, etc. what was
one end God had in it? To give Jerusalem warning. I said, surely thou will
fear me, thou will receive instruction, so their dwellings should not be cut
off. Oportet abietem vlulare quia cecidit Cedrus, ac alios vicinorum plaga
erudiri atque per aliena mala rebus suis probe consulere. Greg. Naz.
God then aimed at this in his Judgments upon other nations that Jerusalem
should take warning. Then God gives warning when he puts the sword into
Commission. It is warning when he whets his sword, but much more when he gives
the sword a Commission. Ezekel. 14. 17. If I say; Sword go through a land, so
that I cut off man and beast from it. There is the sword put in Commission, and
being so put in Commission, there is warning given of approaching calamity. We
may know the sword to be in Commission as we know the Judges of Assize to be.
When we see the Judges ride circuit, and go from one shire town to another,
and do executions upon malefactors: then we know they have their
Commissions: Judges may not ride circuit without their Commissions. So when we
see the sword ride circuit, and do Executions every where as it goes, and
cannot be staide, but it prospers and preuailes, then without all question it
is in Commission. When it goes through Lands, and Provinces, and Churches, and
cuts off man and beast, then questionless God has said, Sword, Go. See Ier.
47. 6, 7. Oh thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet:
put up thy self into thy scabberd, rest and be still. Like enough Ashkelon,
and the Philistines used all the policy, and power they could: but all their
Combinations, Confederacies, Leagues, Unions, could do no good. For all these
the sword was restless, and prospered strangely, and not by any weakness of
theirs, nor by any strength of the enemy the victory still lost: so as a divine
hand of God was manifest therein. What might the reason of all this be? It had
a charge: How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against
Ashkelon.

When the sword has a Commission, it does as Samuel did, 1. Sam. 7. 16. He
went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal and Mizpeh, and
judged Israel in all those places, and his return was to Ramah. Now look
then, as when Samuel was at Bethel, then they had warning that he was coming
to Gilgal, when he was at Gilgal then had they warning that he was coming to
do Judgment at Mizpeh: So when the sword is once walking circuit to judge, if
it be come to Bethel, it is a warning that it is coming to Gilgal, if at
Gilgal, there is a warning for Mizpeh. Let other Kingdoms, and Churches, that
stands by and look on, let them take this as a warning from God, that the
sword is coming to execute judgments amongst them. Then it is a warning that
God will give men to the sword: when evil goes forth from nation to nation,
Ier. 25. 32. And why should other nations be amazed, and their Kings be
horribly afraid, and tremble every man for his own life in the day of Egypts
fall by the sword, Ezech. 32. 10. were it not but that Gods dealing with Egypt,
were a warning of the like wrath, and ruin coming upon themselves?

5 God gives warning by doing, as Psalm. 78. 50. He made a way to his anger, he
gave their life over to the pestilence. God brought the pestilence amongst
them, but yet first he made a way for his anger, and his making of a way, was a
warning that wrath was coming. God when he means that wrath shall enter
indeed: he does not presently let it break in; but first makes a way for it,
takes all things out of the way, that may stop or hinder it in its passage, or
be any rub to it in its entrance. Now then when we see God preparing, and
making the way, then he gives warning of wrath coming, and being at hand.
When Christ was to manifest himself in his ministry, first John Baptist must
come before him, and his office was, Mark. 1. 3. To prepare the way of the
Lord. Now then those that had eyes to see John Baptist preparing a way for
Christ, might easily see that God gave warning, that Christ himself was
shortly to come: because John was preparing a way for him. So when God is
preparing a way for wrath, such as have eyes to see the way preparing, may see
God giving warning, that some heavy judgment and calamity is at hand. When
the Kings harbengers come before, and prepare for the King, it is a warning to
such places that the King is coming. God so deals in the bringing in of
judgments upon a nation, as he did in bringing in that great plague upon the
Church, in bringing in Antichrist into the world, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. The mystery
of iniquity does already work, only he who lets will let, until he be
taken out of the way. That plague was breeding long before it brake forth and
came to ripeness: but there was a (...); namely, the Roman Ethnic Emperors
that stood in the way, and till they were first done out of the way, the man of
sin could not enter: but when that let should be taken out of the way, and so
a way made, Then shall that wicked one be revealed, v. 8. So that when that let
was done away, and so a way making, such as had then eyes to see it, might see
that God gave warning that Antichrist was now coming into the world. So it is
in this case, Judgment is breeding long before it comes. God has a purpose to
bring it, but yet many times there be some lets in the way that it cannot well
come till they be removed; God therefore prepares, and makes a way for the
intended Judgment by removing, and taking out of the way every (...) every let
that may hinder it when it comes. And when ^he way is making, God gives warning
that the Judgment is coming. Now God commonly makes the way by two things; The
Moath and the Hornet. And when those two come then are the harbengers come, and
the John Baptists of the Judgment.

1 The Moath, when God means to bring a Judgment upon a Kingdom he first
gives warning by making way for it by the Moath. God threatens, Hos. 5. 14. a
terrible Judgment that he will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a young Lion to
the House of Judah, that he will tear and go away, etc. But will God give no
warning, yes that he will, and fair warning too. And how? By making way, for
the Lion by the moath v. 12. I will be unto Ephraim as a moath, and to the
House of Judah as rottenness. The moath is a secret insensible Judgment that
gradually, and insensibly eats out the heart and strength of a State, and by
the weakening of a State prepares it for a fatal desolatory Judgment.

A moath eats now one thread, then another, makes now one hole, then another,
and so by degrees wasting, and rotting the garment perpares it with much ease,
to be rent in pieces. It is difficult to rende in pieces a strong sound
garment, but when once it is all moath eaten, and rotten, how easy is it for
any: much more for a Lion to rende it: thus therefore would God prepare Ephraim
for the Lion by the moath, and by the moath give him warning of the Lion. What
this moath is we may see plainly by that, Isay. 3. 1. 2. 3. with the eight
verse. In the eight verse, God threatens the ruin and the fall of Judah and
Jerusalem. But will God come suddenly upon them? No, he will give them fair
warning: But how? By making way for their fatal blow, and for the Lions claws
by the teeth of the moath. First before the Lion comes they shall see a way
making for him by the moath. ver. 1. 2. 3. for the Lord of host does take away
from Jerusalem, and from Judah the stay and the staff. First God before he
ruins them will weaken them, and by some precursory Judgment will infeeble
them by taking from them whatsoever might strenghten them against an enemy,
that when an enemy comes, they shall have no stay, nor staff to rest upon
against him. If an enemy do offer to make an invasion; yet if a people be well
stored with provisions, they have good store of bread, trading be quick, that
there be no general poverty and penury in the Land, it is a great stay against
an enemy, it is a strong thread in the garment. Again if an enemy do attempt
an invasion, yet if the State be well furnished with Prudent, Ancient,
experienced Counselors, if withal it be well provided of brave soldiers, men of
war, mighty men, Captains of fifty, brave Leaders, and Commanders, this is a
great stay to a State, these be strong threeds in the cloth that will not
suffer it easily to be rent. It will be hard to rend such cloth a sunder that
has such strong threeds in it; Therefore that it may the easier be rent in
pieces God will send some Judgment before hand that moath-like shall eat
asunder those threeds, he will bring in the decay of trading which is the
bread of a Land, he will now take away one Prudent man, then another, now such
a man of war, and then another, and thus by degrees so weaken them that when
an enemy should come having al resistances removed he may with all case ruin
Judah and Jerusalem. Thus Judah by the moath had warning of the Lion, and when
God made their State and their Kingdom a motheaten Kingdom, he thereby gave
them warning that they should assuredly fall, and ruin.

2 The Hornet. When God means to bring Judgment upon a Kingdom he gives
warning thereof by premising and fore-sending, the hornet. Exodus 23. 28. I will
send Hornets before thee which shall drive out the Hiuite, the Canaanite before
thee. What that Hornet is we may see v. 27. I will send my fear before thee,
and will destory all the people to whom thou shall come and I will make all
thine enemies turn their backs unto thee. This Hornet then was nothing else
but the misgiuing fear of the Canaanites selfe-condemning consciences, which
should take all heart and courage from them, that they should not be able to
stand it out in the day of battle, but their own guilty consciences
representing unto them their deserts, should Hornet-like so sting the^ with
fear, that they should turn their backs to the Israelites. And this was that
which Rahab told the spies, and upon which she concludes that the Land was
theirs, Josh. 2. 9. 11. I know the Lord has given you the land. How did she
know it? she saw the Hornet was come before, and had stung the Canaanites, and
thereby gave warning of ruin, And that your terror is fallen upon us, and
that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you, And as soon as we
had heard these things our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more
courage in any man because of you. Here was the stinge of the Hornet, here was
the Hornet making way for wrath. If the Canaanites had had courage and spirit,
and should have stood stoutly, and bravely to it, it would not have been so
easy a matter for Israel to have conquered Canaan, but now because God would
ruin the Canaanites, and give Israel their land, therefore he sends the
Hornet before to make way for their entrance, and so to sting them that all
Courage, and Heart might be taken away. And when the Canaanites feel this
stinging Hornet, then have they plain warning that their Desolation is
approaching. This is that Hornet which God sent before the Medes, to make way
for the destruction of the Babylonians, Esaias. 13. 7, 8, 9. And this is that
Hornet, that made way for the Babylonians to ruin Jerusalem, Ier. 6. 24. We
have heard the fame thereof, our hands wax feeble, anguish has taken hold of
us, and pain as of a woman in travail. This was that Hornet, that made
Pharaohs arms fall down, Ezech. 30. 25. and his sword to fall out of his
hands, v. 22. He was so stunge at the heart with the fear of the King of
Babylon, that he had neither strength to lift up his arm, nor to hold his
sword in his hand. As the Moath takes away all outward stays and helps, so the
Hornet takes away inward Spirit, and Courage. And when both these are taken
away, how fair a way is prepared for an enemy. Where ever then men's hearts
melt with the fear of an enemy, from the guilt of selfe-condemning
conscinces, it is a warning from God, that wrath is coming.

6 God gives warning by his graduall departure from a Nation and a Church. When
God means that Iugdement shall come, he himself will first depart, and as
Judgment shall come, so will he go. Judgment comes not all at once upon a
nation but by degrees, and God gives it an admission by a graduall recesse and
departure. Now then whenever God begins to go, then is it a fair warning
that Judgment is coming. In the ninth, tenth, and eleventh Chapters of
Ezekiel, God makes diverse remoues. And we shall still observe that as he goes
out, so some new Judgment comes in. 1. He remoues from the Cherubins, in the
Oracle to the threshold, Cap. 9. 3. and upon that remove see what follows,
ver. 5, 6, 7, etc. 2. He remoues to the Cherubins on the right side of the
house, Cap. 10. 1. and upon that remove see what follows, v. 2. 3. He remoues
to the East gate of the house, and the first entrance into the Temple, Cap. 10.
19. and see what follows upon that, Cap. 11. 8, 9, 10. 4. He remoues to Mount
Oliver quite out of the city, Cap. 11. 23. And when God was gone quite out,
then followed the fatal calamity in the ruin thereof. Thus still as God went
out, Judgment came in, and by these steps of his departure, he gave warning
of the coming of Judgment. When God is at the threshold, Judgment is at the
doors. So Amos. 9. 1. I saw the Lord standing upon the Altar. But what does
the Lord standing upon the Altar? His station was between the Cherubins in
the Holy place: Give ear thou that dwell between the Cherubins. Psalm. 80.
1. What then means the Lords standing upon the Altar? surely it means no
good. It is a sign God was going, he has made a step from the Cherubins to
the Altar, and see what follows in that place: namely; a terrible sentence of
Judgment. God is at the Altar when this sentence is pronounced. It is in this
case as it was in that. Numb. 12. 9, 10. The anger of the Lord was kindled
against them, and he departed. When God is angry, then will he depart. And what
if he do, what will follow? And the cloud departed from off the Tabernacle,
and behold Miriam became Leprous. No sooner does God depart, but Judgment
comes in his room. So that when God begins to set his first foot forward,
it is a fair warning of evil coming. The destroying Angels could do nothing
to Sodom, so long as Lot was there: neither can desolatory Judgments have
power over a Nation so long as God is graciously present with them. Therefore
as when Lot went out of Sodom, in that day fire and brimestone came down upon
Sodom, so when God once goes, then are calamities ready to crowde in upon a
Nation.

Now Gods departure has certain foote-steps, which are Ominous presages of
sorrow at hand.

1 When Idols and Idolatry enter into a land. When God's Ark came into Dagons
Temple, then Dagon dropped down, but when Dagon comes into Gods Temple, and
rises and is advanced there, then God is going. See Ezekiel. 8. 5. 6. There was an
Image of Jealousy, and therefore God would go far off from his Sanctuary.
Specially are Gods jealous eyes provoked, when the case is as Ezekiel. 43. 8. That
but a wall between God, and Idols. He likes no such near neighbors, he
will be gone rather then brook such neighborhood. Nay, it is a sign that God
is already in some measure gone, for had he held his own station and
possession, how could they have entered. Such a step presages great calamity.

2 When the ministry of a Church, begins to grow corrupt and vnfounde in
doctrine and manners: when Truth and Holiness departs, God departs. Hereupon
a corrupt ministry made a presage of calamity. Hos. 9. 7. The days of
visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel shall know it,
Nay Israel may know it before they come: But how? The Prophet is a fool, the
spiritual man is mad. When Prophets, and spiritual men once begin to be
fools, and to be mad, to be out of their spiritual wits, and out of the way
of truth, then look for the days of visitation: because when truth goes, God
goes, and when he goes no good can come.

3 It is a manifest step of Gods departure, when it is with a Nation, as it was
with Sampson. Judge. 16. 20. He wist not that the Lord was departed from him.
But God was departed from him, and how appeared it? v. 19. She began to afflict
him, and his strength went from him: he thought he would do as at other times,
but could not. At other times he brake the green withes, at other times he
brake new roapes, at other times he went away with the pin of the beam, at
other times he was still too good for the Philistines, but now he could not
do as at other times. God was departed from him, and thereupon followed that
misery, v. 21. They put out his eyes, they put him in fetters of brass, etc.
Gods departure gave warning of all this sorrow, and in that his strength went
from him, that he could not do as at other times; this was the impression of
Gods departing foot. Thus is it with a State and Nation. If God depart from
them, he thereby gives them warning to look for Philistines, fetters of brass,
and the prison house. And then may a Nation know that God is departing if not
departed, when their strength is departed from them, and they cannot do as
they have done at other times. That same is an evident step of Gods departure,
Ps. 60. 10. Wilt not thou O God which had cast us off? and thou O God which
did not go out with our armies. When God the^ goes not forth with a peoples
armies, he casts them off, he departs from them. And thus God departed from
Egypt, and gave them by this step of his departure, warning of their
destruction. Ier. 46. 14. 19. Standfast, prepare thee, for the sword shall
devour round about thee, furnish thy self to go into captivity. But what
sign or likelihood of Captivity? See v. 15. 16. Why are thy valiant men swept
away? they stood not because the Lord did drive them; he made many to fall, yea
one fell upon another, and they said: Arise, let us go again to our own
people, and to the land of our nativity from the oppressing sword. God was
departed from them, their enemies beat them, great reason has Egypt to take
warning of sword and Captivity coming upon her: when a Nations shield is
gone, what can they look for, but to be bread for their enemies. And thus
does God give warning in these particulars.

Use 1. Take we here notice, of Gods gracious dealing with this sinful
English nation. Our sins are such, that God might have done with us, as with
Sodom, Lam. 4. 6. That was ouerthrown as in a moment. God might suddenly have
surprised us, and have let in the flood of his wrath to have swallowed us up in
a moment. But here may I say as Paul, Romans 11. 22. Behold the goodness, and
the severity of God: The Severity of God in his purposes of wrath against us:
The Goodness of God, in his gracious warnings, wherein he gives us intelligence
of his Intentions. This day is this truth fulfilled in our eyes. We see it
true for our parts, that God gives fair warnings before Judgment ceaze upon a
people. God never gave any fairer warning then he has given us: we have had
warnings in all these kinds: For,

1. What if I should say that God gives us warning by Oracle? Seems he not to
do it, Apoc. 3. 10. Speaks he not of an hour of temptation which shall come
upon all the world? Seems not that hour to be already begun? Surely if that
Scripture look so far toward the ends of the world, and if meant of an
hour of temptation, to come in this last hour of the world: then may we say
of this, as our Savior Christ of that, This is the hour, and the power of
darkness. The present troubles of the Church, may seem to be the beginning
of that hour. But to let this pass, if God warn not us thus yet want we no
warnings.

2. If prodigious signs and wonders be warnings, then judge if God have not
warned us. Besides that common warning, which God gave us with the rest of his
Churches, in that prodigious Comet we have had peculiar warnings in this
kind. God gave us warning in that wonder of the doubled tides in the river of
Thames. God gave us warning in that Earthquake March 27. 1626. God gave us
fair warning in that prodigious storm in the City, that fetched the dead
bodies out of their graves: together with that stupendous sight upon the
water. And amongst diverse others, I dare not slight that hand of God in sending
John Friths preparation to the Cross, in the fish belly to the University of
Cambridge, a little before the Commencement. That such a book, should in such
a manner, and to such a place, and at such a time be sent: when by reason of
peoples confluence out of all parts, notice might be given to all places of the
land, (in my apprehension) it can be construed for no less; then a divine
warning, and to have this voice with it, England prepare for the Cross. Of
which thing I may ^y with a little ^hange, as Aug. speaks ^f a prodigi^us
warning God gave the ^omanes. Quod quanti ^ali signum ^it? Quod si ^oc signum
^ntum ma^um ^it, quantum ^alum erit il^d cuius hoc ^gnum fuit? Aug. de ciuit.
^i lib. 3. c. 23.


3. And how long, and how loud has the Ministerial Trumpet sounded in our
ears? Has it not sounded like the Trumpet in Mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 13. 16.
Have we not heard it very long, and exceeding loud, Have not Gods watchmen
from their watch-Towers a long while cried as Esaias, 21. 8. A Lion, A Lion. Have
we not in this kind been warned unto wearysomnesse.

4. But what warnings has God given us in the calamities, and miseries of our
neighbor, and sister Churches? Nec illos natural robur corporum facit viuere,
nec nos naturae infirmitus vinci. Nemo sibi aliud persuadeat. Nemo aliud
arbitretur, sola nos morum nostrorum vitia vicerunt. Salv. de prouid. l. 7.
Ideo infirmis hostibus tradidit vt ostenderet scilicet non vires valere sed
causam vt cognosceremus meritorum hoc fuisse non virium. Id.
Have we not seen the sword in Commission and upon Circuit? Has it not
circuited from Bohemia to the Palatinate: from thence into other Provinces of
Germany, and so up the borders of Denmark: Have we not seen a divine hand in
all the Churches losses, victory and success going with the enemy: though
there have not wanted equal power, and forces to match with them? Nay, to come
near home: Has not the sword ceazed upon our own armi^? Has it not begun
to eat English flesh, and drink English blood? Warnes it not us fairly, that
it is bending its course, and laying its road toward us? The Lord threatens
the Edomites. Esaias. 34. 6. That the sword shall be filled with blood, and be
made fat with fatness: and else where, that it shall be drunk with blood. The
sword has been a long while kept lean, hungry and thirsty, and has not fed
on our flesh, and blood. Is it not to be feared, that now it has got a smatch,
it will like an hunger-sterued wolf, fall so much the fiercelier, and
greedilier upon us? Nos non vicinos nostros tantum ardere vidimus sed ipsi iam
arsimus. Et quid hoc (pronefas) mali est. Arsimus Arsimus and tame^ flammas
quibus arsimus non timemus. Salv. de Prouid. l. 6.
Yea, does not God hereby give warning, that he will provide a more liberal
feast for the sword even unto fatness and drunkenness? If the sword upon
other Nations, be Gods warnings to us of this Nation; then much more the sword
upon those of our own Nation is a warning from God to us, that he intendes to
have a great sacrifice amongst us.

5. And who is so blind, as that he has not seen the Moath at work now a
long while together? How has it sheared a sunder the strong threeds of our
cloth, and how is our garment become Moath-eaten? What else means the common
cry, and complaint of the decay and deadness of trading, of the poverty and
penury of many places in the land? What has it bin, that within these few
years has taken away so many brave, and worthy soldiers, men of note for
birth, worth, skill and courage, that like those Judge. 5. 18. Would have
ieoparded their lives in the high places of the field: What I say has it bin
that has by degrees picked out now one then another but the Moath sent of God
to prepare, and make way for a rending, and a ramping Lion? As if God had said,
I am determined to bring a smarting judgment upon England: but I see such a
mighty man, such a man of courage and skill, he will be a great hinderance to
an enemy at his coming in, he may be a stop, and a rub in an enemies way:
therefore I will take him out of the way, that so judgment may pass on
smoothly without any check. And when we have heard the fame, and rumor of
enemies approaching; alas what a deadly sting has the Hornet stricken into our
hearts? how have our selfe-condemning hearts, under the conscience of our
personal and national guilt melted like water?

6. Lastly, unless we will wilfully shut our eyes, may we not trace God in
the foote-steps of his departure from us? May we not find him from between
the Cherubins, and removed not only to the threshold: but in a manner to the
Eastgate of the house, as if he had but one remove more, to be gone quite
and clean from us? They have seen thy goings O God, even the goings of God my
King in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 68. 24

So may we see the goings of God, even the goings ^f God our King from his
Sanctuary. What else ^anes the spread, and growth of Popery and Idola^y? What
else means the departure of our old Truth (...) the increase of Arminianisme?
Shows not this that God is at the threshold, if not at the East gate? And what
means the going away of our strength that we cannot do as we were wont to
do as at other times. When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling, but when he
offended in Baal he died. Hos. 13. 1. Ephraim was terrible to all his
neighbors about him, and who durst budge against the name of Ephraim; but when
Baal was come God was gone, and then every paltry adversary trampled upon him,
and feared him no more then a dead man. How dreadful has the English name,
and the English sword been to all our adversaries; when England spoke, there
was trembling? Vbi namque sunt antiquae Romanorum opes and dignitates?
fortissimi quondam Romani erant, nunc sine viribus. Terrebant Romani veteres,
nos timemus. O infaelicitates nostrae! ad quae deuenimus.
But Lord what shall I say, says Joshua, when Israel turns his back upon his
enemies? And Lord what shall we say when England turns her back upon her
enemies? What shall we say? What can we say, but that God is departing from us,
and gives us warning thereby, of fearful afterclaps like to follow. Ichabod,
Ichabod, where is the glory? The glory is departed. And it is with us as with
them: a people terrible hitherto, but not so now. Hitherto have we been
terrible; but it is a sign the Lion is dead, when Hares insult over him.
Surely God gives us warning that our shield is going, and that if we take not a
course to fetch him back again, and set him between the Cherubins, that we
are no better then bread for our enemies.

Use 2. If God give warning, men should take the warning he gives. To what end
are warnings given* if not taken. If the trumpet give an uncertain sound* who
shall prepare himself to the battle? 1. Cor. 14. 8* But when the trumpet
gives a certain sound, then i^ is time for men to look about them. Two things
should make us take warning.

1. The great danger that will follow upon warning* neglected. Gods warnings
neglected, do but exasperate wrath, and will make vengeance so much the
smarter when it comes. See the danger of not taking warning. Ezekiel. 33. 3. 4. 5.
If the watchman blow the trumpet and warn the people, then whosoever hears
the sound of the trumpet, and takes not warning, if the sword come and take him
away, his blood shall be upon his own head; he heard the sound of the trumpet,
and took not warning, his blood shall be upon him. Calamity single and alone,
will prove burden heavy enough; calamity with guilt, and iniquity upon our
heads, the guilt of the neglect of Gods warnings will prove calamity
unsupportable.

2. The great ensuing benefit upon warning taken. Let things be ever so
dangerous and desperate, yet if men would take Gods warnings, there were
possibility enough to save all. Safety and prevention of dangers lies in taking
of warning. Noah's taking of warning, was the saving of his house. He that
takes warning shall deliver his soul. Ezekiel. 33. 5. The King of Syria find many
dangerous proiects against the King of Israel; Elisha still gives the King of
Israel warning of the danger. 2. King. 6. 10. The King of Israel took his
warning, and what was the issue? He sent to the place which the man of God had
told him, and warned him of, and he saved himself there not once nor twice.
The way to save our selves from the dangers we are warned of, is to take Gods
warnings. Look upon all the warnings God has given us, and consider if it may
not be said of us as of Moab. Ier. 48. 16. The calamity of Moab is near to
come, and his affliction hastes fast. Yea consider, if we have not the buds of
the figtree, telling us that summer is nigh, and that judgment is near even
at the doors. And hastens our affliction, and sit we still? As we desire to
prevent the fatal ruin of this renowned Church and Kingdom, so in the fear
of God be we persuaded to take warning.

But how is that to be done, wherein stands this taking of warning? That is now
the second thing in the Text. Noah's wisdom in taking warning. God gives, and
he takes warning; and that 1. in believing it: 2. in fearing it: 3. in making
use of it for safety.

1. In believing it. By faith Noah etc. That should indeed be men's wisdoms to
take Gods warnings by believing. God is to be believed in his threatenings,
as well as in his promises. And this was the Ninevites wisdom. Ion. 3. 5. So
the people of Nineveh believed God. And this is the first ground of safety. If
Noah had not believed, he had not feared; if he had not feared, he had not
prepared an Arc; if an Arc had not been prepared he had perished. But now
his Arc saues him; out of faith and fear he builds his Arc. And this is it
God looks for at our hands, that after so many warnings we should believe him.
Noah did so; and though he were warned by immediate Revelation, and in that
regard had more reason to believe then we have, yet again in some respects
we hau^ more reason to believe then he had. For

1. He was warned only once, and that an hundre^ and twenty years before the
flood came; we read o^ no more warnings that he had. In an hundred an^ twenty
years he might have an hundred and twent^ doubts and questions in his heart,
whether it should be so or no. But we have had warning upon warning* several
kinds of warnings, and every of these iterate* So that as God speaks to Moses
in that case, Exodus 4 1. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. so it may be said of us. So that
i^ regard of the variety and frequency of our warnings* we have more reason to
believe then Noah had.

2. He was warned, as the text says, of things as yet not ene; and yet he
believes, there was nothing in natural course that presaged the floods. He
sees nothing till the flood begins, and yet he believed. Now in this regard we
have more reason to believe than he. He was warned of things not seen, but we
are warned of things seen; we cannot say in this case as the Church complains
in another, Psalm. 74. 9. We see not our signs: we see our signs, even all
signs of a flood that may be. Except ye see signs and wonders, says our
Savior in another case, ye will not believe, Ioh. 4. 48. it was somewhat yet,
that they would believe then: we see signs and wonders, and yet we believe
not. Except I may see and feel, says Thomas, I will not believe, Ioh. 20. 25.
but when he did see and feel, he believed. We if we have not lost our sight
and senses, both see and feel, and yet will not believe.

The people of Nineveh believed God, when Jonas warned them, yet forty days
etc. The men of Nineveh will rise up in judgment against us of this Nation:
they had far less reason to believe than we have, and yet they believed; we
have far more reason to believe, and yet we believe not. 1. They had but one
witness, we are compassed about with a cloud of witnesses. 2. They were
warned but once, we have been warned unto weariness. 3. They could see no
likelihood of any such sudden danger, they knew of no preparations abroad;
they see no enemies begirting their City with a siege, they were a strong and a
well provided City; we hear and know of enemies, of potent and provoked
enemies, and of their great preparations. 4. They were Heathens and Idolaters
that professed not the name of God; we glory in our Christian title and
profession, in our believing in God. 5. They were warned only by a stranger,
one of a nation held in suspicion and jealousy. If some Spaniard should now
come into England and threaten it with desolation within forty days, what
little regard would we give unto it. But we are warned and threatened by those
of our own nation, of whose love, loyalty, and fidelity we can make no doubt;
by those that pray for the welfare of the Nation, and wrestle mightily with God
for the peace of it. Here is a great deal of odds between Englands and
Ninevehs warnings, and yet Nineueh believed God, and we believed him not. We
have more warnings, they more faith. The men of Nineueh will judge this nation
for their unbelief.

How long, and how often has God warned us by his Ministers, and yet may they
say as Is. 53. 1. Lord who has believed our report? How truly agrees that to
us. Hab. 1. 5. Behold and regard, and wonder maruellously, for I will work a
work in your days which ye will not believe though it be told you. It is just
our case, though we hear that which may make both our ears tingle, yet we
will not believe it. It is just with us as it was in that case. Act. 27. 10.
Paul there gives them fair warning: Sirs, I perceive that this voyage will be
with hurt, and much damage not only of the lading and the ship, but also of
our lives. And so it proved in the sequel. But v. 11. The Centurion believed
the master and the owner of the ship more then those things which were spoken
by Paul. We are warned of a storm, and that no small tempest is like to lie
upon us, and that all hope that we shall be saved is like to be taken away,
and yet for all this we are readier to believe any that will comfort us with
some poor shadows of hope, then to believe Gods Paul's. Nay we are worse then
the Centurion, for he yet believed the Master, and the owner of the ship, and
if he had told him of danger, he would not have loosed from Crete. Why now
the Master and Owner of the ship, he and not Paul alone tells us of the danger.
Our sovereign Lord the King in his Proclamation for the Parliament, and for
the General Fast, gives us to understand of potent and dangerous enemies, and
their preparations. Nam ita cunctos sua crimina praecesserant, vt nec metuerent
periculum suum praenoscebatur captivitas, nec formidabatur. Ablatus quippe erat
a peccatoribus timor ne posset esse cautela Salv. de prouid l. 6.
If Paul, Gods Ministers, will not be believed, yet let the Owner of the ship,
Gods anointed, be believed. Faith would save us in this kind. If the
Centurion had believed Paul, Act. 27. 21. the ship had been saved. Sirs, ye
should have hearkened unto me, and have gained this harm and loss. They
believed it at last, when the forepart of the ship stuck fast, and the hinder
part was broken with the violence of the waves. It is too late to believe when
all is lost; it is good believing when somewhat may be saved by it.

2. In fearing, moved with fear. This must be another point of wisdom to
take warning so as to fear. The warnings of wrath should work deep
impressions of fear in our hearts. Hab. 3. 16. When I heard, my belly
trembled, my lips quiuered at the voice, rottenness entered into my bones. Am.
3. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? And v. 6. Shall the trumpet be
blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? And yet people are not
afraid, though their fear would much conduce to their safety. This is the way
to be hid in the day of trouble, Hab. 3. 16 my belly trembled etc. that I might
rest in the day of trouble. And Exodus 9. 20. He that feared the word of the
Lord made his servants and his cattle fly into the houses; and so they were
saved from the storm. Much might be said to this point, but I must contract
and hasten.

3. In making use of it for safety, and in taking a course for the prevention
of those dangers he was warned of, prepared an Arc. And this is the special
point of wisdom above the rest. Prou. 22. 3. A wise man foreseeth the evil.
That indeed is some wisdom, but that is not all; And he hides himself. That Is
the special wisdom which takes a course for safety against approaching
evils. This is that we are to do, and then indeed we take Gods warnings when
we provide for the worst. And thus it concerns us to do now, if ever. Do we
not see a flood coming? Why then are we not at our Arkes? Why will we
wilfully perish and cast away our selves? When a flood cames, what would a man
give for an Arc then? Ah when the flood is come, what will be the miserable
madding fears of such as shall not have an Arc ready then? See their pitious
condition, Ier. 47. 2. 3. Behold the waters rise up out of the North, and
shall be an ouerflowing flood, and shall ouerflow the land etc. Then shall the
men cry and the Inhabitants of the land shall howl etc. The fathers shall not
look back to their children for feebleness of hands. How deep and weighty
is the oppression of such fears, as make parents grow unnatural?

Quest. What is to be done then for the making of an Arc? How may we provide
for future safety?

Ans. For the making of an Arc and providing for future safety, there be first
some things to be done by all in general. Secondly some things by some in
special. 1. Those things that are to be done by all, are two. 1. Humiliation
and deep abasement of our souls under Gods threatening hand. So that here we
have cause by the way to break out into thanksgiving, and to say as Ezekiel. 7.
27. Blessed be the Lord God which has put such a thing as this into the Kings
heart: as to call forth the whole Land to the duties of Humiliation that we may
yet beg for our lives. Well, If ever we will make an Arc for the land, and
provide for our safety, this is the first piece of timber that must be felled
and squared for it. They be great things that Humiliation will do if it be
done aright. Job. 22. 29. 30. When men are cast down then shall thou say,
There is lifting up, and he shall save the humble person. He shall deliver the
Island of the innocent. Alas, we are down, exceedingly down from the ancient
excellency of former times. How now might we recover the ancient glory of this
Island? Let men cast themselves down this day, even down to the dust, and lay
their mouths in the dust, in the depth; a truth of humiliation: and though it
were ten times lower with us then it is, God would say, Behold England is cast
down, There shall be a lifting up. What is our errand this day in these duties
of humiliation, but that God would be pleased to take off present evils from
us, and that the future things might go well with us? And would we now in
good earnest prevail with God in these things? Humble we then our souls
seriously this day before our God. Humiliation indeed will do the deed. See 2.
Chron. 12. 6. 7. The Princes of Israel, and the King humbled themselves, and
they said, The Lord is righteous: And when the Lord saw that they humbled
themselves, he said, They have humbled themselves, therefore I will not destroy
them etc. And again v. 12. And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord
turned from him, that he would not destroy him, and also in Judah things went
well. How welcome should that man be unto us, that could put us into a course
that might put us in hope that all things now should go well with us? Lo here
is a course will do it. Our fears and dangers are exceeding great, but be
they never so great, yet if we this day do all deeply humble and afflict our
souls, and power out broken and bleeding hearts, and buckets of water before
our God, I dare be the man that shall promise you hope yet of saving all. I
dare the boldlier do it, because I have a text for it. Ezr. 10. 1. 2. yet now
there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. Now there is hope. Why now?
There was praying, confessing, weeping, and the people wept very sore, they
wept a great weeping. Yet now, says Shecaniah there is hope: as if he had
said, though our danger is great, yet now upon this humiliation, there is hope
all shall be well. As therefore we would this day go home from this duty
with hope, so do we then to the purpose; Let hearts split in sunder, rend to
pieces, mourning and melting hearts in confession and supplication. Do we as
Manasseh did, 2. Chron. 33. 12. He humbled himself greatly. Great humiliation
will send us away with great hope.

2. Personal reformation and amendment of our own evil ways and
prouocations. Every soul this day quit his hands of his personal guilt. It is
the wrath of God from whence all plagues and judgments come. Nos coelestis
irae ignem accendimus, and excitamus incendia quibus ardeamus: and recte utique
quoties ista mala perferimus, ad nos dici illud Propheticum ( Isai. 50.)
possit. Ite in flammam ignis quam accendistis. Salv. de provid. lib. 8.
They be our sins that kindle this wrath; they be the fuel that kindle and
feed this fire. The King of Nineueh saw this to be a special provision for
safety from threatened wrath. Jonah threatens speedy wrath: he proclayms a fast,
he enioines strickt abstinence from food and apparel. Would that serve the
turn? No, he will have prayer also added thereto, and not ordinary prayer
neither, but crying prayer, nor any crying prayer neither, but let them cry
mightily. And would this serve? No, he will have more, he will have serious
repentance and forsaking of sin, and this not only of some few, but of all, let
them turn every one from his evil way. Now one would think nothing could be
added to all this, and yet he has not done; there is one thing more behind
that makes up all. Besides their general repentance, he requires a special
personal reformation of their special personal sin, And from the violence
that is in their hands. So well did he see the vanity of all the rest without
this last.

2. There is something to be done by some special persons. And that is by you
that are now met in this great and honorable Council of the Land. You
therefore that are the great Senate of the land, upon whom our eyes and hopes
next under God and the King are; Be ye entreated in the bowels of the Lord
Jesus Christ to take notice of Gods many warnings given to this Land, and so to
take them to heart as to take a course for the prevention of threatened and
imminent evils. God gives you fair warning of foul weather, and of a
dreadful flood, that is like not only to ouerflow and go over and reach to
the neck, as that Isai 8. 8. but of a flood like Noah's, that is like to
ouertop the highest hills even many cubits. The Pharisees Matthew. 16. 3. were
weather wise, It will be foul weather to day, for the sky is red and
lowering, but could not discern the signs of the times, as the face of the
sky. Cast up your eyes, you honorable Senate of the Land, and you shall see
that foul weather is toward, for the sky is red and lowering. Ye shall see a
cloud not only as that 1. King. 18. 44. as big as a man's hand, but as v. 45.
The heavens all black with clouds and wind. Listen and you shall hear a
sound of abundance of rain. Do ye not already begin to feel the drops
falling in your faces? We question not but your wisdoms discern the signs,
and the dangers of the times as well as the Pharisees did the face of the sky,
and that you see all sad presages, and prognostications of a flood.

Now then so many of you as God has called to this Parliamentary service, we
have to tell you what God and this Realm and Church with the distressed parts
of Christ's Church abroad, look for at your hands. God has called you together
to be the public Arke-wrights for the safety of this Church and state. The
eyes of these Dominions, and the weeping eyes of Gods Churches beyond the Seas
are upon you as upon so many Noah's. Lamech when his son was borne gave him
the name of Noah, that is, one refreshing with rest, bringing comfort and
consolation; you see his reason of the Imposition, Genesis 5. 29. He called his
name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning the work and sorrow
of our hands, because of the earth which the Lord has cursed. Now this is that
we all pray and hope for, that this present assembly may be an assembly of
Noah's, that this Parliament may comfort us concerning the fears and griefs of
our hearts, and because of the land which of late the Lord has not blessed.
This is that we all pray for, we all look for. Now then if you would prove
right Noah's to us, such as may bring us consolation, then for Christ's sake fall
to the making of an Arc, and thereby make your selves Noah's and Barnabasses,
the blessed sons of consolation to this Church and State. Think when you sit
together in your solemn assembly that you hear the State and Church cry out
unto you, as once Peter did to Christ when the winds rose, and the Sea grow
rough, Master, Master save me, I perish. So think you hear the people
crying from all the quarters of these Dominions, Fathers, Elders ^iue us, build
us an Arc, or else we sink, or else re^edilesse we perish.

Think as you sit together in council that you ^eare a voice from all parts
of the Land from whence ^e be come, crying in your ears, Help, Help, or else
^e are all but dead men, Exodus 12. 33. Present unto ^our thoughts the sad and
disconsolate condition of the Church beyond the Seas. Think you hear the
shrikings of slaughtred and butchered infants dragd from their mothers breasts
to have their brains dashed out against the stones of the streets. Think that
you hear the sorrowful and doleful lamentations of ravished matrons, and
defloured virgins in the bitterness of their spirits, wringing their hands and
rending the hair from off their heads. Think that you hear the Church both
at home and abroad, crying out unto you, An Arc, An Arc, for Gods love
provide us an Arc. Improve all the wisdom of your hearts, and all the power
of your places to which God has now called you, to save us from the rage of
the merciless waters. Gods watchmen have a long time cried, a Flood, a Flood,
Gods people now cry an Arc, an Arc. Now therefore in the name of God fall
close to the building of an Arc. Noah built an Arc but for the saving of his
house, what is an house to a Church? to a kingdom? to many Churches? to many
kingdoms? Noah built an Arc for the saving of eight persons: what are eight
persons to millions and worlds of Christ an people that are like to perish,
and be overwhelmed by the merciless enemies of Gods grace? that make a noise
like the noise of the Seas, that make a rushing like the rushing of many
waters, like the rus^ing of mighty waters. Is. 17. 12. 13.

Quest. But what course is to be taken, and what i^ to be done for the building
of an arc?

Answ. I will not take upon me to direct your wi^domes, but since it has
pleased you to call me to thi^ service, give me leave so long as I keep my
self within the bounds of my profession to advise what I conceiu^ may make for
common safety. If therefore you would make an arc, 1. make choice of good
materials, wherewith to build.

2. Have a care to go to work in a due manner.

1. Your Gopher wood or building materials they be these.

1. The public reformation of all such national^ prouocations as have made
God angry with the land* Illud magni and singularis est meriti, non solum ipsum
labe non pollui, sed providere etiam ne unquam alij polluantur. Procurator enim
est quodammodo salutis humanae, qui non tantum id agit ut ipse bonus sit; sed
efficare hoc nititur ut alij mali esse desistitant. Salv. de provid. 7.
This must be the very keele of your arc, here yo^ must begin: all arkes that
want this Gopher wood i^ the keele will prove but cocke-boates. Alas, wha^
poor relief will a cocke-boat afford in a storm^ when the cursed Euroclydon
shall blow. A cocke-Boa^ will never live in a storm. All courses you can take
for safety and deliverance, public reformation being neglected, will prove
but such Arkes, as that wherein Moses was exposed. Exodus 2. 3. Arkes of
bulrushes* Alas, what succor will an arc of bulrushes yield in an universal
deluge? Do what you will, what you can, yet if this be not done, nothing is
done. There be three things that conduce to public safety. 1. The joint
endeavors of the Parliament in plotting, and the people in praying. 2. Warlike
provisions and preparations. 3. And fasting. There is indeed much safety in
these, and yet if Reformation be neglected, there (...) a vanity in all these,
and no good will they do. See ^ in particular.

1. People may pray hard, and you may work hard, ^et if no reformation no
safety. You have a good gale ^f prayer at your backs, there is a great spirit
of prai^ up in the Land at this time; and I am verily per^aded that neu^ any
Parliament in this Kingdom ^as more heartily prayed for. Besides we do with
all thankfulness acknowledge the great goodness of God to us in you being
reputed as wise and judicious able house as ever sat. So that when we consider
the earnest prayers of the whole kingdom, and the great wisdom of this
Honorable Senate; I confess they are as a valley of Achor, a door of hope.
Hos. 2. 15. We have great grounds of hope of much good. But yet nevertheless
let me be bold to tell you, that if there be no reformation of angring
prouocations, all will come to nothing, and God will blast our hopes. It is
much that prayer can do; it is the lock and key of heaven, and yet it is
little it will do without reformation. It is much that wisdom can do. The
wisdom of one wise man will do much. Eccl. 9. 14. 15. There was a little City
and a few men within it, and there came a great King against it and besieged
it. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered
the City. Therefore what great things may a whole Parliament house of wise men
do? And yet neither our prayers, nor your endeavors and wisdoms will deliver
the land unless some course be taken for reformation. It will be no better
in this case with us, then it was with the mariners. Ion. 1. 4. 5. There was a
mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was li^ to be broken. The mariners
use all means they can s^ safety, they cry to their gods, they lighten the
shi^ and yet all will not do, yea after they knew the cau^ of the tempest, v.
13. the men rowed hard to bring t^ ship to land, but they could not, for the
sea wrought an^ was tempestuous against them. So then neither cryin^ to their
gods, nor casting forth the wares, nor rowing, nor tugging at their oars,
will bring the ship t^ land out of the danger of the tempest, till Jonas wa^
thrown over board. And so soon as that was done* see what followed, v. 15.
They took up Jonah, and ca^ him forth into the sea, and the sea ceased from
her raging. It is so here; let all the people in the Land tug and row with all
their might in prayer, and do you row with all the strength of your wisdom
in your Parliamentary endeavors, yet till our Ionasses and Iudasses the
provoking sins of the Land that cause the storm, and endanger the ship be
cast over board, till they be reformed, there is no hope of bringing the ship
safe to land.

And here by the way let me advise every Parliament man that intends to
further the work of reformation, and in it to provide for the Lands safety, to
begin first with the reformation of his own person. The work of reformation
must not be undertaken with foul hands. God will have no honor from guilty
hands. God sends Moses to do a great service for his Church, he goes about it
with a guilty hand, with the neglect of his childs circumcision, therefore God
would have killed him by the way. He must first reform his own sin before
he must meddle with Isreal's deliverance. And when God raised Gideon for the
succor of the afflicted state of Israel, before he must meddle with that
work, God sets him another task, Judge. 6. 25. he must first down with Baal.
That which the Emperor Sigismund once spoke at the council of Constance is a
good rule here, one said in the council, Oportet reformationem incipere a
Minoritis, meaning the Minorite Friars, To which the Emperor answered, Imo vero
a Maioritis, meaning the Pope, Cardinals etc. So I say if you will go with a
right foot to the work of Reformation, begin it A Maioritis, that is, from
your selves, you are are of the Maiorites of the kingdom, begin with your
selves, your eyes will be the clearer, and your hands the cleaner for the work.

2. Warlike provisions and preparations will not do it without reformation.
There be no such traitors to the strength of a land, no such underminers and
weakeners thereof as are unreformed prouocations. It is but a folly to trust to
our strength so long as no reformation. Think upon that Ezekiel. 33. 26. Ye stand
upon your sword. As if he should say, It is but a folly for you so to do, your
sword shall do you little service. Why so? Ye work Abomination, and ye
defile every one his neighbors wife, and shall you possess the Land? Shall
your swords keep you in, whilst your sins cast you out of possession?
Reformation is it must strengthen our Arm, and sharpen our sword against our
enemies.

3. And what can do more then fasting? and yet little service is it, it will
do without Reformation; Ier. 14. 10. 12. When they fast I will not hear their
cry. What may the reason be? There was fasting without reformation v. 10. So
Josh. 7. deep and hearty was Ioshuaes abasement, but yet somewhat else was to
be done. Israel has sinned, v. 11. and they must away with the accursed
thing. There was a Babilonish garment in the camp. What if there had been a
Babilonish God? what if a Babilonish Idol? what if a Babilonish Priest? what
if swarms and crowdes of Babilonish Priests? It is not fasting that will make
a waterlight Arc unless the execrable thing be removed. Reformation must do
it. The way to ease our souls of all our grieuances and fears is to grieve
the soul of God. Do this and then there is hope of safety. Judge. 10. 16. And
they put away the strange Gods from amongst them, and served the Lord: there
was reformation. And see what follows. And his soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel. And then God rayses Iephthah for their deliverance. And this
is the first thing to be done.

2. God we see is going and departing from us. Labor to reduce him, and to set
him in his primitive station between the two Cherubins the power and the
purity of religion. If we have sin amongst us, he is the one Arc in the
world against a flood. His Name is a strong tower for deliverance, Prou. 18.
10. maintain that tower. He is a strong Hold in the day of trouble, Nah. 1. 7.
make good that Hold. He is an Arc in the time of a flood. Psalm. 32. 6. 7. In
the floods of great waters they shall not come nigh unto him. Thou art mine
hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble. Yea he it is that can
prevent the flood, Is. 59. 19. When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the
spirit of the Lord shall put him to flight. Therefore as you would provide for
the safety of the Land, so provide for Gods return and residence amongst us.
Do as the two disciples did when Christ made as though he would have gone from
them, Luke 24. 29. They constrained him saying, Abide with us. The common
complaint is, that Popery spreads, that Arminianisme spreads, as these come in,
so God will go out; these will soon drive him out to mount Oliuet, take some
course therefore to suppress the growth of these. Let me never prosper, if
the State prosper under these. Keep our old God, and our old truth, under
which the kingdom has enjoyed so long and happy peace, and has had so
wonderful victories and deliverances. It will be with new doctrines and
novel opinions, as it was with new Gods, Judge. 5. 8. They chose new gods, then
was war in the gates. As ye love your old peace, so maintain, and do your
best to maintain your old truth, the old way and the good way. The Lord is
with you whilst you are with him.

3. That same is a special piece of Arke-timber, right Gopher wood indeed to
make Arkes withal, which we find Ezr. 7. 23. Whatsoever is commanded by the
God of heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven;
for why should there be wrath against the Realm of the King, and his sons?
The way to prevent a flood is to prevent wrath, the way to prevent wrath and
keep it from a Realm is to do for the house of the God of heaven whatsoever
is commanded. There be three things commanded to be done for the house of the
God of heaven.

1. His house lies waste beyond the seas, miserably ruined. The God of heaven
commands that his house be repaired. And God seems to say now to you, as
Iehoash to the Priests, 2. King. 12. 7. Why repair ye^ not the breaches of the
house? Whilst Gods house lay waste, there was wrath upon the Land. Hag. 1. 4.
5. 6. But when once the house built and repaired, then Hag. 2. 19. From this
day will I bless you.

2. He commandes his house to be purged, 2. Chron. 29. 5. Sanctify the house
of the Lord, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place. For this
filthiness was the wrath of God upon Judah and Jerusalem, v. 8.

3. He commands an able preaching Ministry in his house. In this respect many
houses of God in this land lay waste. Many congregations want Preachers, many
Ministers want maintenance, and many covetous Impropriatours want conscience.
They have learned that language, Psa. 83. 12. Let us take to our selves the
houses of God in possession. The God of heaven commands a preaching Ministry
in his house, that cannot be had without maintenance. Deny the Levites their
portions, and the house of God will be forsaken, Nehem. 13. 10. 11. And ye
shall have those in their fields who should be in the Temple. Do this one
thing which the God of heaven commands for his house; and you shall notably
provide for the safety of the Land. Ministers of the word are the horsemen and
chariots of Israel: we fear enemies, Horsemen and chariots will be good
defense, provide store of horsemen and chariots. How confident was Abijah
against Jeroboam, 2. Chron. 13. 12. that Jeroboam should not prosper in
fighting against him? What was his ground? With us are the Priests of the Lord
with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. But what safety was therein?
Exceeding much, for Numb. 10. 9. And if ye go to war in your land against
the enemy, then shall ye blow an alarm with the trumpets, and ye shall be
remembered before the Lord your God, And ye shall be saved from your enemies. The
trumpets of the Priests were as good as all the swords in Israel. Would ye save
us from our enemies then? Provide that the silver trumpets may be blown and
may sound in every Parish of the Kingdom. No such Arkes to save from
approaching dangers, as Pulpits well furnished. How happy was the poor fig
tree, Luc. 13. that had such a dresser of the vineyard that could dig as well as
beg. His mattocke kept off the axe. We are now in fears of enemies, and
dangers; would we not be glad to have our fears taken off, and to have them be
upon our enemies, that they might make no war against us? Here is the way to
do it, to provide preaching Ministers in all places of the kingdom. Consider
seriously that passage of Scripture, 2. Chron. 17. 7. 8. 9. Iehoshaphat sets up
a teaching ministry, not only here and there, but in all the cities of Judah.
And what was the sequel? That v. 10. And the fear of the Lord fell upon all
the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no
war against Iehoshaphat. It is worth our noting, that at the second verse of
the Chapter it is said that Iehoshaphat placed forces in all the fenced cities
of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah. And yet thereupon it is not
said that the fear of the Lord fell upon the neighboring kingdoms; but when
he had established a teaching Ministry, then his enemies had a fear, and made
no war. Forces and garrisons will not make a kingdom so dreadful to an
enemy as an able and godly preaching Ministry will do. Have a care of this,
and in doing this you shall do that which shall tend exceedingly to our safety
and preservation.

4. That is another good piece of timber for an Arc, Ezr. 7. 26. Whosoever
will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the King, let judgment be
executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. There is a generation that will
neither do the law of God, nor of the King; who both by the law of God, and
the King, are men of death. Oh that life might be put into those laws, and
judgment might be speedily executed, whether unto death etc. The Romish
Locusts swarm every where in the land, and they go about to draw away men
from obedience both to God and the King. And these they be whom we may thank
for the increase of Popery, what wonder is it that so many are drawn into the
whores bed, when there be so many Panders in every corner entising men to
commit fornication with the Romish strumpet. Audite and videte in ipsis
veteribus factis omnia futurarum rerum signa and indicia. Invenitur Sara
afflixisse Agar ancillam, and afflixit came graviter Sara, and fugit a facie
eius. Ecce libera afflixit ancillam, and non vocat illam persecutionem
Apostolus, ludit servus cum Domino, and persecutionem vocat. Afflictio ista non
vocatur persecutio, and lusio illa vocatur persecutio. Quid vobis videtur
fratres? Nonne intelligius quid significatum sit. Sic ergo quando vult Deus
concitare potestates, adversus haereticos, adversus dissipatores Ecclesiae etc.
non mirabimur: quia Deus concitat vt a Sara verberetur Agar, cognoscat se Agar,
and ponat cervicem. Aug. in Euang. Joan: tract. 11.
Lay the axe to the root of the tree. Clear the Kingdom of these frogs that
come out of the mouth of the beast, and the false Prophet. Never think to have
your Arc water-light, nor to provide for our common safety till judgment be
executed upon them. It is no cruelty to call for Justice, nor persecution to
do Justice upon such, upon whom Justice being done, you may procure mercy from
God upon a whole Church and Nation. It is worth your notice that after the
hanging of the sons of Saul, 2. Sam. 21. 14. it is said, After that God was
entreated for the land. The land for three years had been under a judgment
and there was (doubtless) entreating of God for the land; but when they were
hanged, then God was entreated for the land, and then it went well with the
land. And as God will in some cases have mercy and not sacrifice; so in some he
will have justice, and not sacrifice. This day is a day of sacrifice in prayer
and humiliation for the safety of the land.

Honored in the Lord, God will have justice and not sacrifice, Prou. 21. 3. To
do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice. Nay
the doing of justice is a sacrifice, with the sacrifices of your prayers and
humiliations let God have the sacrifices of justice, for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased, and for such sacrifices will be well pleased with the
land. It was zeal yet in the Egyptians. Exodus 8. 26. Lo shall we sacrifice
the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
How foul a shame for Israelites then, that they can suffer the abominable
sacrifices of Egyptians, you are afraid that God may let in oppressing enemies
upon us, you sue this day for mercy to God in that thing; execute justice and
judgment, and then may ye pray as David did, Psalm. 119. 121. I have done
judgment and justice, leave me not to mine oppressors. And so I have done with
the materials of your Arc, the particulars whereby our safety may be procured.

2. The manner follows how ye should build this Arc. That stands in these
things, Go to work.

1. With a spirit of concord and unity. The Churches have lost too much
already by disunion. My prayer and hearty desire is that it may be with both
the houses of this present Assembly, as God promises to do with the two houses
of Israel and Judah, Ezekiel. 37. 19. that the Lord would make them one in his
hand. And we shall see elsewhere the mischief of it when these two, were two,
Zech. 11. 7. There were two staves, of Beauty and of Binders. That staff of
Binders was none other but the bond of unity, by which the two houses of Judah
and Israel were knit together. God breaks the staff of Binders, v. 14. and
the brotherhood breaks, So Iunius expounds it.
and then v. 15. 16. follows the threatening of sending into the land foreign
and Roman Governors that should eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their
claws in pieces. See the mischief of a spirit of peruersities, Is. 19. 14.
16. 17. making way for the ruin of Egypt. Be it therefore the utmost of your
cares and wisdoms to keep the staff of Binders unbroken. Knit together in
and for God to do him and his Church all possible service.

2. Set upon the work with speed. As Christ spoke to Judas in a case of
taking away life, so I say to you in the case of saving the life of the state.
That which ye do, do quickly. It is high time that the Arc were already
made. It will be too late to build Arkes when the waters are broke in: you had
need do in this case as Aaron did in that Numb. 16. 46. Go quickly, for wrath
is gone out.

3. Go to work thoroughly, and substantially; make sure work: God bid Noah
pitch his Arc within, and without. He bestowed a great deal of time in
building it, he made an huge vessel, but if he had not pitched it well within,
and without he had lost all his cost and labor; both his Arc and himself
had been cast away. Therefore God appoints him Copher as well as Gopher; pitch,
as well as Pine or Cedar trees.

4. Go to work courageously. Betray not the State and Church with any carnal
and base fears. If I be bereaved of my children I am bereaved was Iaa^bs
conclusion. If I perish, I perish, was Esthers reso^tion. Let the same be yours
also. It is better to perish for a Kingdom, than with a Kingdom. If the
Kingdom perish who can hope to escape? If the public wrack, who can hope to
save his private ^ake? It is a folly when the whole Ship is in danger so to
take care for ones private cabin, as not to put ones self in danger to save
the Ship. If the Ship drown, what becomes of the cabins then? I say no more
but as 2. Chron. 19. 11. Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the
good. Thus we see the materials wherewith, and the manner how this saving Arc
must be built. Now the Lord give all you, our Noah's and Parliament
Arke-wrights, hearts to say as Nebemiah spoke of building the wall of
Jerusalem. Nehem. 2. 20. The God of heaven he will prosper us, therefore we
his servants will arise and build. You his servants take notice of Gods fair
warnings, take notice of our fears and dangers, take notice of the hopes and
expectations of the Church at home and abroad, take notice of the eyes of the
kingdom, and of all Christendom that are upon you, Do you arise and build,
and the God of heaven prosper you.

FINIS.

