A TREATISE OF BENIGNITY.

WRITTEN BY FATHER FRANCIS ARIAS, OF THE Society of JESUS, in his second part
of the Imitation of Christ our Lord.

Translated into English.

Estote inuicem Benigni, misericordes, donantes inuicem, sicut and Deus in
Christo donauit vobis. Be benign to one an other, merciful, pardoning one an
other, as God in Christ has pardoned you. With permission of Superiors Anno
1630.

TO THE READER.
GOOD Reader, The tra^slatour of the treatice of Patience lately printed, had
also rendered this of Benignity out of the same Autour: but it came not in time
to be dispatched with it; and therefore goes here a part by it self. It will
serve no less then that other of Patience to inamour us with Christ our Lord,
if we will consider the unspeakable sweetness of his charity, whilst he made
the world happy by conuersing in it. The particulars whereof thou shall find,
Good Reader, admirably expressed in this treatice by this holy Autour; which is
therefore recommended unto thee.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE 1. CHAPTER. IN what the virtue of Benignity consists; and how Christ our
Lord discovered it, in the Mysteries of his Incarnation, Nativity, and
Apparition to the Shepherds, and in the vocation of the Gentiles in the person
of the Magi. page 1 The 2. Chap. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord used
toward sinners, and other very weak and imperfect men, supporting and
instructing them. page 17 The 3. Chap. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord
used toward the Apostles, enduring and curing their defects. p. 34 The 4.
Chap. Of other examples of that Benignity which our Lord used toward his
disciples; enduring their imperfections, and sweetly curing their ignorances,
and other defects. p. 40 The 5. Chap. How we are to imitate this Benignity of
Christ our Lord. p. 57 Tho 6. Chap. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord did
use, in touching sick and leprous persons with his own sacred hands. p. 74
The 7. Chap. How the Saints have imitated this Benignity of Christ our Lord
toward sick persons. page 82 The 8. Chap. Of the Benignity, which Christ our
Lord did use to diverse blind men, hearkening to them, expecting them, and
illuminating them, and how we are to imitate him in this Benignity. p. 93 The
9. Chap. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord showed to little children; and
what he taught us thereby. p. 102 The 10. Chap. Of the Benignity, which Christ
our Lord showed toward wicked persons, who came to him with a corrupt
intention. p. 111 The 11. Chap. Of the Benignity, which we are to use toward
our neighbors, doing them honor by good words; and of the examples which
Christ our Lord gave us herein. page 122 The 12. Chap. Of other examples,
which Christ our Lord gave us, of his Benignity in the same kind. p. 132 The
13. Chap. Of the Benignity, and curtesy of speech, which the holy Apostles used
in imitation of Christ our Lord. p. 142 The 14. Chap. How we are to exercise
this Benignity, and to use this good manners, toward them who use us ill. p.
157 The 15. Chap. That it is not contrary to Benignity, to reprehend wicked,
and obstinate persons in their wickedness, severely as Christ our Lord did. p.
161 The 16. Chap. That it was convenient, that Christ our Lord should use
these severe reprehensions, to teach the Prelates of his Church, how they
should proceed against sinners: and how the Saints have been ever wont to
proceed. pap. 176 The 17. chap. Of the Benignity, vvherevvith a Christian it to
be glad of the good of his neighbor, and to approve and praise the same: and
of the example, which Christ our Lord gave us thereof. p. 192 The 18. chap. Of
the intention, and moderation, vvherwith we are to praise virtue in our
neighbors: and of the examples which Christ our Lord gave us thereof. p. 207
The 19. chap. How we must praisse virtue, for the making it be more esteemed:
and of the examples which Christ our Lord gave us to this purpose. page 220
The 20. Chap. How it is fit to praise the virtue of some, thereby to correct
the vice of others. p. 231 Tho 21 chap. How we are to praise the virtue of
our neighbors, to defend them so, from some unjust slander. p. 245 The 22.
chap. How we ought to praise wise men, when they are virtuous, to the end
that others may profit by their example and doctrine. p. 156 The 23. chap. Of
the rule which we are to hold, when upon the aforesaid reason, we shall
praise the servants of God. p. 266 The 24. chap. Of other rules which we
must observe when we praise men: that is, that we praise some, without
offense to others: and that we do it in moderate words. pap. 276 The 25.
chap. Of the rules, which they are to keep, who are praised; that so they
may be at no prejudice, but receive profit thereby. p. 282
A TREATISE OF THE VERTVE OF BENIGNITY, wherein the nature thereof is declared,
together with the operations and exercises of the same, and the examples
thereof, which Christ our Lord gave us. Translated out F. Francis Arias of the
Society of Jesus, in his 2. part of the imitation of Christ our Lord.
THE I. CHAPTER. In what the virtue of Benignity consists; and how Christ our
Lord discovered it, in the Mysteries of his Incarnation, Nativity, and
Apparitio^ to the Shepherds, and in the vocation of the Gentiles in the person
of the Magi.
THe virtue of Benignity consists in that a man desire, and dispose himself
to do good to his neighbor, whosoever he be; and in that he do it from the
heart; yea and with a sweet and tender kind of will; and in that he put this
will in execution by doing good indeed to his neighbor; and in that he do it
abundantly, if it be in his power; and lastly in that it be with a kind of
contentment, and joy. It does also consist in that a man treat and converse
with his neighbors after a sweet and gentle manner, condescending to them, and
giving them gust in any thing, which is lawful, and agreeable to the service of
God; and behoulding them with a clear, and discharged countenance, and speaking
to them in sweet and gentle words.

There are men, who in very truth have the essential part of the virtue of
Charity with their neighbors, both friends, and enemies; both wishing them
good, and performing it to them: but yet they fall short, in remedying their
necessities according to their ability; and they are austere and sharp in
their conversation, and dry and untoward in performing the very good, which
they do.

The virtue of Benignity, does cure and heal a man of all these defects;
making him who is the owner of it, to love his neighbor heartily, and sweetly;
and to do him good liberally and cheerfully; and to converse with him affably
and gently, avoiding (for as much as the law, and good pleasure of God will
permit) all that which may give him any disgust, or pain. And so, Benignity
falls out to be, the act and exercise of Charity, with that perfection, which
we have declared; and interiourly it embraces the act of benevolence and
love; and exteriourly the exercise of beneficence, liberality, affability, and
of all sweetness in conversation. It is also one of the fruits of the Holy
Ghost; For an act of virtue, in regard that it proceeds from thence, and
gives gust to him who performs it, is called a fruit; and therefore
Benignity being an act of Charity, and causing delight in him, by whom it is
possessed, is accounted amongst the fruits of the Holy Ghost. All this is
confessed by the Saints, when they speak of Benignity. Saint Isidorus says;
That man is said to be Benign, who does good with a good will, and uses
sweetness in his words. And Saint Anselmus, declaring what Benignity is, says
thus; Benignity is a good affection of the will, and a serenity of heart; in
virtue whereof a man does, for Gods sake give all he can, after a gracious and
cheerful manner; and discourses and conuerseth gently, and sweetly with his
neighbors. And Saint Thomas, explicating the nature of Benignity, says, that
it is the very sweetness and tenderness of Charity which spreads, and
communicates it self exteriourly; and that as natural fire does melt mettel,
and make it flow; so the fire of love, which is Benignity, makes a man scatter
what he has toward the succor of the necessities of his neighbors.

This is that, which the Saints say of Benignity, and the sum of it all is
this: that it is the tenderness of Charity, which does not only communicate a
man's exterior goods to his neighbor, but together with them, it communicates
his own very bowels; which is, to discover both by words, and works, the
dearnes and sweetness of Charity. The Apostle declares this, by saying, Charity
is Benign. Which signifies, that it makes the man who possesses it, not to
be straight handed, but apt to communicate his goods; and not to be harsh or
bitter; but that he communicate even his very heart by conuersing with all men
after an affable and sweet manner. And to give us to understand this truth, the
holy Scripture, does by one and the self same Hebrew, and Greek word, which
signifies Benignity in doing good, signify also a softnes, and sweetness in the
manner of showing mercy. And so, whereas David says; Our Lord is sweet toward
all, another letter says, Our Lord is benign toward all. And whereas he
says, That man is gentle, and sweet, who shows mercy; another translation
says; The man who shows mercy, is Benign. And therefore S. Basil, when he
would explicat what it was, for a man to be Benign, says; that it is he, who
does liberally enlarge himself to do good to all such as are in necessity.
And he confirms it by that Psalm which says, Our Lord is benign toward
all; and by that other, which also says, That a man is Benign, who shows
mercy, and imparteth his goods to such as are in necessity.

In this Benignity did Christ our Lord instruct us, and persuade us to it, by
many examples, and Mysteries of his holy life which we will e^deauour to
declare. The first and principal Mystery, wherein he discovered his Benignity,
was that of his Incarnation. In that, the most high son of God was pleased to
become a natural man, and to appear visibly in the world in mortal flesh,
obnoxious to the miseries and penalties of other men; and in that he did all
this, to do good to man; and to draw him to his love, and so to save him; not
only did he discover an immense love toward us, but a love which was also
most sweet and dear. And not only did he communicate his blessings to us, but
he also did it with supreme liberality, and gust, and joy of his own sacred
heart. And together with his blessings, he communicated to us, his very self;
namly his body, his blood, his blessed soul, and his divinity; and all that
which he has, yea and even all that which he is, he communicated to us, by
many admirable and mysterious ways. This did the Apostle signify by saying;
When in the time of grace, the Benignity and imme^se love of our God and
Savior to man, did manifest it self to the world, he saved and freed us from
our sins, not by the title of Justice, and the merit of our works, (which
were not of any value without Christ our Lord, for the arriving to that end;)
but through his own great mercy, and most gracious bou^ty, and by means of
that sacred Lauatory, which is holy Baptism, whereby we are engendered a
second time to be the sons of God, and renewed by a spiritual generation,
and renouation, which is wrought by the holy Ghost; which Holy Ghost, the
eternal Father has by means of his gifts and graces infused and communicated
to us in great abundance, through the merits of Christ our Lord, to the end
that being justified through the grace of the same Lord, we might from this
instant become heirs of eternal life, which now we hold by certain hope,
and which hereafter we shall have in actual possession. This is delivered by
Saint Paul. And Saint Bernard, upon these words, declaring that Benignity of
God which was discovered in this Mystery discourses thus. Before the humanity
of Christ our Lord appeared in the word the Benignity of God was hidden from
us. There was already in God this Benignity, and mercy, which in him is
eternal; but so great Benignity as this, was not known before, nor was there
any means how to to know it. And although it were promised by the Prophets,
yet men understood it not, and felt it not, and many did not so much as believe
it. But when that time arrived, which had been ordained by the divine wisdom,
Almighty God came in mortal flesh, and being vested with his sacred Humanity,
and appearing to the eyes of our flesh and blood, his Benignity came to be made
known; for by no means could he more have manifested his Benignity, then by
taking our flesh; and by no means could he more have declared his mercy, then
by undertaking our misery. Let man consider, and understand from hence, how
great care God has of him; and how much he esteems him; and for how mighty
an end he made him; since he did, and suffered so great things for him. And
thus, by this Humanity we may know his Benignity; for how much the less he
became by his Humanity, so much the greater, does he show himself to be in
bounty; and by how much the more he abased himself for us, so much the more
amiable does he show himself to us. This is said by Saint Bernard; and so it is
a most clear truth, that nothing has made so great discovery ^o us of the
bounty, and Benignity of God, nor has moved and obliged us so to love and
praise him, as for that he has taken our Humanity. And therefore as David
says, give praise to God, because he is benign and good; and sing praises to
his name, because he is sweet.

Christ our Lord did also discover to us his Benignity, after a most sovereign
manner, in the Mystery of his most holy Nativity. For what love can be imagined
more dear? and what communication of ones felfe more a morous? and what dew of
heaven more abundant, and more sweet, then to see that hidden God, that God of
vengeance, that God of those Celestial Hosts, that Judge of the quick and
dead, that Omnipotent in his works, and that Terrible in his judgments? to see
him I say, become a tender and delicate little Infant, hanging close upon the
breasts of a Virgin; all burning in love, and all expiring the sweetness, and
dearnes of the same love toward us? And that he comes to us, not as anciently
he came to the children of Israel in Mount Horeb, with thunder and lightning
and with the terrible sound of the trumpet, and with huge flames of material
fire; and with prohibition that no man should approach to the foot of the
mountain upon pain of death: but that he should come to be borne an Infant,
and appear on earth, with a most clear, and sweet light from heaven, to
discover him and with most delightful songs, and exultation of Angels; who
being full of joy, sing Glory to God, and peace to men. And that insta^tly
then, he should recreate, and honor those poor shepherds with an Embassage
performed by Angels; and should inuit them to come visit him, and to receive
the comfort of his presence, and to be enriched with the gifts of grace through
his goodness. And that by his love, and humility, and meeknes, and sweetness, he
should encourage all men to approach toward him; and to come to him by faith
and obedience; and so to take their part of all the riches and benedictions of
heaven; for being the son of the eternal Father, be came full of grace and
truth.

He also discovered his Benignity to us, in the vocation of the Magi, that
first flower of the Gentiles, whom he meant to call in after times. He calls
them instantly, as soon as he was borne, and he sent no Prophet for them, nor
any Angel; for they had no knowledge of Prophets, and they were not wont to
see Angels, and so they might have rather been estranged by such unusual
inuitations: but condescending to their condition and custom, he sent them a
star, which by the nouelty thereof might move the^ to a kind of admiration;
and to a search of what it might mean; and by the secret virtue thereof might
be teaching them withal, that if signified the birth of the new King; and he
admonished and invited them to seek him, by following that star, and he gave
them courage not to fear the tyrant Herod; and he gave the^ faith and devotion
to know, that the Infa^t, whom they saw newborn, was the eternal God; that
so they might dedicate themselves to do him eternal service, as to the King
and Lord of heaven and earth, whom they saw in so great poverty and contempt,
for as much as concerned the world.

All this is the supreme Benignity, and most sweet dear love of God toward
man; and it inuites us to seek him; and if we have offended him, to confide,
that lamenting our sins, we shall obtain pardon of him; and that he will
receive us, to his grace and love. For now, when he has already discovered his
great Benignity to us; by his sacred Humanity; with more reason does he say,
that to us, which ancie^tly he said by the Prophet Joel, be you converted to
your Lord God for he is Benign, and merciful; and as he is Benign, he takes
gust in dealing graciously, and most liberally with you, and in pardoning your
offenses past, and as he is merciful he will deliver you from your miseries, and
from the greatest of them of all, which are your sins.

THE II. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord used toward sinners,
and other very weak and imperfect men, supporting and instructing them.
AFter our Lord had begun to manifest himself in Israel, and to converse with
men, he discovered and exercised his Benignity, many several ways: One of
them was, that such persons as were ignorant, tude, and very imperfect, who
came to demand succor of him, he received with much sweetness, and
condescended to their great weakness, and tolerated their rudenes, and after a
mild and gentle manner, dispossessed them of their ignorance. Nicodemus the
Pharisee, Io. 3. came to Christ, to be taught by him; and though our Lord saw
his great weakness, in that he had not the heart to publish himself for the
disciple of Christ our Lord, nor to confess his faith, for the fear he had to
be persecuted by other Pharisees, and was ashamed that they should know of him,
that being an Ancient, and Master in the law, he should go to Christ to
learn the Mysteries of the same Law; for which reason he went by night, and
that in very secret manner. And though our Lord did well discern his great
ignorance, and rudenes, and that he had no understanding, or apprehension of
spiritual things, or divine Mysteries; but that whatsoever he said, and
taught, the other did measure, and judge of it by the rule of corporal and
sensibles things, without raising his heart from earth to the consideration of
things invisible and divine: notwithstanding all this, our benigue Lord, did
not reprove these so notorious defects, with severity, nor did he exaggerate
his ignorance, nor reproach him for his rudenes, nor condemn him for his
inordinate fear, nor did he drive him away for his weakness, nor showed he any
wearisomnes, or disgust in respect of his cross answers; but he entertained
himself at large with him alone, and held long discourse with him, whereby he
did, after a sweet manner give him to understand his ignorance and rudenes; and
he discovered to him the Mysteries, which were necessary for his salvation;
namely the spiritual regeneration which is made by Baptism; and the Mystery
of the Incarnation; which he declared to him, by saying that he was in heaven,
whereby he signified that he was God, and in all places at once. And by saying
also that he was descended from heaven, and he signified that he was true man.
He declared also the Mystery of his Passion, by saying that he was to be raised
up to the Cross, as the Brazen Serpent was lifted up upon a pole, to the end
that, as al they who beheld the serpent were cured of their torporall diseases,
so might all they be healed of their sins, who would behold and believe in
him, with a lively faith. It was a great Benignity to dissemble, or pass by so
many defects of a timorous and imperfect man, and to discourse with him after
so loving and sweet a manner; and to discover so great Mysteries, to a person
so rude and weak; and to give him light to understand them, and help whereby
he might go increasing, and profitting in the good way which he had begun.

There came to Christ our Lord, Mat. 9. Marc. 5. a Prince of the Synagogue, to
ask remedy for a daughter of his, who already was at the last cast, and he
held her for dead; as indeed she died instantly after; and he desired our Lord,
that he would go to his house, and lay his hand upon her, that so he might
give her life. This man coming to Christ our Lord with so imperfect a faith,
and with so mean a conceit of the power of our Lord, as to think that it
would be necessary for the health of his daughter, that he must go to his
house, and lay his hand upon her, not believing that he could cure her without
these ceremonies; yet notwithstanding all this, our Lord received him, and
conuersed with him after so sweet a manner, and showed himself so affable to
him, that he dissembled the seeing of all these defects; and he reproved him
not for them, least he should have grieved him by his words, whereas he meant
to cure him by his works. Nor did he deny that which the other asked; nor did
he differ the doing of it; but instantly he rose up, and went with him, and
granted not only that which he asked, but a great deal more. For he raised
his dead daughter to life in body, and he also gave health to her soul, by
making her believe firmly in him, upon the sight of so great a miracle, and he
moved and obliged him, to do him service with devotion, for so singular a
benefit.

This was an act of great Benignity, and so did Saint Chrysostom observe
thereof, saying; Behold the dullnes of this man, who for the health of his
daughter, desires Christ our Lord that he will go to his house, and lay his
hand upon her. And yet our Lord, not looking upon the unworthiness of him who
asked the benefit, did with much facility and suauity grant his suite, going
presently to his house, to do the thing which he desired, and much more then
he desired. For he resolved to raise her from death to life; and moreover to
give a firm hope of the Resurrection to them, who saw, and believed that
miracle.

Let us be hold other examples of the same kind of Benignity, in his
receiving rude, and imperfect people, after a sweet manner, and in teaching,
and comforting the^, both by word and deed. John 4. There came a Samaritan
woman to Christ our Lord; and, notwithstanding that she were a creature of very
base condition, and of more base life; and a Gentile by descent, and extremely
rude in matters which concerned Religion and spirit, yet he invited her to have
speech with him, himself beginning the discourse and desiring water of her,
whereof he knew he would not drink; and he fell into a most sweet and
favorable communication with her, and he made her a very long Sermon, full of
Mysteries, and he passed by the rudenes both of her questions and answers; and
he condescended to her ignorance; and he accommodated himself to her weakness;
and by the resemblance of corporal things taught her things which were
spiritual; and by means of material water, he advanced her to the
understanding of the value, and effects of the water of grace. And he went
instructing her by little and little; discovering to her first that he was a
Prophet, and teaching her afterward, how she was to honor one only God, with
spiritual and true worship. And having already disposed her, by the knowledge
of these things, he plainly declared to her at last, that he was the very
Messiah, who was come to save the world; and that which he told her in words,
he imprinted in her heart, giving her both light to believe it, and courage,
and devotion to confess it.

What dearnes, what sweetness of discourse, and conversation, can be imagined to
exceed this? That the Creator of all things should speak, in so familiar
manner, with so base a creature, and that the eternal wisdom should vouch
saffe by his very self, to instruct at so great leisure and by such a lowly
manner of speech, so ignorant and rude a woman, and should give so high
mysteries to be understood so quickly and so clearly by her.

This is the Benignity, which Christ our Lord used toward this woman, and the
Apostles were in wonder at it, as Saint Chrysostom observes saying; The
Apostles were in admiration to see that excessive meekenes, and humility of
Christ our Lord, in that he was content, so publicly and in sight of all men,
to speak so of set purpose, and so at leisure, and so benignely with a poor
woman, and that a poor Samaritan.

There came to Christ our Lord Matt. 9. Marc. 5. a sick woman who was subject
to a bloody flux, and she came with much want of virtue; for out of shame and
inordinate fear, she durst not discover her infirmity; and she thought to
keep her self from being known by Christ our Lord, by means of the press of
people, coming secretly near him, without the observation of others; and
meaning, after this sort, to steal health from our Lord, without so much as
his knowing of it, who was to give it. But notwithstanding she came so
imperfect and weak, our most pitteous Lord, did pass by all these defects of
hers, without so much as reprehending them, or reproaching her for them; and he
granted that which she desired, and hoped for, yea and much more then that. For
instantly he cured her of that corporal infirmity, and he cured her soul, by
taking away that vain fear, to which she had been subject, and by enabling
her to confess both her sickness, and the health which she had received; and by
augmenting in her, the gifts of faith and love. And having used so great
Benignity toward her by this work, he was also benign to her in words. For
putting her into quiet, and giving her comfort, he said, Thy faith has made
the whole. Which was as much as to say; In regard of that says, wherewith thou
did touch me, although it was imperfect, I have delivered thee from thy
disease: go thy ways in peace, and still be free from the same disease. So
says Chrysostom. This woman had not a perfect opinion of Christ our Lord, for
if she had, she would never have imagined, that she could hide her self from
him; and our Lord took public notice of her, for the good both of her self,
and many others. For by discovering her, he took away her fear, and he
prevented that remorce of conscience, which was to accuse her, as having stolen
the gift of her health; and he rectified her from that false imagination; and
he made her know, that nothing could be hid from our Lord, and then co^me^ding
her faith, he placed her for an example to be imitated by others.

We also are to imitate Christ our Lord in that Benignity which he used
toward such as came to him full of imperfection, weakness and ignorance; and
we must receive after a sweet manner our neighbors, when they come to us full
of necessity and ignorance; enduring with a serene countenance their
importunity, and rudnes; and giving ear and satisfaction to their questions;
and benignely instructing them in those things which are fit for them to be
known by them, according to the capacity of every one, and removing the
ignorance, wherein they are, and comforting the^ with the knowledge of truth,
and the hope of salvation, and appeasing their conscience, delivering the^ from
vain scruples and fears.

To this does the Apostle Saint Paul Gal. 6. advise in these words. My
brethren, if any of you be surprised by any sin; as it happens to them who
sin out of Passion, or weakness, orignora^ce, and not out of mere malice; and
who are as it were prevented, and surprised by that sin, into which they fall,
because they have not well considered the ill they do, in respect whereof they
are the more worthy of mercy, and more easy to be reformed; If any such, I say,
have fallen, you who are spiritual men, and live according to spirit, (that is,
according to the true and spiritual understanding of the Law of God) instruct
and inform well such a kind of sinner as this; and do it not with sharpenes,
and rigor, but with sweetness and gentleness both of words, and deeds, wherein
true Benignity consists. And for this purpose, let every one consider himself,
and reflect well upon his own weakness, and danger, and how subject he is to
fall, as the other did, and peradventure worse. And from hence he will grow to
instruct, and correct others, with the sweetness of mercy, and Benignity, and
not with too much rigor, and severity; least himself also grow both to be
tempted, and conquered. This in substance is delivered by the Apostle; and with
great reason he wishes him who treats such, as have fallen into sin,
without mercy and Benignity, that he look well to himself, least he be
tempted and overcome. For in very truth it is the punishment, which he
deserves, and which ordinarily almighty God inflicts, upon such as rashly judge
and condemn their neighbor for committing any fault, and as despise him for
it, to let them fall into the same sin. As on the other side, our most
piteous Lord, is wont to use supreme Benign^ty and mercy, toward such others,
as use Benignity and mercy toward their weak and imperfect brethren. This did
that great and admirable woman Christina, with great ponderation and feeling
affirm, when she said; There is no thing in the whole world which does more
move Christ our Lord to use Benignity, and mercy toward men, then to see that
themselves are benign and merciful toward others; and such Benignity and
mercy, cannot but lead them on to a happy death, which will deliver them up to
eternal life.

THE III. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord used toward the
Apostles, enduring and curing their defects.
THis very manner of Benignity, did Christ our Lord use toward his blessed
Apostles, whilst he conuersed with them, in mortal flesh. For during all that
time (which was the space of three years) they were very imperfect, and lived
in great ignorance; and by reason of their much rudnes, made little profit of
the great light of doctrine which was propounded to them; and of that so
admirable example of the life of Christ our Lord; which they had before their
eyes. Let us produce some examples to prove this truth.

Our Lord had already wrought that illustrious miracle, in the sight of his
disciples, Matt 15 of feeding five thousand men with five loaves of bread; and
shortly after, another necessity offering it self, wherein our Lord was pleased
to feed four thousand men with seven loaves, and having already told his
disciples, that he would not permit those troops of men and women, to return
home to their houses, till he had fed them; they conceived it to be a matter of
so much difficulty, that (as if it had indeed been impossible for our Lord to
do) they said, where can we be able to procure in this desert, such a
quantity of bread, as would be necessary for the feeding of such a multitude?

What a great imperfection was this in them? and what a strange rudenes, and
blindenes of heart, that having seen with their own eyes, that our Lord had
wrought so many like, and greater miracles then that, they did not yet believe,
and confide so much in him, as that with so few loaves, he was able to feed so
much people? and especially considering, that he had declared himself to have
a will to do it; and that he had wrought the like in the self same case some
few days before. And yet these disciples, making him answer with so little
faith, and indeed with so little good manners; our most blessed Lord did yet
treat them with so great tenderness, and sweetness, that he blamed, or reproved
them not; nor showed himself a whit disgusted, or offended, for the little
account, and estimation which they showed themselves to have of his power. But
passing by all this, he asked them how many loaves they had, and they saying
that they had seven, he commanded the troops to sit down, and he gave them
all to eat of those seven loaves, and he made the Apostles gather up seaue^
baskets full of the overplus; and in this sort, he did by that action of his
let them see their rudenes, and he removed their ignorance, and settled them
faster in their faith. And this was so great a fault in the Apostles, that the
confessing and publishing of it themselves, after the coming of the Holy Ghost,
was an act of great humility in them; and the suffering and curing it by our
Lord, with so great pity and mercy, was admirable Benignity in him. So says
Saint Chrysostom. It is worthy of great admiration, to see the Apostles so
great friends to the truth, as that themselves, who wrote the Evangelical
history, would not cover those so great faults of their own. For it was no
little one, that they could so soon forget that miracle, which our Lord had
wrought so lately before, in the multiplication of the five loaves of bread.
And Theophylact adds thus; It was not reason that they should so soon have
forgotten that miracle, whereby our Lord had given food in the wilderness, to
more persons, with fewer loaves of bread. But the disciples, were men very
gross, and of mean understanding; which our Lord permitted to be so, to the
end that when afterward we should find them so full of discretion, and
wisdom, we might know that it was the gift of divine grace, which caused it.
But their ignorance and untowardness being so great, as we see it was, our Lord
did not yet rebuke, or reproach them for this fault, but cured it with great
Benignity; and instructed us thereby, not to put our selves in choler with
ignorant people, nor to be sharp or wayward toward them, but that we must
have compassion of their ignorance, and instruct them and correct them with
charity.

Our Lord did also discover his Benignity to the Apostles, in that having
already wrought that miracle of the seven loaves; and telling them that they
were to take heed of the leven of the Pharisees and Saduces, Matt. 16. Marc. 8.
(which signified their evil doctrine and example) they would needs understand
as if he had said it, because they were not provided of bread enough for the
desert; and so they were afraid they might want food. And our Lord
reprehe^ding this fault in them, which they had added to the former, said in
this manner; do you not understand, and remember the five loves of bread, and
the five thousand men, which I sustained with the^; nor yet the seaue^ loves,
wherewith I fed four thousand men? And thus reproving them, as much as was
necessary, he did it yet in words as gentle, as you have heard; and with so
great sweetness, as that, together with reprehending them, he excused them;
imputing their fault to ignorance and forgetfulness. O admirable Benignity,
worthy of such a Lord as he, who together with the chastiseme^t, gives
comfort; and whilst he speaks of the fault, he gives hope of pardon and
remedy* So does Saint Chrysostom observe. Consider the reprehension which he
gives the^, all tempered with meekenes; for whilst he reproues them, he
excuses them; yea and he answers for the very men whom he reproves.

But let us look upon some other examples of this Benignity, which Christ our
Lord did use toward his disciples. When thus he had answered that rich young
man, Matt. 19. who said. He had kept the comaundments, If thou will be perfect,
go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and come and follow
me, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and when the young man was going
sad away, because he was very rich, and had not the heart to embrace the
counsel of our Lord, and to make himself poor for the kingdom of heaven;
Saint Peter said to our Lord, Behold, o Lord, how as for us, we have left all
things, and we have followed thee, what therefore shall be done to us? What
reward will thou bestow on us? Our Lord made them this answer; Verily I say to
you, that you who have followed me, shall sit upon twelve seats, and thrones,
to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, with the Son of man, when he shall sit
in the seat of his Majesty, at the general resurrection to a life of glory.
At that day, you shall have great authority, and glory, by reigning with the
son of man, and judging the world together with him.

It was very little, which Saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles had left
for Christ our Lord; for they were but a poor company of fishermen; and that
which they had left (as Saint Chrysostom says) was some fishing rod, some net,
and some little bark. And although together with these things, they also left
whatsoever they might grow to have, yet that also must needs be very little;
for in the trade they had, they were never able to get much. And all this being
so little, and that Saint Peter with so much liberty, and audacity should say
to him, Behold, o Lord, we have left all, we had, for thee, as if they had
left most abundant riches and great hopes; our Lord might with much truth and
reason, have said to Saint Peter: What great possessions have thou left for
me; and what great acts of prowes have thou performed in my service? And yet
he said no such thing; nor did he answer them with any show of any disdain or
eue^ disgust, or with little estimation of that which had been left for his
sake; but he spoke to him in great earnest and with words, of much weight and
with show of great estimation of that which they had lest, and of that which
they had performed in following him; and he declared that most high reward of
glory and that most eminent dignity which he would give them, in the kingdom
of heaven.

By this answer, Christ our Lord did show extreme Benignity, partly by making
so great account of such a trifle as his disciples had left for his sake; and
promising such a sovereign reward for such a slight service as they had
performed in following him; and partly by showing how greatly he loved them,
who then had labored so little for him; and by esteeming them so much, who
were so mean, and poor, as to promise to exalt them to so great dignity, and
to give them a seat of so great Majesty; and by answering them in words so
serious, so sweet, so full of comfort; and which gave them such a height of
hope. So says Origin. Saint Peter asked what reward he would give him for what
he had left, as if he had performed things of mighty difficulty. But although
the things which he and his brother left were little, in the account of the
world; yet in the sight of God who regarded the love, and great good will
wherewith they were left, they were much esteemed. This is the most benign and
sweet condition of Christ our Lord, and our God; who be houldeth the services
which are done him, and the good will men have to serve him, and their holy
desire to please him, and that grace which he liberally bestows for the doing
of them; and therefore does he recompense little works, with most high and
everlasting rewards.

Our Lord, 10.11. whilst he was in the desert, having heard the message of
Lazarus his sickness, and two days passing on, after he had heard it; and now
understanding that Lazarus was dead, he said resolutely; Let us go yet once
again into Judea; for Bethania was seated in that Province. But his disciples
answered him after this manner, Master, it is but the other day, since the
Jews were ready to stone thee in Judea, and do thou think of going back,
where there is so much danger? And our Lord saying still, let us go yet again
into Judea, and they seeing his resolution and being full of apprehension and
fear of death, Thomas said to the rest of the Apostles, Well then, let us go,
and die with him.

Now the Apostles having known by so many experiments, that our Lord knew the
secrets of men's hearts, and that his enemies having a mind to take and stone
him, were not able to touch him, because he had all power in his hands; and
having heard him say many times, that in all things he performed the will, and
good pleasure of his eternal Father; they ought to have believed, that if our
Lord went into Judea, it was most convenient thnt he should do so; and that he
knew very well whatsoever was to happen to him there; and that if he should
have a mind to free himself from his enemies, they could fasten no hurt upon
him; and that themselves going in his company, might hold themselves secure
enough; and that without his will, they could receive no harm; and that they
ought to make themselves wholly subject to that will of his. But they
forgetting all this and distrusting his power and protection, would have
hindered his going into Judea, and would needs have dissuaded him from the
resolution which he had taken in that behalf; as if he had been either
ignorant of the danger which there he might incur, or impuissant in defending
himself from the same; and they were full of apprehension and fear, as if our
Lord had not been able to protect them.

And these defects of theirs being so great, our most merciful Lord was not yet
offended with them; nor did he show any disgust, nor did he reprove them with
sharp words, for the mean conceit which they had of him; but he informed
them in sweet terms, that there was no danger in his journey, and that they
might hold themselves safe in his company, by saying thus to them; Are there
not perhaps twelve hours in the day? He who goes by day, stumbles not, because
the day light lets him see the way; but he who walks by night, may stumble and
fall, because he sees not the light. Whereby he would let the^ know, that just
as, whilst the natural day lasts, which has twelve hours of light, it is
not in the skill or power of any creature to take away or diminish any one of
these hours, or any part thereof; and that during this time, a man may walk
securely without stumbling or falling; just so, as long as that time of his
life was to last in this world, which had been determined by the will of his
eternal Father, in which time he was to illuminate the world with his
doctrine, and by his miracles, there was no cause for them to fear; for that
all the power of the world was not able to take one moment of that time from
him; and that so both himself, and al they of his company, were very safe.
With this Benignity did he tolerate their boldness, and cure their rudenes, and
their want of that faith, and confidence, which they ought to have had in our
Lord.

THE IV. CHAPTER. Of other examples of that Benignity, which our Lord used
toward his disciples; enduring their imperfections, and sweetly curing their
ignorances, and other defects.
THE two brothers Saint James, and Saint John, came to Christ our Lord, Matt.
10. Luc. 22. to demand at his hands, the two prime dignities of his kingdom;
and herein they served them selves of the intercession of their mother. Now the
rest of the Apostles, seeing the pretension of these two, grow into indignation
against them, and were offended and troubled much, to see that they would offer
to outstrip all the rest; and it moved a strife amongst them, to know which of
all the company was to be the greatest in the school, and kingdom of Christ
our Lord. These faults of the Apostles, being so worthy of reprehe^sion; for
faults they were (as we have declared elsewhere) in some of them, of ambition,
and in the rest of envy; and such faults in men who had been so long advised,
and instructed by the doctrine, and example of Christ our Lord, which was ever
preaching, and persuading humility and charity, did well deserve to make our
Lord offended with them, and that he should reprove them after a serious and
sharp manner, and that he should punish the^ severely: yet our most meek
Lord, having compassion of their ignorance and rudenes, which was the root
from whence those faults did spring, used so great Benignity toward them, and
cured their defects, with so great sweernes, that as for the two, with only
looking upon them, and giving them answer to that petition, which their mother
had presented, he made them see that fault into which they had fallen, by
making their mother their intercessour for that suit, and by desiring to cover
under the piety of a mother the inordinate appetite which they had to be
preferred before the rest; and with only saying; You know not what you ask,
he corrected and cured all the ambition which they had; and so reprehending
their fault, he did withal, excuse them by imputing it, not to malice, but to
the ignorance of men, who knew not what was best for themselves. And as for the
other ten, he reformed them also by calling them to him, and aduertising them,
that to desire command, and advantage over others, was the vice of Gentiles,
who lodged not their heart upon heavenly but on earthly things; and that they
were not to do so, but to imitate their Lord and Master, who came into this
world, not to be served by men but to serve them, yea and to give his life for
them.

With this Benignity, Christ our Lord did tolerate, and cure those so great
defects of his disciples. So says S. Chrysostom. As those two Apostles did
obey the inordinate appetite of flesh and blood and did beg of our Lord, the
two chief seats in his kingdom; so also the other ten, obeying the like evil
inclination of flesh and blood, were offended and afflicted by the demand, and
pretension of the former two. For it was ill done by the two, to desire to be
preferred before the rest; and the rest, conceived it to be an affront to them,
that the two should be preferred before them. And Saint Hierome adds; That
our Lord, who was al meek and and humble, did not sharply reprehend that
inordinate appetite of honor, wherewith those two came to him; nor yet the
indignation and envy, which the ten conceived against the two; but he treated
them, and instructed the^, and ^ured them all with supreme Benignity, and
meeknes.

The Apostles being in the garden, with our Lord, the night of his Passion, he
admonished them to remain watchful in prayer, least otherwise, they might
fall into that temptation, and tribulation, which was coming toward them. But
they, the while, laid themselves to sleep; and our Lord having been at Prayer,
and going to visit them, and finding that they were fallen a sleep, did wish
them a second time, to watch and pray; and he said; Why sleep you? rise up to
watch, and pray, least else you be overcome by temptation. And having given them
this lesson, he returned again to Prayer, and after went to see them a second
time: and finding them asleep yet again, he said nothing to them. A third
time he went to Prayer; and a third time he went to see them; and finding them
still sleeping, as being oppressed by the great sorrow they had, he said to
them, sleep on, and take your rest. And so he left them for a while, till the
time was come, when his enemies who were to apprehend him, were approaching.
Then he turned toward them and said; It is enough: rise up, let us go; for
the hour is already come, wherein the Son of man, is to be delivered over,
into the hands of sinners.

This was a great defect in the disciples, because they were advertised, of the
much danger wherein they were to see themselves that night; and they had
promised, that they would give their life for our Lord; and they had been
warned by him, two several times in words of great exaggeration, and weight,
that they should watch and pray, because they were to be tempted in a grievous
manner; and their prayer was to be the means, for their not being overcome by
that temptation. And yet notwithstanding all this, they neither watched, nor
prayed; and they suffered themselves to be overcome by sleep, which was the
cause, why afterward being overcome by the temptation, they fled all away for
fear, at the time when our Lord was apprehended, and they denied their Master,
who was the head and crown of them all. But yet our Lord did suffer, and pass
by, and seek to reform this so great defect with so great Benignity, that
finding the^ asleep the first time, he corrected them with no other then these
gentle words; Why sleep you? Whereby he would give them to understand, how
vain that confidence was, which they had reposed in their own strength,
making a promise that they would give their life for their Lord, whereas the
while, they had not the strength to watch and pray during that little time. And
when he went to visit them the second time, and perceived them to be overcome
by sleep, through the great weakness, and frailty of imperfect men, he
dissembled the seeing it, and having compassion of their infirmity, did not
reprehend them, nor so much as speak a word, nor wake them, but still let them
sleep. And the third time; returning to them, and seeing the difficulty they
had to overcome their sleep, in regard of their much sorrow, he did not only
pass it over, but expressly gave them leave to repose and rest, whilst he
was watching, and praying, and sweating blood for them. With this so admirable
Benignity, and so full of the deernes, and sweetness of love, did Christ our
Lord treat his disciples, and tolerate their defects, and endure the trouble
they gave him; and he removed their ignorances and cured their faults.

THE V. CHAPTER. How we are to imitate this Benignity of Christ our Lord.
THis Benignity must we use toward our neighbors, in imitation of Christ our
Lord; and especially it must be done by Superiors toward their Subjects, by
Teachers toward their Scholars, by Masters toward their Servants and slaves,
and by Parents toward their children. First they must exercise this Benignity
by enduring their imperfections, negligences and faults; not suffering
themselves to be overcome by wrath, to wish them any evil, or to curse them,
or give them injurious words, or any other word of revenge. And to this
exterior patience, they must add the sweetness of Benignity, in such sort, as
that it may be a benign kind of sufferance, which springs from the
interior sweetness of Charity. To this did Saint Chrysostom admonish us, who
upon those words of Saint Paul, Charity is patient, and it is benign,
discourses thus; There are some who have patience, but they do not use it as
they ought; for although in the exterior, they are silent, and dissemble the
cause of their disgust, yet they do it with a kind of bitterness of heart yea
and they show some exterior untowardness, and undervalue of their neighbor;
and so they grow to offend, and provoke to further wrath, even those very
persons, whom they were resolved to tolerate. This kind of patience is not
agreeable to charity which is benign, and uses to suffer with gentleness and
sweetness both exterior and interior; and whilst it is suffering, does not
provoke a man's neighbor to increase of anger, but rather does mitigate, and
appease it. For we must not be content to tolerate the faults of our
neighbors, after a superficial manner; but whilst we be suffering, we must
also admonish and comfort them; and thus shall we cure that wound of wrath,
which they may have in their hearts. Saint Chrysostom declares; that this is
to suffer with Benignity.

Superiors also who have charge of others, must exercise this Benignity;
providing all things necessary both for their bodies and souls: for their
bodies, giving them food, clothing, physic in their sickness, ease in their
labors, and comfort in their troubles; to the end that they may bear them
with contentment: and for their souls also by giving them doctrine, counselle:
spiritual consolation, and good example, which may edify them. This do
Prelates owe to their Subjects; Lords to their Servants and slaves; and fathers
to their children. Benignity I say, does require, that Superiors make
provision of all things necessary, both for the body and soul, of all such as
are under their charge, not sparingly and miserably, not with disgust and
bitterness, and vexation of the inferiors; but sufficiently, and plentifully,
according to the necessity of the inferior, and to the ability and means of
the Superior; and that they do it with facility, and suauity, and with
comfort to the inferior. For to this is the office and charge of a Superior
ordained; not for the honor, and ease, and temporal comfort of the Superior;
but for the remedy and benefit of the inferior, whom he has in charge. So
says Saint Augustine; We who are Superiors, and Pastors of others, have two
capacities; the one, in that we are Christians; the other, in that we are
Superiors, and rulers. Our being Christians, makes for our selves; and under
that capacity, we are to look to our own profit, fit, and good: but our being
Superiors, is for the use of others; and for the complying with this duty, we
must procure their benefit whom we have in charge. This is delivered by Saint
Augustine. And although it be true, that the Superior, as he is a Superior,
is not to look so carefully to his own temporal profit, as to that of his
subject, yet doing that which he ought in his office, and complying with them
whom he has under his charge, he does also negotiate his own profit, and
dispatcheth his own business best, since he purchases spiritual and
eternal benedictions thereby.

All Superiors must also exercise this Benignity, by imposing the burdens of
their imployme^ts, and commandments, in such sort, as that the inferiors
may be able to carry them on, with comfort. Let them measure out the labors,
the business, and the offices wherewith they will charge their subjects, by
the strength, and talents of every one of them; to the end that they may not
carry them with deep sighs, nor be forced to faint under the^; but that they
may be able to discharge them with a cheerful and contented heart. And let
them moderate their directions and co^maundments, whereby they rule and
govern, according to the capacity and talent of the inferiors; that so they
disposing themselves to obey, and to do their duties, may perform them with
facility, and profit of their souls. So faith Saint Chrysostom; If thou will
proceed like a man who indeed is holy, be austere and rigorous toward thy
self, and benign and pitteous toward others; and let men see, and hear it
said of thee, that thou commaundest others to do things which are light, and
easy, to be performed; and that thy self vndergoest heavy, and performest hard
things.

As for that which concerns the chastisement and correction of inferiors,
the virtue of Benignity does not teach, that they should not be corrected: for
this virtue is not contrary either to that of Justice, or to that of Charity;
both which oblige Princes that they should correct, and chastise their
vassailes; Lords and Masters their servants, and slaves; parents their
children. For, the Apostle faith of that Superior, who governs the
co^mo^wealth. It is not in vain that he has power and authority to punish; as
we see by the sword he carries; but it is given him upon great cause and
reason, and for a great good use; for he is the Minister of God, for the
punishment of such as do ill, and for the execution of justice upon their
persons. That which Benignity does teach and exact is this; that since
correction, and punishment is necessary, and most important for the general
good of the commonwealth, and for the particular members thereof; which is, to
the end that they who are faulty, may amend; and the rest may fear punishment,
and take warning by others, it must be executed with that moderation and
sweetness, which may carry most proportion to this end, as Christ our Lord has
taught us by his example.

This moderation and sweetness, consists in that; when the inferiors commit
small faults, the Superiors do not exaggerate, and enforce them too much,
nor correct them with too grievous punishments; but that they moderate their
words and deeds, according to the fault. So faith Saint Dorotheus; Be not to
great, nor too severe a punisher of faults, and defects, which are not great.
And so also, when faults are committed through ignorance, or through great
weakness, or upon some vehement temptation, and not with malice; observe that
moderation, in making the reprehension and inflicting the punishment, as that
you affront not the offender, with ill words; but that the pain he is to
suffer, may lessen, according to the ignorance and weakness, wherewith the fault
was made.

And sometimes when the person, who sinned through ignorance or passion, is
such as that of himself he grows to know his fault, and has much compunction
for it; and does cordially put himself upon amendment, and that noe hurt or
ill example of others grows by it; the virtue of Benignity does require, that
the punishment be remitted, or moderated at least, very much. So says Saint
Gregory; Some faults are to be punished very gently; for when men sin not by
malice, but by ignorance, or weakness, it is necessary that the correction and
punishment, be tempered with great moderation. And in another place; as the
fault of them, who sin by ignorance, may be tolerated in some sort, so they
who commit it wittingly, and wilfully, must be severely punished. And that it
is more convenient to pardon a fault sometimes, then to inflict punishment, the
Venerable Bede does affirm saying; Not allwaies are they to be punished, who
offend; for sometimes clemency does more good, both to the Superior for the
exercise of his patience, and to the inferior for his amendment. When faults
are great, and inexcusable by any ignorance, and that it be necessary to
inflict due punishment; that which Benignity requires, is, that the Superior
who corrects and punishes, be not moved to it by anger and passion; but that
in his heart, he have pity of the delinquent, and that he commit no excess in
punishing; but that he temper, and moderate it in such sort, as that it may
not seem cruelty, or too much rigor: for else he who corrects, and
punishes, will receive more hurt, by his own passion, and the excess which
he uses, then he who is punished will receive good. So does Saint Gregory
advise, speaking to a Superior. Let such as are good, find by experience that
thou art sweet toward them; and let such as are evil, find by experience,
that thou have zeal in correcting, and punishing their faults. In which
punishment, thou art to observe this order, that thou love the person, and that
thou abhor and persecute the vice; procuring that the vice may be destroyed,
and that the person may be amended, and preserved; and according to this, let
the punishment be moderated in such sort, that it reach not so far, as to
prove cruelty; and so thou happen to hurt, and to loose him, whom thou desire
to amend, and keep.

And to the end that the correction and punishment may be imposed with that
moderation which Benignity requires, let the Superiout procure, that he do it
not, whilst he finds himself angry, and altered, or enflamed with choler;
but let him stay, till his heart be calm and quiet. And before he punish, or
reprove, let him lift up his heart to God, and desire favor and grace from
heaven; to the end that he may do it with such moderation as is fit; and to
such end as he ought; which is, that the delinque^t may amend, and so others
may take warning by his example, and that the divine Majesty may be served and
glorified by all. This does S. Dorotheus declare to us, by these words. Our
Predecessors and forefathers, the holy men, did teach us, that if any Superior
being in anger, did reprehend his subject chollerickely; in such sort, as
reprehending the other, he satisfied his own passion and anger, it did amount
to be a kind of revenge; and he discovered the vitiousnes of his own heart,
whereby he disedified them, whom he was to reform. And for this reason it is
fit, that first he bridle his own choler, and be wholly in the hands of
reason, before he punish other folks.

All this moderation, which is necessary to the end that correction, and
punishment be imposed with Benignity, the Apostle teaches us, speaking thus to
his disciple Saint Timothy; Argue, (that is to say convince such as err, with
reasons and authorities) and entreat the^ also. Which is as much as to say,
admonish the good by way of request, and in sweet manner, to the end that they
may profit; and such others as are weak, and pusillanimous, to the end that
they may get up into heart; and reprehend and correct the wicked, with fervor
and zeal; but yet this you must do, with much patience. In a word, you must
correct such as are faulty, without showing your self angry, or in passion;
but let them see, that you have a calm, and quiet heart.

THE VI. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord did use, in touching
sick and leprous persons, with his own sacred hands.
IT belongs to Benignity, to show the sweetness of love, in life and
conversation with men. And a great sweetness of love it is, that a man placed in
dignity should draw near to a poor sick person full of soars, and should
speak to him in most amiable manner; and should touch his soars, and cleanse
them, and cure them, and comfort him with such a regalo as this would be. And
so much more eminent as that Lord were, who should desce^d to this office; and
so much more base as the sick person were, and so much the more horrible as
his disease were, and so much the more often, and so many more as the sick
persons were, to whom he should use this charity; so much the greater, and so
much the more admirable would this sweetness of condition, and Benignity fall
out to be.

Well then, all this was done by Christ our Lord, who being the King both of
heaven and earth, and the Lord of infinite Majesty, did touch with his own
blessed hands, those poor base persons, who were sick of horrible diseases;
and who came to him with desire of remedy; and he cured them, and left them
full of comfort; and this he did many times, and to innumerable persons. S.
Luke, and Saint Mark relate, how our Lord beginning to preach in Galilea,
after his fast in the desert, came to the City of Caphernaum; and being gone
forth to preach in a Sinagogue, and the evening being already come on, all they
who had sick persons in their power, brought them before him. And those sick
people, being many. Mark 1. Luke 4. and their diseases of many kinds, (for
they came from several parts of that Province, to hunt after their health by
his means) he touched every one of them with his own sacred hands, and gave
them perfect health; the whole City, the while, standing al amazed at that
wonder, to see how he touched them one by one, and how instantly withal, they
were cured.

Having once preached a sermon in the Mount, he descended toward the plain,
Matthew. 8. Mark, 1. and there came many troops of people to him. Amongst the
rest, there approached a man all laden with leaprousy; and in the presence of
all that multitude of people, he placed himself upon his knees, before our
Lord, (but a little separated from him,) and besought him to cure him of that
leaprousy, saying. O Lord if thou will, thou can make me whole. Now our Lord
could have cured him with the least word; yet, not co^te^ting himself with
that, but to the that he might show the more Benignity, he extended his hand so
far as to reach him, and touch his leprous body, saying, I will, be thou
clean; and instantly he was cured.

After the mystery of the Tra^sfiguration, Matthew. 17 Mark 9. there came
troops of people who were expecting him, and they brought a lunaticke before
him, who was extremely tormented by a devil. Our Lord commanded the devil to
depart, who yet at his going out, did treat the young man so ill, as that he
fell to the ground like a dead body. And whereas our Lord could easily have
commanded him to rise up, or else appoint one of his disciples to raise him, he
did not so; but himself went toward the young man, and took him by the hand,
and raised him up; and then the young man being touched, and assisted by our
Lord, who sustained him in his hands, did rise.

Whilst he was in Bethsaida, Marc. 8. they brought a blind man to him that he
might cure him, which he would not do in the City before that people, but
abroad in the field. And when he might have commanded them, who led him, to
conduct him forth of the City, he was not pleased to serve himself of any
other in that office; but himself would needs take the poor blind man by
the hand, and drew him a side into a part of the field out of the company, and
himself lead him, and became his guide, and to cure him laid his hand upon his
eyes, and to discover his Benignity to us, he vouchsaffed himself in person,
to be the leader of a poor blind man, which is a work of so much humility
and meannes. Not only did he use this kind of Benignity with men, but also
poor sick women. The mother in law of Saint Peter, Matthew. 8. Marc. 1. was
sick of a violent fever. He went into her house to visit her, he drew near
her, he took her by the hand, and he raised her up, commanding the fever to
forsake her: so might he have commanded her to rise alone, but he would not do
so, but would needs raise her up himself, to discover his Benignity so much
the more.

Our Lord being preaching in a Sinagogue one Saboth day, Luke 13. there came
before him, a sick and miserable creature, bowed crookedly down even to the
ground, and tormented by a devil; and our most pitteous Lord called her gently
to him, and made her come near him, and laid his hands upon her with great
Benignity, and gave her perfect health.

That which our Lord did with these sick and miserable persons, whereof we
have spoken, he did at other times, with other innumerable sick people, who
were subject to horrible and loath some diseases; for all the world came to
him. And they who were so weak and wasted, that they could not come of
themselves, were brought to him by others, and so they drew near him, and he
touched them with his most blessed hands to cure them. Now that our Lord
himself, should raise sick persons out of their beds, or from the ground, to
which they were fallen, did proceed in him, from an un speakeable and most
tender love, who not only was disposed to do men good, but also to comfort,
honor, and regale such persons as he did good unto: which was a fruit of the
supreme sweetness of his Benignity and love.

THE VII. CHAPTER. How the Saints have imitated this Benignity of Christ our
Lord toward sick persons.
THis example of Christ our Lord, has generally been imitated much by holy men
who thereby have been moved, and animated to serve sick persons, and to cure
them, and to raise them in their arms, and to cleanse them with their own
hands. And this has been done, not only by mean persons, but by principal
and great Lord; who not being content with giving alms to poor sick people,
and to maintain them by their bounty, have themselves, been glad to serve
them, and strive to cure them, sometimes being sick of leprosies, and other
most loathsome and corrupt soars; and have with extreme Benignity, done all
imaginable offices of charity and tenderness, yea eue^ so far as to kiss
their leprosies, and soars. And to the end that God might declare how much
this tender, and benign kind of charity was pleasing to him, he did
oftentimes concur, by miraculously curing those sick persons, who had been
touched by his servants. Let us relate some examples of this truth.

Saint L^wis King of France, used to visit the hospitalls, where there was a
great number of persons sick of diseases, both grievous, and dangerous, and
extremely loathsome withal; and yet the King, without loathing that
uncleanness, and the horror of their diseases, and without any fear also of
contagion, would go to the sick, and would be serving them upon his knees, and
regaling them with extreme Benignity. And this he performed with so great
cheerfullnes, and estimation of this office, as if visibly he had beheld the
person of Christ our Lord, in every one of those poor people. And finding on
day a leaper, whose nose, and whose very eyes were eaten out, with the
leprousy, and who was become even abominable to all that saw him; to this man
he used extraordinary tenderness, and gave particular regaloes, and served him
upon his knees, putting the meat into his mouth, with his own hands, and
giving him the wine and water which he was to drink.

The Count Elzearus of Ariano had every day in his house twelve Leapers, and he
washed their feet, and gave them meat; and not content with what he did in his
own house, he went to the hospitalls, where they lived; and there putting
himself upon his knees before them, he would wash their feet, and kiss and
cleanse and tie up their soars. One day in the hospital he found six leapers,
and some of them had their lips, and mouths so eaten, that they could not be
looked upon, without horror; and the holy Count went to them, and comforted
them by word of mouth; and afterward kissed the soars of every one of them;
and this charity was so acceptable to God, that instantly they were all cured,
and the house was filled with a most fragrant odor. Not only did Christ our
Lord approve this work, by curing those leapers, who had been touched by his
^erua^t, but himself also was pleased to appear to him in form of a leper,
that so he might receive the same service, and regalo, which was affoarded to
the rest.

Surius relates in the life of Saint Ethbinus, the Abbot, whose feast is
celebrated upon the 19. of October, that another holy Priest going with him by
the fields to his Monastery, they encountered in the way, a poor leper all
full of soars, and deeply groaning upon the ground, where he was laid. They
came to him, and comforted him, and having much compassion of his misery, they
asked him what he would have? and offered him all the service they could
perform, although it were to give him of their very flesh. The leper said, the
thing which I desire of you, is that because my nose is so full of corruption
and filth, you would assuage my grief, by making it clean. They do so; and
Ethbinus takes him in his arms, and raises him up from the ground, and the
Priest comes, and cleanses the corruption of his sore with his to u^g. In that
very instant, wherein they began this work of so great Charity, and
Benignity, there appeered Angels from heaven close by the leaper, and there
appeared also a Cross, which was placed over his head; and the leaper rose up
whole, all full of splendour, and beauty; and they saw clearly that it was
Christ our Lord. And when he was a little mounted up, he said. Yea were not
ashamed of me, in my afflictions; neither will I be ashamed to confess you,
and to admit you as my servants, in my kingdom; and when this was spoken he
vanished, and ascended up to heaven. The two Saints were amassed, and full of
mighty joy, and could not satisfy themselves with praising God, for the great
favor he had showed them, by appearing in the form of an poor sick man; and
for vouchsafing to receive that poor service at their hand, and to reward that
with so great bounty as to give them an assured hope, that they should enjoy
him in his kingdom.

There have also been many Queens, and great Ladies, in the Church of Christ
our Lord, who have imitated his Benignity, toward sick persons. Fortunatus
the Bishop, relates of Radegundis the holy Queen of France (whose feast is
celebrated in August) that she made an Infirmarie, into which she gathered,
and wherein she cured a great multitude of sick persons, and she her self
would serve them; and lick the corruption of their soars and even the worms
which grew therein, and she would cleanse their heads, and cut their hair. And
especially she did this to leprous women, whom she would embrace, and kiss,
and anoint, and cure, and serve at table, with great sweetness of love.

The Queen Donna Isabel, daughter to Don Petro King of Arragon, and niece of S.
Isabell, daughter of the King of Hungary, who was married to Don Dionysio King
of Portugal, and who for her sanctity, is publicly reputed and served in
Portugal as a Saint by leave of Pope Leo, did not content herself to give all
the goods she had to poor people, who were sick; but she herself would be
serving and curing them, in her own person. And for this purpose, she would
cause both men and women who were sick of loathsome infirmities, as soars,
and leprosies and cankers, to be sought forth, and secretly brought into her
Palace, and there she cleansed, and cured and served, and regaled them with
all the expressions of piety, that she could make; and she would kiss the
feet, and the soars of the leprous women. One day washing the feet of a woman
who was leprous, the woman hid one of them, because it had been much eaten with
the canker and there distilled forth corrupt matter, which gave a most loathsome
savor. The Quee^ made one of her women draw forth the leprous foot, and put
it in a basen, that she might wash it. When this was done, there came such a
pestiferous savor from that foot, that the Queens women, not being able to
endure it, went all out of the room. The Queen remaining alone with the
leaper, did gently touch the foot with her hand, for fear of hurting it, and
she clea^sed it; and stooping kissed it with that horrible sore which it had. And
Christ our Lord being pleased to discover how much gust be takes in such
works of piety, did entirely cure the leaper at the instant, when the Queen
kissed her foot.

Now we also are to imitate Christ our Lord, and his Saints, in this sweet and
benign kind of charity, toward poor sick persons; and we must visit them
in their houses, and hospitalls, and infirmaries, and we must serve and
cleanse, and cure and comfort them, and provide them, the best we may, of all
things necessary. And howsoever we may be placed in great height of nobility,
and dignity, yet must we not disdain to affoard such services and regaloes to
poor sick people; since this was done by Christ our Lord, who is the King of
glory; and many Christian Kings and Queens, have done the same for love of
him. And it is a great honor and glory for us to be able to do a work so
acceptable, and pleasing to Christ our Lord, and so profitable to our own
souls; and of so great edification and good example to our neighbors and
which has the assurance of so immense a reward in the kingdom of heaven.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord did use to diverse
blind men, harkening to them, expecting them, and illuminating them, and how
we are to imitate him in this Benignity.
IT does also belong to this virtue of Benignity, to give that to ones
neighbor, which he desires, with facility and sweetness; yea and more then
that which he desires; and not to reflect upon the indignity of him who
asks, nor upon the authority and greatness of that Lord, who may need the
like; but to consider what is agreeable to charity, which whenever it is
great, it communicates it self to all, and does good to all, and takes order
that in many things, the high and low, the great and little men of the world,
be made equal to one another.

Christ our Lord left us many examples of this truth. Saint Luke chap. 18.
relates how once coming to the City of Jericho, a blind man near the way was
asking alms; and when he heard the noise of the people in company of our Lord,
and understood that it was Jesus of Nazareth, who passed by, he began to cry
out and say, Jesus thou son of David, have mercy on me. And although the
people bad him hold his peace, yet still he continued in crying out, and
beseeching our Lord that he would free him from the misery wherein he was. Our
Lord heard his cry, and detained himself in the high way, and made all that
people which was in his company stay with him, and commanded that they should
bring the blind beggar to him, and he stayed expecting till he came; and being
come, he asked him this question; What would thou have me do for thee?
What do thou desire at my hands? The blind man answered; the thing which I
desire and beg of thee, is that thou will give me my sight: and instantly our
Lord, without the least delay, gave him that which he desired, and said;
Receive thy sight. And he received the sight of his corporal eyes, and the
sight also of his soul; for being full of faith, and devotion he followed
Christ our Lord, both with body and soul; and did not cease from glorifying
Almighty God. This passed at the entry which Christ our Lord made into Jericho,
for Saint Luke relates that he entered into Jericho, after he had wrought this
miracle.

Saint Matthew also chap. 20. shows, that Christ our Lord going forth of the
same City of Jericho, and being accompanied with much people, there stood two
blind men, close upon the way, demanding alms; and when they knew that Jesus
passed by, they began to cry out and say, Jesus the son of David, take pity
on us. Christ our Lord did instantly make a stand in the way, and caused them
to be called to him; and being arrived he asked the^ thus, what do you ask at
my hands? They answered, Lord that thou open these eyes of ours, and take this
blindenes from us; and at the instant our Lord extended his hand to their eyes,
and they obtained sight both of body and soul; and they followed our Lord,
being full of gratitude for so great a benefit, and of faith, and desire to do
him service.

Much is here to be considered in the admirable Benignity, which Christ our
Lord did use toward these blind men; in that he would hearken to their cries;
and they, being so base persons, and our Lord so soueraignely high, that he
would yet pawse in the way, and stay for them, and make all them also stay, who
went with him; and condescend thereby to the necessity of those blind men, and
acco^modate himself to their weakness. For if our Lord had gone walking on, they
not seeing the way could not have followed him, or at least, not fast enough to
overtake him; and he must have given them much trouble in putting them to it.
That way of Jericho, was also full of impediments and dangerous precipices, as
Saint Hierome notes; and so if they had been put to go a pace in such a way,
they had been in danger to receive much hurt. For these reasons did our Lord
make a stand; as also because he would vouchsaffe to do them honor, making so
much account of them, as for their respect to stay in that high way; and to
make so much people stay with him. And besides, it was a great testimony of his
Benignity toward them, to grant them at the instant of their asking it; and
that with so much comfort to them, so great a benefit, as it was to receive
their sight, both in body and soul, and such devotion, as carried the^ on to
glorify Almighty God.

A great wonder it was, that Iosue should cause the Sun to stand still, and
make a pawse in the heaven, to illuminate the earth, till such time as he had
obtained victory over his enemies; and that the Sun and all the Orbs, which
moved with it, should stand still, obeying the voice of Iosue, the servant of
God. But a much greater wonder it is, that our Lord who created both the Sun,
and the whole machine of the world should make a stand in the way, obeying the
voice of a blind beggar, that he might illuminate him both in body and soul,
as the true Sun of Justice.

A great Benignity it is, that a King of any earthly kingdom passing on his
way through a street, should stay and make all the Gra^des of his Court stay
with him, upon the cry of a beggar, who asks alms; and that he should expect
that beggar till he could arrive; and should give audience to his petion; and
then insta^tly, open a purse with his own hands, and give the beggar
whatsoever alms he had desired. But a far greater Benignity it is, that the
King of heaven and earth should deteine himself in a high way, and stand
expecting a poor beggar, till he could arrive to him, and then should ask him
what he would desi^ to the end that his own mouth might be the measure of that
which our Lord would give him; and that instantly he should open the treasures
both of his mercy and power, and bestow all that alms upon him which he could
ask or desire, yea and much more then he knew how to ask.

Now our Lord by showing this mercy to those blind men, has showed also a
very great mercy to all faithful Christians, instructing us and persuading us
by his example, to use Benignity toward our neighbors, giving ear to the cry
of the poor, and bestowing with liberality, what they ask according to the
ability we have: and that when they are not able to come to us, to ask remedy
as being hindered, either by infirmity or ignorance, or any other weakness, we
go to seek them out, or make the^ be sought; to the end that we may help
them, accommodating our selves to their impote^cy, and necessity. And teaching
us also by this example, that we must expect, and stay for our neighbors,
when there is occasion to do them good, and to give them comfort; and that
although we may be placed in high estate, and they in low, we must not yet
disdain to use this charity, and sweetness toward them. And that when our
neighbors make us expect ^ while, and come not so soon as we desire; we
must not yet be angry with them, nor loose the peace of our heart; but we must
endure with patience, and expect and speak to them with Benignity, i^
imitation of this example of Christ our Lord.

THE IX. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord showed to little
children; and what he taught us thereby.
THe parents of little children, Matthew. 19. Marc. 10. Luc. 18. seeing the power
which Christ our Lord had to cure all diseases by touching sick persons,
brought those little children to him; and not only them who were able to go
upon their own feet, but also their sucking babes, who could not speak nor
go, but in the arms of others; and they offered the^ to him, that he might
touch them, and give them his benediction; and they had confidence that by this
means, such of the^ as were sick, would recover their health, and they who
were not not sick, would continue whole. Their parents used this very often,
and with much importunity: for they who had children were many, and did so much
esteem this good of their children, that no man would want it by his will; and
every one desired to prevent his neighbor, and be the first to get a blessing
for his son. The Apostles seeing this, and conceiving that it was a thing
unworthy of the authority and gravity of our Lord, to employ himself upon such
a light and mean thing as this, and thereby to hinder greater matters; and
thinking also, that because the exercise was so frequent, and used with so
great importunity, and ill manners by those parents, who brought their
children, that our Lord would be troubled and vexed thereby; did use severely
to reprehe^d such as brought the children; and would shake them off, as
threatening them; that so they might not come to our Lord. So says Saint
Chrysostom, giving a reason thereof. The disciples drove away the little
children, and forbad them to come to our Lord, in respect of his dignity, and
the authority of his person. And S. Hierome, declaring another reason says;
The disciples thought, that as other men are wont to be disquieted, and
displeased, by such importunities; so also would our Lord be, by the frequency
and importunity, whereby they offered their children. And Saint Ambrose adds
another cause to this, and faith; The disciples also did thus, least otherwise
our Lord might have bee^ oppressed, that is; much straigthened and tired, by
the multitude of people, which came to him; some thrustling and iustling
others, by occasion of the children who^ they brought. Now our Lord perceiving
how the Apostles hindered little children from approaching to him, though he knew
their zeal, and the intention wherewith they did it, which was not ill; yet he
liked it not, because it was not so agreeable to the divine spirit of the same
Lord, but to the humane spirit of the disciples. And showing both by his
countenance and his words, that he liked it not, he called and reprehended
them saying; Suffer little children to come to me, and do not hinder them;
for of such is the kingdom of heaven. I mean that heaven does belong, not
only to those little children, for the purity, innocence and grace they have;
but that the same kidgdom of heaven shall be also given to men, who in their
practice of humility, simplicity, and purity of life, will become like little
children. And so for that, which little children are in their own persons, by
divine grace, which is, to be acceptable to God, and worthy of heaven; and for
that also, which they represent in others, namely to be men, who are humble,
innocent, and pure, whom I love and esteem much, and embrace with my very
bowels, and bless with my gifts; therefore will I suffer them to approache to
me, and I will admit them to my embracements, and blessings; and therefore see
you give them noe impediment in coming.

Our Lord having thus reprehended his disciples, he called them who brought the
children; and making those children come near him, he put his hands upon their
heads; and embraced them, and gave them his holy blessing with his hands; and
with his words he recomme^ded them to his heavenly Father; and he made them
partakers of his divine grace, by the efficacy of his benediction.

By this act, Christ our Lord discovered to us his Benignity, and most sweet
condition; in that a Lord of so great Majesty, and who was ever e^ployed in so
great and high works, should descend to a thing, which in all appearance was so
poor and mean, and belonging wholly to men, who had no weighty business in
hand; and that he should do it, with so cheerful a countenance, and with so
much gust, and sweetness, that their parents, and others of kin who brought
the children, should presume to bring them so often, and so importunately, and
to interrupt the continuance of his discourses, and the working of his
miracles; and to e^ploy so large spaces of time, in this so mean exercise.

And not only did Christ our Lord discover his Benignity to us, by this
proceeding; but he manifested it to be so great, and so admirable, that it does
incomparably exceed all that, which men can conceive, and believe thereof. For
although it were much, which the Apostles knew of the Benignity, and piety, and
meeknes of our Lord; yet they could not believe or understand, how it could
possibly arrive so far as this; but did rather think; that our Lord was to
disdain such a poor employment; and that he would be troubled, and offended
by the disquiet, and importunity which they gave him in this kind. But indeed
it was far otherwise with him; for the meannes of the action pleased him
much; and the time it cost, was held by him to be well employed; and the labor
and trouble which they put him to, was sweetly, and gladly endured by him.

Let us imitate this Benignity of our Lord, in descending to do such things
as are poor, and mean in the account of men, when charity requires it at our
hands; and to treat and converse with poor, and mean people, though we may
seem perhaps to loose somewhat of our right, and dignity thereby; if yet it
do import for the assisting, and comforting them, in their necessities, and
for gaining them to Christ our Lord, doing that which the Apostle did, in
imitation of Christ, when he said, I have made my self all things, to all
men, I have accommodated my self to the inclination and gusts of all men, in
all lawful things; thereby loosing somewhat of mine own right and liberty,
that I might save as many as I could.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity which Christ our Lord showed toward wicked
persons, who came to him with a corrupt intention.
Our Lord showed great Benignity in yielding so liberally and sweetly to all
that, which the persons, who came to him, desired of him with good intention,
and true desire of finding remedy by his means; but he discovered it much
more, in yielding liberally to that which was desired of him, with a corrupt
mind, and with a meaning to calumniate him, and to draw some word out of his
mouth, or to note some action, whereby they might defame him, and condemn him
to death.

There came to him a man of the Law Luc. 10. after a counterfeit manner, to
tempt him; and he asked him, what he was to do for the obtaining of eternal
life? but our Lord did not discover his treachery, nor reprehended his
wickedness, but granted that which he desired, instructing him with words full
of sweetness, concerning the truth of what he was to know and do, for the
obtaining of eternal life.

There came a Pharisee to him, Matthew. 22. who was learned in the Law, to ask
him which was the greatest commaundment of the Law; and he came, with a
malicious mind and not with a desire to understand the truth, but to find
matter, whereof to accuse him. And yet he without showing any feeling or
disgust, either in his countenance, or words, did answer to the question with
much facility and suauity, and he taught him the truth.

The Pharisees did often inuit him to eat with them, Luc. 7. and 11. Matthew.
22. not with charity, but with a perverse and malicious intention; which was to
see if he did or said any thing, which might be taxed; and finding nothing
whereof they could take hold wherewith to hurt him, they procured to serve
themselves of his piety and religiousnes toward the making good their ill
purpose; and therefore they invited him upon their Sabbath days, and would
place sick persons before him; to the end that curing them upon the Sabbath,
they might accuse him for not observing it. And our Lord knowing the malice,
and wicked intention wherewith they invited him, did not yet excuse himself
from going; but with great facility granted the suite they made, and accepted
their inuitation; and he went to their houses, and did eat with them, and
comfort them by his presence, and illuminate them by his doctrine, and edify
them by his example. And though he used most exact temperance in eating and
drinking; yet to accommodate himself to them, and to show himself affable,
and benign toward them, he fed upon those ordinary meats, which they used.
And even this was a proof of his very unspeakable Benignity, that coming into
the world to suffer for man, and carrying such an intense love toward the
Cross, and such a most ardent desire to abstain from all earthly comfort, and
regalo; and to take all that to himself, which was most painful and grievous,
that so he might suffer the more for man, and satisfy the divine Justice more
perfectly, and discover and exercise that love so much the more, which he
carried both to the eternal Father, and to the whole race of mankind; yet
nevertheless, he did in many things remit much of this rigor at some times, and
did both in his feeding and clothing, serve himself of ordinary and usual
things; so to show himself more appliable, and sweet toward them with who^ he
conuersed and fed; and to make himself more inuitable by all men, and to give
them all, the greater hope of their salvation. So says the venerable Abbot
Euthymius. It was fit that our Lord who came to take away finne, should be
benign and sweet, and that he should accommodate himself to the weakness of
men to gain them for heaven, as he did; and for this cause he went to the
table of sinners, and fed upon their meats; though he did it in a most
temperate and religious manner, as it becomes holy men to do. And although at
times, he condescended thus to the usual custom of men for the winning of
them; he did not for all this, give over his manner of austere and painful
life, which he also exercised at certain times; as namely during those forty
days, which he fasted in the desert.

This was said by Euthymius; whereby it is confirmed, that so to admit of the
inuitatio^ of sinful people, and especially such as did inuit him with a
malicious mind, as if it had been but to eat with them, was a work of
supreme Benignity, whereby he showed his most sweet love; in the strength
whereof, he had a meaning to comfort and save all the world.

Especially he showed this unspeakable Benignity, in the time of his Passion.
For being in the house of Caiphas, Matthew. 23. Luc. 22. before that Council of
unjust Judges, and they asking him whether he wore Christ and the Son of God
or no; and our Lord seeing that they asked it not with a desire of knowing the
truth, or for the doing of Justice, but only from his answer to take occasion
of blaspheming him, and condemning him to death, and accusing him to Pilate, to
the end that he might execute that unjust sentence, which they had given
against him. And observing, that by reason they were so wicked, and so vain,
and proud, they were most unworthy of any answer; yet nevertheless that
sovereign Majesty of Christ, the King of glory refused not to give them
answer, and disdained not to speak to them; but in very modest words, was
content to declare to them, who he was by saying thus; Herafter when my Passion
is at an end, the Son of man shall be sitting at the right hand of the power
of God; which was as much as to say, that he was to reign, and discover his
power, and authority as he was God, coequall to the eternal Father. And they
enducing another question hereupon, saying; Therefore belike thou art the son
of God; he answered also to that, saying; your selves say that I am so, which
was to answer truth: but with very modest, and humble words; whereby though he
gave to understand, that in very truth he was the Son of God, yet he affirmed
it not expressly, as it was fit not to do to such as would not profit by it,
though the answer had been more express and clear. And by answering them
after this manner, he also showed his inclination to answer them more
plainly, and directly to what they asked, if they would have known the truth,
to have believed it. And this he signified by saying. If I tell you what you
ask, you will not believe me; and if I ask you any thing, to the end that I
may teach you truth, you will not answer me.

Our Lord by answering these questions, which were asked by Judges so wicked,
so cruel, and so undeserving of any respect at this hands, did show how free
his heart was from all passion, and choler; since he answered with so great
serenity, and peace of mind; and thereby he prevented that aspersion which they
would have cast upon him, if he had been wholly silent; and he discovered the
Benignity and sweetness of his imme^se charity toward his enemies, since he
obeyed them, who had noe right of commaundme^t over him, and satisfied their
demandes who were so unworthy of all answer.

Let us follow the example of Benignity, which here our most blessed Lord and
Savior gives us, and not only let us love our enemies, as we have already
showed: but let us also be benign toward them; and let us grant them, what
they desire when it may lawfully be done; condescending to their disposition
and inclination in lawful things; and speaking to them humbly, and modesty,
and showing them the love of our hearts, and the desire we have to give them
gust, and contentment, in such things as are agreeable to the will of God.

This does our Lord himself expect, and advise us to, by Saint Luke saying;
Love your enemies, and do good to them: and if they desire to borrow money of
you, or any other thing, affoard it without hoping after any interest. And when
there is need, give with a free hand, without expecting any other reward, then
of Almighty God; and so the reward which God will give you for such works, will
be very abundant and great. For you shall be the sons of the most high God,
who is benign, even to men who are ungrateful and wicked; and though they be
unworthy of his benefits, and breakers of his co^maundments, and worthy of
eternal torments, yet he cease not to do them good.

THE XI. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity, which we are to use toward our
neighbors, doing them honor by good words; and of the examples which Christ
our Lord gave us herein.
THe virtue of Benignity, requires that a man should be courteous, and well
mannered in the words, he speaks of his neighbor; and that both in
presence, and absence, he do him honor by his manner of speech. For Benignity
makes a man sweet and civil in his discourse and conversation, sticking close
to the end of charity, which is a spiritual, and eternal good. And a
principal part of this sweet conversation does consist, in that the words be
civil and courteous; whereby we may honor our neighbor, according to the
quality of his person and state: and for this reason, a man who uses curtesy,
is called benign, and gentle, and he adorneth his neighbor with good words.
There are men, who being governed by a spirit of this world, or else by their
natural condition (not corrected by reason,) use to speak of their
neighbors, with little estimation of them, and when there is a latitude of
giving the^ a title more honorable, they give him the least they can, so it be
without offense to the quality of his person. And whereas they might treat
them in better terms, they proceed in such sort, as to show little estimation
of them, and so they trouble and greiue them. And especially they speak of
their neighbors, when they are absent, in words which show they make little
account of them; and thereby they think to exalt themselves, and to make
themselves more esteemed by others; but they are deceived. For in that they do
not the thing, which is required by charity, which is benign and sweet, they
obtain not that which they pretend, which is to be esteemed and honored; but
they are despised, and dispraised for it. For estimation springs from love;
and if you love a man, you esteem him: and so on the other side, contempt
springs from hate; and to abhor a man, is to despise him. And so when a man
is well conditioned, and courteous in his words, toward his neighbors, he is
generally beloved; and for the same reason all men respect, esteem, and honor
him: for they love a man, who loves them; and they esteem and honor, such as
esteem, and honor them. But when a man is discourteous in his words, and
appears to make small account of his neighbors, he is abhorred by all men;
or if they do not abhor his person, yet they abhor his condition, and
discourteous language; and for the same reason, he is little accounted of, and
despised by all.

This is taught us by holy scripture saying; A sweet and gentle word, does
reconcile, and win the hearts of men, and makes the^ their friends, and
multiplieth others, and does sweeten and appease enemies; and a benign and
gracious tongue does abound in a good man. The meaning is; it produces an
abu^dant fruit in the heart of others, moving them also to be benign, and to
speak gently and sweetly, to such as speak gently and sweetly to them. The
holy Ghost says of the servant of God, that he is well mannered, and courteous
in his words; and this is that divine fruit, which he produces in his
neighbors, to make them meek, and Benign, as himself is. And of him, on the
other side, who is rude, and discurteous in his words, the Holy Ghost also
says; The stroke of a whippe, makes the flesh black, and blew; but the blow
of an ill tongue, breaks the bones; that is to say; it does many times hurt,
and wound the soul, in such sort, as to cause is to fall into sorrow, and
impatience, and hatred, whereby the strength, and vigor of that grace and
virtue, which it had, is lost. This hurt, does a discurteous and unmannerly
word, which wants Benignity, produce in the soul of man.

Of this kind of Benignity in speech Christ our Lord did leave us most
excellent examples, in his holy Gospel: They brought him one day, a man in
his bed who was a paralitike, and breaking through the roof of the house, they
placed him before him; Mat. 9. and our Lord, behoulding the faith of them, who
brought him, did him so particular a favor, that he efficaciously moved him to
a great sorrow for his sins, and to have faith in our Lord, and confidence
that he should be forgiven. And being then in so good a disposition, he
pardoned them, and so he declared himself to do, by saying, Son, thy sins
are forgiven thee. This man being so miserable in his corporal state, and being
so base of condition, as that he might without shame, carry his couch upon his
back, and being a sinful man besides, (for as Saint Hierome, notes he had
contracted his disease by his sins) and coming to the presence of our Lord
with the uncleanness of those sins, by the weight whereof he was oppressed
(for there they appeared to have been taken from him by our Lord;) the same
Lord being the creator of all things did yet call him Son; which is a title
of great sweetness of love, and shows such equality in condition, as runs
between fathers, and sons. So high a Lord, does honor and exalt so base a
man, so far; that in some sort he makes him equal to his Angels, and
Saints by giving him the name, and title of his Son. For this is the great
dignity and honor, which Saints and Angels have, to be the sons of the most
high God. So does S. Hierome, note saying; O admirable humility of Christ our
Lord, that to a contemptible and defeated man, without strength or health in
any part of his body, whom the Priests of the law would have despised, and
disdained even so much as to touch, our most B^nigne Lord was content to give
the name of Son*

There came to Christ our Lord, Marc. 5. Luc. 8. a woman who had a flux of
blood; she touched the skirt of his garment, and remained whole; and our Lord
having brought her forth to light; and she having confessed the benefit which
she had received, our Lord said publicly to her; daughter thy faith has made
thee whole; go in peace. He honored her by calling her daughter, and by
attributing her cure to her own faith; and making her rich with Peace, and joy
of heart; which was an effect of the pardon of her sins, and of the grace he
gave her. And thus, by honoring the paraliticke, with the name of Son, and
this woman by the name of daughter; we see it was no particular privilege,
which he gave to this, or that person only; but that it was the common style
which our most benign Lord used; honoring with this name such mean and poor
me^ and women, as came to him for any help.

His disciples being poor, and mean, and very full of defects, at such time
as he conuersed with them in mortal flesh, sometimes he called Sons; yea and
at some other times, he would call them, by that diminitiue whereby fathers
call their sons, little children; to unfold so much the more, that sweetness
of love wherewith he called them Sons. At other times, he would call them
Friends; and after the Resurrection, when the glory of his sacred Humanity, and
the Majesty of his Divinity was more discovered, he called them his Brothers,
when he spoke of them to others in their absence. For once he said to S. Mary
Magdalene; Go tell my brethren, I ascend to my Father and to your Father. And
again he said to the Mary's; Go tell my brethren, that they are to go into
Galilea, and that they shall see me there. All these are titles of great
honor, and glory; and that our Lord should use them toward men, who were so
mean, and poor, and at a time, when still they were so imperfect; and
especially that he did it after they had quite forsaken him, in his Passion,
was an effect of extreme Benignity in him.

THE XII. CHAPTER. Of other examples, which Christ out Lord gave us, of his
Benignity in the same kind.
CHrist our Lord, preaching in a Sinagogue Luc. 13. they placed a woman, who
was deformedly bent down to the ground, by that devil wherewith she was
possessed. Now he having cured her, they calumniated him, in respect that he
had done it upon the Sabbath; and he defending his miracle, from that slander
said; Which of you will not, upon a Sabbath day, let your ox, or ass be
untied, and carried to the waters? If this may well be done; how much more is
it convenient, to untie the bond of sickness, whereby Satan had bound up this
daughter of Abraham, although it were upon the Sabbath day?

That title of the whole world, which was most honorable amongst the Jews,
and whereby they prised themselves, and wherein they gloried most, was to be
called the sons of Abraham; and so upon a certain occasion when they were
disposed to magnify this honor, they said to Christ; We are the sons of
Abraham. And whereas it had been curtesy enough toward that woman, if Christ
our Lord had said; It had been convenient to free this afflicted Woman, from
that misery; or to deliver this miserable creature from that infirmity: he
could not content himself therewith; but was resolved to honor her with the
most glorious name, which could be used, amongst the Jews, by saying; This
daughter of Abraham; this woman, who according to the extraction of flesh and
blood, is descended of Abraham; yea and in the way of spirit also; for she is
an imitatour of his faith.

When Christ our Lord received that message Ioh. 11. concerning the sickness of
Lazarus, and being resolved upon his death (which succeeded within few days
after) to raise him up again to life, he said to his disciples; Our friend
Lazarus sleeps, and I will go waken him. It had been enough, and more then
enough, for a Lord of so great Majesty, to have said, Lazarus sleeps, or
(since he would needs do him honor to say) Lazarus my servant, or Lazarus,
whose guest I have been, sleeps; and with this, he had done him much honor.
Yet his enamoured heart, could not content it self with this; but he would
needs pass on, and say, our friend Lazarus, which is a word of the greatest
curtesy and honor. For if it go for a point of high honor, to be accounted
the friend of an earthly King; and for a great favor, and regalo to any
vassaile, that a King should call him by that name; what honor must it be, for
a mortal man to be accounted a friend by Christ our Lord, the King of heaven?
and what kind of felicity, and comfort must it be, to be called so, by Christ
our Lord himself; and that not in complement, but from the very roots of his
heart? And so Christ our Lord honoring Lazarus with this word of friend, did
also honor his disciples; equalling them with himself, and making them his
companions in the friendship of Lazarus, and declaring that they were all his
friends.

This Benignity, which Christ our Lord did use both in word and deed, whilst
yet he lived in mortal flesh, has been also used by him, since he ascended up
to heaven, toward many servants of his, to whom he has severally appeared.
And leaving many examples of Saints, to whom he has done it, sometimes in the
form of a child, and sometimes of a most beautiful young man, and sometimes
of a most glorious person; and has honored and comforted them, both with
words and deeds, of must sweet love: We will speak here, of one admirable
apparition, and that of great authority, whereof we have made some mention
elsewhere, to another purpose; and in respect it was vouchsaffed to a person of
very mean quality it does so much the more disclose the Benignity of Christ
our Lord, and makes us the more confident of his goodness. Saint Paulinus Bishop
of Nola, relates how certain ships going from Sardinia toward Italy, grew
into a great tempest, close by the Island; and the rest of them breaking, and
sinking there, one of them which was fraught with corn, did not split, but yet
was extremely ill treated by the storm. The mariners, did all leave her, and
left also in her, an old poor man of Sardinia, who was yet no Christian, but
had begun to be catechized in that faith; and it was his office to cleanse, and
pumpe the ship. When the man observed him self to be alone, and in a ship
which had neither anchor nor stern, (for she had lost all, in the tempest:) he
began with tears to recommend himself to Christ our Lord, and to beg remedy at
his hands. He passed in this anguish, six whole days, without eating any
thing, and still continuing in this affliction, Christ our Lord appeared to him
in great brightness and beauty, and comforted him and fed him, and commanded
him to cut the mast, which was the ordinary remedy, whereof the ship seemed
capable, in that extremity. For though our Lord was resolved to deliver the
poor man, yet he was pleased withal, that he should also do his part. He put
himself therefore, to cut the mast; and because he alone was not able to do
it, the Angels of heaven helped him in it. When this visit was at an end, and
the man had disposed himself to sleep, our Lord came again and appeared to
him, and gently touching his ear with his hand, and gently pulling it, he
waked him, and required him to go about the doing of those things, which were
necessary for his nauigatio^; and in that which himself could not do, he had
the assistance of the Angels. Another time, he appeared to him, sitting in the
pupp of the ship, where the stern is wont to be; letting him see that it was
he, who governed her. The good man came to the feet of our Lord; and
perceiving, that he vouchsaffed to be so familiar and Benign toward him; and
that he did so cherish, and inuit him to himself, he took great courage and
confidence, and bent his head down, sometime toward his sacred feet, and
sometimes reposed it in his bosom. Our Lord departed then, having both by word
and deed, affoarded those great favors and regaloes of so great Benignity, to
this old Catechumenus. And the ship, being directed, and conducted by the
favor of heaven, sailed three and twenty days by sea; and and passing by
Afric, and Sicily, and by the Faro of that Island, he came at last to the
coast of Lucana, which is the lower part of Calabria. There the inhabitants did
receive him, and were all eye witnesses of the miracle; seeing him come safe in
a ship, which was all defeated, without stern, or men to govern her. From
thence they conducted the old man to Saint Paulinus, who received him with
great love, and baptized him; and whereas first his name was Valgius, he called
him now by the name of Victor. And the Saint affirms, that this was a very
well conditioned, and a sincere innocent kind of man, and that he would
recount this benefit, and apparition of Christ our Lord, with so great
te^dernes, and devotion, that whosoever heard him, could not choose but weep
from the heart.

By this example, and many others, over which I pass for breuities sake;
Christ our Lord has discovered, that the Benignity, and and sweetness of his
condition, which he used toward miserable me^, whilst he lived in this world
in mortal flesh, is still conserved by him, and still he uses it toward such
as will profit by it.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity and curtesy of speech, which the holy
Apostles used in imitation of Christ our Lord.
THis Benignity of speaking in sweet and civil words, which was used by Christ
our Lord toward men, he commanded his disciples in the Gospel that they
should also use, toward their neighbors. And so when he sent them to preach
to the people of Israel, he commanded that as soon as they were entering into
any house, they should instantly salute them, who were in it, saying, peace be
to this house, desiring and begging of God, the most holy gift of peace for
them all. And this was to teach them, that they were to be courteous and
affable, and benign to all them, with whom they conuersed. The Apostles
observed this order, very exactly. S. Peter the Prince of the Church, called
the wicked Jews his Brethren, who had crucified our Lord, saying. Act. 23.
Brethren I confess that you did it by ignorance; do penance, and you shall be
forgiven. And such as were converted, he called his fellows, and equals, 2.
Pet. 1. in the faith, and grace of Christ our Lord. And the great Evangelist
Saint John, called the faithful, his much beloved children. And writing to a
Christian woman called Electa; he says in the letter, to the Lady Electa and
her children, whom I truly love. And writing to another Christian called Caius,
he says, to my much beloved Caius, whom I do very truly love.

But what then shall we say of Saint Paul? With what Benignity, with what
curtesy, and good ma^ners, and with what regalo, did he speak to all men? For
speaking to the Jews who still continued in their infidelity, he says Act.
13. Men and Brethren, and the sons of Abraham, to you was that word sent from
heaven, which gives salvation. And speaking to the Christians, who had been
converted from gentility he says, Philip. 4. My brethren much beloved and much
desired, who are my joy, and my crown. And in another place he says, 1. Tim.
2. You are my hope, my joy, and my glory. And speaking to King Agrippa, who
was a wicked Prince, by nation a Gentile, and by sect a Jew; he made him an
exordium, full of estimation, curtesy, and good fashion, saying, I bold my self
happy, o King Agrippa, in that I am to defend my self before thee, concerning
those things, whereof I am accused by the Jews; especially since thou know
the customs and questions, which are amongst them; and therefore I beg thy
patience in hearing me. By these few words, so full of divine sweetness and
eloquence, he made him so propitious, and gained so far upon his good will,
as to make him gladly, and with great attention, give ear to a discourse, and
sermon full of divine mysteries. And speaking to Festus the Judge, a Gentile
and an Idolater; and having heard this word of injury, from his mouth, Paul
thou speak like a madd man; too much learning has put thee out of thy wits
(for him self being blind, understood nothing but earthly things, and so the
mysteries of heaven which S. Paul expressed, seemed madness to him) he answered
thus; Most excellent Festus, I am not madd; the words which I have spoken to
thee, are full of sobriety, and truth. What admirable Benignity was this, not
to be offended or disgusted, nor a whit altered, by such a great affront, as it
was to be called, mad man; and to answer with so great serenity of mind, and
so great sweetness of words, so full of curtesy, and good manners, as to call
him good or Excellent who was an impious Idolater? and he might say so too with
truth: for although he were not Good or excellent in his Religion, nor in that
kind of virtue which makes a man just in the sight of almighty God; yet he
was very virtuous in conversation, and morally virtuous, and so using a word of
a double signification in a true sense, he honored him as much as he could,
yet still speaking truth. The Apostle did much declare his Benignity, and
suauity by these examples, whereby he honored his neighbors, both in speaking
to them, and speaking of the^: but much more he discovered it, in this instance
which follows.

Onesimus an Infidel, and a slave, fled from Ph^emon his Master, and came to
S. Paul being at Rome. The Apostle received him with much love, and instructed
him in the faith, and converted him by the grace of Christ our Lord, and
baptized him, and returned him to his Master, and recommended him by his own
letter, wherein he wrote to this effect. I beseech thee for my some Onesimus,
whom I have engendered, for as much as concerns the spiritual life of grace,
whilst I was in prison at Rome, and I embraced him as I would do mine own
bowels. Which signifies to this sense, I received him with much tenderness of
affection, as a son whom I love with my whole heart, and with all the
affections thereof. If thou houldest me for thy friend, and if thou love and
respectest me, as such an one; receive him even as thou would do me, with
the same affection of love, and with the same estimation, and good usage
wherewith thou would receive me. And if he owe thee any thing, either for
having run away, or for taking any thing from thee, put it upon my account,
demand satisfaction and payment thereof at my hands; for I offer to pay and
satisfy it all, for him. Grant my suite, as I desire it, and I will rejoice
with thee in our Lord, for this good work of thine. Make my heart glad, by
doing as much as I have asked; which is to say, give me this comfort and this
regalo, that thou receive and treat Onesimus, as I have begged at thy hands.

Who would not be amazed to read, and hear these words of Saint Paul? That
an Apostle of Christ our Lord, a Prince and Instructor of the world, having
been personally visited before by Christ our Lord himself, and raised by him
up even to the third heaven; and chosen out to judge all the Nations of the
Gentiles, yea and the very Angels with them, in company of Christ our Lord;
and being so employed, both day and night in preaching the Gospel, and
government of the Church, as that in his breast he carried the solicitude, and
care of all the particular Churches thereof; that such a man I say as this, so
venerable to the Inhabitants of heaven, and so reverenced here on earth; should
take so much to heart, and negotiate at so great leisure, the business of a
fugitive slave, but newly converted to the faith; as that he should write a
letter from Rome to Phrygia, which was in Asia minor, where his Master was
dwelling in Colossus, and recommend him to be received, to be pardoned, and to
be treated well. And not being contented to perform this office of charity in
ordinary words (which yet had been sufficient,) that he should honor Onesimus
with terms of so great estimation, love and sweetness; and should recommend him
to his Master in terms, and with reasons, of so great exaggeration, as a
Father would do, recomme^ding his only son, whom he did extremely love, to
some great friend of his.

This was the Benignity and curtesy and suauity of speech, which the Apostles
learned of Christ our Lord, and this must all faithful Christians imitate,
treating our neighbors with terms of curtesy, and good manners; and giving
the^ the most honorable titles, and names we can, according to the estate of
every one, and according to the custom of that people amongst whom we live,
in speaking honorably of them, both in presence and absence.

In this sort we shall prevent many sins, which we use to commit, for want
of observing the rule of charity. We shall free our selves from detraction and
murmuring, which is a vice through which a man contemnes, and affronts his
neighbor, speaking ill of him, and recording his defects and faults, whether
it be with truth, or with falsehood. But howsoever this is a vice much abhorred
by Almighty God, and very abominable to them who fear him; which made Saint
Paul say, detracters, who are abhorred by Almighty God. And the wise man in
the Proverbs, says. The murmurer who speaks ill of his neighbor, and
makes a scorn of him, is abominable to men. And because when God has
abomination toward a sinner, it is to wish him the evil of eternal pain;
from hence it is that the murmurer is subject to eternal malediction, and
condemnation, as Ecclesiasticus chap. 28. signifies, saying. The murmurer, who
secretly speaks ill of his neighbor, and who has two tongues, (because in
the presence of his neighbor he speaks well of him, and in his absence he
infameth him by ill report) is accursed both of God and man; because he has
given trouble to many, depriving priuing them of the peace, and quiet of their
hearts; and filling them with grief and anger, and destroying that agreement
and good correspondence, which they had with their neighbors.

We shall also deliver our selves by this means, from the sin of contumely
and reproach; into which they fall, who face to face give ill words to their
neighbors; whereby they undervalue, and affront them; and this is the vice of
them who want judgment, as the wise man affirms, saying; He who speaks
contumelious words to his neighbors, is a fool. And in another place, all
fools are apt to thrust themselves into suites, and strifes, and such other
businesses, as tend toward the affronting of others; or else to the being
affronted by others, with iniutious words. And this is so grievous a sin,
and so worthy of punishment, as that Christ our Lord said; He who shall call his
neighbor fool, with a mind to affront him, is worthy of eternal fire.

We shall also thus excuse our selves from cursing others, whereby men offer
their neighbors to the devil, that they may be damned, or else, whereby they
desire them any other evil. Which sin is so grievous, as that it excludes men
from that glory, to which they were created, as the Apostle signified 1. Cor.
6. when he said; They who curse men (desiring the accomplishment of that with
their heart, which they say with their tongue) shall not possess the kingdom
of God.

We shall defend our selves from these sins so pernicious to the soul, which
are committed by the tongue, if we be well conditioned, and benign in our
words; whereby we honor our neighbors in their presence, and speak not ill
of them in their absence. And together with this we shall, by the good use of
our benign speech, give great gust to Almighty God, and shall deserve much in
his sight; and we shall win the love of our neighbor, making them friendly,
and kind to us; to the end that they may willingly receive any good advice,
and counsel from us, which we shall think fit to give. And we shall
conserve the peace, and strength of our own souls, yea and of our estates
also for the susteining of our lives; which many times is lost, by the ill
government of our tongues; and finally we shall edify our neighbors, by the
example of our good words. All this was signified by the wise man, when he
said; The peaceable and quiet tongue, is a sweet tree of life. Which signifies
that it recreateth, and comfort the hearts of men, and gives them spiritual
life, and strength; and frees them from the mortal distempers of anger, and
hatred, and other passions. And this is wrought by that man, who gives good
language, thro^ugh the much gain and merit, which they get in the sight of
Almighty God. And in the^ also, who hear the good speech which is used by any
man of his neighbors, works the like effect; for thereby they are edified,
and induced toward a love of virtue.

THE XIV. CHAPTER. How we are to exercise this Benignity, and to use this good
manners, toward them who use us ill.
SOme Christians there be, who are very courteous, and well conditioned toward
their neighbors, as long as those neighbors treat them with the same curtesy
and ciuility; but if their neighbors fail toward them, they also fail; and
then they treat the^ with the same discourtesy and disgrace, wherewith they
are treated, and they use the same ill terms which are used to the^. This is
no good, but an ill spirit. For, that I should be well co^ditioned toward my
neighbor, because he also is so to me, is no love of charity, but a love of
interest, and concupiscence; and that I should fail in curtesy, and good
condition toward another, because he falls short therein toward me, is not
the virtue of Benignity, but it is the vice of revenge. That which charity and
Benignity requires, and which God exacteth at our hands, is that although
another man do not what he ought, yet I do; and that although another man
should fail of using me with due curtesy, yet that I fail not thereof toward
him. For by this means, it will appear that in the ciuility, which I use
toward my neighbors, I am not moved by humane respects; but for the love of
Almighty God: and that I pretend not proper honor or interest, but the glory
of Almighty God, and the profit of my soul, and the edification of my
neighbor. And in this sort I being of good condition, and showing curtesy
toward him, who does not so to me, I shall please almighty God much the more:
for I shall move more purely for the love of him, and shall exercise more
virtue, and increase merit, and gain more reward in the sight of God. For,
together with the Benignity, which I shall exercise, by carrying my self
sweetly toward my neighbor, I shall also exercise patience, and humility, in
bearing with his ill condition: and I shall exercise more charity, by pardoning
the injury which he does me, in treating me ill. This was taught us by the
Apostle Saint Paul with a kind of heavenly inue^tion; associating Benignity
and Patience in suffering injuries, with Charity in pardoning the^; for thus he
says; Colos. 3. Cloathe your selves spiritually, as it becomes just men, and
the elect of God, with the bowels of mercy, and Benignity; that so you may be
affable, and sweetly conditioned toward your neighbors; and with humility,
modesty, and patience also; enduring, for the love of God, the ill treating and
perverse condition of one another, and pardoning also the injuries of one
another. And so also, if it happen that any one be offended, and affronted by
any other, and that he have reason to complain, yet let him pardon it in
imitation of Jesus Christ our Lord, who when we were wicked, and as enemies of
his had done him wrong; did forgive our sins and the offenses, which we
committed against him; and did free us from them by means of Baptism, and
Penance; without taking that vengeance of us, which we deserved. This is the
substance of S. Paul's discourse, and these are those rules of Charity and
Benignity, which we are to keep, that so we may comply entirely with the will
of Almighty God in this behalf.

THE XV. CHAPTER. That it is not contrary to Benignity, to reprehend wicked,
and obstinate persons in their wickedness, severely as Christ our Lord did.
IT is much to be noted concerning this virtue of Benignity, which Christ our
Lord taught us, both by his word, and by his example; that there are some, both
sayings and deeds of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, which to ignorant
persons might seem contrary to this Benignity; but which yet are not contrary,
but very agreeable thereunto. For Charity, which teaches us, that for the glory
of God, and good of souls, we must use this Benignity toward our neighbors,
of speaking to them in kind and gentle words; the same teaches us also, that
when we have authority in our hands, we may use words so severe, and pricking
in some cases, toward public and obstinate sinners, and who by their ill
example are pernicious to others, as may discover the grieuousnes of their
sins, and may disgrace, and condemn them as they deserve: that so if it be
possible, they may be reformed, or at least that others may fear to follow
their ill example. And now we will go declaring some instances, which Christ
our Lord left us of this truth, in the holy Gospel.

Saint Luke chap. 13. relates, that our Lord being then, as it seemed, in
Galile, which was the jurisdiction of Herod, some of the Pharisees came and
said to him; Avoid this country for Herod has a mind to kill thee. Our Lord
made them this answer; Go tell that fox, that he may see I cast devils both
out of bodies and souls, to day and to morrow, and that the third day I shall
die, and by ending my life give end and perfection to these works of mine. By
these three days, our Lord understood the time of his whole life; and
sometimes he called that, one day, and some other times three days; to signify
the shortness of this life; and to signify also, as we said before, that as no
humane invention or means was able to make the natural day one minute shorter
then it is; so neither was there any means to shorten his life, by one minute.
And therefore the substance of what he said was this. During all that time of
my life, which is given me by the determination of my eternal Father, I shall
converse in this world, and do those works, for which he sent me; which is
to teach truth, and to cast devils both out of bodies and souls, and to
bestow both corporal and spiritual health upon men: and as long as this time
shall last, neither Herod, nor any other power under heaven, shall be able to
take my life from me. But when the hour shall be come, which is determined by
my Father, I will offer my self to death, to give perfect life and health to
the world. Yet this I will not do in Galile, but in Jerusalem. For as it is
not fit, that any Prophet die out of Jerusalem; so especially is it decreed of
this Prophet (who for his eminency and excellency is called The Prophet which
is the Messiah) that he shall die in Jerusalem. And as for the rest of the
Prophets, it has ordinarily been true, and so also it will be, that they have
been put to death and are to die in Jerusalem; because in that City, the
wickedness of the^ who govern the people does abound.

Now Herod, who was called Antipas, was a very wicked King, and very
scandalous. He was an adulterer, and an in cestuous person; for he took his
own brothers wife from him. He was a murderer, and a sacrilegious man; for he
had taken away the life of the great Saint John Baptist; and as it should seem
he also went about to murder Christ our Lord secretly; least the people, being
instructed by his holy doctrine, might grow to abhor Herod's wicked life. He
was also a most vain, giddy creature; for to reward the dance of a girl, he
promised the one half of his kingdom, if need had been; and he paid the life
of Saint John for it. He was moreover a false and dissembling person, for he
pretended that he murdered Saint John for the complying with his oath; whereas
indeed that was not the cause, but for the contenting of a wicked woman, and
for the settling and securing of his own wicked life.

Now Christ our Lord, resolving to discover the authority of the King of
heaven and earth, and of the Lord of al creatures, which himself had in his
hand, for the reproof, and punishment of all the powerful men of this world;
and to show how free he was from all humane fear; and to give an example to
the Prelates of his Church, of that holy liberty, which in such case they were
to use, toward the Kings of the earth; and to discover also, how vile, and
contemptible, sinful men are, in the sight of God, how rich, and noble, and
great Lords soever they might chance to be, and particularly meaning to declare
to them, who bad him take heed of Herod, that he knew well enough all the
fetches and designs of that crafty man, and that he had no need to be told
thereof by any other: I say to declare and discover all these things, he spoke
this word; Tell that fox etc. Which was to say under a metaphor; Tell that
crafty, and dissembling man, who by the wickedness of his life, gives a
pestilent odor of ill example, that whatsoever e^deauour he may use, he can
take no part of my life from me, till my self shall voluntarily part with it;
as I will do, when the time ordained by my eternal Father, shall arrive.

Being therefore most convenient, for these ends which we have touched, that
Christ our Lord should speak with this authority of a Lord, he did yet observe
great modesty and Benignity therein. For he might well have said; Tell that
wicked man, that adulterer, that murderer, and sacrilegious person; yea or tell
it to that devil (for all this had fitted him, and he deserved it well:) but
Christ our Lord would not use any of these terms, but fell upon a more
moderate word, as this was; Tell that crafty and dissembling man, that he has
no power to stop the course of my life. And so showing the authority, and holy
liberty which the Prelates of the Church are to use toward the great men of
this world; and discovering also, his own divine wisdom; he did jointly
teach us that moderation, wherewith we are to exeroise that authority and
liberty.

Other examples; which may breed the like difficulty in the minds of ignorant
men, are the reprehensions which Christ out Lord gave to the Scribes and
Pharisees of the people of Israel, in very severe words, which did greatly
confound, and grievously wound them; for he would say sometimes, as Matt. 12.
You generation of vipers, you can not speak well being so wicked. This wicked
and adulterous generation asks signs: At other times he would say, as Matt.
23. Woe be to you Scribes and Pharisees you hipoctites. Woe be to you, who are
blind, and guides of the blind. And Ioh. 8. You are of the devil, and him
you have for your Father, and you cooperate to his wicked ends.

Now let us see the mystery of these words of Christ our Lord, and how they
were not contrary to that Charity and Benignity, which he taught us, but full
of conformity to the same. And let us also see, who they be, who may use such
words; and to what kind of persons; and for what ends they may be used.

The Scribes and Pharisees, who were the Doctors, and should have been the true
Religious me^ of Israel, were at that time, not only wicked, but wicked they
were in all extremity, and their sins were very public, and very contrary
to all Religion. And with being so wicked, they yet would needs sell
themselves for good, and holy; and they accompanied their wicked life, with ill
precepts, which were most pernicious to the people. For by their wicked life,
and perverse directions, and with their pretenses and deceits, they corrupted
the manners of ignorant people; and they were blind and obstinate. And besides
these sins, which were ordinary in them, they harbored that supreme
wickedness, of hindering the salvation, which Christ our Lord came to work, in
the souls of men; calumniating his most holy life, and attributing to
Beelzebub, those most evident and express miracles, which he wrought by divine
power; and persecuting him to whom they should have carried all veneration, and
exhibited al obedience, as to the true Messiah; and yet desiring and procuring
by all the ways they could, to put him to death, who came to give the^ life.

These men being such as I have said, it was necessary that Christ our Lord,
(who was sent by his Father to give testimony to the truth, and to take
scandalls out of the world, and to give remedy to souls) using the authority,
which he had, of Savior of the world, and King of heaven, should reprehend
vice; and that concerning public sins, he should reprehend them publickely;
and that concerning grievous and very hurtful sins, he should reprehend them
grievously, according to the quality and perniciousnes of the same: that so
they, who were faulty, might well feel the great hurt they did; and all the
rest of the people, might be disabused, and not have cause to follow either the
ill example, or ill precepts of their wicked Teachers and governors. And now
that Christ our Lord might execute this so important office for the salvation
of souls, which was ordained to the ends of true Charity, such reprehensions
of his were necessary, as might declare the grieuousnes of the hipocrisy, and
other sins of those Teachers, and the hurt they did to the people; and the
damnation which they provided for themselves, by committing such sins: and he
told them, who was the principal Author thereof, namely the devil, whom they
obeyed; and the necessity which they had, of making recourse to strong
remedies; for they were sins which were inherited from their predecessors,
who had been wicked, and they were deeply rooted in their hearts.

Christ our Lord, did especially make such severe and sharp reprehensions,
when they did falsely sooth, and flatter him. For many times, when they darted
out injurious words against him, he reprehended the^ not; but answered them
with all sweetness, showing his humility, and meekenes, and teaching us to
suffer wrongs, with patience. But when they flattered him, he reprehe^ded them
indeed: as when with counterfeit hearts, they said, Master, we desire a sign
of thee from heaven; for then he answered them thus. Matthew. 12. You wicked and
adulterous generation. And when they said, Master we know that thou art true,
and teach the way of God according to truth. For then he said, why do you
tempt me, you hipocrites? discouring thereby, that he understood their hearts,
and that he would not pay himself with their flatteries, and conterfeit
praises; and teaching all the world, that we were not to take gust in being
soothed, nor to desire to be praised by men. So did S. Chrysostom observe upon
these words, Master we desire that thou give us a sign from heaven. Where he
says, that first they injured him, saying, he had a devil; and that then they
flattered him, calling him, Master. And therefore it is, that he reprehendeth
them with vehemence, saying, that they were a wicked generation. So that, when
they affront him with ill words, he answers them with meekenes; and when they
flatter him with a false heart, he gives them sharp words. Our most blessed
Lord discovering to us thereby, that he was free from all passion; and that
neither he was put to impatience by affro^ts; nor that he was inueigled by
flatteries.

THE XVI. CHAPTER. That is was convenient, that Christ our Lord should use
these severe reprehensions to teach the Prelates of his Church, how they should
proceed against sinners: and how the Saints have been ever wont to proceed.
BEsides these reasons, why Christ our Lord did so sharply reprehend the sins
of the Scribes and Pharisees, there is yet another; and it is for the
instructing of the Prelates of the Church, after what manner they are to
reprove the sins of publicke^, obstinate and rebellious sinners, which are of
the more grievous sort, and more prejudicial to others; and that they are to
do it publicly, with great weight, and force of words, to the end that
obstinate sinners may find how wicked they are; and that they may reform
themselves, and that others may fear, and take warning by their ill example;
and that all sins, and sinners are not to be reproved after the same manner,
but some gently and sweetly; and others with severity and rigor, according to
the quality of the sin, and the obstinacy of the sinner, and the hurt which
he does thereby to others. And that these severe reprehensions, which are made
in punishment of delinquents, must not be used by all, but by Superiors, who
have authority for the same; and that the end which such me^ have, must not be
the affront, nor the trouble of the sinner, but the reformation both of him,
and others. And therefore Charity, which teaches us to be sweet, and benign,
toward some kind of sinners, (because that course is fit for the good of
their souls) the self same Charity teaches us, to be severe and strict
toward others; because that also is convenient, to the and that others may be
warned, and they reformed. Saint Gregory notes this, in these words. Some
offenses are to be reprehended with vehemence, to the end that the delinquent,
who of himself perhaps, vndersta^ds not the grieuousnes of his sin, may come
to find it by the words of him who reprehends; and that he may grow to fear
the committing of that sin, which he thought to be but light, by the very
severity wherewith it is corrected. And it is the duty of the Superior to
correct with great severity those offenses of their subjects, which are not
gently to be endured; but he must not do it out of anger, but out of a holy
zeal; for fear, least if he correct not faults as he ought, himself grow to
be faulty; and that the punishment which was due to the offenses of his
subjects, do fall upon himself through his negligence. And the same Saint
says in another place; that their sins who have not lost shame, are to be
reprehended after another sort, then theirs who have lost all shame. For
severe reprehe^sion is necessary for the reformation of them, who are grown
impudent; but such as are still ashamed of their sins, are usually better
reformed, by some mild exhortation.

This style, of severely reprehending the more griouous; and pernicious sort
of sins, which have been committed by the powerful men of this world, and by
the false guide of souls, has been observed by the ancient Saints, who were
moved to it by the Holy Ghost; and the Saints also of the Evangelical Law,
have used the like, being instructed by the example of Christ our Lord; though
it be true that these later, have observed it with greater moderation, and more
mixture of suauity then the former; for so the Law of grace requires.

The Prophet Nathan, 2. Kings. 12. chap. reproved King David; and having first
propounded him a parable, he concluded saying; Thou art that man, who has
committed so great wickedness, as to take the wife of another: and for this
sin, the sword shall never fail to hang over thy house, as a punishment both
of thee, and thy descendents.

The Prophet Elias, 2. Kings. 18. chap. having heard that imputation which King
Achab laid upon him, in these words; Art thou that man who troublest Israel?
did reprove him for that wickedness, which he had committed against God, and his
Prophets; and made answer to him, after this manner. I am not the man who
trouble Israel; but thou and the house of thy Father, are they who trouble it:
because thou have forsaken the law of our Lord.

The Prophet Elizeus, 4. Kings. 3. chap. reprehending the sins of King Ioram,
who was in company with King Iosaphat, when he desired the Prophet to obtain
of God that he would send down water to the army, for that it was ready to die
of thirst, made him this answer; What have thou to do with me? go to the
Prophet^ of thy Father, and of the mother; and if it were not for the respect
of King Iosaphat, who is present, for my part I would not so much as look
upon thee.

The man of God, who was sent by him to Samaria, 4. Kings. 13. chap. and found
King Jeroboam, who was in Bethelle, offering sacrifice upon an Altar like a
Priest, did address his speech as to the Altar, and thereby reprehended him,
after this manner. A son shall be borne of the house of David called Josias,
and he shall kill those Priests upon thee, who are now offering incense on thee.

The great Baptist of our Lord, Matthew. 3. reprehending the Scribes and Pharisees
and Saduces, who came to his Baptism, said thus to them. O you generation of
vipers. You men full of the venime of sin, and that so inueterate, as that
you have inherited it from your Fathers; who has forewarned you to fly from
the wrath and just vengeance of God? What wonder, what strange thing is this,
that men so hard to be converted, by reason of your error and the false
opinion you have of your own sanctity, should come to receive my Baptism, and
do penance, and so fly from eternal damnation? And Saint Peter, Act. 8.
reproving Simon Magus said. Thy money perish with thee; in that thou
thoughtest, that the gift of God, which is imparted by the Holy Ghost, was to
be bought with money. I see that thou art full of the bitterness, and gall of
sin, and that thou art bound fast thereby to everlasting torments. And Saint
Paul, Act. 13. said to Elimas the sorcerer. O man full of falsehood, and deceit,
thou son of the devil, and enemy of all Justice, who forbearest not to do
thy uttermost, to pervert the straight ways of the law of God. And Saint
Steven said, to the Scribes, and Pharisees. Act. 7. O you stiff necked men, and
who have not cut away the wickedness of your hearts, and of your cares, with the
sword of the word of God: You have ever resisted the holy Ghost, as your
forefathers did before you.

After this manner have the Saints (with that authority, which they had from
God for this purpose, and to comply with the duty of that office which God had
given them) reprehe^ded those men with sharp and severe words, who by their
wicked life, and the deceit and falsehood of their perverse doctrine, had
corrupted souls. And they were moved to reprehend them thus, by their great
charity, in their love to God, and their neighbors; and by a most ardent zeal
to the glory of God, and the good of souls. And it is a thing very worthy the
being considered, that whereas the Saints do sometimes use such words in
their reprehensions, as have been expressed, they are not indeed affronting or
injurious words, when we consider the heart, and end wherewith, and for which
they are spoken; though yet they may seem so be to, because they are the very
same, which passionate men are wont to use, when they affront others, and
revenge themselves of their neighbors. Whereby we may be sure, that these
holy me^ did not speak those words with passion, and desire to give disgrace,
as these others do; but with zeal of charity, and desire to do good. And by
this rule which follows we shall discern it plainly.

If they, who reprehend their neighbors, over who^ they have authority, with
sharp words, in cases when there is necessity to do it; if they, I say,
(abstracting from those cases of necessity, and in all things else, which they
do and say) show themselves humble, meek and full of pity both loving, and
doing good to their neighbors, and despising themselves, and suffering the
injuries and ill treaty, which they receive from others, with patience; we may
clearly see, that when they speak sharply to sinners, they do it not out of
pride, or passion, or to put disgrace upon them; but only out of a charitable
desire to recover, and cure their souls. For the men, who when they reprove
sinners, speak words with inward passion, and out of revenge, do the like
when that is not the case, and they show themselves reuengefull, angry, and
proud: but holy men proceed not so; but when that necessary occasion cease,
they use al men with much humility, and charity; and especially those very
persons, whom they reprehended. We see this by the examples which we produced
before.

Though Nathan reprehended David with so great liberty; yet when he saw him
reformed, he went in to him, and cast himself upon his knees, and spoke to
him, and treated him with great reverence. Though Elias reprehended Achab so
sharply, yet after, when the King was in his chariot, Elias himself went
running before him, in his company, with much humility, as if he had been a
mere servant of his. And though Elizeus confounded the pride of Ioram with so
great a reprehension; yet instantly with great charity, he did miraculously
obtain water of God, both for him, and all his army.

Though the man of God did so severely reprove, and threaten Jeroboam; yet
seeing that the King had one of his hands dried up, he besought God with great
devotion, and obtained health for him. Though the great Saint John Baptist, did
with so vehement words, declare the malice of the Pharisees, and Saduces; yet he
did it but by way of admiration, and praise of the power, and goodness of God,
who had moved such obstinate, and blind sinners to make some change of their
lives; and instantly with great charity, and zeal, for the salvation of their
souls, he exhorted and animated them, to do works, worthy of penance, to the
end that their conversion might prove solid and with perseverance. And though
Saint Steven did sharply reprove the Scribes, and Pharisees; yet instantly he
prayed to Almighty God for them, with a most ardent affection of love, even
whilst they were stoning him. And though S. Peter, did with words full of
weight, detest the Simony of Simon Magus, yet insta^tly being full of pity, he
admonished him to do penance, to the end that God might pardon that great
wickedness of his. And though S. Paul did check those great deceits, and the
perverse life of Elimas, the sorcerer, yet instantly he used much charity
toward him. For obtaining first, that God would strike him blind, he would not
have that blindness to be perpetual, as the wicked man deserved; but only that
it might last for a while: that so, being induced by that punishment he might
come to understand his own sin, and so do penance for the same.

In this sort have the Saints discovered clearly, that those sharp
reprehensions, whereby they corrected grievous finnes, were used by them with
great tenderness, and sweetness of love; and that, whilst in the exterior, they
showed themselves so strict, and free in their reprehensio^s, they did even
then, in the most interior of their own hearts, humble and despise themselves,
as Saint Gregory notes in these words. Holy men do not show themselves so
resolute, and free, when they reprove the powerful men of this world, as
presuming upon themselves, nor to the end that men should render and submit
themselves to them through the fear of man; but the great rectitude of heart,
which they have, makes them use that holy liberty; and even whilst they use
it, they conserve themselves in humility; and reprehending the crimes of
sinners, with great strength of mind, they judge themselves, examining their
own faults with great curiosity and care, and they place themselves in their
own account below all others. This is said by Saint Gregory. And by this true
explication which we have made, it remains very clear, that the serious and
severe reprehensions, wherewith Christ our Lord and his Saints have corrected
the great crimes of sinners, are not contrary to that Benignity which he taught
us, but are full of the dearnes and sweetness of true Charity.

THE XVII. CHAPTER. Of the Benignity, wherewith a Christian is to be glad of
the good of his neighbor, and to approve and praise the same: and of the
example, which Christ our Lord gave us thereof.
ONe of the principal things (besides those whereof we have spoken) which
belong to the virtue of Benignity, and the sweet manner of conuersing with our
neighbors is, to be glad of their good, and to praise them; yet with that
moderation, which prudence requires, and to that end which Charity seeks.
For this makes a servant of God to be amiable and sweet, and thus he
augmenteth Charity, toward his neighbors, and he grows more able to be of
use to souls. For by this means, his instruction and admonition, will be the
better received, and the example of his good life better allowed: and he will
have more efficacy to move others. So says the worthy Doctor, and Bishop
Guiltelmus Parisiensis. Benignity is the love of another good; and we call
those men Benign, who as soon as they discover a good thing in their
neighbors, do instantly love it, and love him for it; and from hence it
grows, that they praise, and set him forth in words.

For the exercise of this virtue, there is need of great consideration, and
much discretion, and light from heaven. For as by the use thereof with
moderation, being directed to the right end, it is of great profit, and
edification toward the increase of virtue; so using it without moderation, and
without rectitude of intention; it is both very hurtful to his soul, who
praises, and to his also who is praised. For this reason, Saint Bonauenture
approves this saying of Seneca, praise that with moderation, which is praise
worthy; and dispraise that, which is blamable, with more moderation. For
superfluity of praise is liable to reproof, as well as te^perate dispraise.

Well then, let us go on declaring the error, which is committed, and the
hurt which grows, by inordinate praise and the manner and intention which
praise must have, to the e^d that it may be truly given according to virtue.

For a man to praise his neighbor, for that which is naught, is a great sin;
and not only do they fall into it, who praise a man for some revenge, which he
may have taken of an enemy; or for having affro^ted that person, who did him
injury by some word, or for having uttered some carnal speech, performing some
actio^ of that kind: but they also who praise su^ptuous buildings, superfluous
humors and gifts, curious and rich clothes, delicious and costly diet; and
all that which has any tincture of vanity and pride, and the regalo of this
flesh and blood, and the love of the world. For all these things, are ill, and
hurtful to the soul of a Christian; who, to the end that he may get to
heaven, must deny himself, and embrace the Cross of Christ our Lord. To all
these flatterers who praise that which they should reprehe^d, Esaias chap. 5.
says, Woe be to them, who praise wicked things, as if they were good; and who
hold the darkness of error for the light of truth; and true light for
darkness; and who esteem the bitter life of sinners, to be sweet; and the sweet
life of virtue, to be bitter.

In like manner, it is vicious for a man to praise temporal, and natural
things, as if they were the greatest, and principal gifts of God; as riches,
nobility, strength, and beauty of the body. For these are blessings of little
value, and they make not a man to be better in himself, or more estimable in
the sight of God: and such praise breeds much hurt to the soul, for it makes a
man greatly love and praise those things which he should despise, and from
which he should estrange his heart. The holy scripture condemns this vice
saying, do not praise men for the corporal beauty which they have; nor
despise them for their poor, and mean appearance. Consider that the Be, being
but a very little creature, gives so excellent a fruit, as that it is the
most sweet of all sweet things; for there is nothing more sweet, then honey.
The meaning is, that as the little Be, has efficacy to produce such a fruit;
so may a little body, and a mean presence, have much virtue. And that which
the Holy Ghost says of the beauty of the body, he will have us understand of
all other natural, and temporal gifts, which are of so little value, that a
man is noe further worthy of estimation or praise for them, the^ if he had them
not; but only so far forth, as there may result some profit to the soul
thereby. This was taught us, both by the example, and divine words of Christ
our Lord: For a certain devout woman, having seen his miracles, and having
heard his doctrine, was not able to contain herself, but that she must needs
praise that Mother aloud, who had brought forth such a Son, saying; Blessed
is the womb, which have thee, and the breasts which gave thee suck. But Christ
our Lord gave her this answer; Nay, rather blessed are they who hear the word
of God, and keep it. By which words he discovered to us, how that free and
gratuite blessing, whereby the most sacred Virgin was made Mother of the
natural Son of God, did not alone, and of it self make her happy or
blessed, nor worthy of the reward of heaven: nor more great in the sight of
God; but the unspeakable virtue, and suauity, and grace, whereby Almighty God
did exalt, and dignify her, for such an office: and that which afterward he
gave her, in regard of so high a dignity, was the thing which made her so truly
happy.

If then so admirable a gift, as that was, did not deserve great praise for it
self alone, but for that virtue and sanctity which went in company thereof:
how much more, must all temporal blessings, and gifts of nature, which in
themselves are so poor and perishing, be unworthy of praise; but only so
far forth, as they may be found to assist, and concur toward the good of
the soul?

So says Saint Chrysostom, declaring these words of Christ our Lord. By this
sentence, Christ our Lord did make us know, that it would not have profited the
Virgin, to have brought forth the Son of God, if she had not withal, been
endowed with that faith, and incomparable sanctity which she had. And
therefore, as I said, if so great a dignity, would not have profited the
blessed Virgin, without the virtue, and sanctity of her soul; how much more
clear is it, that it will serve us to little purpose, before Almighty God, to
have Saints to our Fathers, or sons, or kindred, or such other external
gifts; if withal, we have not goodness and virtue, and do not lead a
spiritual life? For this is that which makes men to be of value, and worthy
of praise, in the sight of God.

It is also an error, and fault of flattery, to praise our neighbor for any
virtue, which he may have, and thereby to delight and comfort him principally,
for the temporal gain and profit, which he hops to receive of him. For the
praise of true virtue, which principally is to be ordained to some spiritual
good, and to the service of God, is ordained by him to his own private
interest, which is a sinful thing; and so much the more grievous it will be,
as there is more inordinatenes in the thing. And when it is very great, that
will be fulfilled in their persons, which is spoken of by the Psalmist, Psalm.
2. God will defeare and destroy, the strength and authority of them, who desire
and procure to please, and give gust to men: and have that for their end, not
looking up toward God, but down upon their own private interest and humor.
Especially they who procure to please worldly men, forbearing to do those
things which they owe to God, in respect of them: these indeed, shall be
confounded, and put to shame, by Almighty God. For both in this life, even all
their temporal hopes shall prove vain; and besides, in the other life, they
shall be fulfilled with shame, and delivered over to eternal torments.

Besides it is a defect, and the fault of soothing, to praise a man either for
his wit, or learning, or for the talents, and parts which he has: yea or even
for his true virtue; when it is likely, that through his weakness, or
unmortified ill inclination he may fall into pride, and vain complace^ce in
himself, or into any other prejudice of his soul. Saint Augustine observed
this, in these words. A hard thing it is, that some little impurity of error,
do not stick to the heart of a man, (eue^ though it be clean) upon the praises
of another; unless indeed he should have it so very clean, as that be should
take no gust in them, nor be touched by any vapor of the^; and unless the
praise which they give him, should more content him for the good of them, who
praise him, then for the comfort, or honor, or estimation, which may grow
thereby to himself. And the^ he may know, that their praise of him, is
profitable to the^, if in their life they honor not him, but God; not fastening
their minds upon him, by the praise, and honor, which they give him, but
rising up by him, toward Almighty God, whose most sacred temple every man is,
who lives well. So that it may be fulfilled in him, which is spoken of, by the
Psalmist; My soul shall be praised by such, as are good; not in it self but
in our Lord; that is to say, for the gifts which it has of our Lord, and for
the glory of the same Lord.

This is the danger to which they are ordinarily subject, who are much praised
by men; unless they be possessors of true and solid virtue, whereby they may
resist vain complacence, and refer the praise to the Author of all good
things, which is God. For so says the holy Scripture; Better is it, to be
corrected by a discreet and wise man, then to be praised by an imprudent man,
who with his smooth kind of praising leaves us in error. And declaring the
danger wherein man is, when he who praises, does not observe the moderation,
and end which ought to be kept. Saint Hierome said; There is nothing which does
so easily infect, and corrupt the hearts of men as flattery; and the tongue of
a flatterer does more hurt, then the sword of a persecutour.

Another fault is also committed in praising some, when it is for the dispraise
of others. A man will not dare expressly to speak ill of his neighbor,
especially to one who has auersion from hearing it; and therefore to do it
the more covertly, he does it by means of praising another man for the same
virtues and gifts of his, and then the detracter would have it thought, that
the man whom he means to dispraise, does want those virtues, or else is
subject to the contrary defects. Saint Chrysostom notes this vice, in these
words: We do many good things; but not allwaies with a good mind. We
praise many; but not to the end, that we may speak well of them, but to
detract and speak ill of others. Now that which we say is good, because we
praise virtue in another; but the mind, wherewith with we say it, is infected
with sin, and set on work by Satan: for we pretend not to do him good,
whom we praise, but hurt to him whom we dispraise.

These are the defects, and vices, which grow by praisinge others, when it is
done without discretion and moderation; and without that end to which it ought
to be addressed; and so it leaves to be virtue, as is turned into the vice of
flattery. And now we will declare, how praise is to be used, to the end that
it may be a fruit of the virtue of Charity and Benignity. And we will produce
some examples, which Christ our Lord showed us, concerning the manner and
intention, which we were to hold in praisinge our neighbors,

THE XVIII. CHAPTER. Of the intention, and moderation, wherewith we are to
praise virtue in our neighbors: and of the examples which Christ our Lord gave
us thereof.
IT is a thing both lawful and very pleasing to Almighty God, for a man to
praise his neighbors, for the good he has done; to the end that being
praised, they may love virtue so much the more, and be animated to the exercise
thereof; and not be dismayed by the troubles, and difficulties, to which a
virtuous life is subject. And this is principally to be done, toward men, who
are but beginners in the way of virtue; and who are weak, and of little heart;
for such persons have the greater need of help. Yet even this praise must be
given with the moderation aforesaid; in such sort, as that it may profit, and
not hurt the party praised; but may edify, and induce him to a love and
estimation of virtue, and not to a presumption in himself, and a love of
vanity. For the obtaining of this end, the praise must be given in words, which
may not greatly exaggerate, or amplify the virtue; but plainly declare the
truth, and his approbation thereof. Let us see some examples, which Christ our
Lord gave of this. Nathaniell came to Christ our Lord, John 1. being brought to
him by Saint Philip. This Nathaniell, was a man full of virtue, and very
obseruant of the law; and came in doubt, whether or no Christ our Lord were
the true Mestias, as S. Philip had said he was. And drawing, near, our Lord
looked upon his disciples, and said in the hearing of Nathaniell: Behold here
a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. As if he had said; Behold here a
man truly good, not dissembling or counterfeit; but that virtue which he
shows in his exterior fashion, and public conversation, which is subject
to the sight of men, is possessed by him in the secret, and most interior part
of his heart, which is seen by Almighty God.

This was a true, and moderate praise, and much good grew to Nathaniell by it;
for thereby he vnstood, that Christ our Lord knew the secrets of his heart, and
he was certified of it so much the more, by the further answer of Christ our
Lord. For saying to him, where knew you me? he answered, I saw thee, when
thou were under the sigtree. It should seem that Nathaniell, had retired
himself under that tree to pray, or to do some other good work; and so he
inferring thereby, (as a wise man might well do,) that Christ our Lord knew
all things, he believed perfectly in him, and took him for his Master. Let us
deliver another example of the same truth.

Christ our Lord, Luke 19. came into the house of Zaccheus the Publican; and he
moved him by his words, and by his presence, to so great penance, and change
of life: that not only he resolved to give over all those sins into which he
had fallen, and to restore all that, to the restitution whereof he was obliged;
but to render it four fould; thereby giving satisfaction for the fault he had
mitted, by voluntarily undergoing the pain, which the law imposed upon such
persons, as took away the goods of others; and besides all this, he gave half
his substance to the poor. Christ our Lord perceiving so good beginnings of a
holy life in Zaccheus, did praise him: by saying of him, to the standers by;
This day, is true salvation wrought in this house; For the Master and owner of
it, is already a true son of Abraham: not only now by the extraction of flesh
and blood; but by the imitation of his faith, and virtue. In this sort
therefore, did Christ our Lord praise Nathaniell, who was a new beginner in his
school of virtue and good life, and so also did he praise Zaccheus. And the
praise was true, and moderate; and it did no more then declare in plain
words, that the one of them, was a man truly good, and the other truly
penitent and by means of these words, he strengthened and encouraged them, both
to persevere and grow in the good course which they had begun.

But not only did Christ our Lord praise them, who had good intentions, and who
were truly good; and upright and well meaning souls, as Nathaniell already
was before, and Zacchaus was grown to be; but he approved, and praised also
that good which was said, or done, by such as came to him, even with an ill
mind. There came a man, Luc. 10. who was learned in the Law, to tempt him,
asking what he was to do, for the obtaining of eternal life? Christ our Lord
demanded of him, how it was written in the Law? He answered, It is written
that thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as
thy self. Our Lord the^ said to him, (by way of allowing and praising what he
had formerly said;) Thou have answered well: do as thou have said, and as the
Law commands, and thou shall obtain everlasting life.

There came, another time, a Pharisy to our Lord, Mat. 22. Marc. 12. in name of
all the rest, to see if he could draw some such answer from him, as whereby he
might calumniate him; and he asked him, which was the greatest commaundment of
the law? And Christ our Lord, having answered him, that it was to love God with
all the heart; the Pharisy approved the answer of our Lord, and added
thereunto these words: that to love God with all the heart; and the neighbor
as ones self, was a better work and more acceptable to God, then all the
Holocausts and other Sacrifices of the Law. Then our Lord liking the speech of
this man, did praise him saying; Thou art not far from the kingdom of God.
Which is as much as to say; Thou art not far from believing, and obeying the
Gospel, and obteining true salvation. For the knowing of a divine truth so
important, and the approouing it by the supernatural gift of God, was a
disposition for the being converted to him: and to acknowledge Christ himself,
who was sent into the world to save it.

Christ our Lord, if he would have increased his Justice, upon these two
learned me^ in the Law, might have severely reproved the ill mind, wherewith
they were come to him; and he might have discovered the craft, and malice,
which they carried in their hearts; for so also they would have understood,
that he knew all things, and thereby he might have put them to confusion and
shame. Yet this he would not do; but he heard them with admirable meekenes, and
answered their questions with supreme Charity. And he approved that which they
had said well, though it were very little, and very imperfect; and he praised
it with strange Benignity: that so he might remove that peruersenes of mind
from the^, which they brought to him; and encourage them to increase in the
knowledge and love of truth, till at length, they might grow subject to it. And
so by this true Benignity, he changed their hearts, and sent them bettered from
him; and he taught us withal, that not only we are to praise good men, for the
true virtue which they have, but that we may also praise with moderation, even
in imperfect and wicked men, the good they do or say; to the end that they may
grow to take affection to virtue, and may so detest and drive out of their
hearts, the wickedness which they have, and go increasing in the good way
begun; as also to gain their good will; and to make them beneuolous and
kind; which is a very good disposition, toward the inducing them to receive
in good part the doctrine, which we shall deliver, and the reprehensions, which
we may have cause to use. And therefore Saint Gregory advises, that when they
who are endowed with authority, and wisdom for this purpose, reprove sinners,
who are pusillanimous and weak, they shall do well to mingle some sweetness of
praise, the sharpenes of correction; that so they may the better admit of the
doctrine and reproof, which is given them. The Saint expresses it in these
words. We shall better draw such sinners, as are not perverse and proud, but
weak and poor of heart, to the way of heaven, if whilst we reprehend the evil
things, which they have done, we jointly praise those good things, which we
know to be in them; to the end that by this means, such praise may confirm
and strengthen the^ in their weakness, who were humbled by that reproof. Thus
did S. Paul proceed with those Christians of Thessalonica. For they, having
fallen into the fault of giving credit to certain false Prophets who taught
the^ that the day of judgment was then to come very suddenly, (whereby they
were put into much disorder and trouble) before he reprehended this lightness of
theirs, he praised them saying, 2 Thessalonians. 1. We must give many thanks to God,
for the great increase of yours faith, which is growing every day; and for the
increase also of your fraternall charity, which abounds its every one of you;
and increases daily, both by your loving, and doing good to one another. But
when he had praised them in these and other words, he benignely reprehendeth
them saying, chap. 2. We beseech you brethren, by the coming of Christ our
Lord to judgment, and by the glorious and blessed union which we are all to
have together at that day, that you depart not so easily from giving credit to
us; and from having the true sense of those things which you have learned of
us; and that you be not troubled, or frighted by what others tell you; and in a
word that none may have power to deceive you; By this divine artifice, the
sacred Doctor of the nations, did reprehend them; when first he had comforted
and encouraged the^ by recording that virtue, which he knew to be in them, and
the good opinion which he had of them; to the end that, having co^punction to,
see that they had failed of the good which they had begun, they might the
better accept of the reproof he gave them; and so might reform themselves
thereby.

THE XIX. CHAPTER. How we must praise virtue, for the making it be more
esteemed: and of the examples which Christ our Lord gave us to this purpose.
We must also praise the virtue of good men, to declare how great a good that
is; and how that which seems little and of mean value in the sight of me^,
is indeed very great, and has a most high reward in the sight of God; to the
end that other men may esteem greatly of it, and carry much affection to it,
and labor hard to acquire it. Let us deliver some examples hereof.

Saint Peter Matt. 16. confessed to Christ our Lord that he was the true Son
of God saying; Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. It seemed a small
matter, and of no merit, that Saint Peter, having conuersed so long with Christ
our Lord, and seen with his own eyes, so great and so evident miracles, and
heard such doctrine, and contemplated such an example of life; that he should
piously incline his heart to believe, that he was the true Messiah, and the
natural Son of God. For this did not cost him the shedding of his blood, nor
the tormenting of his body with affliction, and penance; but only to produce a
pious affect of the will, and to perform an act of obedience in the
understanding. But Christ our Lord praised him, and gave testimony that this
inward act of his was of supreme value and estimation, in the sight of Almighty
God; and that on earth he should receive admirable fauouurs from God for the
same; and that in heaven, he should enjoy an imme^se reward of glory. And that
from that instant, he might begin to be happy by that certain hope, and pawn,
which was given him of that infinite good, which he was afterward to possess,
and enjoy during all eternity. All this he declared by saying; Blessed art thou
Simon the son of Jonas. for men who are made of flesh and blood, were not
able, with all the humane wisdom they have, to teach thee this truth. My
celestial Father it is, who has reueiled it to thee, and upon thee, will I
build my Church, and to thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

By these words, Christ our Lord praised by faith and devotion of Saint Peter;
and declared to the world, of how sovereign value before Almighty God, and how
richly to be rewarded with celestial and eternal blessings, one single act of
virtue may be, which is performed by a just man, though it be easily produced,
and in a short time, and how little soever it may cost; and especially an
interior act of lively faith, which a just man has no difficulty at all to
perform.

Christ our Lord, being in the Atrium of the Temple Marc. 12. Luc. 21.
behoulding the^ who were easting alms into the chest, which was to serve for
the reparation of the Temple, for the maintenance of the Priests, and for the
relief of the poor; amongst the rest of them who cast in their alms, which
without doubt was then done both by many and in plentiful manner (for it was
near Easter, at which time there came much people to Jerusalem, from all
parts;) there comes a very poor widow, and casts into the chest, two of the
least little pieces of money or mites. Our Lord seeing her and being pleased to
praise her much, for the act which she had done, and the alms which she had
given, called his disciples, and pointing out the woman said thus to them. This
widow has cast a greater alms into the chest, and made a greater present to
the Temple, then all the rest, who have given alms this day. And our Lord
showed diverse reasons, why she had given more then any of them. First, because
in proportion of her poor condition, it was more for her to give a mite, then
for others to give store of crowns. And because the rest gave the alms out of
that which did advance beyond their necessary maintenance; and that they gave
not all, but a part thereof; but this widow gave that which was necessary to her
self, and she gave it all. But the principal reason which he was pleased to
signify under this was, for that she gave her alms, with a greater affection
and desire to give, and with more ardour of charity then al they; which he
declared by her having given all that she had, being in precise necessity
thereof, for her own relief.

In this sort did Christ our Lord praise the alms of this poor widow, and by
praising her, he manifested to all the children of his Church, how highly the
good work of a just person is valued, in the sight of Almighty God; and the
great account he makes thereof, and how he will reward it in heaven; and how he
means not to give the reward according to the quantity of the work, but
according to the good will and love of God and our neighbor, wherewith it is
performed. He will also have us learn from hence, first to esteem greatly of
the good works, which our neighbors do, how little soever they may be; and and
approve them and praise the^, before men, for their edification; and much to
value those good men, who do them, though they be poor, and of mean
condition and estate; since God, who sees their hearts, does prize them much.
And secondly, he will have us learn by this, to be animated toward the doing
of good works, and to exercise the acts of Religion and charity, with much
affection, and desire to please God; and to do more then we do; although by
reason of our weakness, and our little talent, either of virtue, or goods, or
power any other way, our works be very small; since God has regard to the
good will, wherewith they are done, and to the pious heart, from whence they
proceed.

The Apostle Saint Paul followed this example of Christ our Lord. Who (to
animate the Corinthians, to give alms to the Christians, who were in want at
Jerusalem; and that none of the^ should omit to give according to his power,
how little soever that might be) did praise the virtue and charity, which they
of Macedonia had showed to the same Christians, assisting them liberally with
alms, according to the power of every one. And he praises them in these
words, 2. Cor. 8. We give you brethren to understand, the gracious, and
liberal gift which God communicated by his goodness, to the Churches of
Macedonia, who receiving many grieouous persecurions from the Gentiles, (who
afflicted, and affronted, and robbed them of the goods they had) did yet abound
with joy in their very tribulations, and they did not only accept of them with
patience, but with interior joy, yea and that a very great joy, for the love
of Christ our Lord, for whom they suffered; and through the hope of celestial
blessings, which God promises to them who suffer for the love of him. And
being poor they were all, according to their weak power and strength, so
liberal in giving, that they did very abunda^tly discover the pure intention
which they had therein, and their great promptitude, and even hunger and thirst
to give, and to please God by doing all the good, that possibly they could, to
their neighbors. And I give testimony to this truth, that not only they gave
willingly all they could, but more then they could; for not only gave they of
the superfluity, and that which they could conuenie^tly spare, but they gave
part of those very things, which were even necessary for the very support of
their lives.

The Apostle, having praised in these words, the Charity and mercy of the
Macedonians, inuiteth the Corinthians by the inducement of this example, to do
the like; and he says, that considering what the Christians of Macedonia have
done, I have persuaded my self to se^d Titus to you, that this grace which he
begun in you, may be finished and perfected by his exhorting, and mo^uing you
to give alms to the Christians who suffer in Jerusalem; and by procuring, that
all men may give what they can; and that it may be put all together, and sent
to Jerusalem, as was done by the^ of Macedonia. And he wishes them moreover,
that even they, who have but little to give, should yet give some what even of
that little, with a ready mind, and a desirous good will, to give more if they
could. And he affirms, and testifies, on the part of God, that the little,
which they should give with such affection and good will, would greatly please
God, and be much esteemed by him; and be also rewarded according to the good
will where with they gave. For he says, if the will be ready and efficaciously
prepared to do good, it is very acceptable and pleasing to God, if they work
and give according to what they have, or can perform; and God does not
require, for the making men acceptable to him, that they should give or do,
what they cannot give or do.

THE XX. CHAPTER. How it is fit to praise the virtue of some, thereby to
correct the vice of others.
ANother way, which makes our praising others to be very profitable for us, and
pleasing to almighty God, is to praise the virtue, and good works of them,
from whom no such thing had been expected; and thereby to convince and confound
those others, who were not so virtuous, and did not work so well,
notwithstanding that they had greater helps, and were in greater obligations
then the former. Let us declare this by an example.

There was a Centurion (that is to say a Captain of a hundred soldiers) in
Capharnaum, Matt. 8. Luc. 7. placed there by the Romans; and a Gentile he was,
who descended not from Patriarchs, and Prophets, but from Gentiles and
Idolaters, and from people who had noe knowledge of the true God. This man, by
means of conversation, which he had with the Jews, came to know this truth,
that there was one God; and he had taken an affection to his holy Law, and to
his people of Israel; and he loved and cherished them, and built a Sinagogue
for them, upon the understanding which he had, that of all the men in the
world, these were the professors of true Religion. This Centurion, had a
servant whom he greatly loved, who fell sick of a pleurisy, and was grown to
the very point of death. And the servant being in those terms, and the Master
having heard of the miracles which had been wrought by Christ our Lord, he
conceived a great confidence and faith, that if he desired remedy for that
servant, he should obtain it; and he believed with great assurednes, that
Christ was a Lord so powerful, that even in absence, he could give him the
life, and health of his servant, by the only commau^dment of his word. Not
presuming therefore to appear in the presence of Christ our Lord, (as holding
himself unworthy thereof) he interposed the ancient, and prime men of the
Jews, for intercessours. These men therefore, in the name of the Centurion,
desired that he would go to his house, and cure his servant: instantly our
Lord put himself upon the way, to do as much as they desired. As soon as the
Centurion knew that Christ our Lord was coming to his house, he told him, by
means of the same intercessours, that in no case he was to do it; for that
himself was unworthy of so great honor, but he only prayed, that from
thence, he would commau^d by some one word of his, that his servant might be
cured; and that that would serve for his recovery. And this he confirmed by the
example of his own person; for if he, being a weak man, and subject to the
commau^d of another, (who was the General of the Army) could yet command his
soldiers, to dispose themselves here or there, and that accordingly, and
instantly the thing was done; how much more could Christ our Lord, being so
absolute, and of so great power, command from wheresoever he were, that
sickness and death should be gone, and that health and life should come; and
that they would not fail to obey him.

This man, discovered great humility in not presuming once to to appear in the
presence of Christ our Lord, but to negotiate by means of the Jews, whom he
held for better then himself; and by those words, he also showed a great
faith. And so Christ our Lord, having heard this message, showed to be in
admiration, to see so great faith in a Pagan soldier. And turning his
countenance to the troop of Jews, who followed him, he said; Verily I say to
you, I have not found so great faith as this, in Israel. And many shall come
from the East, and from the West, and from all the parts of the world, out of
the nations of the Gentiles, and by means of faith; and obedience to my
Gospel, shall sit in company of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of
the Patriarchs; and shall reign with God: and on the other side, they who be
the children of the kingdom, which are the Jews, who desce^d from the
Patriarchs, and to whom the promise of the Messiah and of his celestial
kingdom was made, shall the most part of them be excluded from that Kingdom,
and shut up into eternal torment.

Christ our Lord praised the faith of the Centurion, for the reproof of the
infidelity of those Jews, who believed not in him at all; and of the weak
faith of some others, who believed in him; and to confound them by this
example; and to move them to penance for their fault, and to persuade with
them, who believed not; and to increase their faith who believed. And so he was
pleased to express himself to this effect; This Centurion being a Gentile,
and not having read the Prophets, nor having been brought up in the Law of
God, nor in any discipline, but of the war, and not having seen my works
and miracles, but only heard relation of me; has believed my truth, and my
power, with so great and so firm a faith; and on the other side, the children
of Israel, who are descended from the Patriarchs, and who have read the
Scriptures, and know the Prophecies, which speak of me; and who were looking
for me, and have seen my miracles, and heard my doctrine, some of these, have
not believed in me, nor will receive my truth, but persecute the same; and
others have believed it so imperfectly, that none of them has arrived to so
great a Faith as this man has, and as he confesses in honor of me. They I
say, notwithstanding the many causes and motives, which they have had, to
believe my truth with a perfect faith, have not believed it, as they ought: and
this man having had so few motives, as he had to believe in me, has believed
with so great perfection, that he has far outstripped all the rest. And
therefore this man, though but a Gentile; and all the other Gentiles also, who
throughout all the parts of the world, shall be converted to me, and shall be
like this man in his faith, and obedience to my word, shall be admitted into
the Kingdom of heaven, in company of the holy Patriarchs, whom they have
imitated; and on the other side the children of Israel, who according to the
extractio^ of flesh and blood, descend from Patriarchs; if they do not
penance, and reform their infidelity and disobedience, by true and constant
faith, and real subjection to my commaundments, shall be excluded from the
Kingdom of heaven, and condemned to eternal torments.

In this sort did Christ our Lord praise the faith of the Centurion; and
thereby did he correct the infidelity, or at least the weak faith of the
Jews. And he did it with much reason; for the faith of this man was so great,
that some of the Saints conceive, that he did truly know, and believe the
divinity of Christ our Lord; and that it was covered with the veil of his
sacred humanity. For thus says Saint Hierome. The wisdom of the Centurion is
discovered, in that with the eyes of faith, he saw the divinity which lay hid
under that veil of humanity. And the same does Saint Augustine confess,
saying, in the person of the same Centurion; If I, being a man subject to
others, have yet power to command; how much more have thou it, o Lord, whom
all the powers of the earth obey and serve?

We are to profit by this example of Christ our Lord, in praising such
servants of God, as live in a more eminent degree of virtue, then the state and
condition of their life seems to exact at their hands; for the admonishing
and correcting of others, who, by reason of their vocation, and of the parts
and gifts which God has bestowed upon them, were obliged to greater virtue. As
when, for the correcting of some Prelate, who may be straight handed in giving
alms, and negligent withal, in the government of his subjects, we may praise
some Lord, who being a secular man, is yet most liberal in giving alms, and
most vigilant in procuring that his servants and vassailes may be virtuous. And
as if, for the reproof and amendment of a Religious man, who were remiss in
making Prayer, and doing Penance, and were full of tepidity in the exercise of
virtue, and imperfect in the performance of his Obedience, we should praise a
secular Cauallier, for being much given to prayer, and diligent in the
mortification of himself, and full of fervor in the exercise of virtue, and
very obedient to his Ghostly Father. For we frame the reason after this manner;
If a Lord or a Cauallier, being a secular man, be of so great recollection, so
great virtue, such purity of life, such diligence in the doing of good works,
his vocation not seeming to bind him altogether to it; how much more reason is
it, that a Prelate make himself a possessor of these virtues, whom his state
obliges to be a perfect man; and a Religious person, whom his Religion
obliges to procure to be perfectly virtuous?

And so to reform some very wise and learned man, who wants spirit and
devotion, we may praise a man who is wholly ignorant, but yet full of the
spirit of God, and of true devotion saying: If this rude creature having so
little knowledge of God, and of his works, and mysteries, and being able to
use so little discourse of reason, have yet so great love of God, and so great
feeling of his goodness, and of his mysteries, and works, and so great gust of
divine things, and makes so great estimation of virtue, and spiritual
blessings; how much more is it reason, that a wise and learned man, to whom God
has given so great wit, and knowledge, for the comprehending of truth both
divine and humane, and so great light of reason to discourse, and pass by
means of visible things to the knowledge of such as are invisible, and by the
creatures, to come to the knowledge and love of the Creator, have such
devotion, as was said before, or at least procure to have it?

In this sort did the Apostle S. Paul, following this example of Christ our
Lord, commend the Gentiles who were converted, for the most excellent virtues
which they had, and the admirable works they did, and for those most high
gifts, which God had communicated to them, by means of their faith; to the end
that so the Jews, who were in their infidelity, might know their error, and
be in confusion, for their wickedness; and might be awaked by the virtue of the
Gentiles, and encouraged to the incitation thereof. This did he signify by
saying, Romans 11. For as much as I am an Apostle of the Gentiles, and during the
whole time that I shall be so, I will honor this ministry, taking pains, and
suffering for them, to bring them to the faith who are not yet come to it, and
to confirm and perfect them with virtues, and the gifts of God who have
already received it. And by this means, I will procure the conversion of the
Jews, who are of my kindred according to the flesh, to the end that they,
behoulding the most abu^dant fruit which is produced in the Gentiles, and the
most precious gifts which God communicated to them by means of their faith,
may be moved to a holy emulation, and imitation of them, and so some of them
may be saved.

THE XXI. CHAPTER. How we are to praise the virtue of our neighbors, to
defend them so, from some unjust slander.
ANother very just reason, for which we must praise our neighbors, and
commend their virtues, and good works, is to defend them from some slander,
or false testimony, or some detraction or affront, wherewith their reputation
is unjustly spotted, and their good name and the opinion of their virtue
obscured. Let us deliver an example, which Christ our Lord left us of this
truth.

Christ our Lord being in Bethania, at supper in the house of Simon the leaper,
Ioh. 12. Matthew. 26. Mary Magdalen came with an Alablaster box, full of very
odoriferous and precious ointment, and she anointed the feet of our Lord with
it, and filled the whole house with the sweet odor. Now Judas began to murmur
at this work, and to speak ill of the holy woman, in that she had wasted the
ointme^t, which was of so great value, that it might have bee^ sold for three
hundred pieces of money, and been given to the poor. And the rest of the
disciples, seeing the indignation and murmuringe of Judas, and not
understanding the root of malice, from whence it grew, like good simple men
conceived that he had reason, for what he said; and were induced by his
example, to murmur too, and to reprove that good work, which Mary with so
great devotion, had done.

Now our Lord saw well how the disciples murmured against this holy woman,
without all reason; esteeming that to be vicious, which was an act of virtue,
and speaking ill of that, which was well done. For being a custom of the
country, as it was, to anoint the feet of their guests, with precious
ointme^ts, if they were eminent men; it was no evil, but a good work to do
that, which was in use for some good and honest end. For an indifferent actio^,
such an one as this was, is made good by addressing it to a virtuous end. But
then to this is to be added, the pure intention, and great devotion, wherewith
Mary did this work: for she did it as being moved by piety and religion, to
exhibit honor and veneration to our Lord, whom she knew to be worthy of all
possible reverence and respect.

Our Lord therefore on the one side seeing the goodness of the work and
considering moreover, the mystery which himself me^t to signify thereby, who
had moved her to it; and on the other observing the rash judgment and murmuring
of the disciples, and especially of Judas, who was the spring of all that ill,
he began to defend the woman, and to praise the good work which she had
wrought, and to discharge the slander, whereby they thought to do her wrong;
saying after this manner; Why are you troublesome to this woman? Why are you
enraged against her? Why think and speak you ill of her work? leave her free
from your reproach, and give her leave to keep this ointment, for my burial.
His meaning was to say, the bodies of dead men, are according to our custom,
to be anointed before they be interred; and this woman would be glad to anoint
my body, when I shall be dead; and then will not be able, because that office
will be first performed by others, before I be buried; and after that burial,
she shall be prevented by my resurrection. But suffer her to do that now, which
she would do them; and that she may signify by this unction that I am to die;
and that my body will be soon laid in the grave, and she in the mean time,
does but perform that office of piety, which is performed to other dead bodies.

Our Lord said further, she has wrought a good work toward me; and it was
convenient that she should do it although by doing it, the price of this
ointment were thereby not given to the poor. For the poor you shall have
allwaies with you, and so shall you ever have opportunity, and occasion to do
good to them: but as for me, you shall not allwaies have me with you, in this
visible form; for I am quickly to leave this world, and to go to my Father.
And I tell you for certain, that in whatsoever part of the world, the good
news of this Gospel shall be preached, the work of this woman shall be
recounted, and celebrated in her memory, and for her glory in all the parts of
the world. And by these words did Christ our Lord defend the Magdalena, and
praise her good work.

From this example we are first to fetch this fruit, to make great estimation
of good works, how little, how light, and how easy so ever they may be. How
easy a thing is it, for a rich woman to buy a pound of precious ointme^t, for
three hundred pieces of silver, and to anoint the feet of a holy man therewith;
especially of such a Saint as Christ our Lord was? For in that he, who was
anointed, was so great a Lord, the work became more sweet, and easy to be
performed. Well then, so light and easy a work as this, for having been
performed by a person who was in the state of grace, and with a pure intention,
to serve and please Almighty God, was esteemed so highly, as we see by Christ
our Lord, and praised with such Majesty of words; and rewarded with such a
high reward, both in heaven and earth. Such value and dignity and excellency
have those good works, which are done for the love of God.

If the Magdalena had spent, not three hundred pieces of silver, but three
hundred thousand, in the service of the world, as in braueries, and vain
dressings, in curious and delitious bankets, and in making some feast, and
triumph to give delight and gust, as lovers of the world are wont to do; all
that expense, had been lost, and she had not pleased Almighty God thereby; nor
had merited any thing is his sight; and there had been no honorable memory
thereof continued amongst men. And not reaping any profit by them, she would
have incurred many faults, as ordinarily there are, in these things, which
would have condemned her, either to the te^porary pains of Purgatory, or else
to the eternal torments of hell. But now, for having spent a little money upon
the service of Christ our Lord, and for undergoing that light and sweet labor,
in performing that work of piety, with her own hands, she pleased Almighty God
so much, and merited so greatly in his sight, and obtained so much honor
throughout the world, that as long as it lasts, she shall be praised, and had
in veneration for this work, by all faithful Christians; and for all eternity
shall be made happy amongst the Angels in heaven, with a most high crown of
glory. And so will that be fulfilled which was said by the wise man; The memory
of just persons will remain amongst men, after their death, and they shall
relate their heroical deeds, and exhibit praise, and veneration to them;
whereas the memory and fame of wicked persons, shall be full of reproach, and
it shall perish.

Secondly, we are to draw from this example of Christ our Lord, that when we
see virtuous people suffer hurt in their reputation, or good name, whereby
their neighbors were to be edified, and whereof they are deprived, by the
slanders, and lies of wicked people, we must defend them by giving testimony
to the truth, and by praising their good life. And when men murmur against them
in our presence, we must excuse their innocence, and declare their virtue. And
if it so fall out, that we have any credit with the murmurers; we must procure
to mend them, and stop the discourse; and if our advice by way of speech will
not serve, we must show both by our silence, and by our countenance, that such
murmuring is displeasing to us. This is that which the holy Ghost does admonish
saying, that as the sharp cold wind coming from the North, hinders rain,
and permits not, through the coldness thereof, that the clouds should easily
dissolve themselves into water; so does the reserved and sad countenance, of
him who hears, ty up the tongue of the murmurer. This says the Wise man in
the Proverbs, who was instructed by the Holy Ghost. And the reason is, because
when the murmurer sees, that they who hear him look cheerfully upon the
matter, he thinks he pleases them, and that they give him a glad ear; and he
takes so much the more heart, and liberty to murmur: but when he finds, that
they show him an ill countenance, he vndersta^ds by that, that the discourse
pleases not; but that they are unwilling to hear it, and this he marks, and
so he begines to give over murmuring.

THE XXII. CHAPTER. How we ought to praise wise men, when they are virtuous,
to the end that others may profit by their example and doctrine.
BEsides those reasons before expressed, there is yet an other of great force,
why we ought to praise the servants of God; and it is, to the end that our
neighbors having notice of their virtue and parts, may profit more, both by
their doctrine, and by the example of their life. This praise belongs
chiefly, to persons who are much known, and have authority, or public
office, as Prelates, Judges, Preachers, Co^fessors, Religious men, Priests, and
rich and noble persons; for upon the virtue, and prudence, and wisdom of such
as these (who are as the heads, and hearts) depends the virtue of the people:
and so the good life, and incorrupt doctrine of these servants of God, being
generally known, and commended, the rest of men does profit by it so much the
more, and are more edified by their good speeches, and virtuous examples; and
therefore to praise such persons, with that discretion which is fit, is a thing
very acceptable to God, and very profitable for the gaining of souls. Let us
relate an example, which Christ our Lord gave us hereof.

The disciples of Saint John Baptist, came to Christ our Lord in their Masters
name, Mat. 11. Luc. 7. to know if he were that Christ, who was to come; that is
to say, if he were the Messiah, who had been promised by Almighty God, for the
salvation of the world. And our Lord having answered this question, by the
works he did, which was by working the miracles which were prophesied of the
Messiah, and by preaching that doctrine which belonged to him to teach, and
publish, he dispatched them away saying; Tell John what you have and heard.
When the disciples of Saint John were gone, our Lord began to celebrate the
divine praises of the same Saint John, and to proclaim his admirable virtues,
saying; What went you out to see in the desert? Went you perhaps to see some
reed, or cane, which is shaken with every wind? or some man set forth in soft,
and delicate apparel? He mea^t as follows; you went not out to see a light,
or unconstant person, who is moved by every passion, or interest; but a most
constant man, and who perseuereth with admirable resolution, in the truth,
which he preaches; and in that holy life which he began to lead. And you shall
evidently see, that inconstant and light persons, who are moved with passions,
or by the interests of this world, be allwaies in love with regaloes, and
delicacies in their food, their clothing, and their habitation, and are
desirous of wealth, and have recourse to the houses of great men, where these
things are found in abundance. But in John, you shall see nothing of this, but
a life of great penance and austerity, and very abstinent, and estranged from
all manner of regalo, and wholly deprived and destitute of all earthly goods.
For his habitation, is in the dry and horrid desert: his bed, is the hard
ground: his garment is a sharp hairecloth, made of camells hair: his food is
dry locusts: his drink running water; and his continual exercise, is to pray,
and contemplate in that desert, and to baptize and preach penance, in the river
of Jordan. He says moreover of him; And what went you out to see in the
desert? Was it perhaps some Prophet? Verily I say to you, that he is more then
a Prophet. For this is he, of whom the eternal Father said, whilst he was
speaking to his son, as is recorded in Malachias; Behold I send my Angel
before thy presence, to prepare the way for thee. I tell you for a most
certain truth, that there was not borne of women a greater, then John the
Baptist; but yet he, who is the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater then
he. Which signifies, according to the best exposition; He who for his age,
and the office of humility which he exercises, and in opinion of the people is
the poorest member of the Church, (which was our Lord himself the true
Messiah) is both in dignity, and sanctity, greater then he.

Saint John had preached penance to the people, and exhorted men to the
exercise of all virtue, and had given express testimony money of Christ our
Lord, affirming that he was the Messiah. And now, to the end, that by sending
this message, whereby they asked of Christ our Lord, if he were the Messiah,
the people might not suspect that he made any doubt, as some inconstant might
do, of that which formerly he had testified, and of that which now he
questioned, but only in regard both of his own disciples, and of all that
people (that so they might forsake the ignorance, wherein they were, and remain
more confirmed in their faith; and not think that he demanded it in regard of
the ignorance wherein himself was) for this reason, did Christ our Lord extol
him afterward, with so illustrious praises, and testified with so great
asseueratio^, the constancy and purity of his life, and the eminency of his
person and dignity. And he proved this, both by the experience of what they
saw, and by the testimony also of a Prophet: to the end that they might be
settled in the great belief, which they ought to have of his truth, and
sanctity; and that so, they might profit by the doctrine, which he had
preached, and the example of life which he had showed.

In this sort are we to praise men for their virtues, after the example of
Christ our Lord: because their life and doctrine concern the good of the
faithful, to the end that their words of counsel, may be more efficacious,
and their example more profitable to all men. Thus did Saint Paul proceed;
who, resolving to send Timothy, a most faithful instrument of the Gospel, to
preach and administer holy things, at Philippos a City of Macedonia, does
praise him first in a letter, which he writes to the Philippians, wherein he
testifies his virtues, saying, I hope in the mercy of Christ our Lord that I
shall very shortly be able to send Timothy to you. And I have designed to send
him in particular, because I have none other, who is so agreeable to me, and
so of one heart with my self, and who with so pure love and true charity, has
so particular a care of your good.

These and other praises, did S. Paul deliver of Timothy; to the end that the
Philippians, might receive him with great estimation of his sanctity, and
zeal, and might profit by him. And he did the like, when he resolved to send
Titus a servant of Christ our Lord, and a preacher of the Gospel to them of
Corinthus: for first he praised him, saying to this effect; I give great
thanks to God, for inspiring the heart of Titus with the same desire, that I
have, and for having kindled him with the same love and endewed him with the
same desire of your spiritual profit, which he gave to me. With these and
other words, Saint Paul praised Titus, to the end that his labors might
prove of greater spiritual profit to the Corinthians. And after this manner,
are we also to praise Prelates, Preachers, Governors of Cities, Pastors of
souls, Religious men, and Priests, and all such as have public office, and
authority over the people, when they clearly express true virtue in their
lives. For when they are known for-such, and that they are wise, and diligent
in doing their duties, they shall profit the people more, and especially such
families thereof, as converse with them Let us praise (says Ecclesiasticus)
such men as are excellently glorious, above the rest.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER. Of the rule which we are to hold, when upon the aforesaid
reason, we shall praise the servants of God.
But in affoarding this praise, we must observe these directions, and rules of
discretion. That when we praise another man, not to the end of encouraging him,
or moving him to the practice and proceeding in virtue, or for the persuading
him to the doing of some good work, but for the good, and profit of others,
that so his virtue and wisdom being known, and much esteemed, his neighbors,
who hear, and discourse thereof, may profit by his example, instruction,
advice and government (which is the case whereof we are speaking;) we must not
then praise the party in his own presence, nor yet before his familiar friends,
who already know his parts, and who are likely to tell him what they have
heard; but only before such others, who^ it may concern to know his virtues
and parts, to take profit by him. So did Christ our Lord, when he praised Saint
John; for he did it in his absence; and he stayed for the doing of it, till the
disciples of Saint John were gone.

This rule must we also hold, that so we may take from the servant of God,
whom we praise, all occasion of vain complacence, and estimation of himself,
especially when the praises happen to be great, in respect that the parties
virtues, and parts are greatly worthy to be praised. For although it be true,
that many servants of God, who have laid the roots of humility very deeply in
their hearts, and who, by long experience and much light from heaven, have well
understood and penetrated the weakness of man, are free from this danger, and
take no occasion of vanity by it, but contemn themselves so much the more; yet
this is not every bodies case. How soever we see indeed, that it happened in
the case of Saint Ambrose, when once a devil (speaking by the mouth of a
possessed person) had a mind to cry out thus aloud, Ambrose torments me; For
then the Saint understood the devils craft, and what he pretended by praising
him. But he did not only not grow proud by occasion thereof, but he
humiliated himself so much the more, and said; Hold thy peace, thou devil,
for it is not Ambrose who torments thee, but the faith of the Saints in God,
and thine own envy. Know that Ambrose will not grow proud, upon thy praises.
This passed with Saint Ambrose, and the like happened to Saint Marcellus, the
Abbot. For this man, had a gift from God, to cast out devils; and they brought
diverse possessed persons to him; and the devils desiring, by their infernal
craft, to hoise up the Saint, into pride with praise, they cried out thus
aloud, Marcellus, do thou command us to depart out of these bodies, for thou
have power over us; and this they repeapeated often. The Saint understood the
malice of the devils, and would not send them out upon their commaundme^t; but
taking occasion from that speech, to humble him self so much the more, and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, he begged of Christ our Lord, that he would cast
them out saying thus; O Lord, preserve this work of thy hands; and he
continued praying so long, that the devils departed out of the bodies.

Though this be so, and that many great servants of God, are settled so
firmly, and solidly in the truth of humility, that humane praises move them
not at all, but rather they humiliate themselves the more by occasion thereof;
yet there are others, who though indeed they be the servant of God and have
very excellent virtues, and gifts from heaven, and are worthy to be praised;
yet notwithstanding they have some weakness this way, and are subject to the
danger of growing proud upon humane praise, and especially when they are
praised much. And this is the usual case, and which ordinarily happens, that
even good men are subject to this weakness, and are exposed to this danger. And
a man may clearly see, what force those praises have to make men giddy, and how
much occasion they minister of making them fall into vain complace^ce and
pride. First, in that the devils, who are so great and wise Masters in doing
ill, did take the means of praising, and publishing the power which Saint
Ambrose, and Saint Marcellus had over them from Almighty God, as the likeliest
way to make them fall into pride. And this truth may be also seen, by the
great diligence, which the Saints have ever used, in flying from the praises of
men, for the danger which they knew to be therein, and the fear they had to
fall thereby.

Surius does relate in the life of the blessed and most holy man John, who was
a Prior of Chanons Regular; that fearing the danger of praise, he fled from it
after an extraordinary manner. He went to do a certain office of charity, to
certain women the servants of God, who were retired from the world; and one
of them, who was there shut up, received a Revelation of his going thither; and
therein, our Lord had declared to them, the great sanctity and merit of that
servant of his. Now there was here no necessity to recount that revelation in
praise of his sanctity: for it was not made to her for the profit of the Saint,
but to the end that they might profit by his coming thither, so much the more,
by how much more they were certified of his sanctity. And therefore, as soon as
the Saint heard her begin to speak thereof, he found that there was danger of
conceiving some vain complacence, or estition of himself; and it troubled him
much to hear such praises of his virtue; and he made her a quick answer, and
concluding the business in few words, went imediatly away. For the danger that
he found, to hear humane praise, made him resolve not to stay, where there was
so great estimation of the holy manner of his life.

Saint William, who of Duke of Aquitania, came to be a most holy Monk, and a
Father of many Monks, was much praised by men, for his many virtues, and the
great miracles which he wrought. This put him to extreme pain, and he would
feign have avoided the working of miracles, through the fear he had of being
praised. And Theobaldus the Bishop, says in his life; That in regard he was
not able to e^dure humane praise, he went into a solitary place, and and
betook himself there to a little cottage in company of a disciple of his,
doing penance there, and leading a celestial life, till he made a most holy end.

The Saints therefore have well understood; the danger which ordinarily there is
in human praise; especially when they are given with great honor, and
estimation of sanctity. And for this reason, when we praise the servants of
God, for the benefit of others, we are to do it, if we can, in their absence.

We are also to do so, for an other reason, which is, to secure our selves
from the note and suspicion of being flatterers. For when we praise our
neighbor, for the profit of his soul, namely to deliver him from
pusillanimity, and to animate him to virtue, the necessity which then there is
of praising him in his presence, will free us from being suspected to do it
out of flattery: but when we praise him for the good of others, if we do it
without necessity in his presence, it draws the suspicion of flattery with
it; and therefore as much as we may, we must procure to give such praise in
absence. And this also did Christ our Lord teach us, in this praise of Saint
John. For upon this reason, he stayed till the disciples of the Saint were
gone, to avoid all suspicion of flattery. So said Saint Chrysostom; Therefore
did Christ our Lord praise Saint John, when his disciples were gone, that so it
might not seem to be flattery.

THE XXIV. CHAPTER. Of other rules which we must observe when we praise men:
that is, that we praise some, without offense to others: and that we do it
in moderate words.
ANother rule which we are to observe in these praises, is to praise some in
such sort, as that we give no offense to others, by diminishing the virtues
and parts of some, to increase those of other folks. And therefore we must
procure as much as we may, not to make co^parisons between some and others;
telling the faults of this man, and the abilities of that other; abasing and
vilifying some, and exalting and magnifying other men; and of this we must
especially take heed, when they of whom we speak, are alive.

Christ our Lord gave us an example of this rule, in the praise which he
uttered of Saint John; for he said not of him that he was the greatest of all
them who had been borne of women; but that no man had been borne before that
time, greater then he; thereby leaving men in liberty, to think that others,
might be equal to him. And out of this general se^te^ce, he brought that
exception which was fit, saying, that the least of the kingdom of heaven was
greater then he. And although some understand thereby the least of the Angels,
who are blessed in heaven; yet the more certain exposition is (as we have said
before) that he understood him who was the least, by humility, which is, that
Saint of Saints; and he who is the fountain of all sanctity, of whom Saint
John Baptist himself said, that he was not worthy to untie the latchet of his
shoo.

We also must follow this rule of prudence in praising men, who are praise
worthy. For if we praise men for the love of God, and being moved by charity as
we ought; the same charity will tell us, that we must do it without offending
any body, and that so we must comfort, and honor some with our praise, as
that we do not offend, or dispraise others by sleighting their virtues.

The last rule which we are to hold is that we praise men, even although they
be Saints, with moderation, and temperance, and in modest words; in such sort
that we exceed not the limits, either of truth, or of necessity, by our
enforcing, or exaggeration thereof. For if we praise a man, either to make him
friendly, or to animate him to the doing of good, or to persuade him to the
belief of any truth, or to the practice of any virtue, or to gain credit for
him with other folks; it will be fit to speak so well of him as is necessary,
for the obtaining of that end, which is pretended, and to work that good
effect which is desired; and this is sufficient, laying other praises and
exaggerations aside, which neither are necessary, nor profitable to the
edification of others.

This moderation which we ought to use in praising men, is taught us by the
holy Scripture saying, do not praise a man, till he be dead. He does not here
prohibit all praise of such as live; for it is clearly lawful, and necessary,
and pleasing to God, to praise men, whilst they live, as we have declared
already; and the Scripture it self says; The faithful man, shall be much
praised. But he means, that we must not praise such as are still living,
with a co^pleat and perfect praise, as if they were secure, and confirmed in
the state of grace, as they are to be, in heaven. And so that, do not praise,
does signify as the Greek letter shows; do not beatify or pr^clame any man
for blessed before his death: which sentence grew into this Proverb; Let no
man count himself happy before he die. And therefore we are admonished by this
sentence, not to praise any man, as absolutely blessed, or entirely happy in
this life: but when was say he is happy, we are to understand it with this
condition or limitation; that he is happy according to the present justice,
wherein he lives; or happy according to his present state and disposition: and,
in fine, that he is happy in hope. For as long as a man lives, it is ever fit
for him to be afraid of falling, and to be in doubt of perseuering. Yet this
takes not from us, but that we may praise good men; but only that our praise
of the^ must be moderate, as of me^ who may fail in the course of virtue,
wherein they are; and may fall upon that sin in which they are not; til the
good e^d of a happy death, do secure their virtue, and ratify their good life.
This did S. Ambrose declare in these words; He is not instantly happy, who has
now no sin in his soul; for it is not said without cause, that we must
praise no man before his death. And it is certain that whilst a man lives, he
may fail; and therefore till he die, he must not be celebrated with any praise,
as determinate and certain, and which cannot be revoked. He, who after the end
of a good life, has died well, may be justly termed happy: for already he
enjoys the society of the blessed, with a security, which is perfect.

THE XXV. CHAPTER. Of the rules, which they are to keep, who are praised; that
so they may be at no prejudice, but receive profit thereby.
THey who praise others, are to observe those rules, whereof I have spoken. Let
us now say somewhat, of the rules which are to be kept by them, who are
praised; remitting the rest to some other place.

The first rule is, that a man (for as much as concerns himself, that is to
say, his own honor, his estimation and his comfort) must not desire or seek
the praise of men. For to desire praise upon these reasons, and for this end is
a vain and vicious thing, which spotteth, and defiles the heart of man, and
disquieteth and disturbeth it, and makes it subject to every change. For as
all human things are subject to alteration; and one man praises, and another
man dispraiseth; one exalts, and another abaseth; one honors, and another
dishonors his neighbor: from hence it grows, that the miserable heart,
which loves praise, is now cheerful, and then sad; now refreshed and them
dismayed; and never does enjoy strength or rest. On the other a man who cares
not for the praises of men, but despises and auoides them; and, for his part,
desires only to be approved, and praised by Almighty God, whose judgment is
right, and upon whose approbation and praise, our salvation depends, and who
contents himself with this testimony, does proceed like a just man, who loves
true justice, and not vanity; and so keeps his heart quiet, and firmly set
upon goodness, because he rests himself upon God, who is not subject to any
change. So says Saint Chrysostom. The wicked man is delighted with the
praises of men, and though he have not the virtue, for which he is praised, yet
he holds his peace, and is glad of it. But the just man flies from praise, and
though he have that virtue for which they praise him, and though he know
thereby, that he who praised him, said true; yet still he has no mind to be
praised. And in another place, the same Saint says; Nothing makes men so
vain, and light, as the appetite of glory, and of the praise of men, and so
nothing makes them so firm and constant, and strong, as the contempt of all
the honor, and praise of this world.

But now since it is not lawful to like the praises of men for his own
honor, and temporal comfort; let us see, whether it be lawful for him to
like, and desire them for the animating, and encouraging himself thereby, to
the exercise of virtue. We therefore say first, that this may be lawful in
some case, and with some moderation; as namely for a man, who is in affliction,
or desolation to desire that men may comfort him; putting him in mind of the
good he has done, or of the fruit which has followed upon his actions, or by
his example or instruction: that so he may not be dismayed with his affliction;
and if he be dismayed, that he may take heart: not admitting of that praise
with any meaning to dwell therein; but as a receipt of physic, wherewith to
cure his infirmity, and weakness; and to induce himself the better to serve
God, for what God is, and for the accomplishment of his holy will. As King
Ezechias did, who being in the extremity of sickness, and much afflicted with
the approach of death, did for the increase of his confidence in God, and for
the comfort of his soul, and the redress of his desolation, commemorate to
God himself, the good deeds he had done, saying thus; I beseech thee, o Lord
remember how I have lived, and conuersed before thee, with truth, and without
all hypocrisy or dissimulation; and how in all things which concerned thy
Religion, I have served thee with the entire affection of my heart; not
honoring any other God, but thee, who art the true God; and how I have
performed these good works which thou have commanded. In this sort the good
afflicted King, acknowledging that all the good things which he had done, were
the gifts of God, and referring them all to him, reduced them to his memory,
and presented them before almighty God; not resting and relying upon them; but
upon the mercy and grace of God; by means whereof he had wrought them: and he
did it to the end that he might erect himself to some good hope; and to
comfort his sad heart. And so it may be lawful for an afflicted man, with the
same intention, and to the same end, to like and accept of being assisted by
this means of the pious, and confortable speech of his neighbor.

Secondly we say, that although this manner of praise may be lawfully accepted
with this moderation: yet it is not convenient to desire, or procure it;
because there are many better means the^ this, whereby to be animated, and
induced to virtue; and by reason of danger which there is, in loving humane
praise, and the honor which grows thereby; and of making value, and taking
complacence in himself, and so grow to do well for the honors sake. And
because this inconvenience and hurt grows ordinarily upon them who desire to
be praised for this end; Saint Gregory conde^nes it, saying; It as a thing
which belongs to arrogant persons, and given to vanity, when they desire to
be animated to do well, by the praises of others. And preachers and
instructers of others, who for this reason desire praise, are dismayed, when
they are not praised; and being ambitious lovers of humane honor and favor,
they will defend and excuse themselves saying, that it is lawful for them to
desire it, for the good which they receive by humane praise; and for this, they
show their abilities, and will be praised for them, to the end that by means
of this praise, they may grow more in virtue. Whereby certainly they deceive
themselves, and so by means of this error, that diste^per increases in them,
by which they love and desire the praise of men. But the true servants of God,
are free from this vanity; for although they labor by their virtues, to equal
the praises, wherewith men celebrate the same, yet they desire not to be
praised by men, but they despise praise, with their heart; and for as much as
concerns themselves they fly from it with great earnestnes. Thus says Saint
Gregory. Whereupon it follows clearly, that it is not convenient, for the end
of profiting our selves, to desire the praise of men, by reason of the deceit,
and danger which lies hid therein, that we may not perhaps do it for any
true necessity, but for vanity; and not for the true profit of our souls, but
to the prejudice thereof.

The intention and end for which we may lawfully desire, or admit of praise,
is for the good of our neighbors; to the end that by the conceit, and good
opinion, which they have of our life and doctrine, they may grow the better by
us; edifying themselves by our good example, and inducing themselves to the
love of virtue, by means of our advice and counselle, or of our government, or
doctrine. So says the glorious Saint Augustine. He who works according to
virtue desires not praise: but yet praise ought to follow him, who works
well; to the end that it may profit the^, who praise, by encouraging themselves
to the virtues, which they praise. But howsoever it be lawful to desire praise
for this end, because in this case, it is not praise which is loved and
desired, but the profit of their neighbors; yet the better and more secure
way, and that which has been used by the Saints, is; not to procure or desire,
even for this very end, to be praised by men; nor that men should publish his
virtues and celebrate him for the same, least some vanity or other give it
self to his soule^ but that he leave it to Gods providence, that so he may do
therein, as he shall think most fit, and desiring (for as much as co^cernes
himself) that he be not praised.

The thing which he is to do, is that he labor hard, and be watchful in
doing good and holy works; and in giving good example in all things, and
using holy discourse, and teaching sound doctrine, and giving wholesome advice,
and desiring, that the men who shall happen to see his good works, and to
hear his good words, may be stirred up to know, that God is the Author of
them, and may praise him for them, and be induced to serve him, performing not
only those works which he does and teaches, but others which may be much
better. And when he shall find or understand, that men praise him, for what he
does, let him enter into his own heart, and despise himself through the
knowledge he has of his sins; for which he deserves all contempt; and let
him hold himself unworthy of such praise, for having offended God, who was the
principal Author of those good works. And let him desire, that men,
forgetting or despising him, as he deserves, may give the praise and glory of
those good works of God. To this are we advised by Saint Augustine, in these
words. The praise which is given to a just man, for the good he does, he must
instantly refer to God; desiring that his divine Majesty, who is the Author
of that good work, may be praised for it; for the men who are good, have not
their being so, from themselves, but from God. And when me^ praise us, let us
reform those praises, giving all to God, who gave us that goodness, which is
praised by men. And in an other place, the same Saint says, when thou shall be
praised, despise thy self, and desire that he may be praised in thee, who
works in thee, the good thou do; and so thou must not do good things for
thine own praise, but for the praise of that Lord, of whom thou did receive
the good thou do. And heerwith we will conclude the rules which are to be
observed, both by such as praise, and such as are praised.

And so also will we conclude our discourse, concerning those things which
belong to the most sweet virtue of Benignity, and which in sum are these. To
do good to our neighbors with liberality, and with a willing mind; To grant
them with ease, what they ask; To condesce^d to them in things lawful; To
co^uerse affably and sweetly; and both in countenance and words, to be
cheerful; To endure meekly the defects of others; To reprehend them with love;
To pardon them with mercy; To impose commaundments upon such as are subject,
which they may obey with gust; and to impose burdens on them which they may
carry with ease; To be courteous and well mannered; And to praise the virtue of
others for the comfort, and edification and spiritual profit of our neighbors.

By the practice of this virtue, we shall grow most like to God, who is most
Benign; and we shall become acceptable to his most pitteous heart, and
moreover we shall prove pleasing and agreeable to good men, for their
edification; and more tolerable to wicked men, for the conversion and winning
of their souls to God. And hereby we shall also mortify those inclinatio^s in
us, which are contrary to Benignity, and so obtain victory over our selves;
and we shall exercise many most excellent acts of other virtues, which carry
relation, and respect to Benignity; and we shall obtain great peace and
quietness of heart, whereby we may the better be disposed to communicate with
Almighty God, by means of Prayer, and Contemplation.

And finally, if we will exercise Benignity toward our neighbors, we shall
have more (...) experience of the Benignity of God, through the abundant gift
of spiritual graces and comforts, which he will impart to us. And above all
things, we shall be enabled heerby, to perform his holy will; thereby doing
that which he comaundeth us, by his Blessed Apostle saying, Ephesians. 4. Be you
Benign one toward another; Be merciful, having compassion of one another
misery; and pardoning all injuries to one another, in such sort as God has
pardoned us, by the virtue and merit of Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

