A TRVE AND LARGE DISCOVRSE OF THE VOYAGE OF THE WHOLE FLEET OF SHIPS SET
forth the 20. of April 1601. by the Governors and Assistants of the East
Indian Merchants in London, to the East Indies.

WHEREIN IS SET down the order and manner of their traffic, the description
of the Countries, the nature of the people and their language, with the names
of all the men dead in the Voyage.

AT LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Thorpe, and are to be sold by William Aspley.
1603.

A TRVE AND LARGE DISCOVRSE OF THE EAST INDIA VOYAGE DEparting out of England
the 20. day of April 1601.
THe 20. of April 1601. we wayed Anchor and set sail out of Torbay by
Dartmouth.

The 2. of May one of our Admiralles men fell ouerboord from the maine yard and
was drowned.

The 7. of May we came to the Canares, where the General determined to renew
our water: but altering his purpose, we wayed our Anchors and departed with a
fair wind.

The 10. of May being Sunday the General, Captains and Masters dined a board
the Hector. Where the general delivered them articles to be observed and kept
both by sea and land, and what punishment should be inflicted upon the
offenders.

The 12. of May we passed the Tropicke with a fresh gaile.

The 24. we had a great storm.

The 25. we had a storm with great store of rain.

The 27. we had another storm continuing two hours.

The 21. of June we took a Porting all whose lading was Wine, Oil, and Meal,
being about the burden of 100. tun; who not resisting was discharged of his
Merchandise in four days, to every ship according to his proportion.

The 29. of June we passed the Equinoctial, with a fresh gale of wind.

The 12. of July our master Gunner of the Ascension dyed, who was the first
that dyed in that ship: Here we took many flying fishes in the Air.

The 16. of July we doubled the shoales of Braseele, and for joy thereof, every
mess had a can of Wine to supper.

The 20. of July we cast off the Gift, being about 18. degrees to the South of
the Equinoctial, here we took more fish then we could eat.

About the first of August many of our men in every ship fell sick of the
scuruy, so that many died, and few were free of the infection throughout the
fleet: so that there died 80. men in the fleet before we came to land.

The 9. of September, it pleased God after our long distresses, to send us to
the sight of land at Soldania 16. leagues from the Cape de bona Esperance, and
because it was in the night, and all our men very weak, we were in great
danger, being very near the shore, but God stre^gthned us, so that by his
help, and the help of some of our Admiralles men when they had mored their
ship, we were preserved not being able to help our selves.

The 10. day our General went a shore to see if he could get some fresh
victuals, and after he had talked with the country people they made signs
that they would bring Oxen and Sheep within two or three sleeps.

The 14. day every ship sent provision on shore for the building of Tents, and
this day the inhabitants of the country brought bullockes and sheep and so
continued day lie for 12 days together, so that there were bought about 900
or 1000. sheep and bullockes in that time, The price of a bullock was two
pieces of Iron hoopes of 6. inches long a piece, and the price of a sheep one
piece of the same length, provided that the oxen and sheep were fat, or else
we would not buy them. The people are black and go naked, saving that they
wear short coats of Seals skin, and a piece of the same skin about their
members, they are tall of stature, flat nosed, swift in running, they will
pick and steal, although you look on them: Their language is very hard to be
pronounced by reason of a kind of clacking with the tongue, so that we could
not learn one word of their language: The country is full of pleasant rivers,
there is also Dear, Quails, and Partriges: In this baye there is a small
Island not inhabited nor any good thing grows: Thither did the general se^d 6.
sheep and two rams, for the relief of strangers that might come thither,
which shortly after was found there by certain Flemmings to their relief,
because they could get no cattle of the country people. In this Island, there
is great abundance of Seals, and Penguines, in such number as is almost
incredible? The Seals, some are iusset and some are black, both ugly and
fearful to look on, the old ones which are as big almost as a Bear, cry
like a Bear, and the young ones cry like unto Lambs, they have but two
feet, yet they use their hinder parts in going, by which means, they will
go or clime up any rock a great pace, some of these we killed and made oil
of them, and some of the youngest we did eat, which to us seemed good meat.
They lay partly on land, and partly in the water, for there is their refuge.
The Penguine is as strange as the other, being a bird which has a strange and
a proud kind of going, they are of the bigness of a Ducke, they have finny
wings with which they swim a great pace, but cannot fly, and these are in such
abundance that you may take them up with your hands as many as you will, the
eggs of these Penguines was there in such abundance as we could not almost go
for them, so that we laded our boat with Seals, Penguines, and eggs in two
hours; In this Bay likewise as it is credibly reported by the Flemmings, there
is another Island of Conies, in as great abundance as the other of Seals and
Penguines.

Before our departure from hence we had a Sermon and a Communion one a Sunday
in the forenoone, and afternoon one of our men which was a Jew, was christened
and called John, our General being his godfather.

The 29. of October we wayed our Anchors, and set sail, there being dead in
the whole fleet at this time 107. and others that were sick recovered to
health.

The first of November we doubled the Cape debona Esperance with great store of
wind, rain, and hail.

The 26. we saw Saint Laurence.

The 2. of December we had so many huge and great Grampoyses about our ship
as was strange and wonderful.

The 4. of December we had great storms which continued al day and the same
night, so that we were in danger to loose some of our company.

The 16. we saw the land of Madagascar, and the Island of Saint Marie, and the
next day we cast an Anchor between both lands, and sent our boats to Saint
Mary's to see what was to be gotten; but could get nothing there but Oringes
and Lemmans of which we made good stoare of water, which is the best remedy
against the scuruy, here we continued 3. or 4. days but could get no other
things, but lemmons, some honey combs, some milk, and some rice which we
bought for beads, we saw but only one Cow, which they drove away as soon as
they saw us, whereby we imagined they had small store. The people of this Island
are of a tall stature and very well limmed and proportioned such as we have not
seen in these parts of the world, they go naked saving about their members
they wear cloth made of the barks of trees, and the women wear of the same
stuff from their breasts to their feet.

The 21. we had a mighty storm both of wind and rain, so that our ship lost
an Anchor, the Hector let slip her Anchor, and the Susan broake her bow sprit,
and here we were in great danger, by reason we were in such a straight between
two lands: here our ship was almost aboard the Admiral, but God delivered us,
this storm continued 12. hours very forcible, in which time two of our
Admirals men fell from the maine yard, whereof one was saved and the other
drowned, and as the wind was vehement, so the air was very thick and misty
which made it the more dangerous.

The 26. day we Anchored in the Baye of Antogill, and the next day our boats
were sent on shore and meeting with the people of the Country, we bought of
them Rice, Lemmons and Plantons, in great quantity and number, for we bought a
measure of Rice which wayed two pounds and a half, for a bloud-stone, or a
blew Bead, and twenty Lemmons, or twenty Plantons for a Bead. In this place
they have small store of Cattle, but they went with us unto another Baye,
where there was more store, of whom we bought two or three, giving five and
thirty Crystal Beads for a Bullock, and afterward because they would sell
us no more, we went and took some from them perforce, giving them in Beads as
we paid for the other, to the value of ten shillings.

The first of January we began to build our Pinnace.

The 7. of January, five of the Susans company, being some boys, and some
youths, stoale away the Boat from the ships stearne, thinking to have gone to
the Maine to have lived there, but by chance were espied, so that they were
feign to put themselves on shore upon a small Island not inhabited, where they
continued two or three days, and being weary of their fair and lodging, came
again aboorde, and were punished for their offenses.

The 17. of January, one Christopher Newchurch our Surgeon of the Ascension
poisoned himself, but it did not work his death: yet was he grievously
tormented for three or four days, for which cause he was dismissed of his
place, and should have been left in this place a shore, had not Master
Hauers entreated for him who took him into his ship to live as an ordynary
man.

The 4. day of February we had a great storm of wind and rain, which
continued all day and the same night.

The 20. day Master Brodbancke, Master of the Admiral died.

The 23. day of February, Master Pullin our preacher died.

The 23. day Master Napper Master of the vice Admiral died, and the same day
one of our Admirals men being sick of the Calanture, leaped ouerboord and was
no more seen.

The 27. day being Saturday, the lamentablest accident happened, that happened
since we departed England, and thus it was, Master Winter the Masters Mate
of the Admiral dying, the rest of the Captains and Masters went to his burial
and according to the order of the sea, there was 2. or 3. great ordinances
discharged at his going a shore, but the master Gunner of the Admiral being
not so careful as he should have been, unfortunately killed Master Brand
Captain of the Ascension and the Boatswaines mate of the same ship, to the
great danger of the Master, his mare and another Merchant who were hurt and
besprinckled with the blood of these massacred men, so these men going to the
burial of another were themselves carried to their own graves. Thus did we
loose a man religious, wise and provident; such a one as the whole fleet will
miss, both for good husbandry, care, and good advice: Upon these alterations
Roger Haukin was made master of the Admiral, master Indeck master of the
vice Admiral, for master Napper was dead, master Coal master of the
Ascension, master Pope was made Captain of the Ascension and some of the
other Merchants removed some to one ship, some to another.

The 4. day of March, we set sail out of this tempestuous and unfortunate
Baye, where there was many men died of the flixe out of the Admiral. So that
we continued here two months and eight days, having for the most part every
day fearful thunder, rain and lightenning, as the like is not heard in our
country, for they have many slain with the thunder which makes them make
have to get home before night. The people are very industrious and take great
pains, both in setting of Rice which grows there in great quantytie, so that
there is whole stackes thereof, as also in beating and winnowing the same. They
weaue such things as they wear about their bodies being made of the bark of
trees. Their houses are but mean, standing half a yard from the ground and
covered with leaves, with a hoale at one end of the same house to creep in at
on their knees. They love Wine exceedingly, with which they will be very
drunk: As there is many small towns, so there is many Governors which are
known from the other, both by the reverence is given them of the people, and
their ornaments of brass Rings, and Beads: they are marvelous nimble with
their Lawnces and Targets, but very fearful of our Pieces. The chief
Governor came aboorde of us with his wife to dinner, where we might perceive
their manner of feeding to be very homely, and for their assurance of safety,
there was so many sent a shore as came aboard, and after dinner, Captain
Middleton gave the principal man a thin shute of Manchester stuff, which
pleased him well.

Certain words of their language.
Taughu, Wine. Rano, Water. Herinco, Fish. Bedehang, Beads. Kissow, a Knife.
Totombar, Rice. Lemona, Lemons. Eeno, Full. Semiss^, no more left. Matty,
Thunder. Sungo Funsho, ripe Plantons. Essa, One. Roe, Two. Tellu, Three. Effa,
Four. Demi, Five. Ena, Six. Ceto, Seven. Vallo, Eight. Ciui, Nine. Foolo, Ten.
Beginning again and reckoning to ten.
The 17. day of April, we passed the Equinoctial line which is the second
time that we passed it.

The 30. day of March we were on the shoales of Adu which is nine degrees to
the South of the Equinoctial and at the first sight of ground (being full of
rocks) our ship had but 4. fadome and a half, here we were in great danger,
being enclosed and compassed round with rocks as in a pound, and having spent
2. days and nights in turning and returning but could find no way out, at the
length the Pinnace was sent before to find where there was least danger, and
having found 7. or 8 fadom we all followed her and having passed this danger,
we gave God the praise which had mercifully delivered us.

The 7. day of May, we had sight of Nicombar, which is about 40. leagues from
Sumatra, this night following we had a great storm, and in this storm if God
had not delivered us wonderfully our ship or the Hector, or both had suncke in
the sea, being almost aboard of one another in lying of those Islands: this
night also we lost company with the Pinnace, but within 2. or 3. days she came
to us in that habor, here we stayed 9. or 10. days to water and ballast our
ships and to mount our ordinance. The people of the country brought us aboard
Coaker nuts, Cassado roots, Pounceatrones, and Lemmons, and some hens, but they
made dainty of their hens, for they would not sell them under two Counters a
piece, taking them for gould, although they sold other things for old pieces
of Linen, and small pieces of Iron hoopes, some of these people speak
Portugale, who told us that the Portugales use to put into this harbor as they
go to Mallacca, and that two Gallions were there two months before our
coming thither, which had bought all the Amber-Greese was to be gotten.

The 18. day we set sail from hence, but by reason of foul weather, and
contrary winds, our Admiral lost his boat, and sprung a leake, and therefore
would have fetched that harbor again, but could not. So we went to other
Islands called Sombrai, 10. or 12. leagues to lewward Nicombar. Here our
Admiral lost an anckor, for the ground is rockie, and full of counterfeit
Currall. The prople of this Island go naked, having only their priuities bound
up in a narrow piece of Linne^ cloth, which comes about their middle like a
girdell, and so between their twist: they are of a tawnie color, they anoint
their faces with diverse coullers, they are well limmed, but very fearful, for
they would neither come aboard our ships, nor come into our boats: There
grows in this Island Trees, that for the talenesse, greatness, and
straightness thereof, they will serve the biggest Ship in our Fleet for a
maine Maste, and the Island is full of these Trees.

Here likewise we did find upon the Sands a small twigge growing up green
like a young tree, and offering to pull the same up it shrinketh into the
ground, and sincketh, unless you hold very hard, but being pulled up, a
great worm growth about the root thereof, very strange to see, of these I
gathered many. We departed from hence the 29. of this month.

The 2. of June, we anckored in the road of Dachen, where we had of the
country people came aboorde of us with their Canows, greater then any we had
seen before, having rafters of each side of them, so that they cannot sincke.

The next day, there came some of the Factors for the Flemmings aboorde of us,
to welcome us into that Country. And the same day our Vize-Admirall went a
shore to the King, with a message from our General, accompanied with Master
Salter, Master Ianuerme, and Master Grove, who hearing of their landing, sent
them Elephants to ride to his court, being about a mile from the landing place,
where they were kindly entertained, and giving too the Vize-Admirall, a Roabe
and a Tucke of Callico imbrodered with gold.

The 4. of June being Saturday, the General went on shore, accompanied with
Captain Hauers, Captain Pope, and many other Merchants, to deliver the
Queens letter, and to give him presents, which were a Basin and Ewer of
silver, a standing cup of silver, a Head-peece, a pair of Ha^gers, a Fan of
Feathers, and a Looking-glass: these being delivered by the Merchants, none
pleased him so well as the Fan of Feathers, with which he caused his women
to Fan him. First at the Generals landing, the Flemmings met him and
carried him to their house, where he stayed until the King sent for him: In
the mean while there came a Nobleman called Curcon, who would have received
her Majesty's letter to have delivered it to the King, but our General refused
to deliver it to any, but to the King himself. Then did the King send six
Elephants for the General and his attendants, whereof there was one Elephant
which was the greatest that carried a Cannopie covered with Read cloth, in
which Cannopie was a piece of Silk, and a piece of cloth of gold to carry
her Majesty's letter in, and upon this Elephant none did ride but he that
carried the letter. The General rid upon another with a guide before him,
and upon the rest some did ride and some did not, for it is very uneasy
riding upon them, their backs are so broad, and they so great and tall.

The King did likewise send his Trumpets and other Music which played before
the General to the Court, and there was twenty other that carried streamers
of silk of diverse colors, according to that country manner. So the General
entering into the first gate of the Court rested himself there, until the
King had notice of his coming, who presently sent for him, and four other of
the principal men about the General, who when they had brought him to the
King, came back for the presents, which were carried in by the Merchants
appointed for that purpose.

And after they had passed three courts, they came into a place covered with
Cannopies, adjoining to the Kings Gallerie, where the King satte, and after
they had given Doulat to the King, and the King resaluted them according to
their Country fashion, which is by lifting both their hands above their
heads, they satte down to dinner, where they had great cheer, and to the
number of two or three hundredth several dishes of meat, baked, roasted, and
boiled: The Dishes and Cups wherein they were served, were most of goulde,
and of a metal much like to Bell metal, which is dearer then goulde, every
dishe covered, some with Purslain of China. Their drink is called Aracke, and
is very strong, and is not to be drunk without water, yet that which is
generally drunk in the country is nothing so strong, nor so wholesome.

The King asked our General if our Queen were married, and how long she had
reigned, which when the General had answered by his interpretor, the King
wondered. The King likewise told the General, if the words in her Majesty's
letter came from the heart, he had cause to think well thereof. Dinner being
ended, the King caused his Damsels to dance, and his women to play Music
unto them, who were richly adorned with Bracelets and Jewels, and this was a
great favor: for he does not usually let them be seen to any. The King did
likewise give unto our General a fine white Roabe, and a Tucke, imbrodered
with gold very ritchly: also a great Girdell and two Crises, all which one of
his Noblemen put on in the Kings presence, and in this manner he departed the
Court and went aboard; and the King sent him aboorde a Bullock, and great
store of fresh fish. So that to conclude, he did receive her Majesty's letter
with great kindness, and entertained our General with greater state then he
is accustomed to do to other nations, as we might perceive by diverse
Ambassadors that came thither whilst we were there.

The 5. of June Captain Pope went a shore for one of our men which was lest
in the town all night by his own negligence, for the General did fear
because he spoake Portugale, and that there were Portingalls in the town,
that he might make known unto them something which might be prejudicial to
the Fleet, Master Pope dined this day with the King, who gave him a Heyffer
to carry aboorde with him.

The 7. day of June, after the General had license under the Kings hand both
for the safe landing of all our merchandise, without paying any custom or
toale, as also that we might buy and sell of the country people, without let or
molestation: then did Captain Hauers, Master Pope, Henry Middleton, and
Master Starkey take a house, wherein to lay their Merchandise.

The 8. day of June, the General went a shore to lodge there.

The 11. day of June, the King did anoint the General with rich ointment,
and called him his son.

About this time one Thorougood in our Admiral was araigned, and found guilty
of mutiny and comtempe, and therefore was condemned to be hanged; but by great
entreaty he was forgiven.

The 13. day the General went to the young Prince, which dwells half a mile
from his father, and the General gave him a piece of plate, A pair of hangers
and a sword, the Prince entertained him kindly, gave him a roabe and a
crises, and gave unto them which came in with him ruckes of callico Lawne.

The 17. day of June, one Curcon a principal man in that country and diverse
others, came aboard our ships to see them, but especially to see the Susan,
whom the General had offered to the King to sell, for a certain quantity of
Pepper, but could not agree, so after they had banqueted aboard the Admiral,
and dyned aboorde the vice Admiral, they departed with a peale of ordinance.

The 19. day the Admiral received a boats lading of Pepper which was the
first was bought, the price was 64. Rialles of eight the Bahar, which is of our
weight, reckoning two hundred Catties to a Bahar and every Catty thirty one
Ounces, is three hundred eighty seven pound and a half, five score to the
hundred.

During the time we were at Dachem the King desired to have our Pinnace go to
Pedeir, accompanied with a Portugalles frigate, to take if they might rouers at
sea, which did rob his subjects, and did send to the value of 100. Marks in
gold, for those that should be employed in that business, and because the
General sent the Pinnace with 14. or 15. men (of whom Gabriel Towerson was
Captain) but did no service. Therefore the General would have given the King
that money again but he would not receive it by any means, saying what he
gave, he gave, and would not take again.

And at the same time there was seven or eight hundred houses burnt at sundry
times in Dachem while we were there.

Therefore the General bought an oulde stone house bui^te it and covered it
with slate, and at our coming away gave it the king, the ground and house
cost almost one hundred pound starling.

The General having intelligence of the price and goodness of Pepper at
Priaman and seeing the small quantity that was to be gotten at Dachem, sent the
Susan thither with our small Pinnace to bring news of her success, and because
Captain Hauerd was lately dead, Henry Middleton was appointed Cape Merchant in
his place.

The 24. day of June there came into the road of Dachem a Flemmish Pinnace
which had lost her Admiral, of which Fleet one Spilbacke of Middle-bourough
was General, she was of the burden of fifty tun, and had but three men and
two boys in her, which Pinnace our General bought, for they mistrusted they
should not hear of their General again.

There came also into the road of Daehem a great ship of Saint Mallos in
France of the burden of four hundred tun. The General his name was
Mounser de Bardeler, they lost their vice Admiral by Shipwreck upon the
Maldeus and departed from Dachem for France with about 14. tun of Pepper,
some small quantity of Sinamon, and some Indico, so that he had not half of
his lading.

The 8. day of September, came into this road two flemish ships from Seylon
with Sinamon unto whom did belong the Pinnace that our General bought, and
because our General had resolved to go for Malacca, he did take the Admiral
of the flemmings with him being about 200, tun and very well manned, and in
consideration thereof to have the 8. part of what was taken, and for our own
fleet the General had compounded that the company should have the sixth part.

The 11. day of September, our Admiral, vice Admiral, Rear Admiral, and the
flemish ship and Pinnace departed hence for the straightes of Malacca our
general dangerously sick. Captain Pope dyed. During the time of the
Generalles absence, the French men had raised the price of Pepper, from 24.
Tayes the Bahar to 27. and 30. and 32. so that we were forced to buy some of
that price.

The 3. day of October, being in the straites of Mallacca the Hector espied a
great ship toward evening which came from S. Thoma, and was bound for
Malacca, and the next morning yielded themselves without any resistance, or so
much as any one man hurt, this day we began to unlade her, and had out of her
950. packes of Calico, and Pentadoes, besides many great chestes with
Merchandise, all which was upon her orlops, But her hold was full of Rice, and
because of a storm, that did arise we were forced to leave her with that great
abundance of Rice, and with store of victuals as Porke, Butter, Cheese, Ruske,
conserues, suckets, hens in pickle, hens preserved with store of Sinamon water,
and palmeto Wine: the name of this ship was the Saint Anthony, and of the
burden of 700. tun: and it was strange to see the number of men, women and
children that were in her not so few as 600. persons whereof there was but a
few Portingalles, the rest passengers and People of these countries. And in 6.
days we had discharged her of the best of her lading, and would have taken
more if we had had time and place. Thus our fleet returning to Dachin the 28
of October, our General gave order, for the shipping as well of such
Merchandise as came out of England and was vnsould, as also all such Pepper,
and Sinnamon as was bought in the absence of the fleet, and made what speed
possible might be for our departures thence. At this time came our Pinnace
from Priaman with letters to our General, where was good news, both for the
price and quantity of Pepper, upon the receite whereof the General sent the
Pinnace which we bought of the flemmings to Priaman, with some of the prised
goods and other commodities.

The King of this Country is very rich intreasure, and strong in the number
of men, he has great store of Ordinance of Brass, and those very great and
Massey, their Laws are severely inflicted upon them that offend, either by
delivering them to the Elephantes to be devoured or cutting of their Noses, and
ears, according to the haynousnesse of the offense. They bury their dead with
great solemnity, and mourn over their graves certain days, setting up at
each end of their Graves either one or two stones, carved according to the
ability of the person, and they are buried together in families. The people
are very subtle and cunning in bargaining, and unconstant in all their
words, for they will sell one thing to diverse men, and take earnest of them
all; and if another will give any thing more, he shall have it. Their coin is
goulde and lead, that of goulde they call Mass, six of them for a Royal of
eight: Those of Lead they call Cashe, whereof 2100. makes a Mass, so that a
Copaine is the fourth part of a Mass, being 525. Cashe, for which you may buy
Herbs and Fruits, and Fish: every day in the week is a market day for
victuals, not so much as Friday which they call their Good-day; but they keep
no shoppes open for Merchandise on that day. There is great store of Hens,
Buffles and Bullockes, yet very dear, a Hen at nine pence or twelve pence,
Buffels at two Tayes and a half, which is thirty shillings starling, Eggs,
eighteen or twenty for nine pence: and at our coming away, fourteen for
nine pence: Rice is brought from other places thither, as good Merchandise, and
is sold by the Bambue, six or seven Bambues for nine pence, every Bambue
being an Ale quarte; So that in this place there is neither merchandise nor any
thing else good cheap of it self, the country is very unwholesome, that
almost it may be said of it, as it is said of Malacca, few come thither, but
either loose hide or hair: here we lost ten or twelve men out of our ship.
There are Elephants in greater number and bigger stature, then in any of those
parts, which are the chief strength of this land, the greatest is ruled with a
little Boy, having a stick with a hook at the end, and is of the greatest
understanding of any beast living: as for their strength, I did see one draw
the Kings Frigate laden with Pepper, which was a ground, being ten or twelve
tun, very easily. The King takes pleasure to see them fight, as likewise in
Cock-fighting, at which game they lay a hundred pound, or a hundred and fifty
pound Starling on a Cocks head. Their Ships, Sails, Mastes, Anchors, and
Cables, are all of wood.

Malies speech, such as is used in these Indies.
1. Satu. 2. Dua. 3. Tiga. 4. Vmpat 5. Lema. 6. Nam. 7. Toufeurs. 8. Delapan.
9. Simbalan. 10. Sapula. 11. Sablas. 12. Duo blas. 13. Tiga blas. 14. Vmpat
blas, etc. 100. Saratus. 1000. Sariba. Pege, Go. Mar, Come hither. Barapa,
How sell you. Iam, A Hen. Tellor, Eggs. Deduc, Sit down. Mana pege, whether
go you. Harry, A day, Campan, A Ship. Praw, A Boat. Barass, Rice. Ladda,
Pepper. Ladda sula, White Pepper. Tanna, Earth. Roma, A house. Macan, Eat.
Babbe, Porcke. Pedang, A Sword. Cheremin, A Glass. Baick, Good. Teda baick,
Not good. Carron, A bag. Tally, A Cord. Suda, Quickly. Isuc, To morrow.
Bree, Give me. Rotan, that which they bind their houses with. Cring, Dry.
Air, Water. Appe, Fire. Attowan, Sir. Roge, Sultan, The King. Taw, I
understand you. Tida tau, I do not understand. Gyngo, A Jews Harp. Sussu,
Milk.
When we were ready to depart this Road, we had a hundred and foure-score men
dead in the whole Fleet.

The 11. of November we wayed anchor altogether, and the 13 of the same month,
we parted with our General and Vize-Admirall, they went to Priaman where the
Susan did lade, and from thence to Bantam (for there is the best sail for such
commodities as were taken in the Prise, of any place in all the Indies) and we
for England: Deus vortat been.

The 11. of December we had the Moonsoon or trade wind, and so continued
sailing before the wind unto the first of January, after which time we found
the wind variable, being in the height of 20. degrees to the South of the line.

The 11. of January having a storm in the night, we had six Corpus Sanctus,
so called by the Portingals; whereof three were upon our Maine top Maste head,
two on our fore-top, and one upon our flagge staff, they seemed to us to be as
big as the biggest Stars, and are never seen but in storms, and vanish
away before the storm ends: if they be seen in the cheanes or shrowds of
the ship, it is a sign the storm is of longer continuance, if in the highest
tops, it is likewise a sign the storm is ended, and so we found it for
certain.

About this time our Master Gunner, and an other of the Gunner room dyed.

The 13. day we saw two Marmaides, and as we judged them, they were Male and
Female, because the Moss of one of their heads was longer then the other,
their heads are very round, and their hinder parts are divided like two
legs, they say they are signs of stormy weather; and so we found it, For the
17. day following we had a great storm with a contrary wind which continued
4. days.

The 22 the French ship which we left at Dachem ouertooke us, being in the
height of 33. and a half and about 250 or 300 leagues from Cape de bona
Esperance who was glad of our company, both in regard their ship was so leake,
that they were feign to pumpe almost continually, as also they had hope to be
relieved of us with victualles for they had nothing but Rice and water: we
caught daily for six weeks space great store of fish more then we could
eat, as of Albecores, Bonitos and Dolphins.

From the 22. to the 30. we had a fair wind at E. S. E on which day being in
34 and a half we had a great storm, and as it was great, so it was sudden
before we could take in our sails which makes them dangerous, we lay at
Hull two days, after which time we had a fair wind at E and by S. being
about 60. leagues from Cape de bona Esperance.

The 3. of February one of our men going to the top mast head espied the Cape
de bona, etc as also two Holland ships, to our great joy and comfort, for
whom we stayed, and whereas before, the French and we had resolved to go into
Soldania road the next morning, by reason of their company, we shapte our
course for S. Hellena. These two ships had been at Paetania where they laded
pepper, and at the Molucos where they had Cloves, and upon the coast of China
where they bought Silks both raw and twisted, so that their lading was very
rich. The Admiral being of the burden of 600. tun, and the other 200. tun,
both well appointed with men and Ordinance, saving that some of their men were
sick, and when we had toulde them that our Admiral, and vice Admiral, were
gone to Bantam, they told us of a certain they should soon be laden, and at
a low price, for they came from thence, and at their first coming thither, the
Country thought they had come thither to buy Pepper, but when they saw they
were laden already, they would have soulde it for any price, so that in regard
of the Merchandise our Genenerall carries with him (which is the prize goods)
and the great quantytie of Peper which they have no means to utter, there is
no doubt by the grace of God, but they shall be laden good cheap, and in
very short time, Amen.

The 20. day of Februarye we had sight of Saint Hellena and the twentye one
day we anchored in the road, where we delivered unto the Frenchmen, and
unto the Hollanders such victualies to relieve them as we could spare, which
was six hogsheades of Porke, two hundredth of Stockfish, one hogshead of
Beans, and five hundred of bread, whereof the hollanders were in great want.
This Island is not an earthly Paradise as it is reported, but it is a place of
good water, and some Lemmon trees, and Fig trees, planted by the Portingalles,
and great stoare of goats and hogs, and partridges, but not to be gotten
without great labor and pains, for they are wild, and the Island full of
great high hills. The greatest refreshing in this place is fish in great
abundance, so that all our ships have taken in one day four hundred fish,
here did one Moore die, which was one of our Master his mates, he was sick
ever since we came from Dachin.

The 9, day of March, the Frenchmen departed this road.

The 14. day of March, the General of the flemmings Anchor came home, which
caused us to depart thence the same day, for their men were well recovered and
refreshed.

The 21. day of March, we had sight of the Ascension Island which lies in eight
degrees to the South of the Equinoctial.

The 28. and 29 very little wind.

The 30. day of March, we pasled the Equinoctial line, with a fine gale which
is the fourth time we passed it.

The first of April calm.

The 3.4. and 5. very calm, much rain, and the wind very mutable being in
2. degrees to the Northward of the line.

The 6.7.8. and 9. a fresh gaile.

The 21. day of April, we entered the Saragoss sea being in 19. degrees.

The 25. day we passed the Tropickes, the same day one of our men died.

The last of April we were in 30. degrees, and the next day we had a great
gaile with some rain.

The 15. day of May, we were in 40. degrees and in the height of Flore, and
Corues, here the winds were variable and very cold.

The 25. day we saw a small ship but could not speak with her.

The first of June, we were in 44. degrees. having a good gaile of wind at the
South-west, we holding our course North-east.

The 5. day we sounded, and found ground at 94. fadome.

The eight day of May, we had sight of the Lizard, and so with out stay to the
Downs, and from thence into the river to Woolwich, God be praised for it, and
send the rest home in safety.

Certain words of Pegu language.
Mugaru, what call you it. Kidnan tiuan, Give me bread. Fegoe, a Catte. Boon,
A Knife. Tobacu, A Pen. Slappoit, A Book. Pappoit, A Table book. Memuru, What
is your name? Talla, A Chest. Tene, A Pillow. Tayongabalon, a Maste. Pomee,
Breeches. Cheochum, Stockins. Botoway, A Thombe. Toway, a fist. Cadup, a head.
Suck, hair of the head. Slagota, the ear. You, you, I, I. Moat, eyes. Tegla, By
and by. Ciniaut, Let me see. Catu, The Moon. Shenon, A Star. Yacata, The
morning. Keka, Good. Kecho, sit down. Cacadoe, The palm of the head.
Sanimbodoway, the nail of the hand. Nepoe, Sir. Mucherow, how sell you.
Cabang, A Ship. Aw, aw, what say you? Braw, A Woman. True, A Man. Fekee, A
Whore. Oiara, I will go. Tamonra, Farewell. Keag, God. Cling, Clang, Much.
Nung, nung, come hither Cook, Come hither, Clea, Dog. Cle, Bite. Kleg, A
Hog. Togatu, Noone. Daick, Water. Carrow toway, wash hands Ksole, To spit.
Stcake, Sleep. Notada, Arise. Tarangcatu, A door. Poctarang, open the door.
Dotarang, shut the door. Chulay, let it down. Downang, Take up.
A note of the men's names deceased out of the Dragon.
1 William Thomson. 2 Job: Harket. 3 William Allin. 4 Raphe Arden. 5
Christopher Scot. 6 Edward Mayor. 7 Thomas May. 8 John Pegoune. 9 John Johnson.
10 Philip Salisbury. 11 Edmund Dauies. 12 Richard Ioanes. 13 Daniell
Richardson. 14 John Clackson. 15 Robert Poppe. 16 John Web. 17 John Humber.
18 William Burrowes. 19 Matthew Perchet. 20 Edward Keall. 21 Nicholas Williams.
22 Peter Bennet. 23 Leonard Nichols. 24 Robert Dame. 25 John Iudson. 26 William
Barker. 27 William Barret. 28 William Ridge. 29 Ralphe Salter. 30 Jeremy Gaufe.
31 Henry Thickpenny. 32 Henry Brigges. 33 Rice Williams. 34 Martine Topsaile.
35 M. VVilli. Bradbanke 36 Richard Androwes. 37 M. Tho: Pulle^ preach. 38
Ieames Fullar. 39 William Winter. 40 William Hall. 41 John Hankin. 42 Richard
Exame. 43 Robert Hill. 44 John VVoodall. 45 John Ieane. 46 Robert Keachinman.
47 Ieames Cauerly. 48 John Hope. 49 John Trincall. 50 John Duke. 51 Martaine
Cornelison. 52 Launslet Tailor. 53 John Settell. 54 William Burrowes. 55
Perceuall Stradling. 56 John Harrice. 57 Frauncis Pormoth. 58 Edward Baddiford.
59 Thomas Price. 60 Phillip Goulding. 61 Roger Morris. 62 Stephen Burdall. 63
Nicholas Ragwood. 64 George Wattes. 65 Miles Berry. 66 William Mounke.
A note of the men's names deceased out of the Hector.
1 John Robinson. 2 Thomas Dassell. 3 Ieames Iefferes. 4 Morris Web. 5
Matthew Starkey. 6 John Middleton. 7 Thomas Appollow. 8 John Fishaker. 9 George
Parsons. 10 Walter Cobbe. 11 Edward Holte. 12 Richard Marshall. 13 John
Osseuer. 14 Morris Hammont. 15 Thomas Wilkinson. 16 William Jones. 17 Edmund
Faurcliffe. 18 Roger Moore. 19 Robert Ashplie. 20 Peter Johnson. 21 Adam
Children. 22 Robert Burche. 23 Henry Great. 24 Nicholas Frank. 25 William
Predam. 26 Emanuell Sims. 27 John Harris. 28 May. Henry Napper. 29
Christopher Cadde. 30 Thomas Pinchbanke. 31 Rowland Hills. 32 Oliver Adams. 33
John Endick, Master. 34 John Russell. 35 John Martin. 36 John Coman. 37 John
Holliday.
A note of the men's names deceased out of the Ascension.
1 William Leake. 2 William Pizing. 3 William Whitting. 4 Gabriell Stone. 5
William Hambling. 6 Edward Carricke. 7 Arnold Malyn. 8 William Morgan. 9 Robert
Sauadge. 10 John Verker. 11 Richard Burrice. 12 John Griffeth. 13 Michaell
Nicholson. 14 John Fare. 15 Thomas Daurell. 16 John Row. 17 Robert Double. 18
Robert Cooper. 19 John Hampton. 20 Thomas Cocklim. 21 William Betty. 22 Robert
Batman. 23 John Badby. 24 Richard Horton. 25 John Syclemore. 26 William
Williamson. 27 Richard Hamond. 28 Thomas Eueret. 29 Augustine Jordan. 30 Thomas
Way. 31 Methewsale^ Mountioy 32 William Brune Capt. 33 Thomas Ward. 34 Thomas
Scriuen. 35 William Maler. 36 Robert Pope, Captain. 37 John Reddoe. 38 Thomas
Salter.
A note of the men's names deceased out of the Susan.
1 Henry Page. 2 Christopher Scult. 3 John Church. 4 John Foster. 5 Edward
Seely. 6 Martaine Ioxes. 7 Gilbert Crippin. 8 Richard Pope. 9 John Smith. 10
Marchus Flood. 11 Nicholas Sims. 12 Edward Steel. 13 Richard Bowyer. 14
Michaell Allen. 15 Richard Smally. 16 Thomas Wilson. 17 Richard Spencer. 18
Thomas Ioanes. 19 Ieames Sket. 20 Richard Whitehead. 21 Robert Michel. 22 John
Earl. 23 Christopher Androws 24 Jacob Johnson. 25 Anthony Younger. 26 Robert
Powell. 27 John Bishop. 28 Morgan Priddis. 29 William Haward. 30 Richard Sprat.
31 Henry Johnson. 32 Richard Egleston. 33 Ieames Vpgraue. 34 John Goulding. 35
John Brown. 36 John Haward Cap. 37 Phillip Winscombe. 38 John Samon. 39 John
Fousticke.
FINIS.

