THE LITTLE MEMORIAL, CONCERNING THE GOOD AND FRVITFVLL USE OF THE SACRAMENTS.

Wherein Be handled such defects as some persons commit in the use of them, and
the remedies therein to be practiced.

Composed in Spanish, by the R. Father FRANCIS ARIAS of the Society of Jesus,
and newly translated in to our English tongue.

Printed at Roan. 1602

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
LEWIS of GRANADA, that excellent and divine Beseleel of our time for the
building and polishing Exodus 31.
of the spiritual tabernacle of Christ's church, among many other his notable
monuments, intiteled one: The Memorial of a christian life. The first part
whereof entreating principallye of the Sacraments of Penance, and the sacred
Communion, was to the singular benefitte of our country, translated into the
English tongue. God whose hand is not abbreuiated, has in Esai. c. 59.
the same nation, raised him up a companion, like an other Ooliab, for the
Exodus c. 31.
prosecuting of the same work: one of whose small treatises I have likewise
translated, as desirous to inriche our country with so singular a treasure:
and because it is an Addition to a former work, and so by the Author called: a
name nothing fitting it now, when it comes forth alone, therefore have I
thought good after the imitation of that learned man, especially because as
his, so this also contains a brief note, of that which every good christian
ought often to practice, concerning the Sacraments of Penance, and the holy
Communion, to put it forth with the title of a Memorial: and the name (little) I
have added, both for distinction from the former, and also for that it is
comprised in a far less quantity. And although denied it can not be, that
not only GRANNADA, but many others, have learnedly entreated of the same
subject, yet who knows not, that as men's veins be diverse in writing, so
likewise their affections in readinge not all one, and therefore both with
profitte and pleasure, many good works may be published of the same matter,
the latter either for method, perspicuitie, or some other notable thing,
adding somewhat which in the former was wanting, and as it were with Ruth
gathering up Ruth. c. 2.
such ears of corn, as slipped from the reapers hands: and that such labors
may fruitfullie be enterprised: beside reason, and common practice, we have
also the example of the four Evangelists, who by direction of the holy Ghost,
as with singular unity, so with profitable variety, wrote the same life and
death of our Savior Christ. This book therefore, though it entreats of
Confession and Communion, the subject of diverse excellent discourses, yet is it
worthy to be embraced, seeing the manner and scope thereof, is of that quality,
as I think few can read it, that will repent their small pains employed, and
some happily be of opinion, that albeit others with S. John came first to the
John 20. v. 4.
monument, yet that this author with Saint Peter entered first in: and all such,
whose hearts God shall so effectually touch, as that they will not only read,
but also carefully practice, may with much more reason bless the time, that
they met with so heavenly a master, for the saving of their own souls, then
ever did David bless Abigail and her wise speech, hindering him from the
killing 1 Reg. 15. ^. 32.
of an other ma^s body. The principal intent of this Memorial is, to inflame
all with the love of the Sacraments, and to stir up our dull spirits, often to
repair unto those divine fountains of grace, from which so many and rare
benefittes do flow: to discover also the usual disorders, into which not
only those that be careless, but even the devout servants of God do
sometimes fall, when they go to confession, and to receive the blessed
Sacrament, together with singular remedies, how we may auiod al such
inconveniences, and so free our selves, more and more from sin, purchase
greater abundance of grace in this world, and eternal felicity in the world
to come: all which points he does so excellently perform, and like a divine
physician search out the secret and lurking diseases of our soul, and
prescribe such sweet and heavenly receipts, that there is almost none so void
of spiritual sense, but by reading, shall find their conscience touched: nor
any proceeded so far in piety, but that they may make great benefit of this
small treatise, and generallye all that sincerely desire the amendment of their
life, and increase of virtue, shall feel their hearts burning in them, as the
two Disciples did when our Savior walked Luc. 24. v. 32.
in their company, and opened them the Scriptures.

One thing there is which the author in discoursing of such sins, as many
confess not through culpable ignorance, has omitted, to wit the dangerous
error of many young persons, that without the knoweledge or consent of their
parents, bestow themselves in marriage: and an other no less dangerous then
the former, if not more, and that is to make privy contractes, whereof not
only such as live under the charge of their parents, but others also of all
estates and callinges be some time found guiltye. Of these points though
passing necessary, he makes no mention, because the council of Trent making
all privy contractes Ses. 24. c. 1.
of no force, has freed them from such inconveniences, which is not so here in
our country for lack of publication, a thing required by the council before
that decree can take any place: and therefore I have thought good to say
somewhat, both concerning the one and the other, (because they be sins very
rife, and be accompanied with many and great mischifes, especially the second,
as discord betwixt houses, ruins of families, the perpetual state of
adultery, and not seldom a continual torment of conscience, as daily
experience teaches) to the end that such as fear God, and be desirous to save
their souls, may know what herein they have to follow and practice.

As it is certain, that the marriage of children (being of years requisite,
and no other impediment hindering it) contracted freche without their parents
consent, is perfect matrimony, and can Council. Trid. ses. 24. cap. 1.
not either by them, or the temporal magistrate be broken: certain also that
children may sometime upon just and good causes, marry without the knowledge or
consent of their parents, as for example, when they would marry the^ to an
heriticke, and in some few other cases: so most certain it is, that usually
and for the greater part, children do very much offend God, in contractinge
marriage either without their knowledge or against the minds of their parents,
seeing it belongs to their charge to provide for their children: and their
experience and love toward them is such, that neither can they be so easily
deceived, nor yet prefer them to any matches, then such as be good, and most
convenient for their estate: and in holy scripture we read, that the marriage
of the children, was rather commanded unto the parents then unto them: for God
speaking of the Cananites says thus. Thou shall not Exodus 34. Deutr. 7.
give thy daughter to his son, nor thou shall not take his daughter for thy
son: And blessed Jacob, upon the commandment of his father Isaac, very
obedientlye married the Genes 28.
daughter of Laban, and not of such as he had forbidden.

Seeing then marriage is oftentimes with sin contracted by the children, for
lack of their parents knowledge, or consent, and sometime without any sin at
all: such as live in fear of God, and willingly would not offend him, ought
not herein to rely upon themselves, and their own partial affection, and so
to determine that in this and this case, they may with out any respect to their
parents consent, make their own choice: but let them crave the advice of some
wise and discreet ghostly father, and with humility submit themselves to his
judgment: and in any wise let them take heed that they do not herein, refuse
the resolution happily of many, and rest upon the opinion of some one whom they
have found out, because he does most fit their fancy, and best please their
passion: for that were a certain argument, that they sought not sincerely the
truth, nor the honor of God, but rather a cloak for their sin, and a few
cold fig leaves with Adam to Genes. 3. v. 7.
cover their naked souls. Parents also that be the true servants of God,
ought herein to proceed with great moderation, and not to press their
children so much with their authority, as by fear and violent means to draw
them clean contrary to their own mind and liking, for that were to take away
that christian liberty which ought to be in marriage, and without which as
shall straight ways be handled, it is no marriage at all, and what pitiful
effects follow such unfortunate matches, where the terror of the parents more
prevails, then the reasonable love and liking of the children, daily
experience does teach us.

Concerning secret marriages and contractes, as the danger is far greater, so
it deserves a deeper consideration: for many happily think, that herein either
no sin is committed, or a very little one, seeing matrimony is a thing most
free, and therefore al at their liberty to contract as they please. But herein
are they much deceived: for albeit most free it is in this sense that none
ought to be enforced thereunto, but must willingly and freely give their own
consent: and therefore if one should by any kind of violent means be
compelled to marry an other, to whom in their heart they gave no consent, most
certain it is, that it were no matrimony at all: yea the violence and fear
may be such that albeit inward consent be wrung out and gotten, yet is it not
marriage for lack of free consent. I touch this matter briefly, as being not
that whereof I mean now to entreat: if any have herein any difficulty, and
desire farther resolution, let them crave the counsel of those that be
virtuous and learned, with that purity of intention before mentioned. Yet for
all this, in other things marriage is not so free, that men or women may
either marry with whom they list, or in what manner they please. For by the
law of God, and the church, they are forbidden to marry with such as he
allied to them in certain degrees of consanguinitie and affinity: and if any
should presume so to do, besides a great mortal sin committed, the marriage
also is of no force, and their state damnable. Neither can they marry in such
manner as they please: for to omit other cases, and to speak of that which we
have now in hand. If any here in our country, contracte marriage privily,
although the marriage be of force, yet cannot the manner of doing be excused
from sin, and that such a one, as does oftentimes plunge the^ into a perpetual
misery, a point worthy to be deeply considered of al sorts of persons: for
what case can be more lamentable, then when two have contracted secretly, and
made themselves man and wife before God: and yet afterward, either upon the
dislike of their friends, or coffeehouse growing between themselves, they
go back, marry openly others, and so all their life time continue in the
state of adultery, and that without all help, in respect of any outward
court or consistory: for seeing the first marriage was secret, the church can
take thereof no knowledge and so provide no remedy. For the avoiding of this
so infinite an inconvenience, the church of God, tendering like a careful
mother the good of her children, has utterly forbidden such kinds of
contracts, as the council of Trent testifies in these words. The Ses. 21. c. 1.
holy church of God upon just causes has always detested and forbidden
secret marriages. He therefore that is the servant of God, and would not
willingly wound his soul with sin, nor offend against the precepte of the
church, nor yet cast himself into a sea of miseries, ought to refrain from
all such privy contracts, and as much as can be, to observe the decree of the
foresaid Vbi supra
council, which is to contract matrimony in the presence of a priest, and two
or three witnesses, at the least. Good counsel also it is, especially for young
persons, whose judgments are weaker, experience less, and their passions
commonly more strong, not to make so much as any secret promises of marriage,
no though conditional: as if such a portion or ioynter may be procured, or if
my friends shall be content, and such like, for process of time, much talking
of such matters, and other like accidents, make them afterward to doubt, if
any future breach happen, whether they be clear in conscience, and may
securely marry else where or no, and so al such kind of promises in
conclusion, serve for nothing else but to afflict the soul, and to weary the
conscience with many scruples: from al which miseries they be clear, that
keep themselves free from all privy contractes, and secret promises of what
manner so ever, and do never bind them selves, but in such sort as before was
mentioned: or else expect until their matrimony be publicly solemnized.

Although I said before that the state of him that was privily contracted, and
did after marry openly with an other, was without help: yet God forbid that
any should in that case despair, for God who is rich in mercy and will not
the death of a sinner like the good Samaritane, has in store oil and wine to
power into Luc. 10. v. 30.
the wounds of him that has thus pitifully fallen into the hands of thieves,
and is left half dead: and therefore though true it be, that such a one, as I
said before, has no remedy in any worldly court or consistory, yet in
the court of conscience, means are left for the saving of his sinful soul.
The medicine I confess falls out ordinarily to be very sower and sharp, yet
if men willinglye venture the loss of a limme for the preserving of the
corruptible body, though happily they fell into that extremity without any
fault of their own: no reason have they to refuse any remedy, though never so
penitential, for the saving of their immortal soul: seeing especially by
their own folly they have given themselves so deep a wound. Wherefore such as
find their conscience herein troubled, let them make choice of some excellent,
wise, discrecte, and learned ghostly father, for the well managing of this
business, being so important and dangerous. Thus much gentle reader have I
thought good to insert here in the preface, being a thing passing necessary
(and yet omitted by the Author upon the reason before mentioned) and as I
verily hope, that which will be the occasion for the preserving of such as
fear God, from many great sins, which otherwise through ignorance they might
fall into. Now no more remains, but that thou would for thy further
direction, to the end thou may avoid many impediments which hinder others
that be careless from receiving that abundant commodity which is gained by
devout frequenting of confession and the holy communion vouchsafe attentively
to peruse this small treatise, and I doubt not but that thou (...) in comparing
the Author with others of our time, that entreat of the same matter, say of him
as they did in the gospel of our Savior. Never did there Joan 7. v. 46.
man so speak as this man. If thou doubtest (as Nathaniel did of Christ) and
demand how in so small a book so great learning or devotion can be
contained: I willinglye surcease from other answers, and say with S. Philip
Come and Joan. 1. v. 46.
see: Read and judge.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
I OF the great necessity, which all christians have, often to frequent the
Sacraments of Confession and the holy Communion.

II Of a certain disorder, into which some do fall, by excusing and defending
their sins, in the sacrament of confession, and how they are therein to be
mortified.

III Of the disorder in confessing such sins as be certain, with doutfull
words, and which do not signify any sin at all.

IIII Of the disorder in confessing venial sins, without having for them any
grief, or purpose of amendment.

V Of a certain carelessness which usually is found among such as be
desirous to serve God, concerning the examination of their conscience before
confession, and the great harms which do follow thereof.

VI Of some sins of ignorance, which a man knows not, nor confesses* to
wit, to be careless to know whereunto in particular he is bound, and to omit
the works of justice and charity.

VII Of diverse kinds of wicked superstitions, not known to many, and sometimes
not confessed through culpable ignorance.

VIII Of sins committed by playing, and gaming: and beholding of vain and
hurtful sightes, into which many do fall through culpable ignorance.

IX Of other sins more secret, as pride of our own proper judgment, and
self will, which many do not know nor confess through culpable ignorance.

X Of a very profitable remedy against the harm which comes by secret
sins and that is every day to examine our conscience: and the manner how
this is to be done.

XI Of an other singular means for a man to deliver him self from secret
sins, and that his confessions may be more fruitful, and that is to have one
certain ghostly father, unto whom he ought ordinarily to confess his sins.

XII Of an other excellent remedy, to deliver our selves from the harm of
secret sins, and to supply the defects of our former confessions, and that
is with care and diligence, to make a general confession.

XIII Of such defectes as be an impediment to many which do often communicate,
that they receive not the plentiful fruit of the B. Sacrament.

XIIII How for the receiving of more abundant fruit of the holy communion,
convenient it is to purify the soul from venial sins.

XV How to receive much fruit of the blessed communion, necessary it is for a
man to prepare himself with recollection, and meditation: and what manner of
meditations are good to be used for that purpose.

XVI Of that outward reverence, humility, and modesty, with which we ought
to come unto the B. Sacrament.

XVII Of that quiet and repose, with which we ought to come unto the holy
communion: and what thanks are to be given unto God after the receiving
thereof.

XVIII How to abstain from the B. Sacrament without just cause, is an
impediment to spiritual profit: and how that neither for negligence, or lack
of sensible devotion, a man should give over the holy communion.

XIX How for scruples and vain fears, we ought not to abstain from the
sacrament of the Altar.

XX With what moderation we ought to frequent the holy communion, that we do
not therein exceed, nor do any thing contrary to due reverence: and how we
ought to leave this to the judgment of a discreet ghostly father.

XXI Of such rules as holy men prescribe, concerning the often receiving of the
B. Sacrament.

XXII Of that discretion which ghostly fathers ought herein to observe,
according to the doctrine of holy men.

XXIII Whether the holy communion ought daily to be given to some persons of
our time.

THE LITTLE MEMORIAL OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE.
Chap. I.
Wherein is briefly declared, the great necessity, which all Christians have,
often to frequent the Sacrament of Confession, and the holy Communion.

FOR as much as this book, is published for the commodity of such persons, as
be resolved to serve God, by setting down before their eyes, such means as
they have to use, both for the preserving them selves, and also proceeding
forward in his divine service: and further to exhort them, to put those means
in practice: and seeing one of them, and that of great force and efficacy, is to
frequent the Sacraments, that is, often to be confessed, and to receive the
holy communion: two things are here for this purpose, especially to be handled.

The first is, to exhort al faithful Christians, often to repair to these
holy sacraments, by declaring the great and wonderful commodities, which by
means of them be obtained. The second is, to teach and instruct them,
concerning the true and laudable use of the sacrament of Confession, and the
holy sacrament of the Altar: and because to entreat copiously of these
points, were too much for this small book, therefore touching this matter, I
intend only to speak of that, which to me shall seem most necessary, and
worthy to be noted, of such as be resolved to serve God. The first point
therefore which I mean to handle, shall be briefly to set down before our
eyes, how necessary it is, for all Christians, often to frequent the divine
sacraments of Confession, and the sacred Communion: the second shall be to
prosecute in particular, such abuses and disorders, as be more secret, and into
which, even those that be determined to serve God, do not seldom fall.

Concerning the first. Many and very effectual be the reasons, which ought to
move and invite all faithful christians to frequent the Sacraments, that is, to
confess themselves, and communicate once in eight, or fifteen days, or at
least once a month. For if they be such persons, as God has voutchsafed so to
favor, that since their last confession, they have not fallen into any mortal
sin, very necessary it is for them so to do, both to preserve themselves in
Gods grace, and to increase in the same, and also in all other virtuous and
heavenly gifts: to make themselves daiely more acceptable in the sight of God:
to be more fit instruments to set forth his glory, and to advance the good of
his Church: to make their salvation more certain: to lay up the treasure of
greater merits in eternal felicity: to procure more light, and strength, both
to know, and overcome all the temptations and deceipts of the enemies of our
soul: to do the works of virtue, with greater facility and sweetness: to
pass over this life, with more peace, and spiritual comfort: to be at our
death more assisted and helped, of God with plenty of heavenly succor: and so
finally to depart this life, with more hope of salvation, greater quiet, and
comfort of soul. For these, and such other like effects, and singular
commodities, very necessary it is, I say, that the servant of God should often
repair to the sacraments. For albeit since his last confession he has not
fallen into any mortal sin, yet certain it is, that he has committed many
venial, whereof some he does know, and others, he does not, and yet for all
that not to be excused, because he might well have known them: and these
venial or small sins, although they do not spoil the soul of gods grace,
yet do they great harm, and put a man in such a case, that he does thereby
fall the sooner into those that be mortal, as else where has been handled:
Certain In tract. 4. cap. 24.
likewise it is, that a man is continually assaulted with daiely and diverse
tentations by the devil, the world, the flesh, and our corrupt nature, which
do put him in great danger, to fall into mortal sin: and many of them be
secret, and very perilous, and therefore passing necessary it is, that he
should always have a remedy to deliver his soul from venial sins, and
great need he has of daiely strength, to resist all tentations: great need
of the continual dew of Gods grace from heaven, to mitigate his wicked
inclinations: and all this does he find in the holy Sacraments of confession,
and communion, if he do often frequent them. And although it cannot be denied,
but that there be other remedies, for the purging of venial sins, so most
certain it is, that this of frequenting the Sacraments, if it be done as it
ought, is the best, and most effectual of all other. Of the wonderful
effects, which the blessed sacrament of the Altar works in them that do
frequent it. S. Bernard gives an excellent testimony: these be his words. The
Ber. in ser. de ce. dom.
most precious sacrament of the body of our Lord, does work in us two effects:
The one is, that it does diminish the sense of venial sins: and the other
is, that it does wholly take away all consent, to mortal sins. And the holy
man, does prove this to be true, by that experience, which the servants of God
do find and feel in their own hearts, to whom he does there speak in this
manner. If any of you, do not now so often feel, neither yet so great
motions as before time you did, of anger, of envy, of carnality, and other
vices, let him give thanks to the body and blood of Christ, which he
receaveth in the holy sacrament, because this is the effect thereof, and let
him take comfort therein, for as much as God by this means does cure and make
sound the corruption of our nature. Thus writes S. Bernard. And the self same
thing is confessed by all holy men: and the general council of Trent, does
confirm the same Ses. 13. c. 8.
declaring, that the blessed Sacrament, does work this in all such, as receive
it with due preparation, to wit that it does deliver them from consenting to
tentations, pacify their passions, give them victory over their enemies,
preserve and increase the^ in good life, by giving force and strength for all
these foresaid ends. And from hence it comes that in all cities and towns,
where there be many, that often repair to the sacraments, many there be also,
which all their life long continue in Gods grace, without ever falling into any
mortal finne: And all ordinary ghostly fathers, be witnesses of this truth,
who find by experience, that christian people do receive this great commoditye
by frequenting the Blessed sacrament of the Altar with devotion and a virtuous
disposition.

These reasons aleadged, are sufficient to persuade all good Catholics though
not guilty in their conscience, of any mortal sin, often to confess themselves,
and to communicate: but if since their last being at confession they have
committed any deadly sin, then besides the former reasons, greater necessitye
have they straight ways, and without delay, to go unto the sacrament of
Confession: to wit, that by means thereof, they may come out of that damnable
state, and deliver themselus, from all those mischiefs and harms, which from
that kind of sin do grow: as to be hated of God, and to live in disgrace of
the Blessed Trinity: to be abhorred of heavenly Majesty, and to be captives
and slaves to Satan the prince of darkness: to be subject, and obedient to
his will, and to lose the great value and merits of all the good works of their
life past: to be in apparent danger of falling into greater sins, into greater
blindness, and hardenesse of heart, and finally into everlasting damnation. From
al these evils, and mischiefs, and many more, annexed to these, that man is
delivered, who after due preparation, purges his soul straight ways by
confession. And although true it be, that only by contritio^, with a purpose
to confess in time convenient, a man may deliver himself, from the state of
mortal sin: yet to have contrition without help of the sacrament, is an hard
thing, unto which few do attain: for as much, as true contrition, contains
in it self, a great hatred of sin, by reason whereof, the soul does in will
abhor and detest, all mortal sin, more then all other evils in the world,
and with all a firm purpose of amendme^t of life: and so resolutely
determines, never more to consent to any deadly sin whatsoever, neither for
interest or commodity, nor to avoid any pain or misery of this life: and
together with this, necessary it is, that the principal thing, which moves a
man to this hatred of sin, and amendment of his life, be the love of God above
all things. And because men commonly upon their forsaking of mortal sin,
do it not at the first, for this supernatural love of God, but principally
for fear of Hell and damnation: for this cause a very hard and rare thing it
is, to have contrition without the help of the sacraments: whereof it comes
to pass, that such as have sinned mortally, and go not to the sacrament of
cenfession, commonly they continue still in the same bad estate, and so be
subject to al those mischiefs and dangers, which accompany mortal sin, as
before has been said: And the reason hereof is, because ordinarily without
help of the sacraments, men ariue not to have contrition, which yet is
necessary to come out of mortal sin: but when they go to confession with that
preparation which is requisite, if their soul be infected, straight ways are
they delivered from mortal sin, and from all those mischiefs before
mentioned: for when a man confesses him self having a perfect hatred of sin,
and a firm purpose of amendment, although the principal reason which moves
him, to forsake sin, be the fear of his own damnation, yet with the help of
the sacrament, shall he obtain Gods grace: and this is that which Divines
teach, and the holy council of Trent does Ses. 14. c. 4.
declare, to wit that of attrite he becomes contrite. For such was the
infinite mercy of God, now in the law of grace, as to bestow such efficacy
upon his sacraments, that to him that wants grace, and does not of his part,
put any stop, or impediment, grace by means of them is given him, and to him
that is already in grace, the same is increased and augmented.

These be in sum, the most excellent commodities which faithful people do
gain by often repayring to the Sacraments of Confession, and communion: and
these be the pitiful and most grievous evils, from which they be delivered.
He therefore that is desirous of salvation, and resolved to serve God, and
pondereth well this point, how can he let so great commodities slip out of his
hands? how dares he adve^ture the loss of so great gain? how can he excuse
himself from frequenting confession, the spring of life, and salvation, by
means whereof he is delivered from such notable evils of death, sin, and
everlasting damnation? and such purity of soul obtained, such divine and
spiritual beawty, and such treasures of grace and glory? And how can he
contain himself and not go often to the holy Sacrament of the Altar? the
bread of life, the death of sin, the wel-spring of virtues, the medecin of
our passions, the staff and stay of our weakness, the treasure of graces, the
most pleasant repast of all heavenlye comfort, the root of immortalitye, and
the fountain of all goodness. And thus much may suffice, concerning the first
point. Now will I come to the second, which is the principal thing that I
intended to entreat of, and whereof in very deed, we stand most in need and
ought carefully to be instructed in the same.

Chap. II.
Of a certain disorder, into which some do fall, by excusing and defending
their sins, in the Sacrament of Confession, and how they are therein to be
mortified.

MY purpose is not here to note great and manifest defects, into which such as
be careless of salvation vsuallye do fall: as to come to confession without
having before hand thought upon their sins: to conceal in confession some
great sin, either for fear or worldely shame: to confess their sins
without any purpose of amendinge their former life, and to avoid al dangerous
occasions of mortal sin: which be such notable defects, and heinous sins,
that they do wholly hinder all that fruit which should come by confession, and
make it nothing worth at al, and so bound they are to confess again the self
same sins, and also that fault of sacrilege, which they then committed in
making so wicked a confession.

But my intent is, to note certain negligences and defectes, which proceed
from the wicked inclinations of our corrupt nature, and be found in such
persons as are desirous of salvation, and resolved to lead a virtuous life,
which convenient it is, that they should avoid, by mortifying the roots from
whence they do spring. One of these disorders is, for a man in confession to
excuse and defend his sins, putting upon them diverse sorts of colors, to the
end they may seem not so grievous and filthy, as in deed they be: As for
excuse of themselves, some say, that they sinned because they could not choose:
which is most false, for God does not bind any to that which is impossible.
Others say, that although they gave consent unto the sin, as in desiring of
revenge, or some unclean act, yet did that cogitation quickly pass away, and
stayed not long in their heart: and by this means, though the consent were
deliberat, yet would they be thought, not to have committed any sin, or if
they did, that it was but a small one: whereas most certain it is, that if
they did not resist the passion, but gave deliberat consent there unto, that
they sinned, though the consent continued never so small a time. And if the
thing to which they gave consent, was any notable injury to their neighbor,
or fornication, or any other such weighty matter, then was that consent a
mortal sin, and it imports not, that it continued but a little while, for
that did not proceed from his own virtue, but for that the fury of the
passion was now ended. Others excuse themselves, laying the fault upon the
Devil, saying: The Devil tempted me, and it was he that beguiled me, and made
me to sin: Others excuse themselves ascribing all the blame to their neighbors,
that gave them occasion of sinning, saying thus: If I offended god, the reason
was, because they asked me, and were so importunat that I could not excuse my
self, or it was because they first gave me disgratious and bad words, or
offered me this injury, and enforced me against my will, to return them the
like speech again and to offer them the like measure. Others defend and excuse
their sin, far worse then the former, and that is by attributing the fault
to God himself, saying: God has given me such a nature, so wicked a
complexion, and so prone to naughtines that although I do what I can, and
enforce my self never so much, yet can I not avoid these sins, nor resist
these tentations. All which is false and a great untruth, for neither the
Devil, nor any man, can compel one to sin, if freely and voluntarily of
himself, he will not sin, neither does God ever give over to bestow upon
man in this life, all that help which is necessary, and requisite, not to
consent to sin, if man himself would take the benefit thereof.

This so great a disorder in man, grows of pride, and a certain presumption,
by reason whereof, he estemeth of himself, and would also be esteemed of
others, more then is lawful, and is afraid of that confusion, and disgrace,
which for his sins he deserves. So says S. Gregory in these words: Our
hearts filled with In moral. lib. 22. c. 8. in edit. nou.
pride, if it does ought worthy of blame, that does it conceal and hide, and
would not openly confess it, to have any remedy thereof. And this disorder,
descends unto us by inheritance from Adam, for as from him, we inherit
original sin, so likewise by way of inclination do we inherit the increase
of sin, and that is to excuse the same. Adam sinned, and God very mercifully
came unto him, and demanded certain questions, to the end that by
acknowledging and confessing his fault* and accusing himself from his heart,
he might have obtained pardon. But Adam defended his sin and excused
himself, laying all the fault upon the woman: and the woman being asked, she
likewise excused herself laying the blame upon the Serpent, which was the
Devil: and and as S. Gregory says, both of them were in a certain manner Greg
ibid. supra c. 9.
willing, to lay all the sin upon God himself: for what was it else for Adam
to say, the woman which thou gave me, made me to sin, but to insinuat that
god was the cause of his sin, in that he created the woman? And for the woman
to say: The Serpent deceaved me, what was it else, but to ascribe the sin
unto God, as the cause thereof, for that he placed the serpent in Paradise? And
thus by excusing themselves in this manner, they procured against themselves,
two great evils and passing notable harms. The one was, that they did stop and
hinder the mercy of God, and obtained not pardon of their sin, at that time:
for this was the very cause why god demanded of the Devil nothing at all,
because neither would he pardon him, neither was he capable of penance: and of
Adam and Eve did he ask certain questions for that he was desirous that
they should with sorrow, have confessed their sins, and by their humble and
simple confession, not excusing it, have obtained full pardon at his hands.
The second harm which they did, was, that by excusing themselves they
increased their sin, and made it more grievous then otherwise it was: whereof
ensued, that albeit afterward through penance which they did, they were
pardoned: yet had the pardon so great a punishment annexed, as was the
destruction of the whole world, and their banishment for the space of nine
hundred and odd years upon earth, and afterward imprisonment for the space
of three or four thousand years in that place of hell called Abraham's bosom,
or Limbus patrum. In the very same manner does it fare with all the children of
Adam, that defend and excuse their sins: for by laying the fault upon his
creatures, upon adversities and tentations, they do in a certain secret
manner, attribute them to God himself, who is the maker of all creatures, and
the author of all the evils of punishment and affliction: and by these means,
do they increase and multiply their sin, and greatly stop and hinder the
mercy of God, who would pardon their offenses. For so notes S. Gregory in
these words. It is a common In Moral. vbi supra.
vice amongst men, to hide themselves for the committing of sin, and after
the committing being asked, to deny it, and being convinced thereof, to defend
and excuse it, by which the sin is increased.

This so wicked a passion, and disorder, we ought to overcome and mortify, by
confessing all our sins plainly and clearly, with all the greatness they
have, and to lay all the fault upon our selves, confessing our selves to be the
true and entire cause of them, and to attribute all that we do unto our
selves: for although true it be, that the Devils do tempt us, and men persuade
and provoke us to wickedness, yet is man for all that always free, and at
liberty, and has sufficient help from God to withstand tentations, and not to
consent unto any sin at all, and therefore ought he to accuse and blame
himself and not any creature else whatsoever. Let him not therefore say in his
defense, the Devil did tempte me, nor my neighbor gave me occasion, and made
me to sin: but let him say from the bottom of his heart, I am he that did the
sin, and all the fault is wholly mine, because voluntarily and of mine own
free will I gave consent thereunto: and whereas it was in my power to have
shunned such dangers and occasions, which I ought to have done, yet did I not
avoid them: and being able against the tentations of the enemy, to have helped
and strengthened my self with prayer, penance, works of mercy, spiritual
talk, and reading of good books: yet did I not for that purpose, use either
these or any other such like means, which God did inspire into my soul, and
therefore all the fault is mine own, and all the cause of my harm remains
in my self: for that saying of Saint Chrysostom is most true, that none Tomo
5. hom. quod nemo leditur. etc.
receaueth any hurt but of himself, because there is not any other true harm
or damage indeed, but that which sin causes, and that never can be, except
a man does willingly consent thereunto. And when a man confesses his sins
with this kind of purity, let him have great care that he do not either
pretend or desire to be accounted humble for so doing, or to be esteemed for a
good penitent man, for this were to fly from one kind of pride, and to fall
into an other: but let his principal intent be, to be taken for a sinner, and
to be for his sins confounded, reprehended, and to have spiritual physic
given him, as to a sinner: Of which mind of his, it will be a good argument
and testimony, if when his ghostly father does blame and rebuke him for his
sins, and entreat him as a sinner, he take it patiently and well: for if he
accuse him self plainly as a sinner, and yet will not be dealt withal nor
reprehended as a sinner, it is a sign that he does not confess or accuse
himself sincerely from his heart. This is the opinion of Saint Gregory whose
words be these. True confession which we 22. Moral. cap. 20. in edit. noua.
Cassian. col lat. 18. c. 11.
make of our sins, is tried by the reprehension which is given us, for those
sins which we confess: for if being rebuked for them we defend them with
pride: certain it is, that we confessed them not sincerely, for it is the
sin of pride, not willingly to hear that at the mouth of an other which a
man does willingly confess of himself. And if when we confess our selves to
be sinners, we did likewise with true humility acknowledge our selves for such
when we are blamed or rebuked for our sins, never would we deny or defend
them. Thus writes S. Gregory: out of whose words we learn what the intent of
a true penitent ought to be in confessing his sins simply and plainly, and
without excusing them, and that is, not to be accounted just, or to be
reverenced for such a one, but to be confounded, humbled, and reprehended, as a
sinful man.

So great is the virtue of this sincere and humble confession, that by means
thereof a sinner does penetrate the heavens, is presented in the sight of God,
and does provoke his infinite mercy to pardon and discharge him, from all pain
due to his sins, and to bestow upon him great rewards: for as poor beggars
the more they do lay open their pouertye and show their soars, to men of
mercy and compassion, so much the more they move their pity, and receive from
them great alms: even so when sinful men do discover the misery of their
sins, and more amplify and stand upon them, the more they do blame and
accuse themselves for committing them: so much the more do they incline the
clemency of Almighty God, to take compassion and pity upon them, and to
bestow upon them in greater abundance, the most precious gifts of his divine
grace. Very well was David acquainted with this quality of God, when he spoke
thus unto him. Pardon my Psalm. 24.
sin O Lord, for it is great. He excused not his sin, nor made it less,
but did plainly confess it and that with all the grieuousnesse thereof, the
more to move the pity of God to pardon and forgive him. An excellent witness
also is that good thief, who hanging upon the Cross confessed his sins, and
not with excuses laid the fault upon others but accused and blamed himself,
acknowledging himself worthy of all shame and punishment for them, as himself
plainly declared, speaking thus to the other thief. We do justly suffer this
punishment, Luke 23. ver. 41.
for our own wicked life does deserve it. And for this humble and contrite
confession of his, he received straight ways pardon for his sins, and was in
a moment absolved from all punishment both eternal and temporal, and had also
that day bestowed upon him the possession and joys of the kingdom of heaven.
These be the wonderful effects, which a pure confession void of all excuses,
and which proceeds from a contrite and humble heart works in the sight of
God: for it does forthwith pacify God, take away his anger and wrath, which he
had conceived against the sinner, reuoketh all his threatninges of everlasting
torments pronounced against him, and turns them into mercy, into the gifts
of grace, and eternal glory. Wherefore great reason we have to crave of God,
praying thus with David. Suffer not my Psalm. 140.
heart O Lord, to consent unto such malicious and proud words, that I do
excuse and defend my sins.

Chap. III.
Of the disorder in confessing such sins as be certain, with doubtful words,
and which do not signify any sin at all.

AN other disorder which usually springs also from the same root, and into
which those also do fall, that come often to the Sacrament of Penance, is,
for a man to confess his sins with such kind of words, as signify not any
fault, nor import any sin at all, as for example, to say: I confess my self
of these my faults and imperfections. I accuse my self, that I have had little
patience, little humility, and small charity. I accuse my self, that I have not
had more attention at my prayers, nor more care in keeping of my tongue and
mine eyes, and that I have not more speedely dipatched out of my heart, vain
and dishonest thoughts. I accuse my self, that I did not such a work, with
all that humility, and charity, which I might have done. I accuse my self, if
I have spoken any idle word or backbited any. These and other such like
words, do not certainly signify any fault or sin at al, because a fault
and sin is then committed, when a man does not that to which he is bound,
and fails in that, which he ought to do, and which is of necessity and
precept: but as for all these former words, and such like, one may truly say
the^, who has done all that which in rigor he was bound unto, albeit he has
not done all that which he might have done, nor yet all that which was better
and of more perfection; because God does not bind a man in all cases under
pain of mortal sin, no nor venial neither, to do all that which he might
do, nor yet all that which he may, and is able to do, neither all that which
is the better, and of most perfection: and therefore if any should confess
himself, not using any other manner of words then the former, he could not be
absolved, because he confessed not plainly any sin at all.

When one that goes often to confession, and amongst other sins some he has
that be doubtful: concerning which he is not certain, whether he gave any
consent or no, or was careless in making resistance: in this case to confess
them with such kind of words as before are set down, is not inconvenient, nor
any cause why for so doing one should be blamed, seeing other sins, whereof he
is certain he confesses them plainly and distinctly. And if it fall so out,
that since his last confession, he cannot call to mind any new sins, then may
he confess some of his life past, to the end that he may have absolution,
which without specifying of some sin cannot be given.

But concerning sins that be certain, and which the penitent knows full
well that he has committed, he must not use any such manner of words, but
confess them in plain and express terms, and such as do clearly set down
the sin, saying thus: I accuse my self, that I have bin negligent in keeping
of my heart: that I have not repelled vain thoughts, with such care as I ought
to have done: that in the time of prayer, I have not had that attention, and
devotion, which I was bound to have had: that I have not resisted the motions
of anger, of pride, of envy, with such patience, humility, and charity, as I
ought to have done, that I have been cold in doing good works, and some
which I ought to have done, I have upon sloth omitted: and in other some which
I have done, I have not had that virtuous end, and intent which I ought to
have had, in seeking for the glory of God in them, but rather my self, being
moved to do them for mine own pleasure and inclination, or seeking in them
mine own honor and content: I have with superfluous appetite sought for
commodities and pleasure of my body, in meat, drink, apparel, rest, and other
recreations, not observing in all these things, that moderation to which I was
bound: Of adversity, punishment, or any disgrace, I have bin too much grieved
and sad, and not conformed my self so much to the will of God as I ought. Of
such things as have fallen out according to mine own will and desire, as for
that they brought me honor, and procured commendation, or were things of
delight and pleasure, I have rejoiced in some of them vainly, and not referred
them as I ought, to the glory of God, and the good of mine own soul: My
tongue I have not kept so carefully as I ought, and without any necessity or
profit of souls have I spoken words in mine own praise: curious questions
have I demanded, and idle words have I uttered.

These and such like, be the ordinary venial sins, into which Gods servants
that live with care, and in the fear of God, do often times in a week, yea
and in one day fall into (for those which lead their life without any such
care, do commit others more grievous) and with such words as these that
signify and import sin, ought they to confess them: and a true desire to
make their confession as is requisite, humility of heart, grief and sorrow
for sin, and that light which daily they gain in the spiritual profit of
their soul will clearly lay open before their eyes these and other such like
sins of their hearts, and will teach them fit words to express them, and
make them appear with all their deformity as is convenient: because in
sacramental confession the penitent is witness against himself, and the
witness being lawfully demanded, is bound to tell all the truth, and that
in clear and plain words: He is likewise an advocate for God against
himself: and the office of an aduocat is, to allege all the reason and
justice that can be said for his own side, and plainly and truly to open all the injustice and little reason that is on the contrary part. And when a man
does so in confession, then does he give true evidence against himself,
discovering and laying open all the grieuousnesse of his sins: and he that
does behave himself like a wise advocate in Gods cause against himself,
alleging all such reasons as he has to love and obey God, and confess with
true sorrow of heart, al his great ingratitude, and malice, with all such
considerations and circumstances as do increase them, which is but reason,
then does God of his infinite goodness and piety take upon him man's cause,
makes himself his advocate and patron, and gives sentence in his favor,
pronouncing him absolved and free from all his sins, from everlasting pain
and confusion, yea and sometimes from the temporal pain also which for them he
deserved. And thus in this court and judgment, there passes a wonderful
strange secret, to wit, that if a sinner hides his sins, and does not
declare and open them as he ought, then do they remain and be reserved to be
laid open and punished at the day of judgment, and himself to be confounded
before that terrible tribunal, and to be punished for them in the sight of
heaven and earth: and if on the contrary a man does now confess and declare
them with sorrow of heart, then does God hide and cover them in such sort that
they shall never be seen more either of God or men for any punishment or
confusion to such a penitent sinner. For he that confesses his sins in this
manner, God does so deal with him as though he had never sinned, and does give
him so good a countenance, love him so entirely, so bountifully and so
liberally, bestow upon him the treasures of his grace and glory, as though he
had never offended him in his whole life. O with what great reason did David
say, Blessed Psalm. 31.
are they, whose iniquities are pardoned, and whose sins are covered. They are
termed covered, because now they are not, and albeit sometime they were, yet
now shall they never more be seen to the hurt, or damage of the penitent
sinner.

Chap. IIII.
Of the disorder in confessing of venial sins, without having for them any
grief or purpose of amendment.

SOme servants of God there be, which do often confess themselves, and
utterly forsake all mortal sin, and yet sometime commit this fault, that is,
to confess their venial sins, and yet to leave their passions quick, and
lively, bearing still a love and affection unto them: neither do they overcome
them, or by contrary acts mortify them with true contrition of heart, and so
they confess, and accuse themselves of such venial sins, only upon a
custom, without any penance at all, that is not having any true sorrow or
grief for them, or else without a firm purpose any more to commit them: In
this manner do they confess, idle words, voluntary distractions, curiosity
in looking, and the rest of the senses, their excess in eating, drinking,
sleeping, and laughing, their idleness and loss of time, and superfluous
cherishing of themselves, their merry lies, light detractions, and their
negligence and remissness in the time of prayer, and Mass. Of these and other
such like sins do they make their confession, without ever feeling before
hand any grief for them in their heart, and without having any determination
verily never to commit them again. And this carelessness is very hurtful for
two reasons: the one is, because although a man do confess these sins, yet
if he do not truly resolve never to do them again, obtains not any
forgiveness for them at Gods hands, and so they remain still a live in the
soul, and do weaken and dispose it to fall into other sins which be far
greater. An other reason is, because confessing his sins in this manner, he
adds a new fault to the former: because such a confession as touching those
sins, is feigned and false: for though in words he does accuse himself of
them, yet does he not detest and abhor them, nor resolve in his heart to
avoid them. And therefore if he should confess al his venial sins in that
manner, that is, without a true purpose to forsake any of them, the^ were the
confession all together counterfeit and of no valewe: and for this cause
necessary it is, as holy men do teach, that when Gods D Grego^.
servants do confess venial sins, they should think well upon D Bernard
sermon. de ce. Domini. D Thom. 3. p. q. 87. ar 2. and 3. and in 4. did. 16. q.
2. ar. 2.
them, and before hand be sorry for them in their heart, as being offenses
against God, and verily determine with a full purpose never to commit the^ any
more: and if many times they fall into them again, many times likewise let
them rise again, renewing their former purpose: and if so often as they come
to confession they commit afterward the same sins, so often likewise let them
have the same resolution, and not to be dismayed or discouraged: but let them
humble the^ selves, and give God thanks who always is ready, when so ever
they turn unto him, to receive the^, and to pardon their offenses. Neither let
them think, that such confessions be altogether unprofitable, because they fall
again into their former sins, but that they be very good and of much profit,
because so often as they come unto confession with the same purpose of
amendment of their life, Gods grace, (as before has bin said) and the virtues
and gifts of the holy Ghost, be increased in them, and they do obtain force
and strength to preserve themselves, and not to fall into other sins which be
greater: and a great part also of that harm is hindered which they had done,
had they not before confessed such venial sins and obtained pardon for the^.
And if the servant of God when he goes to confession, through his frailty
feels not in himself any determinat purpose, to fly al venial sins, which he
confesses: at least let him have a full resolution to avoid some of the
greatest and which do most harm to his soul: and if his frailty be so great,
that of such venial sins as he has committed since his last confession,
because they be ordinary, he finds difficulty and pain to avoid the^, let
him at least accuse himself of some sin, which in former time he has
confessed, and that which does most grieve him and which he has a true purpose
by Gods grace verily to avoid: because if he do so, the^ shall his confession
be lawful, and accompanied with the fruit of Gods grace: for the obtaining
whereof, requisite is is, that our confession should be, of such sins as a man
does abhor. The reason why one should with D Thom. 3. p. q. 87. ar 1. and in
4. distinct. 16. q. 2. ar. 1. and q. 2. ar. 2.
such a disposition confess venial sins is, because when a man commits
any venial sin, the soul is disordinately turned to the love of the creature,
loving more his own delight, then to please and content God, and desiring more
to satisfy his own will, then the will of God: and therefore for the taking
away of the same disorder from the soul, and that it may return again to his
former rightnesse, necessary it is, that a man should do some inward act
contrary to that former sin, which before he did, as for example, to have
true grief and sorrow for sin, or a resolute purpose to commit it no more,
or else, some other such act equivalent to these: as some act of the love of
God, or devotion, or resignation, so contrary to venial sins committed, that
if he did then remember them, he would abhor and avoid them quickly: and when
he confesses all his venial sins with such a due disposition, certain it
is, that he obtayneth pardon and remission of them all.

A great benefit of God certain it is, that he has of his infinite goodness
bestowed upon man so effectual and sweet a remedy. And for as much as most true
it is, that the soul cannot enter into heaven with one only venial sin, but
that of necessity it must before hand be purified and purged from all, either
in this life, or else in the next: great reason there is, that we should make
our commodity of this divine remedy, and that when we mean to confess such
venial sins as we have committed in those eight or fifteen days, since we
were last at that sacrament, we should first seriously think of them in our
conscience, and consider how they be offensive to God, and contrary to his
divine will, do very much hurt our souls, and hinder us from receiving of
most heavenly gifts at the hands of his divine majesty, and that we were
bound rather to have suffered any temporal punishment, or loss, then ever to
have consented to commit them: and let us be grieved and ashamed that ever we
did them, and determine in our hearts, never to commit them again: and having
thus disposed and prepared our selves, let us confess them, and albeit in
confession we tell not all, but the greatest, and those which cause most shame,
yet let the grief and sorrow for having committed them, and the purpose of
not committing them again comprehend and include all. And by these means
shall we deliver our selves from the terrible fire of Purgatory, and shall
obtain more plentye of Gods grace, and greater purity of conscience, and when
we leave this mortal life, we shall the sooner pass to the joys of heaven:
for as Saint John says, Nothing that is defiled shall enter into Apoc. 21
that holy city.

Chap. V.
Of a certain carelessness, which usually is found amongst such as be
desirous to serve God, concerning the examination of their conscience, before
Confession: and the great harms which do follow thereof.

ALthough commonly such as fear God, and often go to confession, do in such
sort examine their conscience, that their confession is sound, and good, and
bound they be not, to make their confession again: yet in some such, not
seldom, a great carlesnesse is found, which does much hinder the notable
fruit of confession. This negligence is, concerning the examination of their
conscience before they go to confession, doing it very lightly, and
superficially, without entering well into the inward part of their soul, and
without any great care to search out many secret sins, which they have
committed: amongst which although some be great, yea and some of them mortal,
yet because the malice of them is more hidden, or else have some show of
virtue, they know them not, nor make them any part of their confession.
Wherefore for the better understanding of this point, which is very important,
we have to consider, that as some sins proceed of malice, which be those
that a man knows to be sins, and does them of purpose, not having any great
passion to provoke him thereunto: so there be other sins, which come of
infirmity, such as those be which a man knows to be sins, yet he does them,
because some passion or great tentation provoke him thereunto: so likewise
there be other sins, which proceed of ignorance, as those be, which a man
through his own negligence knows not to be any sins. True it is, when a
man does what lies in him, to understand the truth of that which he is
bound to know, and yet cannot come to the knowledge thereof, because he
cannot find any that is able to teach him, then is he very well excused from
all danger of sin: but when a man does not what for his part he ought to do,
to know the truth, as because he does not inquire of such as he should, nor
ask counsel of whom he ought, neither uses other such means as be
necessary, that God may give him light, and that good and learned men may
inform him what he is bound to do, such a man as this, doing that thing
which he knows not to be a sin, is not through his ignorance excused: and
therefore if that which he does be against any precept that binds to
mortal sin, then shall that sin of his be mortal: and if it be against a
precept which binds only to a venial sin, then shall the sin likewise
be but venial, although not so grievous as if it were done of malice, or
were known before hand. The truth of this doctrine is set down by the
church, in a certain decree which is taken out of S. Augustine these be his
words. Not all they which be ignorant of the evil De quest. noui and vet.
Testa. lib. 2 Cap. Non omnis did. 37.
they do, be free from sin, and pain due to the same, but such as have none
to instruct and tell them, may well he excused: but those that may be taught
the truth, and yet will not take any pains to learn it, are not excused:
neither be they free from sin, nor the pu^nishment which for that they
deserve.

Out of this ground, to wit that some ignorance is culpable, as that which
proceeds of carelessness and negligence, which excuses not from sin, it
follows, that there be many christians, which fall into diverse great sins,
which through their own negligence, they neither know, nor understand to be
any sins, and therefore do they not confess them: and some remain so secure,
that they think themselves most assuredly to walk in the path of virtue, and
the very right way to heaven, when as in very truth they wander from true
virtue, and travail in the path of everlasting damnation: for which cause the
wise man says: There is a way which seems Pro. 14. 12.
just and straight, and in the end it leads to death. As though he said:
There be certain kinds of living amongst men which seem just, and there be
actions and customs, affairs and dealinges, which seem good, and yet be not
so in the sight of God, but have sins in them, which carry men to eternal
damnation: what kind of sins these be, and how this evil is to be helped, shall
straight ways be declared.

Chap. VI.
Of some sins of ignorance, which a man knows not, nor confesses: to
wit, to be careless, to know whereunto in particular he is bound: and to
omit the works of justice and charity.

TO the end that this so great an evil may the better be known, and a remedy
thereof found out, it shall be very profitable to set down in this place, some
of these secret sins, which in many cases by reason of the weight of the
matter, be mortal, and be commonly committed through ignorance: and I will
speak only of those which be most usual, for by them the rest may be
easily gathered and found out. Of these sins, some be more sensible and
external and more easily to be known, if a man would be diligent to note
them: others be more subtle, internal, and harder to be found out. Of the
first kind, be these: Negligence for a man to know, and perform such
particular bands as his estate or office requires. Diverse men have diverse
states, and particular offices. Some be Lords over subjects, others be
Governors, others Judges, others Bayliffes, others Counselors, others
Scriueners, others Merchants, some have the state of Prelates, others be
Priests, others religious men, others married. These states and offices besides
such bands and precepts as they have common to all christians, other
particular they have also of great weight, commanded either by the law of God,
or by the law and ordinance of man, and these are they bound both to know,
and also to perform, and yet many do notably fail herein, not having any care
to enter into the consideration of this point. To this kind of carelessness an
other is reduced which many likewise do not consider: and it is for Parents and
Masters, not to instruct their children, and servants, in the catholic
faith, and other necessary things to salvation, not to be careful also that
they hear Mass, keep the fasting days, and say their prayers: not to keep
them from wicked plays, and pastimes, from gadding abroad in the night time,
from the wicked custom of vain swearing, from eating of white meat upon days
prohibited, not to keep them from occasions of sinning, not to bestow their
children in due time in some good and virtuous state of life: or to bestow them
against their own wills or minds: not to pay in due time servants and
journey men their wages: nor to perform such promises as they made them. By
these kinds of omissions, often times mortal sins are committed, which be
not marked or thought upon. In the number of these sins, is also the careless
custom of swearing, By my life, by my health, so God save me, or as God shall
healpe me, with other such like oaths, men swearing sometimes thus, and
threatening that they will do this or that, yet without any intent to perform
them: and at some other times affirming doutfull things for certain, and
again at other times, to swear without thinking whether it be true or false,
which sin although it be perjury and of his own nature mortal, yet many that
make profession of virtue do little consider it. To swear also to do some
thing which may notably redounde to the profit of their neighbor: or to
swear to execute such an office faithfully, or to observe the rules thereof:
likewise to swear not to receive any gifts in such an office, nor any
stipende more then is taxed and set down, and afterward to do contrary to
their oaths, and yet doing so, many do not think that they have committed
any mortal sin in for swearing themselves: and therefore do not accuse
themselves of any such sin in confession.

One of these sins likewise which have their malice hidden, is, to flatter
Princes, Prelates, and great men, commending or allowing of such things as
they have done wickedlie, and to excuse their inventions which serve to
maintain pride and gluttony. To favor also their friends, and to speak and
labor for them that they may obtain such offices or dignities whether secular
or ecclesiastical, whereof they be not worthy, because they have not those
parts which the law of God and man do require: and to take money or other
things equivalent for offices, which should be given freely: or to do other
things of favor, which of justice and by reason of there office they are
bound to do. To omit the doing of works of charity and mercy, whether
spiritual or corporal, in such cases, as the law of God does bind us
thereunto, and to spend in play, vain apparel, iewelles banquets not
necessary, and in other superfluous things, that wealth which God gave us to
bestow in works of charity. Not to hinder other men's sins when conveniently
we may, by correcting them, or denouncing the^ to their superiors or else by
our doctrine, counsel or alms: especially when they that omit these things
be great persons, as Lords, Justices of peace, Judges, or Prelates, who not
only of charity, but also of justice, are bound to correct, punnish, and let
what they may, the sins of such as live under their jurisdiction. Of these
sins likewise they be, which although very gross, yet to many their malice and
greatness is secret and hidden: as much injustice which is committed in not
paying our debtes in due time, and detayning them unjustly against the will of
those that should have them, whether the debts be old or new. To make
collusions, and monopolies, that is for one man or place to ingrosse things,
that none may sell or gain but he: likewise for many sellers to agree together
to the injury of the buiers, and many buyers, to the damage of the sellers. To
show parciality in division of common benefits, or taxing of tributes or
subsidies, or in stopping and aresting of goods, charging some, and exempting
of others, and that for favor and friendship. To gain by play, or to buy
things of other men's children, or such persons as cannot sell or do them away.
Not to perform faithfully and so soon as may be, the wills and testaments of
others. Not to administer honestly, and according to conscience, the goods of
Wards and other children during their no^age, they being their Gardians, and
having the charge of their education. To maintain unjust suits: and in
doubtful cases, not to use first diligence to know whether they be just or no,
by searching out that sincerely and with a desire to be assured there of, and
that of such as can inform them truly, and all this, not to do iniurye or
hurt to any.

Chap. VII.
Of diverse kinds of wicked superstitions, not known to many, and sometimes not
confessed through culpable ignorance.

AMongst other great sins whose malice are not of many so well perceived,
diverse kinds of superstitions are numbered: as to be desirous to know by
superstitions means, things past: as thefts, robberies, and other secret
sins or thoughts of the heart: or to be willing to know future things,
and those not natural, but such as depend upon our own free will, or things
casual, for the effecting Deuteronomy. 18. Leuit. 29.
of which, the actio^ of man's will must concur: as marriages, getting or
loosing of goods, whether such a man will come, or such a blessing or curse
shall light upon such a one or no: whether he that goes on such a side of the
street, shall be slain, or hurt with a stone: whether he that goes over
such a river, shall be drowned: and such other like things, which God only
does know: for a man to be desirous to know such things as these, either by
the stars of heaven, or by the lines or signs of a man's hand, or by dreams,
lots, or the chattering or singing of birds, or by the motions of a Cap.
Illud. cap. sed est. cap. sors 26. q. 2. c. Non obseruetis 26. q. 7. Con. Trid.
ses. 22. D Aug. de doct. Christian. lib. 2. ca. 21. and 22. and de ciuit. lib.
5. vsque ad cap. 6. Ambros. in Hexam. li. 4 cap. 4. D Tho. 1. p. q. 115. art.
3. and 22. q. 95. art. 5. and 96.
man's body, or by other such like means, cannot be excused from superstition.
To be willing likewise for the recovery of some infirmity or to get a remedy for
some malady, to say such kind of words, or to make such signs, or to carry
such a wrighting about them, and by such other like things, which have not any
such natural force to work any such thing, nor be ordained of God for the
producing of any such effects. Likewise to use holy things, and to put all
the virtue and efficacy of them in circumstances, or in ceremonies which be
indifferent or vain: as to obtain some temporal commodity at Gods hands, to
determine that so many prayers and words are to be said and none other: and
that they must be said just so many times, and not one more or less, and upon
such days and no other, or with so many candles, and of such a fashion and
color, and other like things: which being such as it little skilleth whether
they be done in that manner or no, yet therein do they put the efficacy and
effect of their prayer, and not in the devotion and fervor of spirit, with
which the prayers be said, nor in Gods providence who disposes of all humane
things, as best serves for his glory, and the good of our souls. Into these
and other such like superstitions, many persons do fall through culpable
ignorance, thinking that in them, there is no sin at all, or else but small
and venial, whereas in very truth the sin is very great, and very much and
severely reprehended in the scripture, and also by holy men and ecclesiastical
Canons utterly condemned, as those things, in which a secret covenant is made
with the Devil, and in which he intermedleth to beguile christians.

And not long since Sixtus Quintus by his public letters, has condemned all
such vain arts, and upon great pain forbidden them: These be his words.
Besides that art which In motu proprio.
entreats of future effects, proceeding of natural causes, all other arts
which profess to tell future and casual things, be guilefull and vain, and
subject to the pernitiouse deceites of the Devil, who by them do greatly
thrust themselves in. And therefore Astrologers, and Mathematicians, who
profess the vain knowledge of the stars, and the generation and birth of
men, and do presume to know judge, and affirm, of that estate and condition
of life, which men shall have, as what honors shall befall them, what riches,
what children, what health, what death, what iorneyes, what quarrelles, what
imprisonment, and other such prosperous and adverse chances, do offend God
grieuouslie, and are themselves deceived, and so deceive others. And in like
manner all others which by other like arts, are desirous to know things that
shall happen, and be secret, as by signs in the hand, in the water, in the
air, in the fire, or in beasts, or by lottes, or such other tokens, be vain
men, curious, wicked, and without religion: and those men and women which seek
to know such like things of them, or believe them, do offend against their
baptism, and against the christian faith. And he adds besides, that he does
not only forbid these arts, and command that such as use them should be
punnished, when they affirm or assure men, that these or these things shall
fall out, but also when they say the same, though certainly they do not
affirm it. All these be the words of Pope Sixtus, in his said constitution:
wherein also he commands all Prelates, and Inquisitors, to proceed against
such persons very severely, and forbids al books that entreat of any such
arts: And whereas he says that those which enquire, and would know such
things, or do believe them, that they do offend against their baptism, and
the catholic faith: his meaning is, that they offend against that which they
professed in their baptism, and against that which the catholic faith does
teach, which is to fly and detest al such pactes and covenants, whether open
or secret, as the Devil by any means has any thing to do in.

Chap. VIII.
Of sins committed by playing and gaming, and beholding of vain and hurtful
sightes, into which many do fall through culpable ignorance.

AMong the former sins, may be placed playing at Cards, Tables, Dice, and
other like games, which consist in fortune: For whereas playing of his own
nature, that is considered alone without any other circumstance, is not any
sin, and accompanied with D Thom. 22. q 168. ar. 2.
good and honest circumstances, in some persons is lawful: as when one wearied
about honest business, does now and then play a little at some lavvefull game,
only to refreshe his spirittes, and to return more lively to his virtuous
labors, no ill example or scandal following thereof, nor any other
inconvenience or disordinate end: hereof it comes, that although playing and
gaming in such manner as they are used, be very great sins yet seem they to
be little, so that such as be resolved not to commit any mortal sin, do play
very freely, and falling by means thereof into many great sins, and some of
the^ mortal, yet they know them not, nor take them for any such. For first
of all, time, which is the gift of God and that very precious, granted freely
to man, to the end he should bestow him self in virtuous works, by which he
may gain and merit the joys of heaven, the end for which he was created:
that does he spend and waste against the will of God in play and wicked gaming,
and in them does he cast away not a little idle time, but many hours, many
nights, and days. And that time which is spent in this vain and godless
exercise, is also taken away, as by and by shall be handled from prayer,
whereof he has great need, thereby to preserve himself in the service of
God: for he that is given to playing, is neither at that time, nor yet before,
or after, in any good disposition to pray, because that has robbed and
possesses his heart. This time likewise is taken from much other honest business
to which he is bound of charity or else of justice, as well for the profit of
his own soul, as to perform those things which belong to his charge,
conformable to his estate or office: and therefore by playing he does iniurye
to many.

Seeing also God has ordained, that such money as is necessary for the
maintenance of man, and his family, or for other good uses, should be gained
with the labor of his hands, or by his learning, or else by lawful bargains
and couenantes profitable to the common wealth, according to that which God
said to the first man, In the sweat of Genesis 3.
thy face, shall thou eat thy bread. Genesis 3.
Which in a certain manner does belong to all those which maintain them selves
by any honest D Thom. 2:. q. 164. ar. 2. ad 3.
travail: he that follows gaming, does contrary to this ordinance of God,
seeing he would get money by a vain and wicked means, by a thing of hazard D
Thom. 22. q. 118. ar. 8. ad 4.
and chance, and as they say, not otherwise but because it fell out that he had
such cards, or such a chance at the dice: For which cause the gain of play
is called of learned men a filthy gain, because it is gotten by a wicked
means. And as for them which get that whereof they live, by honest travail,
the divine scripture says. Because thou shall eat Psalm. 127.
of the labor of thy hands, blessed shall thou be, and well shall it go
with thee. So on the contrary, of them which purchase their wealth and gather
money together by naughty and wicked means it says, The treasures of Prou. 10.
wickedness shall not profit him that has them. Those goods are called
treasures of wickedness, which are gotten unjustly, or by means of any other
vice or sin, as is that which is gotten by play, when a man does use it to
the end to get money. This money is to him that has it, not only without
profit, but also to his great loss: for besides the harm which it does to his
soul, it will also consume and vanish away as salt does in water. And for the
sin of him that does so get it, it will be the cause that the rest of his
goods will be lost or consumed, and that either in his own, or else in the
hands of his heirs: for this is that punishment which God does oftentimes
inflict upon those that by such unlawful means come unto wealth: and no doubt
can be made but that this kind of play is unlawful and naught, as both heathen
Philosophers, Arist. 3. Eth. D Thom. 22. q. 32. ar. 7. ad 1.
and holy Doctors affirm, seeing God did never ordain playing for a means to
gather wealth, but this was the invention of the Devil, and the devise of the
malice of man: and therefore very great reason there is, to fear that in such
persons the saying will be fulfilled which is uttered by the Prophet Micheas.
The treasures of iniquity (quoth Mich. 6.
he) are fire in the house of a wicked man: because they will like unto fire
with ill success consume both the man and his wealth.

Beside these former reasons which do sufficiently show the malice of play,
others also there be, more clear and apparent to the eyes of all: because
certain it is, that he which usually is given to play, is often times either
to himself, or to those with who^e he plaieth the cause of these sins: to wit,
that some do play away those goods and money, which they have no authority to
dispose of, because either they be their fathers, or their masters, or
because it is due to their creditours, or because is is necessary for the
maintenance of their house and family, or else because they have borrowed it
by fraudulent means, and of them, to whom in very truth they are never able
to pay it again.

They be the cause likewise of much vain and false swearing, of much brawling,
quarrelling and contention, and that when themselves or others be angered and
fretted by play, that they do then fall out and badly entreat their wives,
their children, their servants, yea and their own fathers: they also be the
cause of scandal and ill example to others: and finally they be the cause
that such money as should be given to the poor for the honor of Christ, is
taken from them, lost in play, and bestowed in the service of the Devil. And
whereas it is a commandment of God, as holy Doctors do affirm: for a man to
give in alms, in common and great necessities, that which is superfluous for
the maintenance of his own estate, which is, so much as remains after he
has performed all that which of christian decency is requisite for one of his
calling: D Ambros Luc. 12 and habetur ca. sicut hi^d. 47.
and in the extreme necessity of others to give that also which is necessary
for his estate, that is, so much as remains after he has provided for his
own life, and the life of his friends. In these cases, in which the precepte
of giuinge alms, does bind under pain of mortal sin, according D August.
ep. ad Maced. and cap. quid dicam 14. q. 4. D Thom. 22. q. 32. ar. 5. and q.
66. ar. 7.
to the doctrine of holy and learned men: these gamesters for all that do it
not, but take it from the poor, to employ it upon play. And as such persons
do transgress the law of God and nature, so in like manner do they break
the canonical and civil low, which under great penalties forbid playing at
Cards and Dice and such other games, as a thing pernicious to the common
wealth. For these reasons and causes so sure and certain who sees not, that
the use of play, which to many seems but a small evil, is in very deed a
great one, and the root and fountain of passing great sins.

One of these sins also it is to see comedies and plays, in which is
co^course both of me^ and women, and where many wanton things are brought upon
the stage. To haunt likewise the daunsing schools, and to go a masking and
daunsing: which things because of their own nature they be not mortal sins,
many make small account of, and do not fly them, no not such as have a care
to follow virtue: and yet certain it is, that in them be found the true
occasions of mortal sins, which often times do cause the weak to fall, and
therefore necessary it is, that such as desire to save their souls, should
crave of God, that he would open their eyes, that they may see the deadly
poyso^, which lurketh under the brave gold of worldly delights, and the diverse
shipwrackes which many souls do suffer in this sea, which seems so calm to
the eyes of the world: And if they persevere with humility, craving this divine
light, God will give it them, and they shall become masters of this truth:
and in the mean time, let them be content to learn, and give credit to
others, that have had experience therein, and let them carefully fly such
occasions and dangers, and mortify them selves in this point, as else where
has been admonished: and let the^ crave pardon of Tract. 6. par. 2. c 15.
God, for that they have herein through ignorance offended, saying with David:
Remember not O Psalm. 14.
Lord, the sins of my youth, nor my culpable ignorance, giving me full
pardon for them all.

Chap. IX.
Of other sins more secret, as pride of our own proper judgment and self
will, which many do not know nor confess through culpable ignorance.

THese examples before noted, which are committed through culpable ignorance,
be of the most sensible, external, and easy to be known: Other sins there
be, more subtle, inward, and secret, into which many that desire to serve
God do fall, and through their negligence do not know them: and although
always they be not mortal sins, yet often times they be, and ever dangerous,
and for such ought to be avoided. Of these, one is a spiritual pride, by
reason whereof a man inwardelye in his heart does esteem of himself very
disordinatlie: a presumption of his own judgment, and proper understanding,
by means whereof, what he does judge and think to be so, that does he like,
and follow, and that more obstinatlie then is either lavvefull or convenient:
A pride of his own will, wherewith he loves his will very disordinately, is
enamoured thereof, and desirous that it should be effected in all things: A
presumptuous and disordinat confidence of his own forces and ability: A rash
curiosity concerning the works and judgments of God: A disordinate desire to
be preferred before others: A wicked sadness of an other man's good: A secret
ambition, of honor and dignity: An indiscretion in penance, fasting, watching,
and other mortifications, which he does, following his own judgment, contrary
to the mind of his ghostly father: A wicked desire of singularity, whereby he
greatly desires in outward appearance, to have rare and singular things, that
men may cast their eyes more upon him, then upon others, and have in him what
to admire and commend. These be the most secret and spiritual sins, by reason
of which it falls out sometime, that a man is full and wholly possessed of
them and yet does neither know them, nor confesses them: for as thieves that
break into a house, to rob and spoil it, do first of al put out the light,
because they would not be seen: even so these sins entering into the soul,
and possessing a great part thereof, do quench out the light of grace and sound
reason, and make it so blind, that it can neither see nor know them. This is
the opinion of all holy men, which venerable Richard does excellently well note
in these words Who is able to know Richard de S. victore
the pride of his own heart, which has so long continued and increased
there, if God does not open it: who can understand the secret roots, and
crafty cogitations thereof, by which often times priuiely and without being
perceived, it enters into the heart, and robs that virtue which there it
finds? And giuinge a reason why other kind of sins the greater they be the
more easily they be known, and pride the greater it is, the more secret it
is, and hides it self, thus he writes. Whilst this vice of pride does more
increase and enlarge it self in the soul, and more possess and rule it, so
much the more does it make it blind, and for that cause so much the less does
it perceive it, but although the soul which harbors secreat pride does not
know it, yet God does, who is vigilant enough, and does punnishe it, spoiling
the soul of all his gifts, and leaving it destitute of his divine grace. All
this is out of venerable Richard: in which words he does with all other holy
men affirm that there be secret sins in the soul which a man him self
does not know, and that among all other that which does most lurk and hide
it self is pride.

And it is not a thing much to be maruailed at, that God does use this so
fearful a judgment with sinners, as to suffer them to fall into those
sins, which them selves know not, because God deals thus with such
persons, as first committed those sins which they know well enough what they
were, and yet did not true penance for them: and for punnishment of so bold
and shameless a behavior, as wittingly and malitiouslie to have committed so
grievous sins, God does permit that the darte of his anger come upon them,
which is the greatest punnishment that he uses in this life, so that
voluntarily they fall into such sins as through their own negligence, they
know not to be sins, and being fallen into them, so to continue without
doing for them any penance, and sometime to die in the same. So says Saint
Gregory. It is a punnishment for sin committed, In Moral. lib. 14. c. 15
for a man to see, and know that good thing which he ought to do, and yet
through his weakness, not to put it in execution: and a greater punnishment
it is, and inflicted for some greater sin, for a man not to see, nor know that
which he is bound to do.

Of these secret sins, which are committed through ignorance, and yet for all
that be imputed by God, and severely by him punnished, we have many examples
in holy scripture. I will here only make mention of two, but those of the most
notable, to give more light to that which has been said. God commanded King
Saul to invade the country of the Amalachites, and utterly to destroy 1 Reg.
15.
them, not leaving either man or beast alive, because they did not show mercy,
but cruelty toward the Israelites, when they came out of Aegipt: Saul went,
and conquered the country, slew men, and beasts as he was commanded: but yet
he did spare the life of the king, called Agag, and some of the best cattle:
and in this fact, he never thought that he had committed any sin at all: for
to save the kings life, he did it under the title of piety: and some of the
beasts he reserved, for outward show of religion, to offer them in
sacrifice to God: and therefore when the Prophet Samuel did reprehende him, for
not having kept the commandment of God, he answered confidentlie, that he had
done all that, which God had willed and appointed him. Albeit Saul sinned,
because he should not have interpreted the commandment of God, according to
his own fancy, nor to have done, expreslie contrary to that which God gave
him in charge, either upon any pretext of piety, or color of religion: yet he
thought that he had not committed any sin therein, nay rather he supposed,
that he had done very well: and so that which he reputed for no fault, God
very justly did impute unto him for a grievous sin, and did punnish him most
severelie for the same, depriving him of his kingdom, and casting him out of
his favor, and suffering him by a naughty death to 2 Reg. 24.
end his days. David had a desire to number his people and to muster all the
men of war in his kingdom, and he put this his desire in execution. This was
in him a great sin both because it was very chargeable to the king, very
troublesome to the people, without any necessity or just cause: and also
because it was a kind of pride, and vain ostentation, as Saint Gregory says:
and to this may be also added, how it was against the law, which commanded,
that when upon necessity the people were numbered, that every one should offer
a certain quantity in alms, to be employed about the uses of the tabernacle.
This being so grievous Exodus 30.
a sin, and for so many reasons contrary to the law of God, yet when David
did it, he thought it not any such, until afterward he saw the punnishment
thereof, to consume his people, by so pitiful a pestilence, that there were
already dead thereof seauenty thousand persons: Then he perceived what a great
sin he had committed, and did confess it saying, I have sinned much in this
fact, and have done Charthusianus. 2 Reg. 24.
foolishlie: And David fell into this sin, because beholding himself so
potent in battle, and to overcome al his enemies, he suffered some
presumption to enter into his heart: and for this sin, and for the sins of the
people, God did suffer him, to fall into such an ignorance, and blindness,
that he knew not how great a sin that was which he then committed. So
that both Saul, and David, offended God, in doing these sins, not knowing
how great the fault was which then they did: and in like manner, many fall
into very grievous sins, through culpable ignorance, as has bin said, and
some of them as Saul, never come to know or confess them, and so die in their
sins, and perish for ever. Others, as David come to the knowledge thereof,
and do purge them by true penance and contrition. To the end therefore that
we may preserve ourselves from falling into so great blindness as this is,
and if we be already fallen, that we may come out of it, let us now see, what
remedies are for this purpose to be used, and put in practice.

Chap. X.
Of a very profitable remedy, against the harm which comes by secret
sins, and that is, every day to examine our conscience: and the manner how
this is to he done.

Having now declared, how great an hindera^ce it is, to a good confession,
lightly to examine our conscience, and the great harms which from that
negligence do grow, and that is for a man to fall into those sins which he
knows not: requisite it is likewise, to give some instructions, how we may
overcome this carelesnes, and deliver our selves from these so great harms.

The first is, for a man willingly to take pains to enter with consideration
into himself, and to search all the corners of his conscience, and craving
light at Gods hands, that he may know himself, to stay there for some space,
pondering the motions, and desires of his own soul, and the works which from
that do spring: For to apply carefully, and with diligence, the heart
troubled with such varietye of tentations, to consider with quiet, the inward
actions of the soul, and the outward of the body, is a thing of travail and
pain, and therefore necessary it is, that a man should resolve him self to
embrace this labor, and to overcome this difficulty: And to the end that a
man may by use make this examination well, and get a facility therein, let him
not think it enough to examine his conscience once before he goes to
confession, but let him make it daiely: And for that purpose at night when he
goes to bed, let him retire himself, into some secret place, before some
image: and there let him call his soul to account, how it has bestowed that
day, and let him examine well all that he has thought, said, or done: and
such sins as he finds himself to have fallen into, let him purge with the
tears of penance, for so did holy Job, and this was his meaning when he
said: I considered O Lord, with fear all my works, because Cap. 9.
I know, that thou will not leave any sin vnpunnished, as though he had said:
To prevent thy judgment and punnishment, I have judged and punnished my self:
and that every day, and every hour: because the holy man could not make this
examination of all his works, had he not used it very often. And king David
so employed about the affairs of his kingdom, and so charged with business
of great weight, was not for all that careless herein, but did every night
recollect himself, to make this examination of his conscience, and to bewail
all the wickedness which he had committed against the will of God. This does
he plainly declare, when he says thus: I have labored in sorrow and sighing
for my sins, and every night have I exercised my felfe, until I have washed my
bed, with the abundance of tears, which mine eyes did power forth. And in an
other Psalm Psalm. 76.
he says: In the night time have I exercised my self, meditating within my
soul the mercies received of God, and the sins which I have committed
against him, and reprehending and accusing my self, I have with sorrow washed
my soul.

This examination is to be made by dividing it into five members or points. In
the first, let him give thanks unto God, for benefits received, as for having
created him of nothing according to his own image, and for his glory, for
having preserved him, redeemed him, and made him a christian, and for having
suffered and expected him to do pennaunce: and in particular, for that he
has that day given him life, strength, succor, and holy inspirations to
live well, and delivered him from many sins and dangers, into which thorough
his own weakness, and subtlety of his enemies, he might have fallen.

In the second point, let him crave grace and light of God, to know
thoroughly all his sins, which he has committed that day, and also any
others, done in any time of his life past, which by forgetfulness or
ignorance, he has not yet confessed, nor amended. Let him acknowledge that of
himfelfe he is most ignorant, and blind to know any good thing, and that
through the infinite mercy of God, and the merits of Christ our Lord he must
receive this gift to know himself, and therefore let him crave it with
humility, to understand his sins, and to bewail them as he ought.

In the third point, let him run over all the works, words, and thoughts of
that day, and consider well, whether he has done any wicked work or omitted
to do any good, unto which he was bound: And such good works as he has
done, whether he did not corrupt them and make them naught in the doing, as if
he did correct or punnish any upon revenge, if he rejected any poor body, not
giving him alms as was convenient: if he said not his prayers without
attention. In his words, let him consider, whether he has sworn without
necessity, back-bited any, told any lies, or uttered any idle or impatient
words. In his thoughts, let him examine whether he has had any pride, anger,
couetuousnesse, grief, at the good of his neighbor, vain desires of worldly
praise: and in these and other such like wicked thoughts, let him examine him
self, whether he has cast them quickly from him, craving Gods grace to
withstand them, and has detested them as contrary to the will of God.

In the fourth point. For such sins as he finds that he has committed that
day, be they great or small, let him repent and be sorry from his heart, and
ponder with himself, how sin is an offense done against the majesty of God,
and therefore let him say in his soul, with a detestation thereof. O that I
had never committed thee for any thing in the world. And let him consider,
that although he has many times fallen into the same fault, that he ought
not for all that to be dismayed, nor disordinatelie grieved, but let him
humble himself, and with a loving heart, and confidence in the goodness of
God, who so often as a sinner does turn unto him, is ready to receive him
again, crave pardon at his hands, and let him offer unto his divine majesty,
the merits of his holy passion, that through them he would voutsafe to grant
him remission: And if the sins, into which he has fallen that day be of the
greatest sort, let him for them condemn him self to some penance, as to
fast, or to take away some part of his meat or drink, or to give some alms,
or to say three Creedes, or three Salve reginas, with his arms stretched out
like a cross, in reverence and honor of the blessed Trinity, or the three
hours which our Lord and fauiour remained upon the cross, or five times to
kiss the earth, in honor of the five wounds of our Savior.

In the fifte and last point, let him purpose in his heart, the amendmente of
those sins, that is, not to commit them ever any more for all the world,
and although he has fallen a thousand times into them, yet let him a
thousand times fully purpose to do so no more, and when he determines not to
commit them again, let him by no means trust upon himself, or rely upon his
own strength, for the performance of that his intent, but let him trust upon
the grace of god, which he will bestow upon him for that purpose, through the
merittes of his sacred passion, as else where has been declared: And let
Tract. 2. cap. 2.
him conclude with one PATER NOSTER to God, praying therein for pardon for that
is past, and grace to amend himself, and an AVE MARIA to our blessed Lady,
that she would vouchsafe for this end, to assist him with her prayers and
intercession.

This is the daily examination of our conscience: and it imports so much for
a man to be diligent herein, and never upon any occasion, or business to omit
it, albeit he spend no more therein, then the fourth part of an hour, that no
words can sufficiently commend the same. By the help of this examination, a
man does overcome culpable ignorance, and is delivered from those secret
sins, which from that do grow, because he does what lies in him, to know
the truth and for the goodness of God to reveal it. By means also of this
examination, a man is delivered from that weakness that blindness, that
deformity, which the sins committed that day, left in his soul, and
obtains of God more strength, more light, and purity of soul, and does
every day proceed and go forward in the service of God. By this examination
does he likewise fulfill those precepts and admonitions of Christ, so often and
so earnestly repeated in the Gospel. Watch and pray, Mat. 24. and 15. Luc.
12.
because you know not the day nor the hour of your death and judgment: Be
ready, because at that hour which you think not of, the son of the Virgin
will come, to call you to his diuiue judgment. By this examination also, does
a man watch over him self, escapes the danger and band of his former
sins, delivers himself from those to come, and makes his soul ready for
death, yea if it should come that very night, as it is possible and indeed
may come, and so he might have chanced upon a sudden death, and thereby (had
he not examined himself before) have perished and been damned for ever: but
now having before hand examined well his conscience, with contrition for his
sins, is a saved soul. To this daily examination holy fathers do exhort us,
especially Saint Basil, who speaks thus: Examine at evening, or in the night
De ren^^tiatione seculi.
thy whole days work: Enter into consideration, and remember thy actions
within thy soul, to amend them, and make them better, and compare them with
those of the former day, to see whether thou have amended thy self, and
endeavor carefully every day, to lead a more virtuous life, for by these
means shall thou be more like and more near to the blessed Angels* and
more acceptable in the sight of God.

Chap. XI.
Of an other singular means, for a man to deliver himself from secret sins,
and that his confessions may be more fruitful, which is, to have one
determinat ghostly father, unto whom he ought ordinarily to confess his sins.

AN other means which a man has to use for the remedy of these mischiefs is,
to have one confessor, and spiritual father, who is a prudent man, and of a
good conscience, upon whom ordinarily let him rely, and to him often confess
himself, and in such doubts as occur demand his advice and counsel: Let him
not without great cause change his ghostly father, but keep one sure and
certain, who^e he has made choice of: and to him let him open his soul, and
give an account of his whole life, and not only of those things which be
certainly sins, but likewise of those wherein he stands in doubt: neither
let him only discover his sins, but also his good works and pennances, and
mortifications which he does, that he may instruct and direct him to do that
which is most for the service of God. If our ghostly father had no other office
but to absolve us from our sins, inconvenient it were not, to confess one day
to one man, and an other day to confess unto an other, but so it is not, for
besides this, he has also the office of a father, and a master, and of a
physician, and by reason hereof, it appertains to Cap. omnis vtriusque sexus.
Gulielmus Parissien. de penitentia.
him, to teach his ghostly child all such things as be necessary for the good
of his soul, and to know the roots and occasions of his sins, his
passions, and wicked inclinations, that he may the better cure them, by
prescribing meet remedies for those diseases: and to know his virtuous actions
and good inclinations that he may inform him how to make the more profit of
them, for his further increase in virtue: and to understand what penances he
does, to the end he may teach him the rule of discretion, which touching them
he has to observe. To him also it belongs to appoint him means both to
preserve himself, and to profit in the service of God and also how to continue
those good means. Wherefore to the end that the ghostly father may perform
al these principal parts of his duty, necessary it is, that he have a very
good insight in his ghostly child, and a long knowledge and experience of the
state of his soul, that as reason shall require he may apply one day one
remedy, and an other day an other and to continue it so long, as shall be
convenient, and to enquire whether he reap any profit by such counsel and
means as he does prescribe: which thing cannot be performed, if the penitent
do not usually repair to one ordinary ghostly father. When a scholar learneth
an art of some wise and expert master, it imports much, that he have but one
man to teach him, for if he go one day to one, and an other to an other,
that which he learneth with one, he forgets with an other. And when any
sick body is for some great infirmity under the hands of a learned physician,
requisite it is, that the same man do proceed forward in the cure of his
disease: for if one look to him one day, and an other, have care of him an
other, his recovery is much hindered, and it falls out sometimes, that what
one does, an other does undo. In this manner, it fares in the art of good
life, and in the physic of the soul: for it imports very much, that the
ghostly father being a wise and discreet man, should ordinarily be but one,
who may continue on his good counsel, and the cure of his soul. This advise
gives Saint Bonauenture in these words. Make choice of one ghostly father,
who is of discretion, learning, and experience, to whom confess thy self, and
open all the defectes and tentations of thy soul, that be may prescribe thee a
remedy, and change him not either for shame, or for fear to be confounded,
nay rather for thy greater confusion, enforce thy self to confess to that
man, and open unto him the state of thy soul as plainly as thou can. This
is the counsel of Saint Bonauenture: And that we ought likewise to declare
unto such an ordinary ghostly father, our devotions, penances, and other divine
inspirations, and comforts, S. Dorotheus and the holy S. Dorotheus sermon. 20.
Cassianus collat. 1. cap. 10.
Abbot Moises, and other holy men do advise us, as a thing most important,
to have our soul well directed, and defended from the craft and subtlety of
the Devil. And as I say, that ordinarily it is good to keep one ghostly
father, so just causes may fall out, for which it may be expedient to confess
some time unto an other, and to chang one man and take an other, to whom
usually he should repair for confession: And if it be not done upon lightness
or a vain desire, but upon necessity, or for some just respect, it is not to
be reprehe^ded, especially if the cause be, for that our old ghostly father
cannot be had at all, or at that time: for then shall it not only be well done
to confess unto an other, but it should be a great fault not to do it. For if
because our usual ghostly father cannot be had, one should give over his
ordinary confessio^s, and wax slack in his good custom, to go often to
confession it were certainly a very bad sign: for by that, did he make it
manifest, that in his confessions, he sought his own content and not God: and
that he desired his own temporal comfort, and not the true good of his own
soul: for had he sought the pleasure of God, and the profit of his soul,
when his old confessor could not be had, he would quickly have made choice
of an other, seeing in that he did please God, and procure the good of his own
soul.

By this means of keeping one ordinary ghostly father, who is a wise man and
one that fears God, he that sincerely desires, and labors to save his
soul, shall deliver him self from all evils and inconveniences of culpable
ignorance, and from erring in such things as pertain to his salvation. For
seeing his co^fessor, is in the place of Christ our Lord, and the penitent
soul comes unto him, as though it were to the feet of Christ him self, it
pertains to the pietye of our merciful master, and to the fidelity of his
promises, to teach and illuminate such a soul, in all things necessary for
his salvation, seeing he does seek it, by those means which himself has
ordained in his church, and especially by this of such humility, and so
acceptable in his sight: which thing for the great comfort and security of all,
our Lord has voutsafed to confirm with wonderful examples. Moises was Exodus
18.
in a great error when he alone would hear all causes examined before
himself, being more then he was able to do, by reason whereof many causes
were not dispatched: God to deliver him from this ignorance, brought a certain
Priest called Ietro from the place of his dwelling, into the desert where
Moises was, by whose means he learned a more ready way for the dispatch of the
peoples causes. David likvvise was much deceived, when he thought that God had
voutsafed him of that favor, as that he should be the man, who should build
him a Temple, and that this was his divine pleasure: and God did deliver him
from this ignorance, by means of the Prophet Nathan: by which fact, God 2 Reg.
7.
showed how much it does please him, to teach his faithful servants such
things as be necessary, and profitable for their souls, and to deliver
them from ignorance and deceits, by means of his Priests and servants,
especially by the help of a man's ordinary ghostly father, and in the sacrament
of penance, seeing though Moises were his familiar friend and who as the
scripture says did talk with him face to face, that is to say, in some
passing high contemplation: and also David though his great seruante, to
whom he revealed such deep mysteries, yet it pleased him not to deliver them
from these ignorances, but by the means of others, to the end that being thus
instructed by the will of God, they should also exercise humillitye,
submittinge them selves to men in other things, far inferior to them selves.

Yet necessary it is, that a man should here note one thing, to the end that
God may by the means of his ghostlye father, teach him the truth, and
direct him in the way of virtue, and that is, that he come to confession, with
that end and intention which he ought to do, to wit with a desire to
understand the truth, and that which is most expedient for his soul, although
it be a thing of travail and that which will put him to much trouble and
grief, and with all let him crave of God, to inspire and put into the heart of
his ghostlye father, that which he has to speak, because if he come to his
confessor with a desire only that he should tell him that which does please
himself, and to declare the truth if it be fittinge to his own humor, and
if not, to say nothing, then for punnishment of that wicked intention, God
uses to permit the ghostly father not certainly to tell him the truth, nor
that which is necessary for him, but rather the contrary: for so has God
threatened by his Propher Ezechiell in these words: If Cap. 14.
a man who has his heart from me, comes unto a Prophet, and by means of him
would be taught concerning me, I will permit that the Prophet shall be
deceived and deceive him: according to the wicked intention of him that asks,
shall be the deceit of him that answers. So did it happen to king Achah,
and to many more, 3 Reg. 22.
as experience has taught us, who going to ask counsel for matters of their
soul with a naughty intention have been deceived. Wherefore very necessary
it is, that the penitent which desires truly to be illuminated, and directed
of God, by means of his ghostly father, that he should come unto him with a
pure and sound intention, that is to say, with an effectual will, that he
should tell and instruct him in that which is most acceptable to God, and most
necessary and profitable for his own soul, although it be contrary to his
own liking, and hard and difficult to perform. And coming in this manner,
God will teach him by this means al truth, and give him strength to do it,
and with the help of his grace make it easy, and sweet to effect that which
seems unto him very sharp and difficult. So certain be holy men of this
most merciful property of God, toward such as come with a good intention,
that venerable Richard with great confidence thereof, writes these words.
Curious persons are sometimes deceived Richard de Sancto victore in cant. c. 39.
of the Devil, but the virtuous that with a good intention crave counsel, and
sincerely open unto their ghostly fathers, not only their sins, but also
the tentations of their souls, these walk the right way free from deceit,
because he cannot err, that with a sound intention asks counsel, and is
governed by him, neither can he be beguiled by the enemy that does discover his
tentations. This which venerable Richard affirms, may in general be hoped
for of the goodness of God, but more certain it is, in those things which
be done through obedience, for when they be of them selves lawful, although
the superior that prescribes them may err through ignorance, or malice: yet
the penitent that in those things obeys, can not err by obeying, for as
much as he does in that the will of God, concerning which point, and of the
necessity Tract. 4. c. 34. and tract. 5. p. 1. cap. 2. tract. 6. p. 2. c. 10.
and 11.
and profit which comes by obedience to our ghostlye father, else where more
has been spoken.

Chap. XII.
Of an other exellent remedy to deliver our selves from the harm of secret
sins, and to supply the defectes of our former confessions, and that is, with
care and diligence, to make a general confession.

Besides the former means now spoken of, there remains yet an other, very
excellent, by which Gods servant may deliver him self from such secret sins,
as proceed from culpable ignorance, and from other disorders before handled.
This means is, to make a general confession of all the sins of his life
past: taking for that, the space of a week, in which discharging him self
from all other business, let him enter into himself, and running over the ten
commaundedements, let him call to mind as much as he can, all the sins of
his life past, and make his confession of them: and by the help and direction
of his ghostly father chosen out for that purpose, the doing of it will be
easy and sweet, in such sort that in an hour or two, he may dispatche it,
though it be a confession of many years. When as a man in his former
confessions has concealed some mortal sin through shame, vain fear, or
because he would not bestow any time about the examination of his conscience,
or if he went to confession without a purpose to abstain from mortal sin, in
these cases, to make a general confession, both of all those sins uttered in
that former bad confession, and of all other sins committed afterward, is a
thing necessary and commanded by the law of God. But when a man has
discharged himself well in his former confessions, certain and sure it is,
that bound he is not to make a general confession, nor to confess again
those sins, which before he did confess: but although there be no band or
precepte, yet very good and heavenly counsel it is, and a work of
wonderful profit, for many reasons founded in the law of God and in
experience, which briefly now I mean to run over.

One of the things which does much humble man, is the knowledge of him self,
his own infirmity, his own ignorance, and especially of his sins and
wickedness. And for this cause Saint Augustine Tract. 25. in Johan.
calls humility the knowledge of a man's self, because it springs from
that, as from the cause and root thereof. And Saint Bernarde says, that
humility is a contempt of him self, as of a very Tractat. de gradibus
humilitatis
vile thing, growing from the true knowledge thereof. Seeing therefore a man in
a general confession, calls to mind all his sins, and beholds them all
mustered together before him, does consider and note them more attentively, and
more clearly does perceive all his infirmity, all his ignorance, and all his
malice, by that means does he humble himself, think basely of himself, as
he deserves: and dispiseth himself as a most vile and vvreatched creature.
To this may be also added, that he does open all his ignorance, and malice,
to an other man like unto him self, and of all that does accuse and blame him
self, craving at his hands, that he would correct and punnishe him, and
inioyne him such pennaunce for his sins, as he iustlye deserueeh: And as all
these be such actions, by which a man does abase, contemn, and handle himself
as a miserable wretch so of them humility of heart does increase: and hereof it
proceeds that Almighty God, whose property is to exalt the humble, and to
bestow upon them grace, light, and comfort, seeing a man in this manner to be
humbled, gives him new and plentiful gifts of grace, wherewith he does
enriche his soul, and give it new beams of heavenly light, by means whereof
he does lay open before him all such grievous sins, as through ignorance and
lack of consideration before time he left unconfessed,

One of the things likewise, which makes a man patiently to endure the
miseries of this life as infirmities of body, poverty, injuries, and
persecutions of men, and the scourges of the Devil, is, to know and consider
the punnishme^ts which for his grievous sins he deserves: when a man
examineth and confesses only his venial sins, which he did since his last
confession, and does not consider nor ponder those which in other times he has
committed, unwillingly does he suffer any punnishment or injury, and does
complain and grieve at little things: but when he makes a general
confession, then does he enter into the closet of his own conscience, and does
there behold the bottomless pit of wickedness, and does look upon his heart
as an impostume from whence such corruption of sins did proceed, and then
does he think upon the grievous pains, which for them he has deserved, and
judges hell fire to be to little for the just punishment of such horrible sins,
committed against the majesty of God. And so does he willinglye offer him
self with patience, to endure all the afflictions and miseries of this life,
and dare not complain of any harm, or adversity that befalls him, knowing
how little all is to that which he deserves. Blessed Saint Gregory the Pope,
who was a mirror of all virtue, being unjustly persecuted by Mauritius the
Emperor, and very injuriously entreated, the holy man calling to mind, such
sins as he had committed, in not serving of God, with such puritye and
perfection as he ought, endured all those injuries with such patience, that
writing to the same Emperor, he utters these words: I believe Ep. ad
Mauritium.
that thou shall so much the better appease the wrath of Almighty God, by how
much more severely thou shall afflict and punnish me, because I have so badly
served him. If the knowledge of such small sins, did cause this Saint, to
think that he deserved any kind of punnishmente for them, and was a motive,
so willingly to have suffered them, how much more will the consideration of so
many and so great sins, accompanied with that heavenly light, which God
bestows upon him, that humbles him self in making of a general
confession, cause him to think, that far more justly he does deserve any
pains, that God shall in this life lay upon him, and with patience to endure
the same.

Besides all this, that which does very much move a christian man to love God,
and to be loved of him, is to consider well the particular benefits and mercies
which of him he has received: and this falls out in a general confession,
wherein a man by calling to mind his sins, and confessing them, does enter into
consideration, and ponder, what great mercies God has showed him, in
delivering him from so great evils, and from so many great dangers of
everlasting damnation, and in suffering with so great patience, such notable
injuries as he has done against him, and pardoning with so great clemency such
heighnous sins: and that whereas he has so long time offended God, so
boldly, and so without all shame, yet has he lik a most merciful father,
continually bestowed upon him incomparable benefits: and at that very time,
when he did displease and contemn him, by his wicked life, did the same good
Lord preserve him, cherish, and maintain him with his creatures, inspired into
his soul holy cogitations, and did offer for him unto his eternal father, the
merits of his sacred passion: And whereas he might most justly, infinite times
have thrown him into hell, as he did diverse other sinners, yet dealt he not so
with him, but expected, and preserved him from the fury of the Diuelles, and
with his potent hand, delivered him from the bands of his sins, and the
danger of everlasting damnation. The knowledge of these verities, does a
general confession work, bringing to a man's memory all the sins of his life
past, and making him to accuse himself for committing them, and with this
spiritual feling, does he increase more and more, in the fervent love of so
pitiful a Lord and master, who with such incredible longanimity has expected
and endured him, and with so great love and sweetness, has cherished, made
much of, and drawn him unto him self, and with such father lie pity has
pardoned him, and therefore does he praise him, bless him, give him thanks,
and sing forth his mercies, saying with the Prophet David. If our Lord had
not helped me, my Psalm. 93.
soul had now been, in hell. Blessed be Psalm. 123.
our Lord who has not suffered me to perish betwixt the teethe of mine
enemies the Diuelles; beeinge made their pray: my soul through his piety and
grace, has been delivered from the wicked snares of them, that would have
carried me to everlasting damnation. Thou haste broken in pieces Psalm. 115.
O Lord, the bands of my sins and passions, and therefore will I always
offer unto thee, the sacrifice of praise and thanks giving.

To this may be added, that of such sins as a man has in former time
confessed, and yet had not then happily all that contrition and sorrow which was
requisite, being now when he makes his general confession, touched more
forcibly with Gods divine inspiration, and illuminated with greater light from
heaven, he does more bewail, conceive greater grief in his soul, and does
satisfy God for them with more sorrow and contrition of heart: And to new
grief for his old sins, he joins also a new purpose of the amendment of
his life, and so the whole man is renewed, and becomes better, and more
zealous in the service of God. These and other such like reasons do declare,
the singular commodities, which redounde to the soul by making of a general
confession, and experience teaches them to be so sure and certain, that those
which has made it, do say that they would not for the whole world, have
wanted that spiritual profit, which by means thereof their soul has
received. But necessary it is here to note, that although the fruits of a
general confession well made, be so great and precious, that yet one may exceed
therein: as for example, when a man has made a general confession once or
oftener, and it was well done, and that to a prudent and discreet ghostly
father, and yet for all this he would once again, make an other general
confession, not moved upon any of those good reasons now spoken of, as for to
humble himself the more, and to begin with a more resolute determination to
amend his life, but only upon scruples, because he thinks that he was not
before well confessed, and that by an other general confession he shall quiet
his conscience: in this case, when the prudent ghostly father knows, that it
is a scruple, that moves him to desire it, convenient it is, that he should
not do it, because the way to overcome a scruple, is not to yield unto it,
but to resist it, and to do contrary to that which it would, and the duty of
a spiritual father in this case is, to determine what is a scruple, and what
is a just cause, for one to confess that which has been confessed before,
and to set down what is expedient for the penitent to do. And the duty of the
penitent or ghostly child is, to believe and obey his ghostly father, and that
peace and quietness of conscience, which he shall never obtain by yielding unto
the scruple, shall he find by believing and obeying his ghostly Tract. 5. p.
1. cap. 2.
father, as before has been declared.

Chap. XIII.
Of such defectes, as be an impediment to many, which do often communicate,
that they receive not the plentiful fruit of the B. Sacrament.

AMong such persons as frequent the sacraments, as there be some which by
often receiving of the Blessed Sacrament, do increase, and wonderfully
proceed in all virtue: so there be some other, which do often communicate, and
though they find not their conscience guilty of any mortal sin, yet do
they not profit, nor go forward in virtue, as reason would, nor feel in their
souls, many of those heavenly effects, which they have experience of, that do
communicate with all that disposition which is requisite: wherefore it is a thing
of great importance, to lay open the causes of this so great a spiritual
damage, and the remedies for the same. The ordinary causes of this little
profit, and spiritual harm in such kind of persons be two. The one is, to
receive the B. sacrament only upon custom, that is, not having before hand,
any consideration or spiritual feeling of that, which they intend to do, but
only moved of a certain dry custom, which they have to communicate, as they
have in other business which is, as though they should say, I communicate
because others do it, and because I have of long time used it, and I will do
that which I see other virtuous persons do practice: An other cause is,
advisedly to fall into many venial sins and not to correct or amend them.
Such venial sins as for want of care and diligence, they fall into that fear
God, and be diligent in his service, work not this harm, but those only
which be committed deliberatly by them that be lukewarm, and slack in the
service of God, as for example, long distractions of vain thoughts, merry
lies, little detractions, and impatience, light laughing, superfluous care and
curiosity in apparel, in meat, in recreation, and spending of time, over
much talking, presumption of themselves in their own heart, to praise them
selves in words, to love honor, and commendatio^ of men, and curiosities of
the senses. Into these and such other like venial sins (whereof we have
spoken before) Tract. 6. p. 2. cap. 1. and sequent.
when a man advisedly does fall, and corrects not himself by true penance,
and amendme^t of life, they work that harm now spoken of, and do greatly
hinder the fruit of the blessed Sacrament.

The reason hereof is, because D Thom. 3 p. q. 80. art. 10. and in 4. d. 9. q.
1. ar. 4. q. 2. D Bona. in fasciculario cap. 8.
as al holy men do teach, to come unto the holy communion, and to receive the
great and plentiful commodity, which by means thereof God uses to bestow
upon his servants, requisite it is, to come with much devotion, and that a man
do for his part what lies in him to have it. And to come to the blessed
Sacrament with devotion, is to bring a fervent desire and ready mind to please
God, and to dedicat himself from his very heart to his divine service, and to
come with an hunger to be spiritually refreshed by this divine banquet and
food of heaven. And because this devotion is wrought in the soul by
meditation of heavenly things, and by purity of conscience, as holy men
affirm, and experience D Thom. 22. q. 82. art. 3.
does teach, hereof it proceeds that for a man to offer to communicate, not
having prepared him self before hand by prayer and meditation, and to purge
away venial sins, which do distracte and make the soul some what cold, he
does not receive all the fruit of the holy communion. This reason so sure and
certain, and so worthy of consideration, Saint Bonauenture does note in these
words. De preparat. ad missam. cap. 5.
When thou mindest to communicate, examine first with what charity and feruor of
devotion thou come, because to communicate as is convenient, we ought not
only to avoid mortal sins, but also to shun venial, which through
negligince, idleness, distraction, or an cuill custom be multiplied: for
although they do not kill the soul, because they take not away the life of
grace, yet do they make a man more cold, more undevout, unwilling to do
good, and make him ill prepared and disposed, to receive the holy communion:
wherefore he that minds to communicate, let him first helped with Gods grace,
and stirred up to devotion by good meditations and kindled with the flame of
charity, bannish from himself the dust and chafe of venial sins: and
therefore have care O christian, that thou come not to communicate without
consideration, nor much cold in devotion, for then thou come not with that
disposition, which thou should have. All these be the words of S.
Bonauenture: in which he does set down, what the causes be, that hinder such as
frequent the B. Sacrament, from receiving that great profit and good, which by
means thereof they both might and ought. And although it be a common and true
opinion, that for such causes and sins as these, which be not mortal, that
such as communicate do not lose all the fruit of the B. Sacrament, but that they
receive increase of grace, yet certain also it is, that they do lose that
plentiful and abundant fruit of diverse graces and virtues which are
ordinarilye bestowed upon such as come better prepared, and other wonderful
effects which usually it works in their souls that are more pure and devout.

Chap. XIIII.
Wherein is declared more at large, how for the receiving of more abundant
fruit of the holy Communion, convenient it is, to purify the soul from
venial sins.

OVt of the premises, Gods servants that frequent the holy Communion may
gather, what means they have to use, for the amending of these defectes and
the removing of these impediments: whereof one is, much to enforce themselves,
to avoid not only mortal sins, but also to diminish and lessen what they
can those that be venial, using for that end mortification, whereof before
we have at large entreated, for that is the Tract. 6.
means by which the soul is cured of the disease of her passions, and is
purified from venial sins, which out of them do spring. And with this purity,
a christian man may securely go unto that holy table, as S. Chrysostom does
exhort him, saying: Come to receive God with all purity, and give thy heart
with great confidence: by this most holy body, which here I receive, I do not
account myself any more to be dust Homil. 24. in 1. epist. ad Corint.
and ashes, no more to be a captive but free because I hope to obtain heaven,
and those goods which be there, as immortal and everlasting life, a place
amongst the Angels, and the glorious company of Christ. Thus says S.
Chrysostom. And the glorious Pope S. Gregory does note and ponder this point
more in particular, and that most excellently: who admonishing all faithful
christians, to purify themselves from sin, for the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament, says, that they ought not only to clear themselves from mortal
sins, which do wholly hinder the fruit of this most divine sacrament, but
also from venial, which be a let to that great spiritual commodity which
would come by means thereof. These be his words, worthy of due consideration.
Those that come In exposit. super 1. reg. li. 1. cap. 1.
to receive the consecrated host, which gives true health, and do harbor
sins in their soul, which they have committed, do not reccaue the fruit of
health, and therefore albeit they receive with their mouth, the true sacrament,
yet do they not receive with their soul, the virtue and fullness thereof,
because that is received only of them, that come fasting from sins, and be
adorned with virtues. And because the just also, and the elect servants of God,
cannot lead this life without falling into some sins, therefore the remedy
which they have, is, that they enforce and stir up them selves, daily to
purge their soul by penance, from those daily sins, into which they fall
through humane infirmity, for if they have not this care daily to purify them
selves from their sins, although they be very small, by little and little, the
soul is filled full of sins, which do deprive them of the fruit of the
inward and spiritual fulness: and therefore to avoid this harm S. Paul does
admonish a christian man that he should prove him self before he does
communicate, that is to say, that he should purge and discharge himself from
sin, that being proved and purified, he may come to the table of our Lord:
wherefore seeing we sin daily, daily also let us bewail our sins, and do
penance for them, and the more carefully we do purify our selves from these
daily sins, with the sorrow of penance, so much the more in that spiritual
banquet, shall we receive the abundant fruit of heavenly grace. All this is out
of S. Gregory in which, divinely he puts a difference, betwixt that harm
which mortal sin does work, which is to hinder the whole fruit of the
blessed Sacrament, and to make a man worthy of condemnation: and the harm
which comes by venial sins, if they be not washed away by penance, for
they do much let the wonderful commodity and effects of the holy communion.
And very seriously does he admonish virtuous and just men, to purge them selves
daily from such sins, especially when they mean to communicate, because the
more clear they be from the^, so much the more shall they receive the
plentiful fruit of heavenly gifts and graces, and especially shall they feel
in their soul that divine fullness and inward sweetness which is bestowed
upon them that have the true hunger of God.

Chap. XV.
How to receive fruit of the blessed Sacrament, necessary it is, for a man to
prepare himself with recollection, and meditation: and what manner of
meditations or considerations are good to be used for that purpose.

THE second thing, which the servants of God have to do, is to recollect them
selves before they communicate, to the end they may pray and meditate divine
things, conformable to those documents which we prescribed in the treatise of
prayer: and although a man may out of any matter, which he meditateth, draw
devotion meet for the holy communion: yet the best and most fit considerations
to furnish him self withal for this purpose, be these. Let him meditate upon
the institution of this most holy sacrament in the last supper: how our Lord
rose from the table, took of his garment, and putting a linen cloth about
him, did upon his knees wash his Disciples feet, and afterward when they were
fet, how he took bread and wine into his hands, and by his omnipotent power
did consecrate and change them into his body and blood, which were united to
his soul and divinity, and how when he had first communicated him self, as
many holy men do write, he did straight ways with his own hands distribute
his own body and blood to his Apostles, and withal gave them authority also
to consecrate his body and to give it to all faithful people. Here let a
christian man meditate attentively, that infinite magnificence of the son of
God, that liberality never before heard of, and that unspeakable charity, by
which he voutsafed to give him self, to be eaten in such a wonderful sort,
thereby to bind us unto him by a most straight band of love, and by these
means to heal our infirmities, and to make us after his likeness, holy,
pure, divine, and heavenly. From this consideration, let him labor to procure
a great hunger and very fervent desire to eat this bread of life, and to
draw from it a ready will to please in all things the author of life, who
with so great love, does give himself to us for meat: Let him likewise
consider and ponder, what great purity is required, to come to receive this
divine food, seeing the Apostles that were in the state of grace, and clear
from mortal sins, yet our Savior preparing the^ with more purity for the
receiving of the holy communion, did wash their feet, which was as S. Bernard
Sermon. de cena dom.
says, to purify them by a mystery from their venial sins: For the
affections of the soul which do quickly cleave unto earthly things, be the
feet of our soul, and these we must wash, and make clean to enter into
heaven, and to come unto the holy communion: and this mystery as that blessed
man says, did our Savior represent by that holy kind of washing. Out of this
let a man likewise enforce him self, to be sorry for all his sins, both
mortal and venial, and to purpose the amendment of the^ all: and beholding
how vile, and unworthy he has made himself through his sins, and that so
great purity is required, to receive so infinite majesty, in so much that if
he should prepare him self continuallye, for the space of a thousand years,
to receive him, by devout prayers, holy works, and with the merits of all
Saints, yet all would be very little and nothing, to receive him as he
deserves: let him endeavor also out of this to conceive fear and reverence:
for as from love, desire grows and a ready will, so from holy fear springs
reverence, with which he ought to come to the holy communion. An other
consideration Ambros. de sacram. lib. 6. cap. 1.
wherewith Gods servant may prepare himself to come unto the sacred communion
with devotion is this: Let him consider the dignity, and high majesty of that
Lord, whom he is to receive: let him think, how in Council. Trident. sess.
13. c. 1.
that instant, in which the words of consecration be spoken, the substance of
bread, which remained under the accidents of the host, gives over to be
bread, by the conversion of the same, into the body of Christ, and so the
creature giving place to the creator, in that place where before was the
substance of the bread, succeeds the body of Christ, which was framed by the
holy Ghost, in the womb of the most immaculat Virgin: and because the body of
Christ lives not without blood, there also is present the most precious blood
of Christ, in the veins of his most holy body, and for as much also as the
body of Christ lives not without the soul, there is likewise his most glorious
soul, in which are contained the unspeakable treasures of the power and glory
of God: and for as much as the body and soul of Christ, are united with the
person of God: Christ is God and man, and he that is there contained, is true
God, of infinite majesty and power. After this let him prepare himself to
consider with attention: Now I am to receive God: and that he may the better
understand what a Lord he is, whom he is to receive, let him by meditation,
place himself at the gate of heaven, there let him consider the glory, and
beauty of that supreme majesty, and behoulde, how by his infinite bounty, he
does inflame with wonderful love all the citizens of heaven, and with the
sight of his eternal beauty, does make them all blessed, and infinitlie
delight them. Let him view, with what reverence, all the saints and Angels,
even to the highest Seraphins, do stand in his presence, how they do adore
him, how they do praise him, how they do glorify him, how they do love
him: and after he has spent some time in the admiration of so infinite
greatness, and glory, let him turn unto him self, and think thus in his own
soul. This very God, whose majesty does terrify me, am I to receive into my
mouth and body, this infinite good which does make joyful the city of God, this
self same am I to enclose in mine heart, and this supreme creator of all
things, before whose majesty, the Seraphins and all the glorious company of
heaven, be prostrate with great reverence, him am I to behold, and to touch
under those accidents or outward forms, and to receive in to my body, for the
food of my soul. And this so great a Lord does come unto me, overcome with
love, and drawn by love, and he comes to enamor me of him self, and by
love to turn me into himself, he comes to bestow upon me, the treasures of
his grace and glory, and to translate me from earth to heaven. Out of this
consideration will our soul gather great love, and reverence to come unto the
holy communion: for how can it choose, but be burnt up in love, at the
consideration of so infinite goodness and bounty, who has done so many
things for his love, and who so desires his love: how can it be, that being a
sinner he should not reverence, with an holy kind of fear, that infinite
majesty before whom with the eyes of his soul, he beholds all the princes
of heaven to stand trembling for reverence.

Other considerations, more D Bonau. de prepara. ad missam. cap. 6. and in
fasciculario cap. 8.
proper and more usual, with which the soul has to prepare it self, to
receive this most divine sacrament, be the mysteries of our Saviors passion:
for one of the principal reasons of the institution of this sacrament was, to
the end we should always have present, and lively in our memory, and
affection, the passion of Christ, and all that which he did and suffered for
us, and this is represented unto us, in the mystery of the Mass and Communion,
and therefore a very proper and fit preparation it is before communion, to
discourse by meditation, upon some of the principal mysteries of his passion,
and to entertain our selves for some time with attention, in some one of them.
And from hence shall we also draw as afterward shall be handled, the holy
acts of contrition, fear, thanks giving, love, and resignation of our selves:
in which things consists that devotion which is necessary for the receiving
of the holy communion: and very great reason there is, that we should
undertake this so small a labor, as attentively to consider, what our good
Lord suffered for our sake, seeing him self vouchsafed to suffer for our
love: and this meditation is so effectual and profitable, that by it, we do
dispose our selves, to receive the wonderful effects of this most heavenly
sacrament. This admonition does S. Cirill give us very diuinelye in these
words. I beseech thee, that together In Joan. li. 4. cap. 17.
with thy holy life, thou do prepare thy self to communicate with godly
considerations and believe me, that this blessing of God (for so he calls
the holy sacrament) will deliver thee, not only from death but also from all
the infirmities of thy soul, because by means of this sacrament, Christ
dwells in our souls, and by his virtue does he mittigate and pacify our
passions, and quiet the perturbations of our heart, increase and fortify
piety and all virtue in us, and does deliver us from all sin. Thus writes
S. Cirill. Wherefore let Gods servant, come to the holy communion, and let him
come with a pure intention, and holy purpose, that is, to unite himself unto
Christ by perfect love as to the spouse of his soul, to heal his passions, to
purge him self from sins, to satisfy for the pains thereof, to give
thanks for benefittes received, to find ease and comfort in tribulation, to
overcome some tentation, and finally to obtain some particular grace. Let him
come with consideration, with reverence, with an hunger and desire, springing
from love, and he shall obtain whatsoever he desires, because he is that
good sheepeheard, which says and promises, Math. 11.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are burdened, and I will give you repose
and comfort.

Chap. XVI.
Of that outward reverence, humility, and modesty, with which we ought to
come unto the holy communion.

ALthough the principal devotion, requisite for the holy communion, consists
in the heart, yet because that which is external proceeds from the inward
soul, and God also requires that, I have thought good to set down such
defects, as herein some time do fall out, and to prescribe remedies for the
same. Some persons which are careful to serve God, and often go to
confession, coming to the Altar to communicate be in their gallant, and brave
apparel, their face drowned in their rufs, and with gloves upon their hand; and
to maintain their authority, desirous they are to communicate alone, and to
have a distinct place separat from the rest. All this is contrary to that
reverence which is due to this most holy sacrament, and to that humility with
which necessary it is, that they should come to that divine table. Reverence
therefore requires that they come with plain and simple apparel, with a
comely face and modest hands: And if Saint Paul in prayer only, 1 Timothy 2.
requires this reverence and outward modesty, how much more then convenient
is it that we should have the same, when we come to the holy communion.
Humility also requires, that a man should acknoweledge him self vnvvorthye
to approache unto this holy table, and to think of him self, that any other
person of those which do communicate, deserves at that time the better place,
and also to be ashamed, and confounded, that they will so much as admit him to
the lowest room in that heavenly banquet. If in the feast of a mortal man,
or to eat upon earthly meat, our Savior requires that we should Luc. 14.
come with this humility: how much more necessary is it, that this should be
observed, when we come to this holy banquet, where he that inuiteth us is God,
and the meat which is received is God him self.

Some likewise when they co^municat hold down their heads too low, or do
cover it, and some do not open their mouth in such decent sort as is necessary
for the receiving of the sacred host, and by these disorders they be sometime
the cause that the priest does light with the B. sacrament upon their cloak,
or their lips, or some other part of their face and that sometimes by this
means it breaks and some small piece falls off: wherein they ought to
consider how great an inconvenience this is, seeing in the least piece of all,
the glorious body of Christ is as entire, and with as much majesty, as it is
in the whole host, and as it is in heaven it self. Wherefore to avoid these
inconveniences, and to have that modesty which is necessary, the duty of him
that means to co^municat is, to have his face uncovered, straight, and quiet,
and to use silence when the Priest comes unto him, because it is no time
then to pray vocally, and therefore let him meditate upon some good thing
inwardlye in his soul, and when he is to receive, let him open his mouth
moderately, and put forth his tongue toward his lips, and upon that
receive the sacred host, and when he has taken it, let him not break it, nor
press it with his teeth, but suffer it a little to be moistened, and so to
pass down sweetly, and with reverence: if there be any good external work,
convenient to be well and decently done: how much more ought this, being so
divine, so important, and so much to the glory of God? whereunto that saying of
S. Paul does especially agree. Do all things with 1 Cor. 14.
honesty, comeliness and good order.

Chap. XVII.
Of that quiet and repose, with which we ought to come unto the blessed
sacrament: and what thanks are to be given unto God after the receiving
therefore.

AN other notable defect, into which many persons that frequent the sacraments
do fall, is, that they come to communicate with much have and disquiet, so that
they are scarce entered into the church, or come from the feet of their ghostly
father, but straight way without any more stay, they go to communicate: And
that which is worse, some so soon as they have received, without giving any
more quiet or repose to that heavenly food and without bestowinge any time in
giving of thanks to that divine guest, whom they have entertained, straight
ways go out of the church, fall a talking with others, or else be take them
selves to some other such business. Al these disorders, do much hinder the fruit
of this most holy sacrament: and therefore very necessary it is, to prescribe
some remedy for the cure of the same: wherefore omitting to speak of some
particular case of necessity, in which a man cannot expect, before he does
communicate, nor stay after he has done: that which vsuallye herein is to be
observed is, that when he goes to the holy communion, that he do it with
quiet and repose of mind, forgetting all earthly business and cares, and
committing them to the providence of God, to bestow his whole heart in
thinkinge upon that infinite goodness, which he is to receive, crauinge of
him that he vvoulde vouchsafe to adorn his soul with that humility, that
purity and love which is requisite. And let him stir up him self to do
so, with this consideration: O Lord, if a potent and rich king were to lie
in the house of a poor widdowe, never would he expect that she should
furnish that rome in which he were to lodge, but he would send his servants
before hand, to provide all things in good order. What king is more potent
and rich, then thou O Lord, who art king of kings, and Lord of Lords? and
what creature is more pore or miserable, then my soul? Wherefore seeing thou
vouchsafest to come, and to repose in it, send thy Angels before hand, to
adorn it, to purify it, to illuminate and perfect it, in such sort, as the
superior Angels do purify and illuminate the inferior. Send thy divine
presents, thy perfect gifts, thy heavenly treasures, that my soul with such
celestial furniture may be adorned, and set in that good order, as is
convenient for the lodging of so mighty and heavenly a guest. And because O
Lord, necessary it is, that my soul should also consent and do what lies in
her power, send forth I beseech thee, such forcible favors, and effectual
helps, that may make it wholly, sweetly, and cheerfully, to obey thy divine
will. And when he has craved this of our Savior Christ, let him then turn him
self to the blessed Virgin, and to such Saints as his devotion especially
affects, and crave of them with humilitye that they would obtain for him
the effect of his petition.

After communion, let him entertain himself in the church the space of a little
quarter of an hour when opportunity serves not to do more, and that time let
him bestow in giuinge of thanks to our Lord, for this most high and singular
benefit, and in crauinge at his hands new favors and grace, that he may
serve him better for the time to come. If one had his near kinsman or friend,
which came out of the Indies, with great store of riches, and were desirous to
lodge in his house, and that upon great curtesy and friendship which he bears
him, and with a mind to bestow upon him part of his wealth, certain it is,
that when he saw him enter in at one door, that he would not go out at the
other: but would keep him continual company, and be merry with him, giving
him such entertainment for his welcome, and willingly give him ear whilst he
did discourse of his travails and adventures, and when he came to receive
those rich gifts, which he bestowed upon him, hartelie vvoulde he yield him
thanks, and seeing him of a frank and liberal mind, and desirous to give
yet more, no question but he would demand all that which were necessary for
himself, and his family. In this manner ought we to behave our selves toward
our Savior Christ, after we have communicated: for he comes unto us from the
Indies of heaven, full of celestial riches, which be of divine and infinite
value, and he comes, moved of sincere love to lodge in our soul, to enrich
it: and begins to bestow his gifts and treasures upon us, and has a desire
to give much more: let us not then by and by forget him, and straight ways
busy our minds in other things far different: for what were this else, but
for our Lord to enter in at one door, and for us to go out at an other, which
were contrary to all courtesy, and opposite to all good manners: but let us
keep him company, and be glad of his glory, and all that service which the
Saints in heaven, and the just upon earth do unto him. Let us give him thanks
from the bottom of our heart, for all those benefits which he has bestowed
upon us, especially for this, that he has voursafed to come, and remain in
our soul, by such a mystery and wonderful means. And for this purpose let us
consider who he is that comes, which is God with all his infinite perfection:
and to whom he comes, and that is to a sinful man, who often times has
offended him: and what moves him to come, which is sincere love, and desire of
his good: and wherefore be comes, which is to bestow upon him his merits,
and the fruit of his sacred passion, and death, and the most precious gifts
of his grace, purchased with the incomparable travails and sorrows of thirty
and three years. After that Gods servant has well meditated upon this, let him
offer unto him for a thanks giving all the merits of his most holy passion, and
all the virtues which do shine in that, and relying upon these merits and
joining them in company with those virtues, let him offer unto him, good
purposes of the amendment of his life, and resolute desires to make it much
better: and let him crave pardon of those sins and faults into which he has
fallen, in not communicating with all that purity and deuotition which was
requisite. After all this, let him lay before him all his necessities,
infirmities, ignorances, falls, and all the rest of his miseries, and let him
crave for him self new gifts, graces, virtues, and particular favors, and
withal let him ask the same for all Governors spirituriall and temporal. Let
him pray also for succor and help for all the necessities of the catholic
church both general and particular: for the increase of true faith, religion,
and virtue, for the conversion of infidelles and heritickes, and for the
amendment of all such as profess the true faith of Jesus Christ: and the self
same thing let him also request for all such particular persons as he is
bound unto, or has any special devotion.

And here Gods servant has to understand that of all the times either of the
day or night there is not any one better to meditate, and pray, and to ask
graces at Gods hands then this, in which after he has communicated he has
JESUS Christ present not only as concerning the presence of his divinity,
according to which he is in every place, but also as touching the presence
of his most sacred humanity, which really continues so long in his body, as
the sacramental forms do there remain. Whilst our savior was in this
world in mortal flesh, in all places where he came, he bestowed particular
benefits upon all such as with faith did touch him, or comme^d themselves unto
his divine majesty. He went into the house of Zacheus, and of an usurer made
Luc. 9.
him a just man, and the son of Abraham. He entered into the house of Matthew
the publican, and Math. 9.
made him holy and an Apostle: Travailing upon the way, a woman Math. 9.
that had an issue of blood, did touch him, and forthwith was she cured.
Being by the sea Mar. 4.
of Galile, all that had any infirmities Math. 21.
did touch him, and were made sound. Being in the temple, the blind and the
lame came unto him, and he restored sight to the first, and legs to the last.
Being in the field upon a mountain, there came unto him those which were
possessed of wicked spirits, and they were delivered: there repaired unto him
all that had any infirmities, striving to touch him, and virtue came from him,
and he cured all. That which he did then visiblie, being in the world, the
self same thing does he now invisibly and spiritually being present in the
sacrament, so that such souls, as do entertain him with a lively faith, and
devotion, or having him in their body, come unto him, and with fervent prayers
and desires touch him, those does he deliver from all their evils and does
bestow upon them wonderful benefits, and give unto the^ most precious gifts,
comforts, and very special favors.

Hereof and from the experience of this truth, does it come that many having
communicated, are so willing and desirous to recollecte them selves, and to
think upon our Lord, whom they have received, to give him thanks for this
benefit, and to crave new graces at his hands, to love him more, and better
to serve him, that forgetting all worldly things, and as it were alienated
from them selves, and rapt in God, they would not spend their time in any
other thing then in this kind of exercise. All other business for that time,
do grieve and afflicte them, and this alone does delight and give them
comfort. And therefore when either there own or the necessities of others, or
such things as they are bound to do, by reason of there estate or calling, do
permit them, they do continue long time with great pleasure and content in this
kind of thanks giving. And for as much as holy desires, and effectual
purposes, be tried by the doing of good works: to this thanks giving it
appertains when ability does serve, that a man after he has received the
blessed sacrament and with his heart yielded thanks as has now been said,
should show him self also indeed thankful for so great a benefit, and
do that day as he can, and is able, some work of charity, and mercy, for
the commodity of his neighbors: as to give somewhat in alms, to visit some body
that is sick, to comfort some that is in misery, to teach some that is
ignorant, or to do some other spiritual or corporal work of mercy. For
great reason there is, that upon that day in which the king of glory has
given him so great a pledge of his love, and has showed him such unspeakable
mercy, that he should make his love likewise manifest in the works of charity
toward his neighbor, using mercy and compassion toward him, for this is the
proof that God requires of us for a testimony of our love according to that
of Saint John. This precept we have received from John. 4.
God, that he which loves God, should for his sake love his neighbor and
brother.

Chap. XVIII.
How to abstain from the sacrament of the Altar without just cause, is an
impediment to spiritual profit, and how that neither for negligence, or lack
of sensible devotion, a man should give over the holy communion.

Amongst such persons as have begone to serve god, and for that end do help
them selves, with the holy and laudable custom of often repairing to the B.
Sacrament: many there be, which abstain from their ordinary custom of
communicating, which they did use once or twice a week, or every fifteen
days, according to the counsel of their ghostly father: Such as do so, by
order from him, who for just respects does think it so convenient,
certainelye they do very well, to obey and follow that which he prescribes,
and nothing shall they lose thereby, because that which seems one way to be
denied them, if with humility they be obedient, GOD will recompense it an
other, besto weing upon them new favors and mercies, and giving them such a
disposition, by reason whereof, at one communion done upon obedience to their
ghostly father, they shall receive more grace and comfort then at many, taken
upon their own will, as afterward shall be handled. But speaking of such
persons, as (not by order from their ghostlye father, nor by his will and
direction) do give over that custom of communicating, which they had, and
their confessor did well like of, I say that those which do so only upon
carelesnes and negligence, as not to give over their other worldly business,
or not to take the pain to prepare themselves, or not to bind themselves to
that care and watch fulness in leading of a good and virtuous life, a that holy
custom requires, plain it is, and apparent to all such as have reason, that
they are worthy of blame, and to be condemned of a fault, seeing they do
without any just cause give over so good a custo^e: so glorious to God, and so
important and profitable for their own salvation, as before was declared in
the beginning of this treatise.

Other there be, which abstain from the B. Sacrament upon other causes more
apparent, in which the fault or error, that they commit, and the harm they
incur, is not so easily perceived. One of these is, because having at other
times been visited of God, when they did communicate, he preparing them for it,
with a spiritual hunger and lively desire of the communion, and helping them
with spiritual light to meditate the mysteries of this divine sacrament, and
to receive it with fervor of spirit, with sweetness of love, and devotion:
and giving them when they did communicate, heavenly motions, celestial
comforts, wonderful peace, and tranquillity of conscience, sweet meditations,
great alacrity, and vigor of mind, for all good works: and seeing themselves
now deprived of all these good things, and that they have no hunger, nor
desire to communicate, but faintness and dullness of soul: that they have no
light to contemplate this or any other mystery, but a darkness and confusion
in their understanding: that they have not any feruor or devotion, to the B.
Sacrament, but a dry and cold disposition: and that also when they do
communicate they feel not in their soul any spiritual taste or comfort, and
that after they have received the Sacrament they find not any spirit or
alacrity to good works, but a loathsomeness to pray, and a grief and
heaviness to all kind of virtue. When therefore these persons find this
great mutation in themselves, they verily think that they be not well
prepared to communicate, and that Gods pleasure is that they should not do
it, and for as much as great devotion is required to come to the holy
communion, which they want, therefore they suppose that they ought not by
any means to do it, and although their ghostly father does advise them to
communicate, yet can they not be persuaded to follow his counsel, or that it
is convenient for them so to do.

Such persons as these ought to consider what in this case they have to do,
and that is, that this mutation which they feel in them selves, is a proof
and trial of God, and that his pleasure is, that as when he sent them the
sweetness of his benediction, they were animated to communicate, and to do
other good works, by reason of those motions and sensible effects of his
divine presence, which they found in their soul: so in like manner, that they
should now be moved to go unto the holy communion, and to do other good works
by the only direction and persuasion of faith, not void of charity, but void of
the feeling and experimental motion thereof, and be encouraged to work and
labor in the service of god, moved only of an effectual good will, which is
the principal part of charity, without any other sweet visitatio^s and
co^forts, which according to Gods pleasure proceed from charity, and do make
the works thereof easy and pleasant. And if in this manner they do
communicate, and do good works and persevere in all their virtuous exercises,
moved by faith, and upon a good mind, then do they keep that fidelity and
loyalty which they owe unto God, serving him not only in the time of
prosperity, but also in the time of adversity and tribulation: and not only in
the time of sweetness and comfort, but also in the time of grief and
desolation. And let them know, that by such a communion, and such services
done in the time of adversity and discomforts, they do content, please, and
glorify God, and merit for themselves grace and glory no less, nay more, then
in the time of prosperity and spiritual comfort, because perseuering in this
manner, they overcome, deny, and mortify them selves the more, for the love
of God. And such persons are to know, that the want of devotion, which (as
before has been said) is an impediment In this treatise cha. 13
for the receiving of the sacred communion, is that which is voluntary and
comes of carelesnes and negligence, and because a man will not do that which
lies in him to come with devotion: but when the lack thereof is not
volu^tary, because a man with the help of Gods grace, does use all those
means which for his part are necessary, as in purging his conscience by
confession and contrition, from all his sins both great and small, and
preparing himself to communicate with prayer and meditation, then the want of
devotion does not hinder the abunda^t fruit of the holy communion: for
although sensible devotion he has not, yet has he that which is the best
and most principal, to wit that which consists in purity and good will, and
a true desire to please God, and to do his holy will.

Such persons ought likewise to consider, that as this mutation which they
feel in their soul, is a trial of God, and that if they persevere in
frequentinge the holy sacrament, and exercise of good works, that they do
perform that fidelitye which they owe unto God: so ought they also to perswad
them selves that if for this cause they should abstain from the holy
communion, and become more slow in doing of good works, that it is the
tentation of the ghostly enemy, to make them lose the fruit of the blessed
Sacrament and the merit of good works, and so to have an entry into their
souls by his temptations and deceits. And as that brave captain Holosernes
Judith. 7.
did, who to take the city of Bethulia that was so strong and well manned,
cut in two the conduits, by which the water passed from the fountain into
the city: and by this means was he ready to have taken it, had not God
miraculously delivered them: even so deals the prince of darkness, who seeing
that from Christ who is the fountain of all graces, our succor and help does
come, to defend us from his assaults, by means of the Sacraments, desirous
he is to break and cut in two these heavenly conduits and divine pipes,
casting impedime^ts before us, that we may not frequent the^. Palladius
reports how a certain very In historia Lausaica in vita S. Macarij.
virtuous woman which did frequente the sacraments was by a wicked man
tempted, to commit sin, which she utterly detested: whereupon the
graceless wreatch dealt with a coniurer, who by the art of the Devil labored
to induce the woman to yield her consent, but still she resisted valiantly, and
never would be persuaded to consent unto any such damnable suggestion. The
Devil seeing that he could not hurt her soul, labored to change her outward
form and shape, to the eyes of men: and so he transformed her, that such as
beheld her, took her not for a woman, but verelye thought her to be a mare.
Whereupon in the company of her husband, she went for help unto S. Macharius,
who casting holy water upon her, delivered her from that illusion: and he told
her, that the reason why the Devil had such power over her, was, because she
was negligent in repairing to the sacraments as having not been at the holy
communion of five weeks before, and the holy man gave her counsel never after
to be careless therein, speaking thus to her in great zeal. Never (quoth he)
abstain from the communion of the most pure sacraments of Christ, because for
this negligence this evil has befallen you, for it is five weeks since you
were at them.

This is that which the Devil pretends, when he persuades a man to
abstain from the holy communion, to deprive his soul of the guard and defense
of the sacraments: that findinge it weak and careless, he may by his
tentations and deceits overcome it: and therefore Gods servant ought to resist
the tentatio^, and not for this cause to refrain from the holy communion. The
veritye of this doctrine our Savior Christ taught blessed Saint In lib. ab
ipsa script.
Katherine of Bononia who having for some years endured most pitiful
tentations of drines of spirit, of being forsaken, of distrust and tentations
against the faith of this most holy sacrament, yet she resisted valia^tly, and
perseuering with great constancy in frequenting of the sacraments, and in all
other exercises of prayers, and good works, our Savior Christ voutsafed at
length again to visit his servant, and amongst other things he told her, how
that when any person did communicate, with a good conscience, although it were
without feelinge of devotion, yet did he for all that receive the grace of the
sacrament, and although he were tempted in faith or troubled with any other
te^tation, yet if he gave no consent, he did not for all that leave of, to
receive the plentiful fruit of the sacrament: And that such a man, did not
only gain more by fighting against such tentations, but also by communicating
did merit much more then if he should receive the sacrament with much sweetness,
and sensible devotion, which is to be understood when the want thereof
proceeds not from the fault and negligence of the person him self, but by the
providence of God, who does by such means try and prove his servant, as now
has been declared.

Chap. XIX.
How for scruples and vain fears, we ought not to abstain from the holy
communion.

OTher persons there be, which although they have not found any such mutation
in their hearts, yet being of a good conscience, they abstain from the B.
Sacrament, contrary to the mind and counsel of their ghostlye father, moved
upon scruples and vain fears, and because they think not themselves worthy to
repair so often to receive the food of Angels, and that it should be in them
more reverence to abstain from the communion. And when this temptation falls
to Priests, the servants of God, it is a thing of greater harm, because it
does not only deprive them of the profit of the sacrament, but also the whole
church of the fruit of the sacrifice, seeing certain it is as S. Bonauenture
and other holy Lib. de preparat. ad missam. ca. 5.
men do teach, that so often as a Priest may lawfully celebrate, and yet does
not, that he does what in him is, deprive the most holy Trinity of glory, and
praise, the Angels of joy, sinners of pardon, the just of grace and succor,
the souls in purgatory of ease and comfort, and the whole church of a singular
benefit. The remedy against this tentation is, for a man to believe his ghostly
father and to rely upon him, and to do against his scruples as else where has
been said. And here we have to note, that to come worthily and with due
reverence unto this most holy and worthy sacrament, may be understood two
manner of ways: one is comfortable to the dignity and puritye of that Lord
whom we receive, and that which his infinite majesty deserves: and in this
manner none comes worthily, and with due reverence, no though one should
bestow time in preparing him self to co^municat so long as the world shall
endure, no nor though he alone should have all the puritye and holiness of
all the just men upon earth, and all the Saints in heaven. An other manner to
come worthily, and with due reurence, is in respect of that which God of
necessity does require at our hands, and by band of precepte: and in this
sort, all those that come so disposed, as in the premises has bin handled,
do come worthily, and with due reverence: because God of his infinite piety
condescending to our infirmitye, vvoulde not bind us to any more. And seeing
to judge whether in this sense the penitent has due disposition or no,
pertains to the ghostlye father, who is wise and of a good conscience, a man
may securely follow that which he shall advise him. And that Gods will is, that
a man should overcome such scruples and fears, by the means of good counsel,
God has by many Petrus de Aliaco in eius vita. Surius in Maio.
testimonies declared. Saint Peter Celestinus, who from the state of a pore
Monk, was for his great holiness of life, chose^ to be Pope, moved upon fear
that he was a most unworthy sinner, lacked virtue, and for other such like
reasons, would neither celebrat, nor communicate. Whereupon touching this
point he craved counsel of a Monk his ghostly father, who did encourage him
to overcome those fears and to say Mass, which he did: and our Savior
apearing to him, taught him the same lesson, and so he remained joyful, and
with great quiet of conscience. Cassius an holy man and Bishop of Narnium did
daily say Mass, to the great profit of his soul: and to the end he should not
for any such fear give over that good custom, S. Gregory reports how God
sent unto him an holy priest, to whom he appeared, to deliver him this message.
Do that thou do, work that 4 Dialog. cap. 56.
thou workest, let not thy foot cease, let not thy hand cease, and I will give
thee thy reward: exhorting him by these words to persevere in his good life,
and holy custom of saying Mass. The reason why God did thus comfort and
animate these holy men by special reuelatio^s, was to teach all, that his
pleasure is, that his servants which frequent this divine sacrament, should
quiet and assure the^ selves touching this matter by obeying the counsel of
wise men, for this was the rule which these holy men did follow and that which
God did allow of.

Chap. XX.
With what moderation we ought to frequent the holy communion, that we do not
therein exceed, nor do any thing contrary to due reverence: and how we
ought to leave this to the judgment of a discreet ghostly father.

AS there be some persons, which with hurt to their souls, do without any
just cause refrain to communicate often, as has been now said: so there be
others which do exceed in the other extreme desiring to come oftener, the^
is convenient: Of these some are moved so to do, upon the common conceit and
opinion which they have of the fruit that is received in the holy communion:
others because they have had sometimes experience of the comfort and sweetness
of this most heavenly sacrament: Others are moved upon a kind of lightness,
which is for emulation one of an other, and to maintain their good opinion,
and not to be accounted less virtuous then others, and therefore are they
angry and do complain and be out of patience when they are not suffered to
communicate, which is a plain sign that they are not moved of any good
spirit, but provoked of lightness: For all these kind of persons, the doctrine of
this chapter shall serve: and it is a thing of great importance, and much to
the glory of God, assuredly to take the middle way in this holy exercise,
without falling either into the one extreme, or the other.

As touching the first, certain it is, that all secular persons, as well men as
women, must not herein be ruled according to their own opinion, neither
must they follow their own content, their own comfort, nor their own
inclination, but they must submit themselves to the counsel and direction of
their ghostly father: for if in religious people, the rule of their order and
obedience to their superiors do in this thing prescribe them that measure and
moderation, which they ought to keep: reason it is, that such as be not in
religion, that their ghostlye father who knows the state of their soul,
should appoint them that rule which they ought to observe: And the confessor
or spiritual father, who^ for this purpose they should make choice of, ought
to be wise, of experience, and one that fears God, and that should not herein
respect the comfort of the penitent, or to get credit with him, or any such
like thing, but only that which is most convenient for the glory and service of
God, and the good of men's souls. And the penitent ought not herein to labor
either by importunity, or entreaty, or any other such means to draw his
ghostly father to that which pleases himself, for that were not to obey him,
but contrariewise for the ghostly father to obey the will of his penitent, and
so his judgment and opinion should in this case be erromous: but the penitent
ought to leave his confessor free, to determine that which in our Lord he
shall think most expedient, and let him show plainly that it shall well content
him whatsoever he does therein determine and set down. And let him also take
heed that he go not for this end up and down seeking such a ghostly father
as does best fit his humor, for then in punnishment of so disordinate an
affection, God will permit him to be deceived, as it happens to some persons
which consult about this point (as also in others) many ghostly fathers, Note.
going from one to an other with a desire to find out him, that would tell
them that which the^ selves would have, and when they light upon such a one,
he is the only man that does please them, and him they prefer before all
other: and alas, pitifully are they deceived, for doing thus, they do not
conform themselves to the will of God, but to their own pleasure and liking.
Therefore that which Gods servant has to do, not to be deceived herein, is
not to have any respect to his own pleasure and opinion, but to desire only,
that the will of god and that which is most for his honor may be done: and so
let him co^sult with his ordinary ghostly father, and if he think not him
sufficient, let him go to an other, not him that is most for his own humor,
but him in whom by the report of wise and judicial men, those virtues are to
be found which for this matter is requisite. And let him crave of God that he
vvoulde put into his heart, that counsel, which may direct him better in
his holy service, and that which may more redounde to the glory of the same
God, and the profit of his own soul. And having done thus, let him very
quietly follow that counsel which he shall give him, and be obedient,
trusting in God, that when other direction shall be more convenient, that he
will inspire it into the heart of his ghostlye father, that he may give order
accordingly. The holy virgin S. Lutgarde being a religious woman, did use to
communicate every week, and this leave which they gave her, is agreeable to
the mind of S. Augustine: very well Thomas Cantipratensis in eius vita. Surius
in Iumo.
content she was. The Abbess which had charge over her, thinking that this
was to much, gave order that she should not communicate so often, wherein she
showed her self very obedient, and God who had care of his servant, did
reveal unto the Abbess, that his pleasure was, that his servant should keep
her old holy custom, and so her former leave taken away, was by her superior
restored again.

Chap. XXI.
Of such rules as holy men prescribe, concerning the often receiving of the B.
Sacrament.

PResupposing that the judgment how often in a week or month, Gods servant
has to communicate that desires his own spiritual profit, ought to be left
to the discretion of his ghostly father: convenient it is to set down those
rules which holy men herein prescribe, that the confessor may know what he
has to do: for he has to understand that it imports much to be assured
herein, and not to proceed at random but to follow that light which God has
left in his church.

Certain it is, that in the use of the holy communion, Gods will is, that there
should be an order and moderation, how often one should co^municat, and that it
should not be as men themselves list and desire. And this his will has he
declared in that he has by his church commanded under pain of mortal sin,
that no priest or prelat though Alex. Papa cap sufficit de consecrat. did. 1.
Halensis p. 4 q. 52. mem 3.
never so holy, should usually celebrate or communicate more then once a day.
And the cause why the church has so declared is as Pope Alexander says, and
others affirm, for the great reverence which is due to the B. sacrament, to
which reverence it appertains, that a man should not go to it, so often as
himself pleases. If then for celebrating and receiving when one celebrate,
being yet the common good of the church, Gods pleasure is, that an order should
be set down and has declared it in that very thing wherein his great glory,
and the profit of the whole church consists, that due reverence to the B.
sacrament, might be preserved, by celebrating ordinarily no more then once a
day, rather then he would that great profit which might redounde to the
church, if every priest might often celebrat in one day: hereof does it follow,
that it is great reason and very meet, that in particular co^munio^s, in which
the common good of the who! church is not so furthered, as by the sacrifice of
the Mass, that there should be a straighter order and more moderation be used
to preserve due reverence unto so holy a sacrament.

The rule which holy men do D Thom. in Paul. 1. Cor. 11. lect. 7.
in this matter prescribe is, that when the ghostlye father perceaueth that one
has purity of Gerson de cognitione peccativenialis. p. 2.
heart and true devotion to communicate, and the more that he does communicate,
the more he increases in purity, and does more diminish his venial sins,
proceed more forward in devotion and fervor, in patience, and charity, and
in all kind of virtue: to this man convenient it is, that he should give
leave to repair more often to the holy communion: but when he sees one that
frequenteth the communion, to lack true devotion for that sacrament, and that
he does thereby little profit, because he keeps still his former passions of
anger, impatience, and pride, has small care of his tongue, and does easily
without any resistance fall into venial sins, which do breed a kind of
coldness in his soul, to him he must prescribe abstinence and not to come so
often. This opinion, which is of all holy men S. Bonauenture does express in
these words. In the primative church, 4 Sent. d. 12 ar vlt q. 2.
christians had great purity of soul, and were fervent in charity, and so they
might daily receive the holy communion: after that this great purity was lost,
and that great feruor of charity waxed more cold, and lukewarm disposition
entered in: he that now has that purity and burning charity of the primative
church, may likewise communicate every day: but he that lives coldely let him
come but seldom, and he that is in a mean, that is such a one, who though he
has not that great feruor and purity of the primative church, yet is he not
lukewarm, but does proceed in virtue and walk forward to arrive unto that
great feruor, such a one must keep a mean in frequenting of the communion, that
he may join love with reverence, in such sort, that coming often to the
blessed sacrament, he may be inflamed with love, and abstaining for some days
he may learn to have it in reverence. Thus says S. Bonauenture. And S. Thomas
affirms 3. par q. 80. ar. 10.
the same thing in these words. He that finds himself prepared with
devotion and reverence, may communicate daiely: for upon this reason in the
primative church, the faithful did communicate every day: for then great
devotion did flourish amongst them, but after that charity waxed more cold,
that counsel which is to be given to Christians is, that they communicate
every Sunday. This is the opinion of S. Thomas, and he does confirm it with
the authority of Saint De ecclesi. dogmat. cap. 33. and cap. quotidie did. 2.
Augustine and the doctrine of Gods church.

Chap. XXII.
Of that discretion, which ghostly fathers ought herein to observe, according
to the doctrine of holy men.

OVT of this doctrine of holy men, we may gather, what discretion ghostlye
fathers have in these our days to observe in grauntinge or denyinge leave to
communicate. To such persons that be indeed truly resolved to serve God,
license may be given to communicate once in a fortnight, or once in eight
days. Some Doctors think that leave Soto in 4. did. 22. q. 1 ar. 10.
to co^municat every eight days, ought not to be given but to such as be of
rare virtue, but according to the counsel of S. Augustine, in these times where
there is much frequenting of the sacraments, it may be granted to all them,
which truly have begone a new life and do with care avoid and fly from great
sins.

To such as be very devout, and of whom they have experience that they do
notably profit by frequenting the sacraments and that they do daily increase
in devotion and purity of life, they may grant leave to communicate twice a
week: and when any particular necessity does occur, or in persons of
great perfection, or upon some special devotion, and hunger of this bread of
life, for a week or two to communicate once more seems not excessive, albeit
great reason there is, that the ghostlye father should well consider and
think upon the matter, and not be moved so much for the comfort of the
penitents, as for that he thinks he has sufficient reason so to do.

To such persons as have begone to frequent the holy communion, and do reap
little profit thereby, and experience teaches that they do not overcome, nor
mortify them selves as reason would, nor aspire to more virtue and a better
life, but that through their own fault they live in a cold kind of sort, and
want devotion: convenient it is to deprive them of some co^munions, to the end
they may learn to fear, and by that means humble themselves, and make more
account of the B. sacrament, and to prepare themselves with more devotion for
the receiving thereof: and especially this kind of rigor and proof is to be
used toward those that desire for their own pleasure to communicate, and
that as a thing due to them of justice, and be grieved and complain if this
leave be denied the^, for this is a very great presumption, and plain token,
that such souls, are far from true humility, and the knoweledg of their own
unworthiness, and of that reverence which they ought to bring unto so
heavenly a banquet. And let not the ghostly father, any thing fear, that
denying some times the sacred communion to all such persons as these, and for
such causes as these be, that he does them any harm, in depriving them of that
profitte, which by communicating they might receive, because our Lord that
likes well to deprive his church of the infinite suffrages of holy Masses, by
not giving license, ordinarily to celebrate any more then once a day, for to
preserve that reverence, which is due to this most sacred mystery as before
has been said, it shall likewise Cap. 21.
please him very well, that such persons be deprived of many communions, to
preserve in them and others that reverence which is due to this most holy
sacrament. And if they do take this cross and trial in good part, humblinge
themselves, and willingly obey, they take not harm, but profit, because as
holy Doctors affirm D Bonau. 4. d. 12. ar. 4. q. 1. Soto in 4. d 11. q. 2. ar.
8.
and experience does teach the same, that such as come to communicate with a
cold kind of devotion, through their own fault, although they be in the
state of grace, yet small is the increase of grace which this most divine
sacrament does work, whereas it is most plentiful and wonderful which it
does effect in them that come with that disposition which is convenient: and so
by that fear and humilitye which they conceive by this pu^nishment it will
come to pass that one communion will be unto them more profitable, the^ many
others, unto which they come with careless preparation: And sufficient it is,
that this is the doctrine and counsel of holy men, that the ghostlye father,
who is Gods servant, may believe it and effectually put it in practice: Saint
In breuiloquio p. 6. cap. 9.
Bonauenture speaking of this very matter has these words. Those which
intend to communicate, and perceive themselves not so pure, or do find
themselves without devotion, let them take this counsel, and deserre their
communion until they be better prepared. And the holy man does speak of
those, who though they be confessed and in good state, yet through their
negligence they find themselves somewhat cold, and dry, and not so pure from
venial sins, and so devout as were convenient: for these he says, that it
is better and more wholesome counsel, to defer a day or somewhat longer their
communion, until they be better prepared.

And to that which some may obiecte against this advise, saying, that although
it be good for a man to abstain from the communion, upon fear and reverence,
to so holy a mystery: that yet it is better to come unto it, upon love, and for
desire of so infinite good: the holy Doctor does answer in these words: Both
affections are commended and praised in the Scripture, and so we see that
Zacheus is commended for that he received readily and with joy our Savior In
fascicul. cap. 8.
into his house: and the Centurion praised, that for humility and reverence
and knowing his own unworthiness, and the majesty of our Lord, he did
beseech him not to enter under his roof, and necessary it is for the holy
communion, to preserve both these affections, and that we do in such manner
reverence this most high sacrament, in which GOD himself is given us for
meat, that in like sort we do desire it, and with confidence come unto it:
and that we do in such wise desire it, and have confidence in him, that we
lose not that fear and reverence which we owe unto him. And although love of
his own nature be better then fear, yet in some cases and in some persons,
the affection of fear is more convenient, and it would be more hurtful and
dangerous to be carried away with desire, and that affection which seems to
be of love. All this is out of Saint Bonauenture And that which in brief he
would say is, that he which is with purity and requisite devotion prepared for
the holy communion, that it is better to receive it, moved with love, then
for fear to abstain, but he that lacks that disposition, and through his
carelessness is somewhat cold and indeuout, better it is, moved with holy
fear to defer it for a day or more, until he be better furnished with
devotion: not doing this upon his own head or pleasure, but governed by the
counsel of his ghostlye father. And to that which some might object, that by
this means the profit which by often communicating might be gained is lost,
the holy man does also answer in these words: To some it is more profitable
to defer somewhat the communion, to the end they may come unto it afterward
with more reverence and devotion: because as I think, one receaueth more
fruit at one communion, coming well prepared, then by many to which he
comes without any diligent preparation.

Chap. XXIII.
Wherein is declared, whether the holy communion ought daily to be given to
some persons of our time.

OVt of this doctrine of holy men before mentioned and set down for a ground,
we gather how rare the virtue of that person ought to be, to whom license
should be granted dailye to receive the blessed sacrament, and how much, many
ghostly fathers are deceived, that herein make no difficulty at all: And
besides the reason already alleged, which is that holy men do say that the
persons to whom this leave should be given, ought to be of that great purity
of soul, and to have that wonderful burninge charity, which flourished in the
christians of the primative church when the hearts of all was but one, and the
soul through the straight band of love one, and and when charity and mercy
made the goods of each man common to all: besides this reason, many other
there be, worthy of great consideration, which here I will set down. Most
certain it is, that who soever does communicate every day, that his ghostly
father does give him an open testimony, that he is one of very singular
virtue, for this is a general received opinion among all people, that it does
not pertain to any, dailye to communicate but to holy persons: and thereforre
it is a thing well to be considered, how great danger of presumption and
vain glory it is for weak souls, and subject to tentation, although very
devout and virtuous, that they should understand that their ghostly father
has such an opinion of their virtue: and that people look upon them with
such eyes, and such a conceit of holy persons. Ignorant we are not, and
experience teaches, how passinge hard it is, to overcome well the temptation
of honor and vvorldly praise when it is offered, as Saint Augustine does
excellently note in these words. How great forces the love of honor and Epist.
64 ad Aurelium
worldely praise has to overcome ones soul, and to make it fall, none know
but he that has much fought against that tentation, for although there be
no great difficulty to abstain from honor and praise when they are denied a
man, yet when they are offered, very hard it is not to take vain pleasure
therein: Ignorant also we are not, how by offering themselves to the occasions
of this tentation in receiving honor and worldly praise, many persons of a good
and rare life, and those which with great travail had gotten much virtue, and
great store of spiritual riches, in the service of God, in Homil. 3 in 1.
Johan. and hom. 17. in cap. 10. ad Roman.
short time lost all, as Saint Chrysostom affirms: because when vain
glory did tempt the^, they were overcome and pitifully overtaken with that
vice, in such sort, that leaving the creator, they put their chief felicitye
in the creature. Seeing then it is so hard to overcome the tentation of honor
and worldly commendation when it is offered, and that so many persons famous
for virtue, have upon these rocks suffered ship-wracke, and been cast away in
this tempest, no sufficient reason there is that discreet ghostly fathers,
should offer weak and feeble souls, though never so devout and virtuous, to
so great a danger: but rather necessary it is, that they should norish them in
true humility, labor to have them well rooted in that virtue, and to preserve
them therein: and to effect this, very convenient it is, that the ghostly
father should by no means let the^ understand that others have any great
conceit and opinion of them, and that he should, what he can conveniently,
take from them the occasions of all pride, as singular things be, which may
make them to be famous in the sight of the world, and any thing else that may
bring them honor and reputation: and to induce them what he can to conceal all
show of holiness, according to that which else where has been said,
entreating of the virtue of humility. And certain it is, that many ghostlye
fathers because they have without discretion, commended their spiritull
children, set out their virtues, and given them occasion to make ostentatio^
thereof, that they have been the cause that many tender plants have with the
northern wind of pride withered: and many that were well grown, have by the
just judgment of God, bin pulled up by the roots, whom for their ingratitude
and vanity he has permitted to fall. To this may be added that by granting
such leave, they give occasion to others that be yet in firm and not so well
prepared, that they also be stirred up with emulation, and do desire and
procure the same, and that with out the counsel and leave of their ghostly
father they venture upon it, supposing it to be very well done, seeing the like
leave is given to others, who are in their opinion but little their superiors in
virtue. They be the occasion also that when any such person turn backewarde,
that frequentinge of the holy sacraments, is much infamed and discredited
among worldly men, and that their tongues do readilye speak evil both of the
penitents that come often unto the^, and also of their ghostly fathers. And
reason it is, as much as we may with out any prejudice to virtue, that we
should not give any such occasion to weak people. Out of these reasons we
have to learn, that in these times those persons which may daily come to the
holy communion, ought to be passing well grounded in profounde humility, and so
tried with injuries, contempts, and diverse kinds of tribulation, until they
come to love them, and to thirst after them, and that they be fortified with
perfect and sound virtues like unto Saint Clare, or Saint Katherine of Sienna,
that the burden of these tentations do not make them to fall: and that their
rare and extraordinarye virtue be so great, and so well known, that all
emulation of others may be cut of, and such inconveniences as has now been
spoken of, and others which may be objected. For certain it is, that in the
primative church, those which did dailye communicate were of great virtue as
has bin said, and that in these days, such special persons to whom this
license is to be given, requisite it is, that they should be furnished with
more virtue, then that which was at that time common and usual among
christians, because that being then the custo^e and common use, the tentation
of emulation, and other occasions before mentioned had no place: For none had
any cause to think that he was reputed far more holy then other, for, having
that leave granted which was given to all: nor any could take occasion of
envy or emulation, seeing themselves might do that which they saw others do.
And if any think that it does hereof follow, that few will be found to whom
license daily may be now given, because they be very rare that be of such
singular and eminent virtue, and be free from those occasions and
inconuenie^ces, which before have bin spoken of, I say that most true it is,
and that hereof no harm does follow, but the more glory of God, and very
great profitte to men's souls, for as much as hereby that is done which is
most convenient in respect of that reverence which is due to the blessed
Sacrament, and the occasions of many sins are cut of, and good people be the
more stirred up to have the holy communion in greater reputation, and to
prepare them selves for the receiving thereof, with more reverence, more
purity, and devotion: so that by this means, one communion is more profitable
unto them, then many others would be, as before has been said. And by doing
thus we do also faithfully observe the doctrine of the gospel and holy men:
for by this kind of obedience we perform that which the law of love does
require in the use of the holy sacrament, by taking the benefit of that large
leave, which we have granted in repairing often to the holy sacrament, and yet
we do not forget that holy fear and due reverence, which ought to be
joined with love. And for a couclusion, let Gods servant persuade himself, that
although he ought to desire, and to endeavor often to come unto the holy
communion with due modesty, yet his principal care ought to be, that when he
communicates that it be done well, and with that preparation which is
requisite: wherefore let him provide him self with great humility,
acknovveledging himself far unworthy to come unto the holy communion, and
placing himself, with contempt of himself, in the very bottom of his own
unworthiness, let him come with great purity, extending his contrition and the
purpose of amendment to all his sins, both great and small, which he has
both committed and may commit: Let him also for the purchasing of this purity,
help him self with the sacrament of confession, although his conscience does
not accuse him of any other sins the^ venial, and those also of the lesser
sort: Let him come with great hunger of this divine banquet, and with a lively
desire, to unite himself unto God with most fervent love by means thereof:
Let him come offering himself wholly and perfectly to perform his divine
will. O what an heavenly storehouse of spiritual medicines shall he find,
for the curing of all the wounds and infirmities of his soul: O what an holy
table full of divine food, and celestial comforts shall he have, to satisfy
his hunger, to strengthen his weakness, and to glad his heart and make it
joyful: O what a rich shop and plentiful, shall he find full of divine
virtues, and iewelles, full of spiritual and celestial gifts, to adorn and
beautify his soul: O what Indies shall he meet with, to enrich it with
heavenly wealth, divine furniture, and the treasures of Gods grace. Blessed be
our good Lord, and magnified be his holy name for ever, who fo bou^tifully
and in such plentiful manner, has opened the bowelles of his infinite and
unspeakable mercy, that by one divine and sacred morsel, which pure souls do
with so great comfort, and sweetness receive in this most heavenly banquet, he
has voutsafed to bestow upon us mortal men all those goods, and spiritual
riches, which for the space of three and thirty years living in the pilgrimage
of this life, and vale of misery: yea suffering, and at last also dying upon
the Cross, he did gain and purchase for us most unworthy and miserable
sinners.


