THE CHRISTIAN SCHOOLE-MAISTER, OR A DIALOGVE Between the Master and the
Scholar.

By G. E. Minister of Gods word.



Prou. 22. 9. Instruct a Child in the Trade of his way, and when he is old,
he shall not depart from it. LONDON, Printed by Tho: Creed, and are to be sold
by Will. Barringer, at his shop, near the great North door of S. Paul's Church,
1613.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER,
IT is the office and duty of every good child, that carefully and
studiously labors to obey and follow his Fathers precepts and
commandments, principally before all things, to endeavor to know perfectly the
nature and condition of his Fathers will, whereof (if he be ignorant) many
times in the same things he judges best and most pleasing, he most
offends, and incurreth greatest displeasure. Even so, we that be Subjects
and Children to the great GOD, and Almighty Creator of all that heaven and
Earth contains, can do nothing grateful and acceptable unto his Majesty,
except we first know his good will and pleasure toward us, concerning our
duties in belief, life and conversation: In the knowledge whereof, that we
might have a settled foundation, and familiar education, this ensuing
Cat^^^i^me. is collected and gathered from the Sacred Word and will of
Almighty God, contained in the Old and New Testament.

The commandment of God, to teach and instruct children in religion is
general, and pertains to all men of every age and time: and therefore as well
unto us as to the Jews, it is said, Teach (...) like of them when thou art in
thine house, and as thou walk by the wa^, when thou li^st down, and when
thou risest up; Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Whereupon ^. Paul says, And you Fathers provoke
not your Children to wrath, but bring them up in Instruction, and Information
in the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 4.

There is but one and the same corruption of nature, and our Children are as
well conceived and borne in sin, as the children of our forefathers, which
corruption must be reformed by careful and diligent instruction, and long
custom, even from tender years; and this especially is required in the
children of the Faithful and believers: who seeing they belong to Gods Church,
and our Savior Christ commanded them to be brought unto him; It were a most
heinous fault, and odious shame, if they should be found untaught, and
ignorant of the doctrine of Christ and his Church.

Therefore Solomon most wisely counsels in the 12. of his Proverbs, Instruct
a Child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart from
it: That is, If you would have him lead his life godly, justly, honestly,
and virtuously, you must instruct him when he is young, in all those things
which belong to the service of God, to the society of men, and to all special
duties.

Consecrate unto me (says the Lord) every one that first opens the Womb
amongst the children of Israel: Exodus 13. By which Ceremony, God did not
only call to their remembrance the benefit long before showed their Fathers in
Egypt, and thereby confirm them in the Faith of Redemption that was to come;
but also put them in mind of their duty, that they ought to consecrate unto
him whatsoever was most precious, and even their Children especially; For
though all were not admitted to the Priest-hoode, yet all were to be
instructed in the knowledge of God, and though the outward Ceremony thereof,
together with the rest be abolished in Christ, yet the commandment remains:
whereby we are even at this day bound to the like holy presentation of their
souls.

For the performance of this, did the mother of Samuel voluntarily bind her
self unto God, saying: If thou will give unto thy Handmaide a man child, then
will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life. 1. Sam. 1. 11. This
did Joseph and Marie diligently observe toward CHRIST whom both according as
it is written in the Law of the Lord, they brought him to Jerusalem to
present, and when he was come to the Age of twelve yeaes, they carried him
thither for the service of God.

The better part of man is the soul, which cannot be redeemed with the
substance of the whole world; Are not they then most foolish and very
indiscreete in their proceedings, who strain themselu^^ to provide for their
children things pertaining to the body, and the honors of this world, in the
mean time being utterly careless whether they have any true knowledge of
God, whether they be joined to him by Faith, whether they know wherein
consists the salvation of their souls, and the everlasting happiness of man.

Abraham and the rest of the holy Fathers were far wiser then these men,
whose special care was this, to have their Children instructed in the
knowledge and fear of God, for they knew that godliness was the greatest gain
of all.

For these causes then the necessity of godly Instruction does appear; and
to that end this ensuing Treatise is collected, wherein is laid open and
expounded the Moral Law, and the use thereof, out of which a man may know
his own wretched estate, and his debt, wherein he stands bound unto God,
that so he may truly humble himself before him, and earnestly bethink
himself how he may be delivered from sin, and the punishment thereof, and
from the wrath of God, and from the curse.

In the next place is Expounded the Creed, (that (...),) the doctrine of man's
deliverance from misery by CHRIST; of the person and Office of Christ; of
Justification by Faith; of the Sacraments; of the Keys of the Church, and use
of them; of true Repentance; of good work^s, and the necessity of them, for
the true service of God; Of the thankfulness we owe unto God; Of the
insufficiency of man in this life, to fulfill the Law of God.

Last of all, the sense and meaning of the Lords Prayer; This for the glory,
praise, and honor of the divine Majesty, and the benefit, profit, happiness,
and salvation of thy Soul.

Farewell, In Christ Jesus.
THE CHRIStian Schoole-maister.
Master. What is the only true comfort, of a Christian in this life?


Scholar. That in soul and body, whether I live or die, I am not mine own,
but I belong unto my faithful Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who by his
precious blood, most fully satisfying for all my sins, has delivered me from
the whole power of the devil, and does so p^^serue me, that without the will
of my heavenly Father, not so much as a hair can fall from my head, yea, and
all things are made to serve for my salvation, wherefore he does also assure me
by his spirit of everlasting life, and makes me forward and ready from
henceforth to live unto him.


Master. How many things are needful for thee to know, to the end thou
enjoying this comfort, may live and die a happieman?


Scholar. Three things; First, what is the greatness of my sin. Secondly, by
what means I may be delivered from my sin and misery. And thirdly, what
thankfulness I do owe unto God, for that deliverance.


Ma: How do thou know thine own misery?


Scho: By the law of God.


Ma: What does the law of God require of us?


Schol: That does our Savior teach us in the 2^ of Matt: Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind;
This is the first, and greatest commandment, and the second is like unto this.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two commandments hangs
the whole law and the prophets.


Ma. Art thou able to ^^epe all tehse things perfectly?


Schol. In no wise: for by nature I am prone to the hatred of God, and my
neighbor.


Ma: Did God then make man so bad and corrupt?


Schol: No truly, God created him good, and according to his own Image; that
is, endewed him with true righteousness and holiness, that he might rightly know
God his Creator, love him with all his heart, and live in blessedness with him
for ever.


Ma: From whence then arises this corruption of man's nature?


Schol: From the fall, and disobedience of our first parents, Adam and Eve, in
Paradise, where our nature was so corrupted, that we are all conceived and
borne in sin.


Ma: But are we so corrupt, that we are not at all fit to do well, but apt
unto all evil?


Schol: Yea truly, unless we be regenerate by the holy Ghost.


Ma: Does not God then deal Injuriously with man, when he requires that of
him in his law, which he is not able to perform?


Schol: Not at all: for God so created man that he was able to perform it, but
man enticed by the devil, by his own disobedience, deprived himself and all
his posterity, of those gifts of God.


Ma: What then, will God let go this disobedience, and backsliding of man
without punishment?


Schol: No surely, but he is most grievously angry, both with our natural
sins, and with those sins which we our selves do commit, and does punish
the same in most just judgment, both with temporal and Eternal punishments,
even as himself prenounceth, Cursed is every one, who continues not in all
things that are written in the book of the law to do them.


Ma: What, is not God merciful also?


Schol: Yes truly, he is merciful, but so also he is just. Therefore his
justice requires to have that punished with everlasting punishment of soul
and body, whatsoever is committed against the majesty of so sovereign and
almighty a God.


Ma: Seeing then we are by the just judgment of God, in danger of temporal and
everlasting punishment, Is there any way or means left whereby we may be
delivered from these punishments, and be reconciled to God?


Schol: God will have his Justice satisfied, wher^^ore we must needs make
satisfaction, either by our selves or some other.


Ma: Are we able to satisfy by our selves?


Schol: Not one whit: but rather daily do increase our debt.


Ma: Can any creature in heaven or in earth, make satisfaction for us?


Schol: None at all, for first God will not punish any other creature, for that
sin that man has committed. Secondly, that which is but an only creature,
is not able to endure the wrath of God against sin, and to deliver others
from it.


Ma: Then what manner of mediator and deliverer must we seek for?


Schol: Such a one as is true man, and perfectly just, and yet notwithstanding
more mighty then al creatures: that is, one who is also true God.


Ma: Wherefore must he needs be true man and perfectly just?


Schol: Because the justice of God requires, that the same nature of man which
sinned, should also pay the punishment of sin, but he that were a sinner
himself, could not pay for other men.


Ma: Wherefore ought he also to be true God?


Schol: That by the power of his Godhead, he might be able to sustain the
burden of Gods wrath in his flesh, and to recover and restore unto us, the
righteousness and life that we had lost.


Ma: But who is that mediator, which is both true God, and true perfect man?


Schol: Our Lord Jesus Christ, who is made unto us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, satisfaction, and perfect redemption.


Ma: Whereby know thou this?


Schol: By the Gospel, which God first revealed in Paradise, and afterward
did publish by the Patriarchs, and Prophets, shadowed out in Sacrifices, and
Ceremonies: and last of all, accomplished by his only begotten son.


Ma: Is salvation then restored by Christ to all men that perished in Adam?


Schol: No not to all, but only to those who are ingrafted into him by true
faith, and do lay hold upon all his benefits.


Ma: What is true faith?


Schol: It is not only a knowledge, by which I do steadfastly assent unto all
things which God has revealed unto us in his word, but also an assured
affiance, and trust kindled in my heart by the holy Ghost through the Gospel,
by which I rest upon God, making sure account, that forgiveness of sins,
everlasting righteousness and life, is bestowed not only upon others, but also
upon me, and that freely by the mercy of God, for the merit and desert of
Christ alone.


Master: What are those things which a Christian man must of necessity
believe?


Schol: All those things which are promised unto us in the Gospel, the sum
whereof is briefly comprised in the Apostles Creeds, or in the chiefs heads of
the Catholic and undoubted faith of all Christians.


May: What is that Creed of the Apostles?

1. I believe in God the father almighty maker of heaven and earth.

2. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

3. Which was conceived of the holy Ghost borne of the Virgin Mary.

4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, descended
into Hell.

5. Rose again the third aay from the dead.

6. And ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty.

7. From thence he shall come to Judge the quick and the dead.

8. I believe in the holy Ghost.

9. I believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

10. I believe the forgiveness of sins.

11. The resurrection of the flesh.

12. And the life Everlasting.


May: Into how many parts is the Creed divided?


Schol: Into three parts. The first is of the everlasting Father, and of our
Creation. The second is of the Son, and of our Redemption. The third is of
the holy Ghost, and our Sanctification.


May: Seeing there is but one only substance of God, why do thou name
those three, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost?


Schol: Because God has so revealed himself in his word, that these three
distinct persons are one true and everliving God.


May: What beleeuest thou, when thou say I, Believe in God the Father
Almighty?


Schol: I believe the everlasting Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who created
of nothing the heaven and the earth, and all things that are therein, and does
uphold and govern the same by his everlasting counsel and providence, to be
by the means of Christ ^ay God and my father, therefore I so trust in him, and
so repose my self upon him, That I doubt not but he will provide all things
necessary both for my soul, and for my body. And moreover also, that what
soeucr evil he sends upon me in this miserable life, he will turn the same
unto my salvation, seeing he is both able to do it, as being God Almighty, and
willing to do it, as being my merciful father.


May: What is providence?


Schol: The Almighty and every where present power of God, whereby he does as
it were, bear up with his hand, and govern the heaven and earth, with all
creatures; So that whatsoever grows out of the Earth, as also Rain and
drouth, Plenty and dearth, meat and drink, health and sickness, Riches and
poverty; Finally, all things that are, fall out not rashly, or by chance and
fortune, but by his Fatherly counsel and will.


May: What profit have we by this knowledge of the creation and providence of
God?


Schol: Hereby we are in adversity made patient; in prosperity thankful; for
the time to come, we have a good hope reposed in GOD our most trusty Father;
knowing assuredly, that nothing can draw us from his love, seeing all
Creatures are so in his power, that without his pleasure, they are not able,
not only not to do any thing, but not so much as to stir or have motion.


May: Wherefore is the Son of GOD called JESUS. (that is) a (...)?


Scholl: Because he saves and delivers us from all sins, neither ought
salvation to be sought for in any other, neither can it elsewhere be sound.


May: Do they believe in the only Savior Jesus, who seek for happiness from
Saints, or from themselves, or from any thing else?


Scholl: No, for although in word they glory in him as a Savior, yet in
deed they deny the only Savior Jesus Christ: for it must needs be that
either Jesus is not a perfect Savior, or else that whosoever by true Faith
embrace him as a Savior, they also are possessed of all things in him, which
are required unto salvation.


May: Wherefore is he called Christ, that is, Anointed?


Scholl: Because he is ordained of the Father, and anointed with the holy
Ghost, to be the chief Prophet and teacher, to reveal unto us the secret
Counsel and will of the Father, concerning our Redemption; and to be our high
and only Priest, to redeem us, by the only sacrifice of his own body,
daily to make intercession unto the Father for us, and to be the Everlasting
King, to govern us by his word, and with his spirit, and to preserve and
maintain that salvation which he has purchased for us.


May: Why art thou called a Christian?


Scdoll: Because by Faith I am a member of Christ Jesus. and partaker of his
anointing, so that I both confess his Name, and present my self unto him a
lively offering of thanksgiving, and in this life with a free and good
conscience fight against sin and Satan, and after this life to possess with
Christ, an everlasting Kingdom over all creatures.


May: For what cause is Christ called the only begotten Son of God,
whereas we also are the Sons of God?


Schol: Because Christ is the Eternal and natural Son of his Eternal
Father, but we for his sake by grace, are made the Sons of the Father by
adoption.


May: Wherefore do thou call him our Lord?


Schol: Because he has redeemed our bodies and souls from sin, not with
gold, nor with silver, but with his own precious blood, and having delivered
us from all power of the devil, does challenge us properly to belong unto
himself.


May: What do thou believe when thou say, He was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary?


Schol: That the very Son of God, who is and abides true and everlasting
God, did through the working of the holy Ghost, take the very true nature of
man, of the flesh and blood of the Virgin Mary, so that he is also the true
seed of David, like unto his brethren in all things, sin only excepted.


May: What fruit reapest thou by the holy conception and birth of Christ?


Schol: That he is our Mediator, and by his Innocence, and perfect holiness,
does cover my sins, wherein I am conceived, and keeps them from coming in
the sight of God.


May. What beleeuest thou, when thou say, He suffered?


Schol: That in the whole time of his life which he continued here upon earth,
but especially in the end thereof, he sustained both in body and soul, the
wonderful pain and grief of God, for ye sin of all mankind, that by his
suffering, as by the only sacrifice of reconciliation, he might both deliver
our souls from everlasting condemnation, and might also purchase for us the
favor of God, righteousness, and everlasting life.


May: What reason was there why he suffered under Iudg^ Pilate?


Schol: That he an Innocent, being condemned before a civil Judge, might set
us free from the straight judgment of God which was to fall upon us.


May: Is it any more that he was fastened to the cross, then if he had been
put to any other kind of death?


Schol: Yea truly, it is more, for by this, I am sure that he has taken upon
him the curse which did hang over me, for the death of the cross, was cursed
by God.


May: Why was it necessary that Christ should humble himself unto the death?


Schol: Because the justice, and truth of God, could by no other means be
satisfied for our sins, but by the death of the Son of God.


May: Wherefore was he also buried?


Schol: That he might thereby make it known that he was truly dead.


May: But seeing Christ died for us, why must we also die?


Schol: Our death is not a satisfaction for our sins, but an utter destroying
of sin, and a passage into everlasting life.


May: What profit receive we further by the sacrifice and death of Christ?


Schol: That by the power of his death, our old man is crucified together with
him, and is also dead and buried, that the evil concupiscences and desires of
the flesh, may not hereafter reign in us, but that we may offer our selves
unto him a sacrifice of thanksgiving.


May: Why is this added, he descended into Hell?


Schol: That in my greatest sorrows and most grievous temptations, I may
uphold my self with this comfort, that my L. Jesus Christ has delivered me
from the anguish and torments of Hell.


May: What does Christ's rising again profit us?


Schol: First by his rising again, he has overcome death, that he might make
us partakers of that righteousness which he purchased by his death. Secondly, we
also now by the power thereof, are raised up unto a new life. Last of all, the
rising again of Christ our head, is a pledge unto us of our glorious
resurrection.


M^ist: How do thou understand that he ascended into Heaven?


Schol: That in the sight of his Disciples, Christ was taken up from earth to
heaven, and is yet there for us, and shall be till he come again to judge the
quick and the dead.


May: What then, is not Christ with us as he promised unto the end of the
world?


Schol: Christ is true God, and true man, therefore according to his manhood he
is not now upon earth, but according to his Godhead, his grace and his spirit
is at no time from us.


May: Are not the two natures of Christ by this means pulled asunder, if the
manhead be not wheresoever the Godhead is?


Schol: Not a whit, for seeing the Godhead cannot be contained in any compass,
and is present in all places, it follows necessarily that it is without the
nature of man which it has taken, and yet nevertheless is in it also, and
remains personally united unto it.


Ma: What fruit does Christ's ascension into heaven bring us?


Schol: First, that he makes intercession in heaven unto his Father for us.
Secondly, that we have our flesh in heaven, whereby is a certain Pledge, we
may be assured that hoe (who is our Head) will lift up unto him, us that are
his members. Thirdly, that he sends unto us his Spirit, as a Pledge between
us, by the working whereof we seek not things on Earth, but things that are
above, where he sits on the Right hand of GOD.


M^ist: Why is it added, He sits on the Right hand of God?


Schol: Because Christ did therefore ascend into heaven, that he might there
declare himself the head of his Church, by which his Father governs all
things.


M^i: What does this glory of Christ our Head avail us?


Schol: First, that by the holy Ghost he powers upon us his members,
heavenly gifts, and then that by his power he does protect and defend us
against all enemies.


May: What comfort does Christ's coming again to Judge the quick and dead
bring thee?


Scholl: That in all miseries and persecutions I lift up my head, and wait
for him who did before stand in my stead before Gods Judgment seat, and did
take away all curse from me, to come from heaven as a Judge, to throw all his
and mine enemies into everlasting pains, and to receive me with all the Elect
unto himself, into heavenly joys, and everlasting glory.


May: What belieuest thou of the Holy Ghost?


Scholl: First, that he is true GOD, and coeternall with the everlasting
Father and the Son, then that he is also given to me, that through Faith he
may make me partaker of Christ, and all his benefits may comfort me, and abide
with me for ever.


May: What belieuest thou of the holy Catholic Church of Christ^.


Scholl: I believe that the Son of God does by his Spirit and by the Word,
gather unto himself, out of all mankind (from the beginning of the world unto
the end) a congregation chosen unto everlasting life, agreeing in true Faith,
and does maintain the same and preserve it, and that I am a lively member of
that congregation; and shall so for ever abide.


May: What means the Communion of Saints?


Schol: First, that all and every one of she believers have fellowship with
Christ, and all his benefits, as being members of him: Secondly, that every one
who has received gifts, ought to employ them readily and chearefully for the
common profit a nd salvation of all.


M^ist: What beleeuest thou concerning forgiveness of sins?


Schol: I believe that God for the satisfaction of Christ, has quite put out
of his remembrance all my sins, and even that corruption also, wherewith I
must strive all my life long, and does freely give unto me the righteousness of
Christ, so that I shall never come into judgment.


M^^st: What comfort does the resurrection of the flesh minister unto thee?


Schol: Not only that my soul shall straight way after it is departed out of
the body, be taken up unto Christ, the head thereof, but that this flesh of
mine also, being raised up by the power of Christ, shall be united again to my
soul, and shall be made conformable unto the glorious body of Christ.


May: What comfort receiuest thou, by the Article of Everlasting life?


Schol: That because in this present life, I feel the beginning of everlasting
joy in my heart, I shall after this life, enjoy full and perfect blessedness,
wherein I shall praise God for ever, which blessedness neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor any heart of man can conceive.


May: When thou beleeuest all these things, what benefit comes to thee
thereby?


Schol: That in Christ I am righteous before God, and heir of life Everlasting.


Ma^st: How art thou righteous before God?


Schol: By faith alone in Jesus Christ, so that although mine own conscience
do accuse me that I have most grievously offended against all the
commandments of God, and have not kept any one of them: moreover also that I
am prone to all evil, yet notwithstanding (so that I do embrace these benefits
with true affiance of mind) without any merit of mine own, of the mere mercy
of God, the perfect satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ, is
imputed and given unto me, as if I had neither committed any sin, neither
were there any blot or corruption cleaving unto me: Yea, as if I had my self
perfectly performed that obedience, which Christ has performed for me.


May: Why do thou say that thou art righteous by faith?


Schol: Not because by the worthiness of my faith I please God, but because the
only satisfaction, righteousness and holiness of Christ, is my righteousness in
the sight of God, and I can lay hold upon, and apply the same unto my self, by
no other means but by faith.


May: Why cannot our good works be righteousness, or any part of righteousness
in the sight of God?


Schol: Because that righteousness, which is able to abide the judgment of God,
must be most perfect, and in all points agreeing with the law of God, but our
best works that we do in this life, are imperfect, and even defiled with
sins.


May: How say thou that our good works deserve nothing, whereas God
promises that he will give us a reward for them, both in this life, and in the
life to come?


Schol: That reward is given not of desert, but grace.


May: Does not this doctrine make men secure, and profane?


Schol: No, for it cannot be but they who are ingrafted into Christ by faith
should bring forth fruits of thankfulness.


May: Seeing then faith alone makes us partakers of Christ, and all his
benefits, from whence proceeds this faith?


Schol: From the holy Ghost, who by the preaching of the Gospel does kindle the
same in our hearts, and does confirm it by the use of the Sacraments.


May: What are Sacraments?


Schol: They are holy and visible signs, and souls ordained of God, to this
end, that he might thereby more fully declare and seal unto us the promise of
the Gospel, to wit, that he does freely give forgiveness of sins, and life
everlasting, not only to all in general, but even to every one that
believes, and that for the only sacrifice of Christ offered upon the cross.


May: What then, do both these, as well the word as the Sacraments, tend to
that end, to lead our faith unto the sacrifice of Christ offered upon the
cross, as to the only foundation of our salvation?


Schol: Yea truly, for the holy Ghost teaches by the Gospel, and confirms
by the Sacraments, that all our salvation stands in the only sacrifice of
Christ offered upon the cross.


May: How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in the new Covenant?


Schol: Baptism, and the holy Supper.


May: How art thou put in mind and confirmed in Baptism, that thou art
partaker of that holy Sacrifice of Christ?


Schol: Because Christ has commanded the outward washing with Water, adding
this promise, that I shall no less assuredly be washed by his blood, and by
his spirit, from the spots of my soul (that is) from all my sins, then I am
outwardly washed with Water, wherewith the spots of the body use to be
washed away.


May: What is it to be washed by the blood and Spirit of Christ?


Schol: It is to receive at the hands of God forgiveness of sins freely for
the blood of Christ, which he has shed for us, in his sacrifice upon the
cross; and next, to be renewed also by the spirit of Christ, and being
sanctified by him, to become a member of Christ, to the end we may more and
more dye unto sin, and live holy without blame.


May: Where does Christ promise that he will as certainly wash us with his
blood, and with his spirit, as we are washed with the water of Baptism?


Schol: In the Institution of Baptism, the words whereof are these; Go and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost: he that believes and is baptized shall be saved: he
that belieueth not shall be condemned. This promise is repeated when the
Scripture calls baptism, the washing of the New birth, and the washing away
of sins.


M^i: Is then Baptism the washing away of sins?


Schol. No. For the only blood of Christ, and the holy Ghost, does cleanse us
from all sin.


M^i: Why then does the holy Ghost call Baptism the washing of Regeneration,
and the washing away of sins?


Schol: God does not without great cause so speak; not only to teach us, that
as the spots of the body are cleansed by water, is our sins are purged by
the Blood and Spirit of Christ, but much more, that by his heavenly Token and
pledge, he may assure us that we are as truly washed inwardly from our
sins, as we are washed with outward and visible water.


May: Ought Infants also to be baptized?


Schol: Yea truly, for seeing they belong to the Covenant and Church of God,
as well as those that be at years of discretion; And seeing unto them is
promised by the Blood of Christ, forgiveness of sins, and the holy Ghost the
worker of faith, no less then to the other, they ought also by baptism to be
i^grafted into the Church of God, and to be discerned from the chuldren of
Infidells, as they were in the old Testament by Circumcision, in place whereof
was ordained Baptism in the new Testament.


M^i: How art thou put in mind and assured in the Supper of the Lord, that
thou art partaker of that only sacrifice of Christ, offered upon the Cross,
and of all his benefits?


Schol: Because Christ has commanded me, and all the faithful, to eat of
this Bread being broken, and to drink of this Cup being divided amongst us,
in remembrance of him, and has added this promise, first, that his body was
no less offered and broken for me upon the Cross, and his blood for me shed,
then with mine eyes I see the bread is broken unto me, and the cup reached
unto me. Secondly, that my soul is no less assuredly fed, unto everlasting
life, by him with his body that was crucified, and his blood that was shed for
us, then I do with my bodily mouth receive bread and wine, the tokens of the
body and blood of the Lord, being delivered unto me by the hands of the
minister.


May: What is it to eat the Body of Christ Crucified, and to drink his
Blood that was shed?


Scholl: It is not only with certain affiance of mind, to lay hold of the
whole Passion and death of Christ, and thereby to obtain forgiveness of sins,
and life everlasting, but also by the Spirit of Christ, which dwells at one
time both in Christ and in us, in such sort more and more to be united to his
holy body, that although he be in Heaven, and we upon Earth, yet
notwithstanding we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; and as all
the members of the body are governed and quickened by one soul, so are we
all, by one and the same spirit.


M^i: Where has Christ promised that he will as certainly give unto the
belieuers, his Body and his Blood in this manner to be eaten and drunk, as
they do eat this Bread being broken, and drink this Cup?


Schol: In the institution of the Supper, the words whereof are these; Our Lord
Jesus Christ, the same night he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had
given thanks he brake it and said; Take eat this is my body which is broken
for you, this do ye in remembrance of me: Likewise after supper he took the
cup, saying; This cup is the new Testament in my blood, this do as often as you
drink it in remembrance of me: For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. This promise is repeated by
Paul when he says, The cup of thanksgiving, wherewith we give thanks, Is it
not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, Is it not
the Communion of the Lords body? Because we being many are one bread and one
body, for we are all partakers of one bread.


May: What then, are bread and wine made the very body and blood of Christ?


Scholl: No truly, but after the nature of Sacraments, and the manner of
speech which the holy Ghost uses in speaking these things, the bread is
called the body of Christ.


May: Why then does Christ call the bread his body, and the cup his blood, or
the new Testament in his blood, and Paul calls the bread and wine the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ?


Schol: Christ not without great cause so speaks: to wit, not only to teach
us, that as bread and wine sustaineth the life of the body, so also his body
crucified, and his blood shed, is indeed the meat and drink of our soul,
whereby it may be nourished unto ^ife everlasting: But much more by this
visible sign and pledge, to assure us, that we are no less truly made
partakers of his body and blood, by the working of the holy Ghost, then we do
with the mouth of the body receive these holy signs in remembrance of him:
Secondly, that his passion and obedience is as certainly ours, as if we our
selves had paid the punishment of our sins, and made satisfaction to God.


M^: What difference is there between the Supper of the Lord, and the Popish
Mass?


Schol: The supper of the Lord does witne^ unto us, that we have perfect
forgiveness of all our sins, for that only sacrifice of Christ, which he
himself once offered upon the cross, and then that we are by the holy Ghost
ingrafted into Christ, who now according to his humanity, is only in heaven
at the right hand of his Father, and will there be worshipped of us.

But in the Mass, it is denied that ^^e quick and dead have forgiveness of
sins for the once suffering of Christ, unless Christ be still every day
offered for them by the Priests, and then it is taught, that Christ is bodily
under the appearance of bread and wine, and therefore ought to be worshipped in
them: And so the very foundation of the Mass is nothing else but a denying of
that only sacrifice and suffering of Jesus Christ.


Ma: Who ought to come to the supper of the Lord?


Schol: Only they that are truly sorry that they have offended God by t^e^^
sins, and do believe that they are forgiven them for Christ's sake, and that
whatsoever infirmities they have, they are reuered by his passion and death,
and who desire more and more to go forward in faith and vprightnes of life:
But hypocrites, and they that do not truly repent, do eat and drink unto
themselves con^emnation.


Ma: May they also be admitted to this supper, who declare themselves by their
confession and life, to be unbelievers and ungodly men?


Schol: In no wise, for by that means the covenant of God is profaned, a^^
(...) wrath of God provoked against the whole congregation: Wherefore the
Church by the commandment of Christ and his Apostles, using the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, ought to keep back such from the supper, until they
repent and amend their manners.


Ma: What are the keys of the kingdom of heaven?


Sch: The preaching of the Gospel, and Eclesiasticall discipline, whereby
heaven is opened to them that believe, and shut against unbelievers.


Ma: How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut by the preaching of the
Gospel?


Schol: When by the commandment of Christ, it is openly preached to all, and
every one that beleeuer^ that all their sins are forgiven them by God, so often
as they lay bold upon the promise of the Gospel by a true faith: Contrariwise,
unto all unbelievers, and Hypocrites, it is denounced, that the wrath of God,
and everlasting condemnation, lies upon them, so long as they continue in
their sins. According to which testimony of the Gospel, God will judge as well
in this present life, as in the life to come.


Ma: How is the kingdom of heaven shut and opened by Eclesiasticall discipline?


Schol: When by the commandment of Christ, they who are in name Christians,
but in doctrine and life show themselves strangers from Christ, after they have
been once or twice admonished, and will not depart from their errors, or
sinful living, are presented to the Church, or to those who are appointed to
that office by the Church, and if they obey not their admonition, are by
forbidding them the Sacraments, shut out from the assembly of the Church, and
not received again till they profess amendment.


Ma: Seeing we are delivered from all sins and miseries, without any desert
of our own, by the only mercy of God, for Christ's sake, to what end should we
do good works?


Schol: Because after that Christ has redeemed us by his blood, he does also
renew us with his spirit according to his own Image, to the end, that having
received so great benefits, we should all our life long show our selves
thankful toward God, and that he might be glorified by us. Secondly, that we
also every one of us may be assured of our faith by the fruits thereof. L^st
of all, that by the vprightnes of our life, we may gain others to Christ.


M^i: Cannot they then be saved, who being unthankful, and continuing securely
in their sins, are not turned from their wickedness unto God?


Schol: By no means. For as the scripture witnesses, neither unclean
persons, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor thieves, nor coueteus persons, nor
Drunkards, nor Rulers, nor Oppressors, shall Inherit the Kingdom of God.


M^i: Of what parts consists true Repentance or turning to God?


Schol: Of the mortifying or killing the old man, and quickening of the new man.


M^: What is the mortification of the old man?


Schol: Truly and from the heart to be sorry, that by thy sins thou have
offended God, and more and more to hate and siye from thy sins.


May: What is the quickening of the new man?


Schol: True rejoicing in God, through Christ, and a forward desire to frame
our life according to Gods will, and to exercise all good wor^s.


May: What works are good?


Schol: Only those which are done of a true Faith, according to the Law of
God, and are referred only to his glory, and not those which are devised by
our selves, upon a good intent, or commandment by men's traditions.


May: What is the law of God?


Schol: The Lord spoke these words, saying:

1. I am Iehoua; thy GOD, which brought thee out of the land of Aegipt, from
the house of bondage, thou shall have none other Gods but me.

2. Make not to thy self any graven Image, nor draw any likeness of those
things which are either in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the
water under the earth, thou shall not fall down before them nor worship them,
for I thy Lord and God strong and Jealous, auenging the sins of the fathers
upon the children, and that to the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy upon thousands in them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

3. Take not the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not let
him go unpunished that takes his Name in vain.

4. Remember to keep holy the Saboth day, six days shall thou labor and
do all thy work: but the seventh day shall be the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God; Thou shall do no work, neither thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
nor thy servant, nor thy handmaide, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made the heaven, the earth, the
Sea, and all things that are in them, and rested the seventh day, therefore the
Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

5. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thou may live long upon the Land,
which the Lord thy God shall give thee.

6. Thou shall not kill.

7. Thou shall not commit Adultery.

8. Thou shall not steal.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.


May: What requires God in the first Commandment?


Schol: That as I love the salvation of mine own soul, so I diligently shun
and avoid all Idolatry, coniuring, inchauntment, superstition, praying to
Saints, or other creatures, and do rightly acknowledge the only and true God,
trust in him alone, submit m^ self with all humility and patience unto him,
look for all good things from him alone, and with the most inward affection of
my heart, love, reverence and worship him, so that I will rather forsake all
creatures, then commit the least thing against his will.


M^i: What is Idolatry?


Schol: It is in the place of one God, or besides that one and true God (who
has revealed himself in his word) to devise, or have any other thing wherein
to put our trust.


M^i; What does the second commandment require?


Schol: That we express not God by any Image or shape, neither serve him
after any other manner, then as in his word he has commanded himself to be
served.


Ma: Ought we then to make no Images nor pictures?


Schol: God neither ought, nor can by any means be drawn or pictured, and
although it be lawful to resemble creatures, yet God forbids to have or
make their Images, to worship or honor either them, or God by them.


Ma: What means God in the third commandment?


Schol: That we do not reprochfully, or irreverently use the name of God, in
cursing, swearing, forswearing, nor yet take part in those horrible sins, by
holding our peace, and winking at them, but that we use the sacred name of God
with great religion, and reverence, that by true and constant confession and
calling upon him, and finally by all our words and deeds, he may be praised,
and ever magnified.


Ma: Is it then so great a sin to take the name of God in vain, either by
swearing or by cursing? That God is also angry with them, who as much as in
them lies do not forbid or hinder it?


Schol: Surely a most grievous sin, for there is no greater sin, or which
does more offend God, then the reproach of his holy name, wherefore also he
commanded that sin to be punished with death.


Ma: But may any man lawfully, and in a godly sort, swear by the name of God?


Schol: He may, when either the magistrate requires it of his subjects, or
necessity requires that by this means faith be assured, and truth
established, to the end that the glory of God may be set forth, and the
salvation of other men furthered, for this kind of oath is confirmed in the
word of God, and therefore has been rightly used by holy men, both in the old
and new Testament.


May: Is it not lawful to swear by Saints and other creatures?


Schol: No, for a lawful oath is a calling upon God, wherein a man desires,
that he being the only beholder of the heart, would give witness to the truth,
and punish the swearer if he deceive wittingly, now this honor agrees to no
creature.


Ma: What does God require in the fourth commandment?


Schol: First, that the ministry of the Gospel, and schools be maintained,
and that both upon other days, and especially upon holy days, I do diligently
frequent the holy assemblies, hear the word of God attentively, use the
Sacraments, and to the public prayers, join also mine own private, and
according to my ability, bestow something upon the poor; Secondly, that in
all my life I abstain from wicked actions, yielding unto the Lord, that by his
spirit he may work his good work in me, and so that I begin that Everlasting
Saboth or rest, in this life.


Ma: What does the Lord enjoin us in the fifth commandment?


Schol: That we perform unto our parents, and even to all that are set over
us, due honor, love, and fidelity, and do submit our selves, to their
faithful preceps and chastisements, with that obedience which is meet.

Secondly, that we patiently bear with their faults, always having in
remembrance, that Gods will is to lead and rule us by their hand.


Ma: What does God require in the sixth commandment?


Schol: That neither by thought, nor by word, nor by gesture, much less by
deed, either by my self, or by any other, I do revile, or hate, or hurt, or
st^y my neighbor, but cast away all desire of revenge: Moreover, that I hurt
not my self, nor wittingly cast my self into any danger. And therefore also,
that murders might be avoided, he has armed the magistrate with the sword.


Ma: Why, but this commandment seems to forbid only murder.


Schol: For the staying of murder, God teaches, that he hates the root and
original of murder, to wit, anger, envy, hatred, and desire of revenge, and
does account all these for murder.


Ma: What is the meaning of the seventh commandment?


Schol: That God does abhor all filthiness, and therefore that we also ought
to hate and detest it: and on the other side, that we ought to live soberly,
modestly, and chastely, either in holy wedlock, or single life.


Ma: Does God forbid nothing else in this commandment, but adultery, and such
kind of filthiness?


Schol: Forasmuch as our body and soul, are the temples of the holy Ghost, the
will of God is, that we possess both body and soul purely and holily. And
therefore he does generally forbid, filthy deeds, gestures, and behauiours,
speeches, thoughts, and desires, and whatsoever may allure us hereunto.


Ma: What does God forbid in the eight commandment?


Schol: Not only those thefts and robberies which the magistrate does punish,
but under the name of theft, he comprehends all naughty shifts, and devises,
whereby we catch after other men's goods, and labor to conueigh them to our
selves, either by force, or by color of right, as are unequal weights, an
unjust meatewand, false measure, deceitful words, counterfaite money, usury,
or any other forbidden way or means to thrine, and get wealth, add hereunto
all covetousness, and the manifold mispending the gifts of God.


Ma: What does the ninth commandment require?


Schol: That I bear no false witness against any man, that I shall misconsture
no man's words, that I backebite or reproach no man, that I condemn no man
rashly, before his cause be heard, but that I do with all carefulnes avoid
all kind of Lying and deceit, as the proper works of the D^uell, unless I will
provoke the most grievous displeasure of Almighty God aagainst my self, and
that in Judgments and other affairs I follow the truth, and freely and
constantly profess the matter to be, even as it is. Moreover, that as much as
in me lies, I defend and increase the good name and credit of others.


May: What does the tenth Commandment forbid?


Schol: That our hearts be never tempted (no, not with the least desire or
thought against any Commandment of God,) but that always from the heart we
detest all sin, and contrariwise take pleasure in all kind of Righteousness.


May: Are they able who are converted unto God, to keep these Commandments
perfectly?


Schol. No truly, but even they that are most holy, so long as they live.


May: Why then will have his Law so exactly, and so severely preached;
whereas there is no man in this life that is able to keep it?


Scholl: First, that in our whole life we might the more acknowledge how
forward our nature is to sin, and so much the more earnestly desire to
obtain mercy, and Righteousness in Christ. Secondly, that I be continually
about this, and daily more and more labor to obtain the grace of the holy
Ghost, to the end we may every day be more and more renewed, according to the
Image of God, until one day, at length, after we are departed out of this
life, we attain with joy to that perfection which is set before us.


May Wherefore is Prayer necessary for Christians?


Schol: Because it is the principal part of that thankfulness which God
requires at our hands; As also, because the Lord bestows his grace, and the
holy Ghost upon them alone, who with true gronings, do continually beg those
things at his hands, and do give him thanks for the same.


May: What things are required to that Prayer wherewith God is pleased, and
which he hears and grants?


Schol: That with true affection of heart we ask of the true God alone, (who
has revealed himself in his word) all things whatsoever he has commanded us
to ask of him, and that with an inward feeling of our own needy and
miserable estate, we humbly throw our selves down before the Maistie of God,
leaning upon this strong foundation: So that we albeit unworthy, are
undoubtedly heard of God, for Christ's sake, as he has promised unto us in his
word.


May: What are those things which God commands us to ask of him?


Schol: All that is necessary for soul and body, which our Lord Jesus Christ
has comprised in that Prayer, which he himself has taught us.


May: What is that Prayer?


Scholl: Our Father which art in Heaven; hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom
come, thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; Give us this day our daily
Bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is
the Kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


Ma: Why does Christ command us after this manner, to call upon God Our Father?


Schol: That even in the very entrance of Prayer he may stir up in us a
reverence and trust in GOD, convenient for the Children of God, which ought to
be the groundwork of our Prayer; to wit, that God for Christ's sake, is
become our Father, and will much less deny unto us those things that we ask
of him by a true Faith, then our Parents deny us earthly benefits.


May: Why is that added, Which art in Heaven?


Scholl: That we should be assured, that since God is in Heaven, and there
rules over all, whatsoever is fit for us he is able to provide, and from
thence we must look for all good things for soul and body.


May: What is the first petition?


Schol: Hallowed be thy Name? that is, I pray first of all, that we may know
thee, fear thee, reverence, praise thee, and set forth thy power, wis^dome,
goodness, righteousness, and glory, which shines in all thy works. Secondly,
that thou would so direct all our life, thoughts, words, and deeds, that thy
most holy name be not reproched by our occasion, but rather be honored and
magnified.


Ma: What is the second petition?


Schol: Thy kingdom come: that is, so govern us by thy word and by thy
spirit, that we may be more and more subject unto thee, preserve and increase
thy Church, destroy the works of the devil, and every power that exalts it
self against thy Majesty, make void all the counsels that are taken against
thy word, until at length thou do fully and perfectly reign, when thou shall
be all, in all.


May: What is the third petition?


Schol: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven? That is, grant that we,
and all men, renouncing our own wills, may readily and without any delay, or
grudging, do thine own will, while we desire that we may as cheerfully execute
as the holy Angels do in heaven.


May: Which is the fourth petition?


Schol: Give us this day our daily Bread. That is, that thou would give us
all things necessary for this present life, that thereby we may acknowledge
that thou art the only fountain, from whence all good things do slow, and
except thou give the blessing, all our care, and travel, yea even thine own
gifts, will be unprosperous and hurtful unto us, wherefore grant, that
turning our affiance from all creatures, we may set it upon thee alone.


May: What is the fifth petition?


Schol: Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them (...).

That is, for the blood of Christ impute not unto us most miserable sinners,
all our sins, and even that corruption which as yet cleaves unto us, as we
also feel this testimony of thy favor in our hearts, that we have a stedi^st
purpose from our heart and soul, to forgive all that have iniuried, wronged
and offended us.


May: What is the sixth petition?


Schol: Le^ (...) us not i^to temptation, but de(...).

That is, forasmuch as we are of our selves feeble and weak, that we cannot
stand, n^ not a moment against our sworn enemies, Satan, the world, and the
flesh, which continually are tempting us to evil, it would please thee to
strengthen us with the power of thy spirit, that we faint not in this
spiritual combat, but that we may so long stand against them all, that at the
last we obtain a perfect victory.


May: How do thou conclude thy prayer?

For thine is the Kingdom, the power and glory, for ever.


Schol: That is, that we ask all these things at thy hands, because thou
being our King and Almighty, art willing and able to give us all things: and
these things we therefore ask, to the end that by them all glory may
re^ound, not unto us, but unto thy holy Name.


May: What means this last word, Amen?


Schol: That the matter is certain and not of doubt, for my prayer is much
more certainly heard of God, then I in mine own heart do feel, that I desire
it perfect and absolutely with all the inward affection of my soul.


FINIS.
A prayer for the Morning.
O Heavenly Father, which like a diligent watchman attendest always upon thy
faithful people, whether they wake or sleep, and mightily defendest them, not
only from Satan that old enemy of mankind, but also from all other their
adversaries, so that through thy godly power they be preserved harmless, I
most heartily thank thee, that it has pleased thy fatherly goodness, so to take
care of me thine unprofitable servant, this night past, that thou have both
safely kept me from all mine enemies, and also given me sweet sleep, unto the
great comfort of my body. I most entirely beseech thee, O most merciful
father, to show the like kindness toward me this day, in preserving my body and
soul, that as mine enemies may have no power over me, so I likewise may
neither think, breathe, speak, or do any thing that may be displeasant to
thy fatherly goodness, dangerous to my self, or hurtful to my neighbor, but
that all my enterprises may be agreeable to thy most blessed will, which is
always good and godly, doing that, that may advance thy glory, answer to my
vocation, and profit of my neighbor, whom I ought to love as my self, that
whenever thou call me from this vale of misery, I may be found the
child, not of darkness, but of light, and so for ever reign with thee in
glory, which art the true and everlasting light, to whom with thy dearly
beloved Son Jesus Christ our alone Savior, and the holy Ghost that most
sweet comforter, be all honor and glory. Amen.

A prayer for the night.
O Lord God and my heavenly father, for as much as by thy divine ordinance, the
night approaches, and darkness begins to ouerwhelme the earth, and time
requires that we give our selves to bodily rest and quietness, I render unto
thee most hearty thanks for thy loving kindness, which have vouchsafed to
preserve me this day from the danger of mine enemies, to give me my health, to
feed me, and to send me all things necessary for the comfort of this my poor
and needy life. I most humbly beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, that thou will mercifully forgive me all that I have this day committed against thy
Fatherly goodness, either in word, deed, or thought, and that thou will
vouchsafe to shadow me this night under the comfortable wings of thy almighty
power, and defend me from Satan, and from all his crafty assaults, that
neither he, nor any of his ministers, have power over, either my body or my
soul, but that although my body through thy benefit enjoys sweet and
pleasant sleep, yet my soul may continually watch unto thee, think of thee,
delight in thee, and evermore praise thee, that when the joyful light of the
day returns according to thy godly appointment, I may rise again with a
faithful soul, and undefiled body, and so afterward behave my self all the
time of my life, according to thy blessed will and commandment, by costing
away the works of darkness, and putting on the armor of light, that men
seeing my good works, may thereby be provoked to glorify thee our heavenly
Father, which with thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ our alone Savior, and
the holy Ghost thy most sweet comforter, live and raignest one true, and
everlasting God, world without end. Amen.

A prayer to be said for all such as lie at the point of death.
O Most loving Savior, and gentle redeemer, which came into this world, to
call sinners unto repentance, and to seek that which was lost, thou see in
what case this our brother lies here, visited with thy merciful hand, all
weak, feeble, sick, and ready to yield up his soul into thy holy hands. O
look upon him (most gentle Savior) with thy merciful eye, pity him, and be
favorable unto him. He is thy workmanship, despise not therefore the work of
thine own hands. Thou sufferedst thy blessed body, and thy precious blood to
be shed for his sins, and to bring him unto the glory of thy heavenly
Father, let it not therefore come to pass, that thou should suffer so great
pains for him in vain. He was baptized in thy name, and gave himself wholly
to be thy servant, forsaking the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, confess him
therefore before thy heavenly Father, and his blessed Angels, to be thy
servant. His sins we confess to be great (for who is able to say, my heart
is clean, and I am free from sin) but thy mercies (O Lord) are much greater,
and thou came not to call the righteous, but sinners unto repentance. To them
that are diseased, and ouerladen with the burden of sin, do thou promise
ease. Thou art that God, which willest not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should turn and live. Thou art that Savior, which willest all men to
be saved, and to come to the knowledge of thy truth. Withdraw not therefore
thy mercy from him, because of his sins, but rather lay upon him thy saving
health, that thou may show thy self toward him to be a Savior. What
greater praise can there be to a Physician, then to heal the sick? Neither
can there be a greater glory to thee (being a Savior) then to save sinners.
Save him therefore (O Lord) for thy names sake. Again, let the Law be no
corsiue to his conscience, but rather give him grace, even in this extreme
agony and conflict of death, to be fully persuaded, that thou by thy death,
have taken away all his sins, fulfilled the Law for him, and by this means
delivered him from the curse of the Law, and paid his ransom: that he thus
being fully persuaded, may have a quiet heart, a free conscience, and a glad
will, to forsake this wretched world, and to go unto his Lord GOD. Moreover,
thou have conquered him that had rule over death (even Satan.) Suffer him not
therefore to exercise his tyranny upon this our sick brother, nor to disquiet
his conscience, with the terrors of sin, and pains of Hell. Let not Satan,
nor his infernal army tempt him further then he is able to bear: but evermore
give him grace even unto his last breath, valiantly to fight against the
devil, with a strong faith in thy precious blood, that he may fight a good
fight, and finish his course with joy, unto the glory of thy name, and the
health of his soul. O Lord so work in him by thy holy spirit, that he with
all his heart may contemn and despise all worldly things, and set his mind
wholly upon heavenly things, hoping for them with a strong and undoubted faith.
Again, let it not grieve him (O sweet Savior) to be losened from this vile
and wretched carcass, which is now so full of sorrow, trouble, and anguish,
sickness and pain, but rather let him have a bent and ready will, through
thy goodness, to put it off, yea, and that with this faith, that he at the
last day shall receive it again in a much better state, then it is now, or
ever was, from the day of his birth: even as a body incorruptible, immortal,
and like to thy glorious body.

Let his whole heart and mind be set only upon thee. Let the remembrance of
the joys of heaven, be so seruent in his breast, that he may both patiently
and thankfully take his death, and ever wish to be with thee in glory. And
when the time comes that he shall give over to nature, and depart from this
miserable world^, vouchsafe we most humbly beseech thee, O Lord Jesus, to take
his soul into thy hands, and to place it among the glorions company of thy
holy Angels, and blessed Saints, and to keep it unto that joyful day of the
general Resurrection, that both his body and soul, through thine Almighty
power, being knitie again together at that day, he may for ever and ever
enjoy that glorious kingdom, and sing perpetual praises to thy blessed Name.
Amen.

A Grace before meat.
We beseethe thee O heavenly Father, to bless us, and these thy meats and
drinks, that we shall receive from thee, and make us thankful for all thy
heavenly Creatures, which we daily receive from thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Grace after meat.
FOr this thy bountiful goodness in feeding us at this time, we heartily thank
thee O most merciful Father; desiring thee so to feed our Souls likewise,
with that meat and drink which perishes not, but abides in Everlasting
life; that we being fed both in body and soul, at thy merciful hands, may
always do that which is acceptable in thy sight: through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Grace before meat.
Heavenly Father, grant that our bodies being fed with these thy Creatures,
we may serve thee in fear and rejoice before thee with trembling, and in all
things stand in awe of thy Majesty, lest thou be angry, and we perish; For
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and blessed are they that
walk therein, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

Grace after meat.
FOr that we have received at thy hands O God, thy most holy and everlasting
Name be blessed and praised, from this time forth, and for evermore. Amen.


