THE MORAL Philosophy of the Stoics.

Written in French, and englished for the benefit of them which are ignorant of
that tongue.

By T. I. Fellow of NewColledge in Oxford.

Non quaero quod mihi vtile est, sed quod multis.

AT LONDON Printed by Felix Kingston, for Thomas Man.

1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, Knight of the most
noble order of the Garter, Captain of Portsmouth, and one of her Majesty's
Lieutenants for the County of South.
T. I. wishes increase and continuance of honor and virtue.
IF Christians in these days were as religious in dedicating of their books,
as Heathen men in former time were superstitious in dedicating of their
Churches, I doubt not but men would be as far from writing of books, as
they are from building of Churches. In dedication of their Temples they were
(as it is reported) too curious; in dedicating of our books we are (as it
appears) too negligent. They regarded time, place, circumstance and person;
we neither respect time, place, circumstance nor person. Indeed the three
former do not much concern us at all, but as for the last it should be the
first thing which is to be considered in every book: for it suffices not
that the book be well written, unless the person to whom it is written be
fitting and agreeable with the book. For as the Heathens never, or seldom
^imes, dedicated their Temples to men touched with the same infirmities that
they were, but either unto the person of some great god or goddess, who might
if need were, be able to defend them: so should not we commit our labors and
works unto their patronage and protection which are but simply men, scarce
able for to help themselves: but unto such as either for their virtues sakes
are better then men, as Aristotle says, orels by reason of their places and
offices in the Commonwealth, are far above all other men in dignity, and
equal unto GOD himself (as the Scripture testifies) in name. This respective
care (Right Honorable) has not somewhat, but altogether persuaded me to offer
up this small book of Moral Philosophy (which I translated as well upon just
commendations of the author, as also upon entreaty of my kind friend a learned
Doctor of Divinity) into your Honors hands: not as if I meant to interpret
the same unto your Lordship, which better knows the French tongue and other
languages then my self, or most men do: but for as much as this small book
had great need of some worthy Patron, and none more worthy then your Honor
was to be found, whether your rare virtues be to be regarded, or the place
which you hold with honor in this Common-w^alth: it seemed good therefore unto
me to use your Lordships name above all others for patronage of this book, if
it shall need defense, as doubtless it will, though it were never so well
written (as it is most excellently compiled in French) such is the private
malice of certain evil men, and common de^tinie of al good writers. For who
is he that will regard a book if it be little? so little do men consider the
goodness of things, when they measure all things by greatness: as if David were
not little when he slew Goliath the giant; the cloud little which threatened all
Israel with rain; the oil little in the pitcher which filled all the empty
vessels of the widow. And as that oil was little until the time that it was
powered forth: so small books when they come abroad into men's hands, if they
be furnished with doctrine, are of great power to convert men unto p^etie and
godliness. The title of this book is, The Moral Philosophy of the Sto^cks.
Let it not seem strange unto us that Philosophy should be a means to help
Divinity, or that Christians may profit by the Stoics. Indeed the licentious
loosenes of our times cannot well brook the stri^^nes of this sect. The
Stoics are as odious unto some men, as they themselves are hated of others:
they call the professors hereof in their gibing manner stocks, and not
Stoics, because of the affinity of their names. And I pray why may not we
call them wisards as well as wise men by the same reason? Philosophy in
general is profitable unto a Christian man, if it be well and rightly used:
but no kind of philosophy is more profitable and nearer approaching unto
Christianity (as S. Hierome says) then the philosophy of the Stoics. Let us
then that are Christians follow them as far ^oorth as they have followed the
truth: for truth, as a learned writer says, Vndecung, est a spiritu sancto
est: from whence or whom so ever it ^ommeth comes from the holy Ghost. The
Israelites when they departed from the Egyptians stole away their jewels: we
are permitted to use the words and sentences of the Heathen writers to our
purpose in case of doctrine and exhortation, but as it were by stealth very
warily and sparingly, as S. Pa^l used for to do. This liberty Master Calvin
in his Commentary upon those places liberally grants us, and I suppose it
cannot lawfully be denied: for gold and ^iluer and precious jewels were ever
used as ornaments in the old law to deck and garnish the Temple withal. As
for the words of the Apostle, which bids us to beware of philosophy least
they beguile us, they are most profitabl^ for our instruction, to teach us not
to attribute more unto philosophy, then philosophy or the Arts deserve.
Abraham was married unto Sarah, Hagar was but his handmaid, or at the most but
his concubine, yet both lived with him in the same house, and lay with him in
the same bed. Every Christian must endeavor to be as Abraham was married unto
Sarah, that is, unto Divinity: for Sarah signifies a Lady and mistress, and
who fitter to be Lady and mistress then Diuinit^e, which must be attended on
with Philosophy, which is in stead of Hagar her handmaide, which must be used
no otherwise then as a concubine or as a stranger, as her name in the original
betokens. If Philosophy, with her young son Ismael the Ar^s, begin to
despise Divinity, as Hagar despised Sarah, she must be cast ^oorth to be
taught her obedience abroad, which she might as well ^aue learned at home. But
where^ore need all these words? why do I go about to persuade your Honor unto
the embracing of this kind of Heathen divinity, which is better known
together with the right use thereof unto your godly wisdom, then my foolish
ignorance can inform you? Does not the temperance of your welgouerned life and
sober discipline in manners show that you are a perfect Philosopher, not in
word only but in deed also? There be many which are Stoickes in the schools,
as Arrian upon Epictetus notes, but are Epicures at home; that speak well in
public, but live ill in private: your Honor is right well known to be ^one of
these. For your life in priu^te is answerable unto your life in public, and
your words agreeable with your deeds. And whence proceeds all this, if a man
should search the fountain of all your actions, but from the fountain and
lively source of all true learning? which is so united and ingra^ted into your
stock, that few have been of your kind, which have not been either greatly
learned, or great lovers and embracers of learning^ so that learning comes
unto your Honor, as the Priesthood did unto the Leuits, by ^^ght of succession
from the father unto the son. Continue therefore (Right Honorable)
continually to cherish the Arts, and love learning and learned men, as you
have done: and amongst the rest let the worthy work of this noble Ge^tleman of
France, whose name is not as yet known in England, have a small room among
your other books, till such time as the French copy be to be had, which now
is hardly to be gotten: and so as there is joy in your Honors name in this
life, so shall you most assuredly in the next world, your name being written in
the book of life, have joys without end: which God grant, to whom I leave
your Lordship: humbly craving pardon of the same for my boldness.

Your Honors in duti^ ever to command, TH. JAMES.

To the French Reader.
MEn that are thankful unto us for former benefits, do bind us as it were
by way of obligation to follow them with second courtesies: even God himself
which has no other subject to give unto us but for exercising of his bounty,
asks nothing for recompense of all his favors, but a dutiful and hearty
acknowledgement of the same. For as he sees we make account of his favors, so
does he multipli^ the same upon us: what then ought man to do for man, and one
citizen for another; seeing that he cannot do so much good for him, but he
must needs owe him a great deal more? Wherefore, seeing the Manuell of
Epictetus, which I lately sent unto you so generally well esteemed and liked, I
have been encouraged again the second time to offer up unto you this small
Treatise, which is of the same stuff, but a little better labored. And
sending the whole treatise unto you, I have thought good to send these letters
of advertisement along with it; for fear, least if it chance to light into
certain malicio^s persons hands (such as there are too many now adays in this
world) the book might happen to be iniuried before it were fully read or
perused. These shall be therefore to advertise you, and as many as shall
happen to read this book, that it is nothing else but the self same Manuell
of Epictetus own making, which I have taken in pieces, and transp^sed
according to that method and order which I have thought most convenient; having
gathered together certain precepts, sentences, and examples of diverse others,
which have been of the same sect; and bound them up together in certain small
and short discourses, which I have thought most fit and proper, to give light
unto that which was before in their doctrine somewhat dark and obscure: in
such sort, that it may serve for the present, in stead of a summarie treatise
or short abridgement of all the moral doctrine of the Stoics. Now I do not
present you their opinions, as if J could warrant them for good: and least of
all, so recommending them unto you, as if upon the sight and view of them, you
should wholly betake your self unto this profane and puddle water, leaving
the clear and sacred fountain of Gods word, from whence all holi^ and
wholesome precepts of manners and discipline must be drawn: but only to let
you understand, that they have been and will be a repr^ch unto us Christians,
who being borne and bred in the true light of the Gospel, shall see and percei^e
how many there be that have been lovers and earnest embracers of virtue even
^midst the times of darkness and ignorance. Now as concerning this small
labor of mine, which has been employed only in disposing of the matter, and
finding out of words; I present it unto you, as Appelles and Policletus did
their tables and Images, with the pencill and caruing knife in my hand, ready
to reform whatsoever men of more profound and delicate judgments shall think
good to be amended: never thinking that my labor is thoroughly ended, till such
time as it shall please all them which are accounted m^n of good judgment.
Peradventure they shall find in this treatise many things worthy to be
corrected, yet notwithstanding I hope they shall have cause to thank me (if
their bringing up be not altogether rusticall and uncivil) for striving to
enrich my native tongue with the spoils of strangers, and making the hard and
sharp thorns of this kind of Philosophy tractable, and able to be h^^ndled
and touched of the most dainty and tender hands of my countrymen. And this
favor if I may be so happy as to obtain at their hands, I shall not think
my labor and watchings ill employed: for I shall have g^tten the greatest
h^nor whereunto my ambitious thoughts may aspir^; which is to be known to be
a lover of my country, and seeker of her good. And being not able otherwise
(to my great grief and sorrow I speak it) to testify my love unto her, I
comfort her as well as I may in her calamity, c^asing not to ^ake my daily
prayers unto GOD for her good and welfare. God almighty, to whose fatherly
protection I no^ leave her, make her as happy and fortunate, as she is honest
and wel-meaning.

The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics.
THere is nothing in the world, which tends not to one end or other: yea,
even things insensible do advance themselves (as it seems) and make
themselves fit for that use, unto ye which they do properly belong: and being
applied thereunto, do show forth a kind of joy, and seem to have a feeling of
the perfection and happiness of their estates. Things that have action in them,
move of themselves in such sort as we see; all creatures in general, and
every one severally in his kind, with great vehemency and contention,
follows and pursues after that, for which they are borne and bred, and do
most certainly rejoice and exult in the fruition of that which they seek,
when they have found it out. What then ought man to do, upon whom nature,
besides this inclination and motion which dead things do partake with him,
has endued with sense, and over and besides sense, which is common to him and
other creatures, has given the benefit of discourse and reason, to be able to
discern and choose the best things of all things which present themselves unto
his consideration, and that which is most fit and proper to his use? May we not
safely conclude, that man also has his end, as well as all other creatures;
which is set before him as the furthermost mark and butte, whereto all his
actions should be directed: and sithence that the happiness of all things is
their perfection, and their perfection the fruition of their end, shall not the
happiness and felicity of man consist in the ^ul obtaining and attaining unto
that which is proposed unto him, and whereunto all his actions are to be
referred? Now the end of man and of all his thoughts and meditations is good.
And truly, there is not one amongst many, so diverse in nature and condition of
life, which desires not that which is good, and eschueth not that which is
evil: and being demanded wherefore he does this or that, answers not, but
that he does it, or thinks that he does it for his good and welfare. And
albeit in our actions, a man may find a great many more bad then good; yet
the general intention, whereby we are directed and guided, is to come unto
that which is good. But as it fares many times with him which aymeth at a
mark, if his sight be hindered, either by some disease of the eye, or fault in
the air, or if he take one thing for another, although he desire to hit the
mark, so that he covet nothing more, yet it is impossible but he should be
wide from it: so likewise we, because we do not know wherein consists our
good, but oftentimes take that which is about it, for it; do therefore in our
particular actions take our aim amiss, and shoot wide from our general mark
and intention.

Good, in good truth, is not so placed that all the world may see and perceive
it; nature has sowed and scattered here beneath amongst us certain weak and
feeble sparklinges of that heat, which notwithstanding being rightly applied
unto our minds, are able to kindle a pure light in them, and cause us to see
good, as it is, and not as it seems. So then, we must seek it, and we
shall find it; having found it, we must acknowledge it; acknowledging it, we
cannot choose but love it; and loving it, we shall fasten all our desires
thereunto, and enjoy it with great happiness. For even as truth presenting it
self unto our understanding, is there entertained with great joy and
contentednes: even so good offering it self unto our will, is received by her
with great pleasure, as being her natural object. And therefore, I think,
that if a man would properly define good, he must affirm it to be nothing
else, but the essence and usage of a thing, according unto his nature. For this
same nature is so prudent and provident a mistress, that she always disposes
all things unto their greatest good, and therefore has given them a first
motion unto that which is good, and unto that end which they should seek and
search after: in such sort, that he that will follow after it, cannot choose
but compass and obtain it. Now by the rules of nature, man should be so
composed and fashioned, that that which is most excellent in him, should bear
rule and command, and that reason should ^se all that which is presented unto
her, as best beseems her, and shall most serve for her purpose.

Well then, the good and happiness of man, consists in the right use of
reason^ and what is that but virtue, which is nothing else but a constant
disposition of will, to follow that which is honest and convenient. There is
no man, as I suppose, but will avouch this to be good: but yet for all that,
there will be a great many found out, which will affirm, yt herein only
consists not man's good and happiness, but that he must have a sound and well
disposed body, and a hundred more commodities, without the which it is not
possible for man's life to be, much less to be happy and ^ortunate. But if our
position which we have set down unto you at the first be true, (as true it
is) that the end of every thing is his good, and his good is his end, and that
these two are so reciprocable and conuertible the one with the other, that the
one cannot be without the other, then may we not justly say, that health, or
riches, are man's good, seeing that they are not his end which he regards. For
he cannot possess or use them, but to some other end. And so too, that the
greatest part of his time, whilst he enjoys them, he cannot joy in them,
but is with them unfortunate and unhappy: unless peradventure some man will
say, that they are happy, which make their riches and health serve them (as
they do full many in the world) to nourish their vices, and cherish them up in
their wicked passions and affections. But happily will some man say, they do
serve, as means and instruments disposed unto the attainment of this good,
without the which it is not possible that a man should get it, and therefore by
a necessary consequent they are to be accounted necessary, to the obtaining
thereof, and therefore good. Truly it is a harsh and improper kind of speech,
to call that good, which serves to the procurement and obtaining of that which
is good; or that which is the subject and matter of good. For virtue, which we
have proved before to be the true good, is of such a nature, that she can make
her benefit indifferently of things contrary in nature, she profits and
helps her self as well by pouerti^ as by riches, by sickness as by health. For
we do as much commend him that can patiently endure his poverty, and
constantly bear his griefs or disease, as we do him that liberally
bestows his goods, and being in health, honestly labors in his vocation.
So that if you will needs call riches good, because they serve to the obtaining
and getting of virtue, why may you not as well call poverty by the same name,
seeing that it serves to the self same use, and that more profitablie also?
Now to call things so contrary and repugnant, as riches and poverty are, by
the same name, has not so much as any show or appearance of any truth.
Wherefore, let all these things remain indifferent, as being made good or
evil, by the mind of man which knows how to use them rightly, which if he
want, yet will he not want the means of attayning unto his end, which is to
be fashioned and framed rightly according unto reason, and to make use and
benefit of all things which shall happen whatsoever, and consequently to
purchase his chief good and felicity.

If we will truly know wherein consists this good, let us consider within
our selves what that is which seeks it: for it must needs be the good of that
part^ Nothing seeks after that which is another, unless it be coupled and
joined with his own. Now then there is no doubt but that the beginning and
first motion of all our actions comes from the understanding and will, and
therefore the good which we seek after, must needs be the perfection, rest and
contentment of the same. But if we place riches and health in this account,
and esteem them for things good, and by a consequent repute all things
contrary unto them evil; what do we else, but tes^ifie unto all men, that there
is no true felicity in this world, and that our minds are here held in
perpetual torment? For a man must needs have death and grief continually
before his eyes, both which are esteemed evils, and whereof one is oftentimes
present with him, the other never ^easeth to threaten and menace him. If then
they be things evil, the fear of them is just, and if he be always in fear,
how can he be at any time happy? Let us therefore confess, that either man
has no good ordained and prepared for him in this world, which he may compass
and attain unto, or else acknowledge, that this good does wholly and entirely
consist in virtue. For it must needs be that the end of every thing should be
proportionable unto the strength and nature of the thing it self: for other
wise, if the end were impossible to be achieved, in stead of being man's good,
it would turn to be man's further torment. And so he should nothing but labor
and travail in vain, as the daughters of Danaus are said to do in hell,
striving to fill certain bottomless vessels with water, which ca^ hold no water
at all. Again, if there be no Science nor Art in the world, which has not
one end or other limited her, which they may come unto by keeping of certain
precepts and rules; what shall we think that nature, the mother of Arts and
Sciences, has proposed unto man (which is her chief work) an end, which it
is impossible for him to come unto, because it is out of his power?

Will (as we say) is that which seeks after our good: now a ruled and well
governed will never coueteth (as indeed it ought not to do) but that which
she may, and which it is in her power to procure, she busieth not her self
about having of that which it is not in her power to have when she will; as
health, riches, and honors. For if our good did consist and depend of them, we
should not need to employ reason or will to the procurement of them, but we
might as well compass them by prayers and wishes: for it is a thing which is
subject unto a thousand casualties, which cannot be pr^^ented or fores^ene, as
not being in our hands to dispose of them as we list, but subject unto the rule
of Fortune their good Lady and mistress. What show or probability of reason is
there I pray you in this, that Nature should so create man, the perfection of
all other creatures, that his good, which is his perfection, should depend not
only upon other matters, but upon so many things, that a man has no hope to
have them all favorable unto him; but that he should here bene^th with
Tantalus, lie miserabli^ thirsting and crying after water. Nay doubtless, Nature
does offer you so much to the getting of this good, as a mind well disposed
and fit to use any thing which shall be laid before it, and to pass over those
things which do far pass his reach and capacity. Will you then rather
choose to run unto Fortune, and wait at her deceitful hands for that good,
which you may give unto your self and if you will? For this is a divine and
inviolable law, which has been made since the beginning of the world, that if
we will have any good, we must purchase and get it our selves, by our own
labor and industry. For nature has provided a rich storehouse of all good
things, and enclosed it in our minds: let us then but stretch forth the hands
of our will, and we shall take as much as we will. For if the will of man be
well guided and ordered, it will turn all things to her good, as M^das turned
all things that he touched into gold. There is no accident so grievous, which
can befall a man either in body or riches, whence a man may not reap some rest
and comfort of mind: so that if we can here rest and content our selves, we
have already found out our end. For though we should remit so much of the
severity of this sect, as to confess that the body or goods, which are but
instruments of man's life, were a part of man's substance, and might by their
quality alter the quality of the soul; yet may we not avouch this for good,
that loss ^ither in goods or bod^e, is able to hinder the felicity and
happiness of man, if his mind enjoy quiet rest and content.

In things which are compounded of many parts, the most noble part gives both
name and laws unto the rest, and they take their denominatio^ from her: what
doubt then can there be, but that man should be wholly happy, if his mind
enjoys his happiness. And so we say, that a Commonwealth is happy after a
great victory, although there be many citizens lost, because the happiness
thereof is measured by the person of the Prince, or else of the state, to the
good and service of whom all the rest must be obedient. Hence is it that
particular men do even glory in their wounds, do even brag and boast of
them, if they have received them in the defense of either Prince or country.
Shall we than assign unto the body any other motion or desire then that, by
the which it refers all things that come unto him, unto the joy and happiness
of the mind? shall we, I say be so foolish as to link and knit the soul so
fast unto the body, that the good thereof should remain as a slave within his
members, and so far forth depend on them, that accordingly as the body
should be well or ill disposed, the mind should be altered, and accounted
either happy or unhappy? Truly, if so be that nature would have had man's
happiness and perfection to have depended on his body, or consisted in his
goods, she would have given unto all men like bodies, and like measure and
quantity of goods: for so she should not have been partiall^ but equal unto
all, and so have passed from the general unto every particular of that kind.
But on the contrary side, she having made all men of very diverse natures and
conditions, both in respect of their bodies, as also in regard of their goods,
has notwithstanding granted unto all men like power and ability of well using
their bodies or riches of what sort soever they be, in such sort, that the
action of the mind may be as honorable and glorious in one sort as in
another: yea, the excellency thereof does appear and shine forth more
gloriously, and merit more praise then, when being destitute of means and
instruments, he comes of himself unto his wished end. For so in my opinion,
we are to judge him to be the skilfuller pilot in a ship, which can in a
great tempest, amidst the raging floods, guide an old sea-beaten ship full of
holes, whose sails are rent, and ropes broken; then he which can tell how to
govern a new ship well rigged and furnished with all necessaries, having wind
at will, and seas favorable. Therefore we will here conclude this point thus:
Seeing that the happiness of man does lie in procuring of his good, and that his
good is to li^e according unto nature; and to live according unto nature, is
not to be troubled with any passions or perturbations of the mind, but so to
behave himself, happen what happen may, as that he do not exceed patience, or
pass the bounds of reason; that if we will be truly happy, we must purge
our minds of all manner of passions, and learn how to be affected in mind
toward all things which shall happen.

Now there is nothing which can so soon set us in this way, and learn us how
to obtain the right course of ordering our affections, minds and wills
according unto reason, as Wisdom, which is (in my simple opinion) both the
beginning and end of all virtues. For causing us to have an exact and true
knowledge of the condition and quality of things which come into our
considerations and viewes, she teaches and tells us what is according unto
nature, and what not, and like wise what is to be desired and followed, or
shunned and avoided. She remoues al false opinions out of our heads which
trouble our brains, makes our affections kind and natural, and finally upon
her wait all other virtues, as being their mother, nurse, and keeper. O how
happy would man's life be, if it were always led and guided by her direction?
But alas, as this virtue is most fair and excellent, so she is most rare and
hard to be found: for she is so hidden in the bottom of our minds, as the
veins of gold lie secret in the bowels of the earth, and are found but in few
places. This is (as I bele^ue) that great, stately, and impenetrable buckler
which Vulcan forged for Achilles, wherein were engraven heaven and earth, the
sea, clouds, stars, lightnings, cities, weapons, assemblies of people, and
combats: and in a word, there was nothing in the world which was not there to
be seen: signifying unto us by that device, that wisdom and the true
knowledge of things, does better preserve the mind of man from danger, then
the buckler or helmet does keep the body from wounds. But as Achilles went to
school unto Chiron to learn the use of that buckler: so we must go to school
to Philosophy, to know the right use of wisedoome. And if we will hearken unto
her, she will tell us, that wisdom has two properties and uses, the one to
prick us forward to that which is good, the other to pull us back from
following that which is evil. Now because when we come unto Philosophy, we do
not bring with us a mind pure and neat, but already distempered, euilly
disposed, and possessed with filthy humors, and such as are incident unto the
common sort of people; because, I say, we come unto her as unto a skillful
leach or cunning physician: therefore if we will be cured, we must do as
surgeons do which have to do with sores and wounds, who before they apply any
medicine or salve to cure them, do first draw out all the bad humors and dead
flesh: and so must we also in like manner begin first of all to purge our minds
of all such passions as do arise in them, and with the smoke of them darken
and obscure the eye of reason: for otherwise precepts of manners and wholesome
instructions would profit our souls as little, as plenty of meat does a
corrupted body, which the more you feed the more you offend.

Now to know what these passions are, you must understand, that we do term
them a viol^nt or vehement motion of the soul in the sensitive part, which is
caused in the following or eschuing of that which seems to be either good or
evil. For albeit there be but one soul in every one of us, which is the cause
of life, and fountain of all our actions, and is all in all, and all in ^uery
part: yet there be many faculties in the soul, which it is strange to see,
how diverse, yea how contrari^ they be many times one toward another, according
unto the diversity of instruments and vessels where it is kept, and variety
of objects which are offered unto her. In one place she causes vegetation, in
another motion, in another sense, in another desire or appetite, in another
imagination, in another remembrance, in another reason and discourse: even as
the Sun, which though he be all in his own essence, yet dividing and
parting his beams in diverse places, he brings heat to one place, and light
to another, softeneth wax and hardens clay, scatters the clouds, and dries
up standing pooles and lakes. And when the parts where the soul lies
enclosed, doc retain and use her but in a proportion of their capacities, and
as farr^ forth as it is necessary for their convenient use, then she brings
forth gentle, sweet, and orderly effects: but contrariwise, if her parts do
take more heat and motion then is requisite and convenient, you shall have
clean contrary operations, and such as will prove very hurtful and
prejudicial unto the soul: and right so for all the world fares it with the
Sun, who as long as his beams do wanderabroad, according unto their natural
and wonted liberty, do gently and moderatly heat the earth: but if they be
gathered and knit together in the hollow of a burning Crystal, they do burn
and ^^nsume that, which they were wont before to cherish and quicken. Now it
has pleased nature to grant unto sense this power and strength which comes
from the soul, to apply it self unto things, and extract their forms, and
afterward either to choose or refuse them, as they shall best please or
displease him, and agree or disagree with his nature. And this is done for two
reasons: one, because they should be in stead of sentinels unto the body still
watching and warding for his good: the other, which is a principal cause
indeed, because they should be messengers and vantcouriers from the
sovereign and chiefest part of the soul, and also serve for ministers and
instruments of bettering our discourse and reason. But as she has allotted them
this power and authority: so she does most straightly will and command them to
content themselves with their office, which is to call to mind things past, and
thereupon to advise themselves what is best to be done: not presuming or daring
to disquiet the higher and stronger faculties, or breed any further uproar or
confusion. For so it falls out many times in an army, that the watch because
they know not the purpose of the General, whose direction they should follow,
may be deceived, and take the enemy coming unto them disguised, for friends,
and their friends which come in good will to succor and relieve them for
enemies: and even so the senses, because they cannot thoroughly conceive and
comprehend things appertaining unto reason, as being above their reach, are
beguiled with show and appearance of things, and do often times judge that for
a friend unto us, which is our greatest adversary. And so whilst they
presently rush forward without staying, or looking for any commandment from
reason, they provoke and stir up that part of the soul where concupiscence and
anger does lodge, whereby springs such a ^umult and hurly burly in the mind,
that reason during this fury can not be heard, nor understanding o^eied, no
more the^ laws or Magistrates are regarded in a state rent and torn with
evil dissension. But in this trouble, the passions which do wax most
mutinous and troublesome unto the quiet rest of the spirit, do first arise in
the appetible or concupiscible part, that is to say, in that place where the
soul does exe^cise this faculty of desiring or rejecting things presented
unto her, as being things proper or contrary unto her welfare and preservation.
So then, their first moving and springing is upon a show and appearance or
imagination of some good or evil. Now if it be of some present good, which she
does already begin to possess, we call this motion by the name of ple^sure:
but if it be of some good ^o come, which is as yet far estranged from us, we
call it desire: ^f it be of a present evil, the inconvenience and grief
whereof we do already feel, being moved and incensed against another, we
call it hatred or horror: and being moved within our selves, discontentednes,
which if it happen upon occasion of any thing which concerns us, we call it
sorrow: if by reason of another man's evil, pity: if by occasion of an
apparent good where we pretend a part, jealousy: if otherwise, envy. Again,
to fall back unto the second part of our second general division: if it be of
some after ensuing evil, it is rightly termed by the name of fear.

See here the first band of these seditious passions, which so much trouble the
quiet rest of our soul, which are accompanied with most dangerous effects,
and yet nothing like so dangerous as are those which follow after. For why?
these first motions being bred and formed in that part, by means of the object
which presents it self, do pass forth incontinently unto the irascible
part of ye mind, that is to say, to the place where the soul seeks al means
possible of obtaining or avoiding that which seeme^h unto ^er good or evil.
And then, foort^with as a wheel which is already mou^d, being to receive a
fresh motion is carried about with greater swiftnes: so the mind being moo^ed
with the first apprehension, having a second strength added unto the former, is
whirled about with greater violence then before, and stirs up more strong and
untameable passions, because they are doubled and coupled with the former, and
so being joined together, do stay and strengthen one another with mutual
help and consent. For the first passions, which are found of the object of
some imagined or seeming good, considering with themselves of the means how to
obtain and acquire it, do stir up in us either hope or despair: but those
affections which are made of the object of some seeming evil, do bring forth
fear and anger: which four passions are wonderfully strong and violent, and
do wholly ouerturne the frame of reason which they find already tottering.

Here behold and mark the four winds (as I verily suppose) from whence
spring the cruel tempests of our souls. Their den from whence they come, is
nothing else (as has been already showed you) but a false imagination which
we have, that those things which are presented unto us are either good or
evil. For by this means attributing that quality unto them, which indeed is
not in them, we fly or follow after them with vehemency: and this is the
very original and spring of these passions. Well then to stop this den,
assure the rest of our souls, and provide that they be not otherwise moved
then it is meet for them to be, let us call to mind that which was proved
unto us in the very beginning and entrance into this discourse. To wit, that
the good of a man, and the perfection of his nature, consists in the
disposing and fashioning of his will to the right use of things according unto
reason: and contrariwise, that his evil comes from a disordered or
unskillful using, or rather abusing of them. For by the first he shall reap
much profit, receive much content and quietness, and chance what chance, nay he
may set up his rest, and remain as stable andimmoueable as a rock in the
midst of the sea: by the second, every small thing that chances will
trouble him and turn to his great grief and disadvantage. Now this
disposition of our will lies wholly in our power, and consequently our good
and evil. Wherefore, if at anytime there be presented unto us any object, to
the endethat we may not be troubled at all as with some good or evil which
does follow us, let us consider whether the thing which happens be in our
power or no. If it be in our power well and good, it may be good or ill unto
us. And yet in this case too, we must not be too passionaetly affected in any
sort: for if we can but moderate and guide our wills aright, we shall make it
good, and so continue it still. If it be out of our power, then it is neither
good nor evil, and consequently we ought not to seek or provide it.

Now the things which are in our power are these; to approve, undertake,
desire, and eschew a matter, and in a word, all our actions. For our will has
authority and power to rule and govern them according unto reason, till they
come unto the place from whence our good and happiness must come. As for
example sake, she is able to dispose our opinion, so that it yield not consent
but to that which it is meet it should, and which shall be examined either by
sense or reason, that she shall cleave fast unto things which are evidently
true of themselves, and keep her self in suspense in things doubtful, and
utterly reject things which are of themselves plainly untrue and false.
Besides, she can so rule our desire, that it shall follow after nothing but
that which is agreeable with nature, and eschew the contrary. The things which
are out of our power are these; our riches, reputation, and briefly, that which
does no way depend of our wills: and here, if any thing do happen, we may
not say that it is contrary to our natures: because it happens either by the
universal and continual order of things, and ordinary continuance of causes,
and therefore should not seem strange unto us: or else comes to pass by some
particular providence so ordering it, and then we must know that nature has
made us subject thereunto. Furthermore, she has given us a power and ability
in the soul of well using and applying our selves to all that which shall
happen unto us from without; which shows that she has not made us fit and
proper to one thing, but to every thing which shall come unto us whatsoever: in
such sort that we may not desire or fly any such external thing which is not
in our power, as well for that is a very foolish and vain affection to will
that which it is not in our power to have, as also because that howsoever it
happen, it may prove good unto us, and be the subject of many worthy and
laudable actions. Now then if we can so command our selves and our minds, as
not to desire or fly any thing which is out of our powers, but with a sober
and moderate affection receive and entertain it when it comes, we shall be
altogether exempted from all troubles and perturbations of the mind, we shall
be free and happy, and never frustrated of our expectations, or hindered in
our affairs and enterprises: we shall not need to hate any man, to complain
of any man, to fear any man, or to be angry with any man: for no man shall be
able to do us harm. On the other side, if we desire and labor to avoid that
which is out of our powers, we shall oftentimes fall from our hopes and wished
ends, and miss of our purposes, and light upon that which we so much abhor,
we shall trouble our selves, vex and torment our selves, and all to no
purpose or end in the world.

There is no man so foolish or unadvised, but that he confesses that he had
rather have his desires then be deprived of them, and rather be free from
passions, then to be troubled with them, if he may do otherwise. Is there any
man then that will deny this to be a very good, profitable, and natural rule,
by the which he may obtain any thing which he desires, if he desire not any
thing which he can not obtain? and by the which we learn not to be
passionate, or overmuch pensive for any thing which shall happen, placing good
and evil in ou^ power, giving us one, and taking away the other from us when
we will? Therefore when any thing does chance unto us, that we may not trouble
or vex our selves, let us consider forthwith whether it be in our power or
no: if it be, let us so order our will that we may direct and guide all
things unto their true and natural uses: and if we do so, we shall be sure to
receive good thereby: but if upon inquiry we find them not to be in our power,
let us not be moved a whit, but have this word always in ou^ mouths, as a
very profitable and wholesome instruction. This thing touches not me at all,
it co^cernes not me, that is to say, it is neither my good nor my evil, and
consequently neither seek after nor avoid it: but when it happens I will
make the best of it that I can, by applying it unto the best use I can, and
which it is possible for me to refer it unto. And if we find our selves to
be further moved, and y^ any one of the aforenamed passions be stirred up in
us, by apprehending the object of things which are out of our power, let us
straight ways weigh and consider the nature of it which offers it self, and
wherefore it is sent unto us: the^ let us examine our selves, to know unto what
passion we are most inclined^ and what effects it brings with it: afterward
let us mark in our selves what virtue is opposed against it, and what power
and ability nature has granted to rule and govern it. For as the passion
comes from without, and enters into us together with the image of the
subject, which offers it self unto our view: so nature has ^enced us within
with a strong bulwark or rampire to back us against the force hereof, that
is, has granted us sufficient strength to resist it, and if that we be
willing thereunto. Therefore the better to fortify and strengthen this power,
let us furnish our selves with certain wise precepts and short sentences
touching every passion, wherewith we may the better be able to maintain
reason, and as it were with the edge of the sword cu^ off all such first and
sudden motions of the mind, as may any ways violence it. And to make these
precepts stronger and harder to be overcome, let us stuff them out with brave
and worthy examples of men in former time, which have behaved themselves right
valiantly upon such or the like occasions. For the example of virtue in others,
engages us to be likewise virtuous, and their commendation is a profitable
instruction for us to imitate and resemble them.

Therefore as soon as any subject of pleasure for the body, as delicate and
dainty meats do come into our mind, and that we do find our selves moved;
let us think thus, that this is one of the things which is not in our power,
neither good nor evil: but an indifferent thing, a thing which nature has
given us for our suste^ance, and being taken moderatly, preserues the body in
health, and makes it a fit and able instrument for the mind: but contrariwise,
the excess and superfluity thereof greatly weakeneth the body, and
engenders many grievous and dangerous diseases, which are the punishment
which nature uses to bridle our intemperance withal. But if once we loose
the reins unto our appetites to follow abundance or delicatenes of meat, we
shall be held in perpetual torment and pain, things superfluous will prove
but necessary unto us, and the mind e^tsoones will become a slave unto the
body, and we shall find that we live but to eat and drink. Therefore we
must temper thi^ pleasure with a moderate use, and learn to know that it is
sobriety that does preserve the body sound and the mind pure. And therefore
let us frame unto our selves this rule in our diet, to use meat for our
necessity of food and maintenance, and let us not accustom^ our selves to
delicious fare an^ dainty meats, least happily being deprived of them our
bodies be^ll disposed, and our minds discontented: but contrariwise, let us
ordinarily use our selves to grosser meats, as well for that they make us more
strong and sound, as also for that they are more easily to be gotten. For it is
an especial favor of nature, for the which she deserves singular great
thanks at our hands, that she has made things necessary for our life most
easy to be found, and that the things which are not found but with great
difficulty, are nothing necessary at all. And truly I cannot choose but admire
the words of Epicurus, but I would they had proceeded out of another man's
mouth, because I would not have so worthy a sentence marred with the
effeminatenes of the rest of his opinions: My body (quoth he) daunceth for
joy, and my heart within me is ravished with pleasure, to think that I being
content with bread and water, should be able to contemn all the delicate fare
of the world. And now if Epicurus gloried so much in the contempt of all
dainties, what think you should the Stoics do? should not they reverence and
honor sobriety as the very foundation of all other virtues, and such a one as
stifles all other vices in the cradle, and chokes them in the seed?

We read that the families of the Curij and Fabricij in Rome did get many
ample victories over their enemies, yet were they not renowned for any thing
but for their frugalitie. Their feats of arms did for a certain time assure
the state of the Romans against their foreign enemies: but their sobernes and
frugalitie has been a law to frame and fashion the minds and courages of them
which did afterward overcome all the world: the figs and carrots which they
preferred before the riches of the Samnites, were more pleasant in taste to
them which succeeded them, then were the delicate meats of Axicius in his
time. These reasons may likewise serve us to moderate those exceeding great
pleasures which we take in wearing costly apparel, and building stately
houses, and such other things which are to be referred unto the use of the
body: for otherwise, if we do not moderate and measure the pleasures which
we conceive in them by the necessity of nature, the very opinion will draw us
into a perilous downfall, where we shall neither find shore nor bottom. For
example, first our shows must be made of velvet, then of cloth of gold, and
lastly they must be finely embroydered with pearls and diamonds: and so
likewise our houses must be first built with Marble, then with Jasper, and
finally with Porphyre. It shall be good therefore for us to observe this
course, that our apparel be sufficient to defend us from the violence of
heat and cold, and our houses strong enough to resist wind and rain, and
let us not seek any thing else: and if happily we find any thing besides, let
us not be moved therewith at all.

But it seems that reason has more ado in resisting the pleasures which
come by sight, and fruition of fair and beautiful things, then it has in
conquering the pleasures which we have but erst entreated of. For we imagine
that the person which carries on his face the favors of nature printed in a
rare and beautiful sort, has a lawful power over us, and that drawing our
eyes unto it, it draws our affections likewise thither, and enthralles the^
unto it even against our wills. But what then? let us remember that it is a
thing merely without us, and that it is a grace and favor which nature has
bestowed upon the person which enjoys it, and not upon us: and that it is a
thing, the use and possession whereof may be as prejudicial as profitable unto
us: and last of all, let us consider that it is but a flower which continually
fades, and nothing else but as it were the color of a body. If you suffer
your self to be carried away with this mad and frantike passion, where shall
a man find you? you cannot be your own man any longer; your body must
needs endure a thousand pains to seek your pleasure, and your mind a
thousand torments to satisfy your desire. When this desire shall grow to his
full height, it will become low, and love never leaves increasing till in the
end it prove stark madness.

Let us therefore provide our selves of strong rampires and bulwarks to ward
us against this passion, and let us take heed that we be not cosoned or
deceived with her entising baits. The more she dallieth with us, the more let
us defy her, and let us take this warning in good time, that she never comes
to embrace us, but she means to strangle us: that she never gives us liberty
and license, but to bring us into thraldom and slavery: she baits us with
honey, to glut us with gall: she sets before our eyes a vain show of
pleasure, which passes away in a moment, and leaves us sorrow and grief which
remains for ever. Let us therefore order our minds in such sort, that in
considering the excellency of beauty, we do acknowledge the cunning
workmanship of nature, and let us so esteem it as we do the Sun and Moon,
for the excellency which is contained within them. And if the law do grant us
any more particular fruition of it, let it be taken to that end that nature
desires, and so that we do not lose the use of reason which ought still to
bear rule in us; remembering always how much harm comes by the immoderate
use of this pleasure; how it wastes the body, weakeneth the soul, and duls
the spirit. Let us altogether abstain from it (if it be possible) before we
be married: for besides that, it wipes away all shame and modesty in youth,
it makes them lose the sweetness of marriage which they ^lone do taste which
have not used it before, a sweetness which souldereth and knitteth together the
friendship of marriage: and over and besides all these inconveniences before
mentioned, it nourishes us in the liberty and license of an unruly and
inconstant love. But above all things let us take heed that we do not commit
any dishonestie the sooner to accomplish our filthy pleasures. Let us
represent unto our selves the manifold dangers which have befallen the^ which
have bin too deeply plunged in them, how some have lost their goods, others
their lives, others their minds and wits. Again, let us on the contrary side
consider how much more pleasure it will be to us to resist and conquer
pleasure, then to possess it; and how much more praise and commendation of all
posterities has Alexander deserved by his continency, then Darius wife and
her daughters purchased by their exceeding pleasant and beautiful faces.
Cleopatras eyes triumphed over C^sar and Anthony, but Augustus eyes did
triumph over Cleopatras.

Last of all, this kind of pleasure is accompanied with a kind of delight
which concerns the body, and in this regard it seems that it is somewhat
natural: but the desire of goods and honors, and the pleasure which men take
in possessing of the^, is rooted altogether upon a bare opinion. I know not
what he was that first beguiled us in giving of names, in calling that good
which does in no wise depend of us: but this I am sure that he has fastened
our happiness unto a rotten cable, and anchored our felicity upon the brittle
and unstable sand. For what is there in the world so uncertain and unsure, as
the possession of such goods as go and come, slide and pass away as a
torrent? And I may very well say as a torrent, for they make a noise at their
coming unto a man, are full of violence being possessed of him, and are
indeed nothing else but troubles and griefs: it is long before they come, and
when they are come they stay not long with us, but vanish away suddenly and in
a moment, and when they are gone they leave nothing behind them in the bottom
but dirt and filth.

O riches, if men could be so happy as to see the rust of cares and grie^es
which are ingendered in the hearts of men, by looking upon the brightness and
glory of your gold and silver, doubtless they would then hate you as much as
they do now love you. And truly those which do love you, I can say no more of
them but this, that they have one virtue in them, and that is this, to be very
constant in concealing their griefs, for fear of discovering their shames:
and were it lawful for sorro we freely to utter her complaints against
Fortune, think you that she could not answer the accusation of so many men, as
she has cousoned by giving of them evils, under pretense and title of good
things? Verily my opinion is, that she^ would have nothing else to say unto them
for her excuse but this, that she has bestowed them upon none but such as did
heartely desire them. Let us then acknowledge riches to be as they are, that
is, presents of Fortune, which she does but lend unto us for a while: for goods
that ordinarily happen unto bad men, for goods which are not goods, but when
they have gotten them good masters: for good which oftentimes corrupt goods
manners, but never amend the bad: for goods without the which so many wise men
have made their lives most fortunate: for goods which so many wicked men having
had, have suffered most pitiful deaths. Let us know what this unruly desire of
having them does profit us. It is a gangrene in our souls, which consumes our
natural affections with her venomous heat, to fill us with certain poisoned
and virulent humors. As soon as it is lodged within our hearts, all honesty
and natural affection which is due unto parents, friends, and to our selves,
vanishes away: all the rest being compared with our profits, seem nothing:
we, even we for our profits sake neglect our selves, and despise our minds and
bodies, and as it is in the proverb, sell the horse to buy hay. It seems that
nature in the very growing of gold, has in some sort presaged their miseries
which should be earnest lovers of it. For she has made that in those parts
where it grows nothing prospers, neither herbs, nor plants, nor any thing
else which is of any value; ^s it were foretelling us that in the spirits of
those men in whom the desire of this metal should rule, there should be left
no sparkle of honor or virtue.

Let us therefore chase away this ^urious desire far from us, and leaving the
foolish opinions of the vulgar sort of people which poizeth goods in goldsmiths
balances, let us follow the will and counsel of Nature which measures them
with the ell of necessity. We shall learn of her, that our good comes not
from riches, no more then the heat which we ^eele may be said to come from
our garments; but issuing from us is kept and preserved in them. That which
cannot reach so far as them, may be said to be within us: and so our virtue,
though Fortune clippe her wings, shall not be lessened thereby: for though it
have less motion, yet shall it have more rest and contentment. There be some
notwithstanding, which would feign corrupt us with their vain and foolish
opinions, going about to persuade us to think upon nothing else but upon getting
of riches. For what say they? If I do not take care in time to get riches, how
shall I be able hereafter to help my friends, or serve my country? But let us
shape them this wise answer: that it is meet that every one should serve the
Commonwealth in his several trade and vocation. It is the Philosophers duty
to make his fellow citizens modest and obedient: if he do so, it may be truly
said that he has discharged his duty, and pro^ited both his friends and
country. Besides all this, I would say thus unto him: set me down any honest
course of getting riches, and I will not refuse to take it: for my part as I do
not greatly desire them, so I would not refuse any honest means and pains to
get them. Now if you cannot show me this honest means, why are you so instant
with me to seek them by unlawful means? Let us learn to seek that without
passion which nature desires, and we shall find that Fortune cannot hinder us
from atchieuing our purposes. But indeed the speediest and truest way of
attaining unto riches, is by despising of riches. If we would feign be rich, we
need not increase the means of getting them, but rather diminish the desires
of seeking them: he that is a contented man, is a rich man, he may have
riches when he will. Thus Bias made himself rich by ^orsaking his goods which
he might have carried with him out o^ the city as well as the rest, (because
this was one of the conditions in yielding up the town into the enemies hands
for in saying that he carried all his goods with him, doubtless he meant his
virtues. Thus Diogenes grew not only to be ri^h and mighty, but richer and
mightier then Alexander, when he refused his largess, and in recompense of
former courtesies asked only this boon at his hand, that it would please him
to stand a little further from him: (for at that time he stood between him
and the Sun) and truly as Alexander dealt with `Diogenes: so do^ they deal
with us which present us with the goods of Fortune: for they do clean take
from us the gifts of Nature. And this appears most manifestly in them which
suffered themselves to be allured with the pleasant baits of honors (as we
call them) and to be tossed about with the wind of ambition. For forthwith
they find, that in stead of light and brightness they have nothing left them
but smoke.

Indeed true honor is the glittering and beaming brightness of a good and
virtuous action, which rebounds from our consciences unto the sight of them
with whom we live, and so by a reflection in our selves, brings us a testimony
from others of the good opinion which they have of us, which makes us to enjoy
great comfort of mind. Now this good does wholly depend on us. Nature
procures us this good, when, and as often as we will have it, we may have it.
But if we once forsake it, we do but embrace a shadow in stead of a body,
and fasten the rest of our minds upon the opinion of the vulgar sort of people,
and so voluntarily renounce our liberties, to serve the humors and passions of
other men, and are compelled to displease our selves to please them which do
behold us: so that our affections are hanged upon the eyes of other men: and
we love not virtue, but as the common people do love and favor it: if we
chance to attempt or do any good thing, it is not done for the love of good,
but for desire of honor. And so we become like pierced hogges-heads which
suffer no licour to come forth, till there be a vent made. But what bounds
has this passion? how is it limited and confined? Does age waste it? No^ Do
dignities and honors content it? No. It is a gulf which has neither shore
nor bottom. No, no, it is that vacuum which the Philosophers could never yet
find, it is a fire which daily increases being daily fed and nourished. They
which would smooth and flatter ambition, would feign make men believe that she
is in stead of a staire for virtue to mount up to the top of honor: for, say
they, for ambition sake men leave all other vices, and in fine forsake ambition
too for the love of virtue. But stay, this is not true: if ambition cover and
hide all other vices, yet she does not take them away for all that, but suffers
them to lurk for a time under the crafty ashes of a malicious and fained
dissimulation, hoping that they shall have the opportunity hereafter to break
forth into a flame, when they shall get credit enough to reign and rage
publicly where they will with impunitie.

Serpents lose not their venom being benumbed with cold, neither do ambitious
men forsake their vices, whilst they cover the^ with the cold of
dissimulation: for when it is come to the place whither she desires to go,
then she displayeth her force and makes men feel her strength. And were it so
that ambition should abandon all other vices, yet would she never leave her
self, being only in this one thing just, that she suffices to her own
punishment, and willingly offer^th up her self unto torment. The motion of her
desires is like unto the wheel of Ixion, it is turned up and down
continually, and never suffers a man's mind to rest quietly. Let us therefore
fortify and stablish our minds against these grievous motions which so much
disease our quiet rest and repose. ^et us so govern our affections, that the
luster of honors do not dazzle or darken the eyes of reason, and let us plant
certain noble resolutions in our minds in stead of bars and barricadoes
against the furious assaults of ambition. First of all let us persuade our
selves that there is no true honor in the world but that which comes from
virtue. Secondly, that virtue seeks no greater or ampler theater to show her
self in, then her own conscience. The higher the Sun is the less shadow it
makes, and the greater a man's virtue is the less glory it seeks. And indeed
a man may very well liken glory unto a shadow, for it follows them which
fly from it, and flies them that seek after it. Let us consider that we come
into the world as to a comedy, where we may not choose what part we will play,
but only look that we play that part well which is given us in charge. If
the Poet bid us play a kings part, we must take care that we do it well, and
so if he charge us with the porter or clowns part, we must do it likewise: for
a man may get as much credit by playing the one well, as by well acting the
other: and like discredit redoundeth unto him if neither be done well.

As for dishonours, we must use them as we do meats at a banquet, where we
taste of them which are set before us, but account it an unmannerly part to
reach our hands after those dishes which are set at the further end of the
table, or to take the platters out of the stewards hands. And so we, if the
testimony of our virtue, profit of our country, and favor of our friends
commit any matter of weight and credit to us for to be done, which we know we
are well able to bring to pass, let us accept it modestly, and discharge it
faithfully and truly, thinking it to be Gods will and pleasure that we should
watch and ward, whilst others take their quiet rest and sleep. Let not us
seek any other recompense of our labors, but the conscience of well doing,
and let us rather covet to have the testimony of our virtues in graven in the
minds and hearts of our fellow citizens, then on the top of pillars or public
statues: for many times it is a greater honor for a man not to have that which
he deserves, then to have it. I account it (said Cat^) more honor to me that
men should ask why there were no images erected in honor of me, in this or
that place, then if they should ask why these images were erected, to what
end, or for what cause. To be short, let us hold this for a maxim, that the
fruit of noble actions is to be said to have performed them most nobly, and
that virtue cannot find out of her self any recompense sufficient to guerdon
her self withal. For without doubt, ambition is a most gentle passion, which
dives most gently down into the most gentle manlike and heroical spirits: but
being there, is not to be drawn out again but with great pain. We think
that every man is bound to seek and follow after good, and amongst therest we
reckon honor to be one of the chiefest, nay more to be accounted of then all
the rest.

See here the cause why men should take such pains to ride and run, to labor
and travel so earnestly and vehemently as they do, and yet for all this, I can
assure you that the other passions which are within us, which grow in us by
apprehe^sion of the object of some apparent evil, which we are to shun and
avoid, do sink deeper into our hearts, and are hardly to be taken out of
them. As namely ^eare, which is an apprehension of some evil to come, which
keeps us continually in a bodily fear, and preuenteth the evils which
Fortune threatens and menaceth us withal. For certainly it is one of the
cruellest instruments which opinion has to torment us withal: for because she
cannot work upon us, but by cosoning and beguiling us, and that every man can
better see things present, then foresee things to come: therefore she serves her
self with things to come, the sooner to come to her purposes, she lies lurking
in some dark or blind corner, to ^atch her time and opportunity, as thieves
observe the night for their robberies, because she would not be discovered in
her actions. Afterward she fears and affrights us with maskes of evils, which
have but a bare show and appearance of evil, having nothing in her which may
hurt us, but the apprehension of a conceived and imaginary evil, which makes
the thing seem evil, though it be not so indeed, and even from that which is
good draws a kind of evil to vex and trouble us withal. And good God, how
many men may we see continually, who for fear of being unfortunate have
become miserable, and so turned their vain fears into certain miseries? How
many men are there in the world which have lost their friends for fear of
distrusting them? and how many have been sick for fear of being sick? so
that it may be truly said, that fear is a heavy weight, which makes us stoop
down to the ground, and stumble as we run hastily from that which we think
is to be avoided. Therefore let us take awayfeare, and we shall remove al
danger of evil far from us: at least we shall not feel it before it come,
and when it comes it will never trouble us so much, that we need greatly to
fear it.

If a man might have his mind to choose from what evil he would be exempted, in
mine opinion he should choose to be freest from fear: because the pain of
other evils dureth no longer then the cause, but fear is formed indifferently
as well of that which is, as of that which is not, and which peradventure is
never likely to be; yea of (...) which cannot be at all. O what a cra^tie and
subtle passion is this, which can out of an imagined evil draw ^oorth such a
true and lively grief? Thus he inueigled the painter Parrhasus, to torment
some of his servants, that he might the better be able to imitate and express
the lamentable and sorrowful passions of the fabulous Prometheus. Now tell me
why should we be so ambitious in seeking our own harms, as once to run to
meet and prevent them with our thoughts and meditations? Nay rather on Gods
name, let us stay til they come, but never make any great looking after them,
and it may be they will not come so far as to us. There be a thousand lets
and hindrances (which cannot be foreseen) to ward the blow from us, which we
fear is coming upon us. For even our fears are as easily beguiled as are our
hopes. But alas, what is there to be feared? Fear we that which is in our
power or no? No: for then perhaps we might remedy it. What then? is it a
thing out of our power? If it be so, it is no evil, and what cause then have
we to fear it? Wherefore serves this fear then? Mary it serves for a
voluntary punishment to vex our selves withal. On the contrary side, if we
can but bear a brave mind and resolute courage against this passion, we shall
be well able to remedy and redress many things which happen unto us, which
by fear and astonishment are made far worse then they are: but amongst many
other evil effects which fear brings with it, this is one most dangerous,
that ordinarily it makes a man to hate that which he fears.

Now hatred is a most deadly passion, which troubles us very strangely. For I
pray, stay a while and consider with your selves how when we mean to hate a
thing indeed, this affection of hatred is nourished and increased within us,
though it be neither watered nor labored, and finally how it causes in us an
utter loathing and detestation of that which is hated. And what is that which
we do so greatly hate and abhor? Mary that you may be sure which we should
not: for if there be any thing in the world which deserves to be hated, it is
hatred it self, and such like passions which are contrary to the nature of
that which should command in us. This is the only grief in the world to
vex us withal. We hate the persons themselves, and we hate their actions,
either because we fear some evil to come, or remember some evil past which
we have received by them, or else because the nature of our senses has a kind
of contrariety, antipathie, or contrepassion with the thing hated. And is
there any thing that can trouble us more then this? By this passion we^ bring
our selves into the power of that which we hate, to vex and trouble us as it
lists. First ^ight moves sense, then remembrance wakeneth the spirit, and so
whether we be waking or sleeping, we represent the thing hated unto our
selves, with a kind of despite and gnashing of teeth, which brings us clean
out of order, carries us out of our selves, and rents our hearts in pieces
most pitifully. Whereby it so comes to pass, that the pain of that evil
which we do wish unto another man, does ^al upon our own heads. Wherefore let
us shut the gate of our soul against this great and terrible passion: and to
take away all pretense of entering in upon us, by a mislike and lothing of
things which may come into our imagination, let us propou^d to our selves this
rule which is most true and infallible, to wit, that every thing has two
handles, by the which a man may take and lift it up: if we take it by one of
the handles it will seem heavy and grievous: if by the other, we shall find
it light and ^asie to be borne. Now nature may speak unto us, as the
Philosopher did unto his scholars; that which I offer unto you with the right
hand, you take with the left, you always choose the worst; if there be any
good thing you leave it, and if there be any bad thing that you will be sure
to take. For example, there is one of your neighbors which sueth you in the
law, and therefore you can not think on him, but you must dream of his
process, and consequently curse and blame him therefore. See here the bad
handle, for take him by the other handle, and then straight ways you will
think that he is a man as well as you, and that God has bound you to love him
by a likeness of nature, that he is your fellow citizen, and that you are joined
together in a community of the same laws, the same Churches, the same Altars,
and the self same sacrifices: again, that you are fellow neighbors, bound by
charity to succor and relieve one another, and shall not so many subjects of
good will be able to quench one little spark of hatred? Peradventure you have
a brother which has offended you, and if you chance to meditate on him, you
think and meditate on him that has offended you, and not on him which was
conceived in the same womb, that sucked the same breasts, was brought up in
the same house, and lastly that he is the one half of you. Let us learn then
to handle things rightly, to take them by the good handle, and so we shall find
that there is somewhat or other to be loved in that which is now hated of us.
For certainly there is nothing in the world which is not created for man's
good. If there be any vicious thing in it which we do hate, it is the evil of
the vicious person himself, and not ours. If happily he offend us, we have
more cause to pity and lament his case, then to hate and abhor him. For he
himself is the first that is offended, and receives most harm thereby: for by
this means he comes to lose thevse of reason, and what greater harm can
there happen unto a man in this world? Wherefore in such and the like cases,
let us turn our hatred into pity, and study to make the^ worthy of our
loves which we would so ^aine hate. Thus dealt Licurgus when every one forsook
the company of a certain fellow which had thrust out one of his eyes, he
abandoned not his company, but carried him home with him, gently entreated
him, and enjoined him no other punishment but this, that he should study more
earnestly to be soberly and virtuously brought up: which being done, he
returned him to his fellow citizens, which found that whereas he before was a
very quarrellous and injurious fellow, now he was become a good, honest, and
sober citizen.

And look as we ought to shun hatred, so likewise must we avoid envy: for
they are sisters german of the same color, and the same port, and both of
them have effects equally dangerous. Envy stirs up within us a kind of
sorrow at the good which other men enjoy, which still lies gnawing at our
hearts, and tormenteth us most cruelly. Indeed it is a cruel passion, and so
cruel, that all the torments of the most cunning and exquisite and professed
tyrants in the world, could never have found out a greater. For seeing it is
of power to convert and turn another man's good into her harm, what limits can
there be prescribed unto her torments, when both her own evils and other men's
goods shall join together to torment and trouble her? Let us therefore run
away from her as we would do from some wild beast, which never cease to
devour and gnaw our hearts, and seek utterly to deprive us of any good that
shall happen unto us. Whilst the envious man looks wistly and ouerth wartly
over another man's good, he lets his own be spoiled, and so loses the
pleasure thereof. Now the ready way to take away the fear of this envy, will
be to ponder and consider with our selves what is that which we esteem good,
and envy another man the having: and we shall find, that all being put
together, yet there is nothing which we would willingly have our selves. For
I find that the things which commonly we envy other men the having, are
these: riches, honors, and favors: but if a man should speak thus unto us, I
am content that you should have as much as they at the same rate, I warrant you
we would straight ways answer that we would have none of them. For if we
would have them as they have them, we must flatter and cosen as they do,
suffer many injuries, and needs lose our liberty. For as the world goes now,
there is nothing to be gotten for bare nothing. Perhaps you make profession of
honor and virtue: well this cannot be bought but with the loss of other things
which are gotten by a modest and shamefast kind of patience. Riches, dignities
and favors are bestowed on them only which can tell how to sooth men up in
their humors, and apply themselves unto their pleasures and affections. This
is a law, or at leastwise the custom of the world, and it was a custom before
ever you were borne, and therefore why does it grieve you to see it observed?
This man sels his liberty and freedom to receive the price of an office or
dignity: why do you envy thereat, for I am sure you would not sell yours to
gain as much: you would feign have silver and cloth and such like things
which this man exchaungeth for his liberty, and yet you would keep yours: but
you may not do so, the law of nations is against it, either you must be
content with your ware, or else with the price. I go to the market, and there I
see one open his purse and deliver out a penny, and ^ee carries away with him a
lettise, or some such thing: I which give nothing carry nothing home with me,
and yet I think my self as good a man as he every day of the week. For lo
here is all the difference, he has his lettise, and I have my money. I epsy my
neighbor coming from a feast; when I consider only the good cheer which
has been made him, I shall be sorry that I was not there with him: but when I
think how a man must flatter the master of the house, if he will be welcome, I
had rather never have good cheer, then at any time to neglect the duty of an
honest man. Let us therefore, as we tender our rest and quietness in this world,
take heed that we grow not too envious of another man's good. For if it be a
true good which has happened unto him, we should rather rejoice and be glad
with him for it: for every man should desire the good one of an other; and to
rejoice at the good of another is the way to increase a man's own.

The very same rules are to be observed concerning i^lousie: for it is as like
it in nature and effect as may be; unless this be the difference, that in
respect of envy we consider not good, but when it is come unto another man
which we desire to have our selves: but jealousy is of our own proper good,
when we fear least another man should have part with us. But verily it is a
sottish and irksome passion, it is the gall which makes bitter the honey-sweet
of our life: for it is ordinarily seen in our pleasantest and sweetest actions
which it makes so bitter and sharp^, as nothing can be more: for it changes
love into hatred, respect into disdain, and certainty into distrust. Make
this account with your self, that whosoever means to lead a ielous life,
must lead a miserable life. The only means of shunning and avoiding it, is
to make a man worthy of that which is desired: for jealousy is nothing else
but a distrust of a mansselfe, and a bearing witness of himself against
himsel^e of his small deseruings. In my opinion, it was a very worthy answer
which the Emperor (...) made unto Faustine, when she asked him what he would
do if Cassiu^ happe^ed to get the victory over him. Mary (quoth he) I hope I
do not ^eru^ the gods so ill, as that they will suffer this misfortune to
light upon me. Let the^ which fear to lose the part which they have in other
men's affections say in like sort, I have made more account of his friendship,
then to deserve any such thing at his hands, as to be lawfully disfriended of
him.

The presumption and confidence of our own worthiness, is a great pledge to
assure us of another man's goodwill: for he that ^eeketh a thing with a
virtuous intent, is glad to have a companion joined with him in the pursuit
thereof: for he may serve to provoke his dulnes, and succor his weakness and
imbecillitie, in pursuing of that which is good, because of the shining glory
and honor of the others estate. Only weakness fears to be encountered, because
she is afraid, yt being compared with another, she shall by and by show forth
her imperfection. Who is he that would if he might sport himself alone at the
games of Olympus? Take away emulation, and take away glory, and take away the
very spur of virtue. It is a strange thing, that accordingly as we are
disposed to use and receive the things which happen unto other men, so they
serve us either to a good use or to a had use: for mark, if the good of
another man do not breed jealousy within us, and keep us in a continual fear
and perplexity. Again on the other side, how another man's evil does cause a
kind of remorse and piti^: so that what for the one and what for the other,
we are clean transported ou^ of our selves, and do come to our wits ends.
And whether it be because of a secret consent within us, whereby we do
communicate with one another miseries, or whether it be for that we fear lest
that should happen unto us, which has chanced unto our friends, we sigh and
groan, suffer and endure with them in their miseries. And we are not greatly
to be blamed for so doing: provided that it be done moderatly and so far
(...) as that it may serve as a mean^s^^ waken and stir us up to help and
succor them. For this is commanded by the law of humanity: but we are not bi^
to adopt unto our s^l^es their griefes^ or to darke^ the cleeren^^ of our
minds with the smoke of their miseries.

Now the ^ecessarie remedies which we must be provided of, against the
discontentednes which we take by another man's e^ill, called pity, are common
to that other kind of discontent which is called by ye name of grief, which is
the feeling of some pretended evil in our selves. For as soon as these evils
(for so we call them) do assault us, forthwith the strength of our souls
withere^^ ^way, v^lesse we take the better ^eede, and we are drawn headlong
into a kind of languor, womani^hnes and want of courag^, that it is strange to
^ee, which ^^keth from us the use of reason, and means of (...) for our own
affay^es. In this ca^e it shall be good for us to remember what things are in
our power, and what not, and to (...) that ^uill which is contrari^ unto the
perfect disposition of our will. For by this means we (...) ^^me to know,
that grie^ and plea^^re are drawn^ both of them out of the ^ame well, if a man
have but the skill to turn his bucket when he would ^ill him with either: for
the use is all in a thing, and euerything is as it is used good or bad. Thus
we make ^iches become ^uill, when we make them serve i^ stead of means to
execute^ out evil passions: and (...) pou^^tie proves good unto us, if we
accompany it with ^rugaliti^ and (...) th^s rest and qu^etnes in^^easeth our
misery if it inc^^ase our sloth and sluggishnes; and labor and pain (...)
sweete^ when by ou^ labor and industry in serving our (...) we p^^^hase
honor and credit^. Wherefore let us so take and estee^e of euerything, as it
is to be taken and esteeme^ of^ and we shall find that ther^ is nothing but
will yield us some commoditi^ or other. For there is no chance in the world
which can happen so cro^^ely, but nature has provided a habit and disposition
in us to receive it when it comes, and turn it to our joy and contentment.

Therefore when any thing does use to trouble us, let us consider two things:
the one, the nature of that which has chanced unto us: the other, the nature
of that which is in us: and then let us learn to use every thing according
unto his nature, and so we shall be sure never to ^^ceiue any lothing or
coffeehouse at all. For discontent being a dise^^e of the soul is contra^ie
unto nature, and therefore we may not suffer it to take deep ^oote within us.
Now there is nothing that causes more offense o^ di^contentment, then the
newnes or straungenes of a thing when it happens. And this appears mo^^
evidently, in that the things which displease us most are made pleasant and
sweet by custom and continuance. The gally slaves when they go to sea, weep
at first shipping, but after three or four months they sing as merrily as
birds. So that you see custom is al: for they which have not been accustomed
to the sea, are afraid and look pale when they see them weigh anchors and
lanch forth into the sea, though it be in a calm: where contrarily the old
and tried mariners laugh and are merry in a tempest. And look what good
custom brings unto the common sort of people, the same meditation brings
unto a Philosopher: for by often thinking and meditating upon things, he
makes them seem most familia^ and ordinary unto him. Let us therefore
exactly consider and ruminate with our s^lues, the nature of each thing that
may molest and trouble us, and let us cast before hand the worst that may
happen; as sickness, poverty, banishment and injuries, and let them sift them
narrowly to find out the nature of them, or else that which is most contrary
unto their natures. It so falls out that some of us are diseased in body:
well, it is not we that are of^ended but our bodies: for the of^ence being
taken, many time^ hinders the excellency and perfection of the thing:
whereas otherwise the disease may happen to be a great deal fitter subject
and occasion to exercise our patience with praise and commendation then health:
now where there is most occasion of praise, is there least good to be gotten?

As much as the mind is more to be acco^^ted of then the body; so (...) the
goods of the mind are more to be valued and esteemed of then the goods of the
body. If then the body be the instrument of the mi^de, who will be so foolish
as to complain, when he sees the instrument applied unto that use for the
which it is ordained? A man's body is sick and diseased: no great marvel, for
seeing it is a compound thing, therefore it is subject unto alteration. Yea
sir, it is true, as you say: but yet for all that the grief of the disease is
felt so violently, that it makes us cry out in spite of our teeth. I grant
indeed that it is felt, I must needs confess that, but it is felt only in
body, and it makes us cry too and if we will be so foolish. Grief is not
intolerable, but unto them which (...) that it is so:for there be which can
endure and suffer it when it is at the sharpest. Possidonius the Philosopher
discoursing at large of certain matters in the pre^ence of Pompey, was sorely
troubled with the gowt, and when the disease pained him most, he said no more
but this: Sir grief, you have attempted your worst against me, what remedy
but patience: you think to make me curse and speak ill of you: no, no, far
be it from me that eu^r I should say that you are evil: and so he went
forward with his discourse, and made as if he had never felt it. Now I pray
tell me and if you can, what new remedies had this Philosopher found out
against this grief? what plasters and ointments had he stored up against the
gowt? Truly these two, the knowledge of things, and courage of mind. For he
was thoroughly resolved, that the body was made to serve the soul, and that if
so be the soul should be grieved for that which happened unto the body, that
then it must ^f force be subject to the body. Now if it ought not to be
troubled for that which happens unto the body, how much less ought she to
be grieved for the loss of goods? For the loss of a man's goods does not
touch a man so near as the want of his health. Indeed both of them are things
merely without us, yet of the two the body is nearer unto us then goods.

Man comes naked into the world, and shall go naked out of the world, can
he then truly say that any thing is his, which he neither brought hither
with him, neither may carry away with him when he departs? The goods of the
earth are like unto household stuff in an Inn, which a man need not care for
but as long as h^ lodges in it. Yea, perhaps will some man say, but if I have
them not, I may happen to dye for hunger. Well, if this be all the care that
may trouble your mind, follow mine advise and you shall do well enough: you
were better dy^ for hunge^ in a good mind, then to live richly and fare
daintily being in continual grief and torment. You must make this account,
that the losses which you suffer, are the prises wherewith you purchase quiet
rest and content of mind. If you employ them to some use, why then they are not
lost: if you do not employ them, then you lose both your goods and your minds
both together. Would you therefore feign know an easy way to cure you of these
wounds? I will show you it presently; look upon the skarres and wounds which
other men of good account and great resolution have received: and consider how
they have laughed at such losses, and taken occasion to thank God for them.
Hearken what Z^no said, that at that time when he suffered ship wrack, the
winds blew very luckely: for they brought him unto the haven of Philosophy,
where he bestowed the remainder of his life in a most quiet and peaceable
Sunshine, amidst the tempests of civil discord, and had a safe covert to
defend him from a thousand scorching griefs, which trouble and torment men in
the affairs of this world.

Do you know how to suffer loss of things so that it shall not trouble you?
It is quickly learned, there is no more in it but this, not to accustom your
self to love any thing otherwise then it is, or better then it deserves. If a
man have an earthe^ vessel, let him love it as a vessel of earth, which may
beebroken, and so if it chance to be broken, the matter will never trouble him
much. Let us pass from smaller things to greater things, from vile and baser
things to things of greater value and more account, and let us do the like. If
we love our children, let us love the^ as men, that is to say, as men subject
unto infinite casualties of death, and then afterward when they happen to dye,
their deaths will be neither strange nor grievous unto us.

Indeed it is an imagination and opinion that vexes and tormenteth us more
then the things themselves, which is formed of those words which a man uses
when he is surprised with such accide^ts: for we call one thing by the name of
another, and imagine it to be like unto that other, and the image and Idea
thereof remains so in our minds. And therefore let us mollify and sweeten
our words as well as we can: for if one of our children chance to dye, say not
I have lost one of my children: but this, I have restored one of my children to
God, of whom I borrowed them. And likewise if we lose any other of our goods,
let us use the like words. If a naughty fellow take away our goods from us,
and it grieves us at the very heart, say no more but this: Was it not meet
that God should have that again which he had lent me for a time? For the rest,
remember your own opinion of the like mishaps when they did happen unto others^
and consider with your self how the^ you were not much moved, but rather how
you did blame them, and neglect their frivolous and vain complaints. Suppose
that the judgment which you give of them, is a prejudice against your self
which cannot be avoided. For our judgments in another man's behalf are always
more just and favorable, the^ in a man's own cause. If a servant of your
neighbors chance to break a glass, you say, there is no great harm done,
it was but a glass broken. If his son dye, you say, he was of estate
mortal, not borne to live ever: and I pray why can you not say as much when
your own son dies, without crying out, tormenting your self, or accusing
God and men for the loss of that which is so ordinary? There happens
nothing unto you but that which you have foreseen and thought on a thousand
times: and wherefore then are you so much astonished? For verily I am persuaded,
that if we were as provident and careful as we ought to be, and may be if we
will, we shall little need to be afraid or troubled when any thing
happens, and principally we should not greatly care for that which we call
injury. For let us but set before the eyes of our minds the manners and
humors of men, with whom we do converse, (as they are for the most part) and
we shall be quickly resolved, I warrant you, to suffer many lewd parts at
their hands, and to endure much of their indiscretion: for the common nature of
men is to rejoice in evil doing, and to measure their authorities by nothing
but by the injuries and contempts of other men. So few there be that take
pleasure in well doing.

Let us therefore determine with our selves, that on what side so ever we
turn our selves, we shall find some or other that will be ready to offend
us, so that a man may find, as many men so many injuries. But let us take heed
that we be not surprised by them, standing always upon our guard, and having
due regard unto them when they come. So that whither so ever we go, and what
business so ever we undertake, let us consider before hand what the event is
likely for to be, and how we shall be entreated. If we be desirous to go to
the baths, let us wisely cast with our selves before hand what the actions of
men are when we shall come thither, how one gapples and cries, another iustles
and iumbles his fellow, here one dashing them with water, and there another
ready to steal their garments. If we have well premeditated and forethought
upon all this, we shall do nothing but laugh at matters when they happen. If
we have occasion to visit some great man, let us imagine that he will make us
wa^te at his gate, and when we seek to get in at the door, the porter will
shut us out, and clap the door against us; that we shall find him busy, or
in such a case that he will not be spoken withal, or when all is done that
he will not give us good countenance, and scarce bid us welcome. When we have
debated all this with our selves, little cause shall we have to be moved or
troubled.

Besides all this, there is another thing which serves greatly to sweeten our
injuries, and that is when we excuse them in our selves which have offered us
any injury, presuming that they would nor have done it without some occasion.
For example, if you should call to your servant, and he not answer you again,
think that he did not hear you when you called him^ he has not been there
whither you sent him, suppose that he was not at leisure ^o goethither: and
thus let us do in other matters, fr^ming still excuses unto our selves in the
behalf of other men: but especially in matters of injuries, let us serve our
selves with the commodity which they offer us. For as there is no kind of
herb how venomous so ever it be, which being well tempered and ordered to
the purpose, has not some profitable use in it self: so is it in case of
injuries. We may (to speak with the least) reap two commodities by them: the
on^, that they make us know them which offer us injuries, to learn to take
heed of the^ against another time: the other, in that they discover our
weakness and infirmity, and the place which lies so open to the batt^ri^,
that we may be the better able to fortify and strengthen it. In such sort that
if you chance to see a man which speaks ill of you, conclude by and by with
your self; doubtless this man is an evil man, I may not trust him at any hand.
The^ examine whether that which he says be true, either in whole or in part,
and correct that fault in your self, least happily another man take occasion
to speak as much, or more of you. For I pray you, what better revenge can a
man take of his enemies, then to profit by their injuries? But indeed the last
fence and strongest rampire that we can have against these or the like
accidents is this, to be resolved that we cannot receive any harm but of our
selves: and that if so be our reason be so well governed as it ought to be, we
cannot be wounded at al. And therefore we may cry out with Socrates; Anitus
and Melitus may put me to death, but they can not do me any harm.

Now he that is prepared to surfer the injuries and rebukes of men, will not
be to seek to bear the pain of banishment. For commonly it is allotted unto
honest and good men, by the injurious dealings of the wicked. But because it is
but a vain show of evil, where with opinion terrifieth our minds, and uses
to draw forth the bitterness of grief and sorrow; let us therefore consider it
more particularly, and try whether it be as grievous unto a man when he stands
by it and viewes it more exactly, as it seems unto him when he is a far of.
Who has taught us that it is the nature of man to stay still in the same
place? What greater displeasure ^a^ there come unto a man then to be confined
and limited within certain bounds? Look upon all the cities of the world,
and observe the inahbitants there dwelling, to see how many you can find which
were townesborne children bred and brought up in the same place; and I believe
you shall find, that the greatest part of the inhabitants are voluntary
exiles from their native country. Every place in the world is a wise man's
country, or rather no place at all is his country. For his habitation is in
heaven, whither he aspireth after he has passed the time here beneath of his
sorrowful pilgrimage; making his abode in cities and provinces, as trauailers
do in Innes and ostelries. Again, we cannot see past ten or twelve leagues of
ground: but the face of this great heaven glistering with so many fair and
beautiful stars, does show her self once a day, because we should see her
turn round about when she displaieth her beauty to the full. Wherefore then
should it grieve us so much to lose the sight of the place where we were borne?
It was in ye power of our mothers (and if they listed) to have been brought a
bed in other places, and so to have made us changed our countries.

This is a bar against all that may be objected concerning this matter, that
we were borne either here or there, it matters not where, and therefore we need
not sorrow so much at our banishments. Pompey seeing the effeminatenes of the
Romans minds which were with him at the battle of Pharsalia, and perceiving
how they turned their eyes and thoughts toward the city of Rome, sorrowfully
regreeting their houses, and sighing as me^ banished from their country: My
friends (quoth he) the country where good men dwell in, is their liberty.
Rutilius declared this most manifestly unto Sylla: for being by him sent for
back again from banishment, he would not repair unto Rome, but rather endure
the vasues of a desert and solitude of an Island, rather then to abide the face
of the tyrant in his own city. Every country is fit to nourish and bring up
men, every country yields them parents: for nature has joined al of us
together in blood and charity: every country brings forth friends unto
virtue, for virtue is of power to make men love one another. What then is there
which may cause us to grieve at our departure from the place of our natural
abode? for the same heaven hangs still on our heads, and the self same
elements continue. If we lose not our courages, we shall not lose any thing by
our banishments. Now if you can resolve upon that which I have propounded unto
you, to avoid these first passions well and good, I shall not need to employ
any further time to discourse unto you the way and means of preparing your
self against the other. For if you never receive into your mind those
passions which grow in the concupiscible part of the soul, you shall never be
vexed with the^ which are formed in the irascible part. For as much as these,
which are despair, and hope, fear, and choler never rise and stir in ou^
minds, but after desire and loathing are engendered within us. And as the former
(whereof we have hitherto spoken) grow by an application of the object and
opinion conceived, that they will be favorable or contrary unto us: so these
other spring from a consideration and search of the soul which it has to
obtain or avoid that which she desires or flies. This is but as it were a
moving of the soul out of it self, which is caused by a redoubling of the
former passion, and therefore as a fire better kindled they are hard to be
quenched: for in a moment they gain the greatest part of the soul, and shake
her strongest passions. Now for a remedy to guard us from them, let us learn
to call them all by their several names, and know them by the liueries which
they wear, made of certain terrible and grievous accidents.

For the first, which is hope, kindling our foolish desires with a soft and
pleasant wind, causes a certain fire in our hearts full of a thick smoke
which dazels our understanding, carries our cogitations away with violence,
and holds them hanging in the clouds, utterly depriueth us of judgment, and
makes us to dream waking. And as long as our hopes dure, we cannot be
persuaded to forsake our desires. On the contrary part, when despair is once
lodged within us, it so tormenteth our soul with an opinion of our disabilitie
in obtaining of that which we desire, that every thing must yield unto her
beck, and give her place: so that for the very love of that which we imagine
we shall never be able to attain unto, we forgo the quiet rest which we
already enjoy. This passion is like unto little children, which for spite
that one of their toys should be taken away from the^, throw al ye rest in the
fire. This passion is angry with her self, and of her self exacteth the
pain of her misfortune. The means to cure a man of it, is to arrest his
desires at their first peeping forth, and if they be wicked not to permit them
to go any further, and if they be good to temper and make them go and grow
into a sweet and peaceable affection, without looking afterward for anymore
favor, then the nature of the thing and inconstancy of Fortune does suffer
and permit: still ballancing our hopes and fears together. For a wise man
ought not to live in hope more then in fear; and it is not his part to commit
himself into Fortunes hands, to hinder or diminish any thing from his
pleasures. In like manner he should not despair or doubt of any thing, as well
for that his desires should be bounded within the limits of his power, as also
for that such is the vnsteadfastnes of things, that it does as well relieve
things desperate, as altogether ouerturne and quail the hopes of things wished
for.

Now for ^eare, which is a violent trouble, whereby the soul being frighted
retireth back into her self, and there stays because she sees not the
means of avoiding the danger which is imminent over her head, it is a
dangerous passion: for besides the great discouragement which it brings unto
us, it seaseth us with such a kind of astonishment, that we have no means of
discourse left unto us: yea even at that time when our senses are most
quickest. For then our eyes are opened and yet we can see nothing, men speak
and talk unto us, but we hear them not, and when we would run away from
the danger, we have not the power so much as to li^t up our legs. To say the
truth, it comes unto us at the first by a disposition of nature, but after
wards delicate nouriture and fond education, prevails much unto the
increasing of it. For because we were not nourished and brought up in the time
of our youth unto labor and pain, therefore we begin to fear those things
which we have no reason to stand in fear of. Wherefore if we mean to arm
our selves against these passions, we must have recourse unto Wisdom, and by
her good means we shall soon come to know the nature of things: which being
known, it will evidently appear, that there is nothing which ought to be so
much feared and dreaded of us. For take but away the mask of opinion, and we
shall find their natures altogether pure, friendly, and agreeable unto us.
Moreover, we must accustom our selves a long time before to the terriblest and
fearfullest things that are, and let us set before our eyes the most ghastly
dangers which can fall upon us, and with joy of heart sometimes commit our
selves unto the most dang^rous hazards^ for trial of our courages. To prevent
a man's evil fortunes by running as it were to meet them, is to take Fortunes
weapons into our hands and wound our selves with them. Were it not better for
us to be provided before hand to withstand her force when she assaulteth us,
then upon the sudden to be put to our shifts to defend our selves? For if we
do so, we shall be sure to have leisure to put on our weapons^ to take our
advantages, and ^oresee a place where to retire if need be: where on the
contrary side, if she set on us upon the sudden, she may easily surprise us,
and deal with us as she list. And therefore it shall be good for us before the
assault, to try how we can defend our selves, to make many false alarmes, and
propose unto our selves the dangers which worthy men have suffered in our
remembrances: how some have escaped the greatest, because they would not be
daunted: and others have been overcome by the least, because they were not well
resolved. But above all other things let us so handle the matter, that we do
not at anytime apprehend (...) or the fear thereof when it comes: for it is
a common obiec^ which troubles our mind, and destroys our judgments, and
makes us abandon al offices and duties, and finally it causes us to forget
our selves.

O that we could be once fully persuaded in this point not to fear death,
good God how happy should we then be? For in this one thing more then in any
other, opinion takes occasion to band her self against reason, that so she
might terrify us by wearing the ugly vizard of death. And albeit there be but
one death in all the world, yet she painteth him forth unto us after an
infinite kind of fashions. Believe me there is nothing in death which is to be
feared: but here is the mischief, she sends forth certain fearful and
cowardly spies abroad, to spy what is done, which report not the truth what
they have seen, but what they have heard me^ say, and which they themselves
fear is likely for to happen. Indeed we trust too much unto the sayings of the
vulgar sort of people, which are most inconsiderate, affirming it to be a great
evil, and yield no credit unto Phil^sophie, which teaches us that it is the
haven of man's life. If Socrates be to be believed, death is not to be feared.
If Ca^o have any credit with us, he will persuade us to run and meet her
coming unto us: and so will Arria the wife of Petus, which dyed to keep her
husband company, for fear of sundring their loves which were sodered together
by chaste and holy wedlock. After she had opened her breast with the first
wound, and made a broad passage for death to come in at, she said unto Pet^^; O
Petus, death is not grievous unto me. She said this unto him which well
understood that death was not evil, but the end of all evils to that man which
was seized with her. For how should she be evil being naturall^ or irksome
and grievous being so ordinary and common?

The contempt of death is the true and lively source of all noble and
commendable actions. From hence were derived so many notable and excellent
words of vert^e, which uttered her sentences by the mouths of so many valiant
men of the world. This is the spirit which animated Demetr^us, and put that
w^rthie answer into his mouth which he made unto Nero. Nero menaced him in
this wise: Sirrah, I will cause you to be done to death. So will nature (quoth
he) cause you to dye also ere ^t be long. This is the ground of that
invincible resolution, which hardened and heartened Heluidi^^ Priscus against
Vespasian: Vespasian sent unto him to will him not to come unto the Senate. He
returned him this answer: that it was in his power to strike him o^^ of the
number of Senators, bu^ as long as he was a Senator he^ should not keep him
from that place, if he might do withal. H^ sent him back word again, that
he might repair unto the Senatehouse, but withal charged him to say nothing
when he came thither^ He told him he would do so, if no man asked his advise.
Nay that may not be, said he: for I must for mine honor sake ask your opinion
as well as the rest. And I for my honor and credit (answered Heluidius) must
needs speak what my conscience bids me. Well, if you do, replied Ner^,
look not to live one hour longer. Why, said he, did I ever tell you that I
was immortal? you may do^ your pleasure, but I will do my duty. It may be it
is your pleasure to put me to death wrongfully, then it will be my part to
dye constantly, and this is the shortest and longest of it. O wonder^ull
courageous and wort^ie sentence, thrice worthy to be heard and learned of them
which ^re to stand in defense of justice and reason, against violence and
force! O true and lively image of constancy, what a brave and notable example
shall thou be unto all posterities? Surely they which propose unto themselves
the lives of such noble personages to be imitated of them, shall neue^ have
their minds troubled with apprehension of any ill chance whatsoever: but with a
courageous and undaunted minds they shall be able to run through fire and
flame to purchase virtue and honor.

But as we must shun fear^, so we must take great heed that we do not
fall into choler, which is the other extremity and flatl^^ opposed against it:
for where a^ fear does make us to retire and withdraw our selves wholly into
our selves; on the other side choler carries us clean besides ou^ selves, and
seeking the means to repulse the evil which either a far off threatens us,
or presently seaseth us, she makes the blood boil in our hearts, and stirs
up certain ^urious vapors in ou^ spirits which blind our eyes, and so throw
us down headlong unto a speedy desire of revenge, which greatly rejoices our
minds. That w^^ch most of al tickleth and delights us in this passion, is,
that it seems to arise upon a good ground, and may be justly excused by the
malice of other men. But what an excuse is this? as if another man's injustice
could make the thing just which is not just of it self, or the loss which we
receive by another man could be deemed any way profitable unto us? Alas, she
wants that strength which she should have to do us good: she is willing to
cure one evil but by another. Briefly to commit the correction of offenses
unto choler, were to correct one vice by an other. But reason which should
command in us, will have no such officers which do al things of their own
heads, without staying for any direction: she desires to do all things
orderly and lawfully, as well as nature. And because it is not her property to
use violence, therefore we oftentimes think that where there is violence
there is strength. But alas we deceive our selves: for there is nothing so
weak as an unruly and disordered motion. Now all violent motions proceed
rather from weakness then from strength: and may be well resembled unto the
force of young children and old folks, which run when they think they do
but walk and go about. For trust me, anger and choler is but an argument of
weakness, and they are much deceived that think otherwise. But what then, may
some man say, shall virtue see vice wax insolent, and yet not be moved at
all? shall we take away all manner of liberty from them, so that they shall
not have so much leave as to show forth their anger against the wicked? For
answer to this I say, that virtue desires no more liberty then it is fit and
meet for her to have; she may not turn her strength against her self, or
be any thing moved with another man's evil. For it is the property of a wise
man as well to suffer the vices of evil men without choler, as to brook their
prosperities without envy: and he must be as ready patiently to suffer the
indiscreete parts of many rash headed persons, as the Physician can be content
many times to bear many injuries at his patients hands, being sick of a
frenzy.

Truly there is no greater wisdom, nor more profitable in this world, then
patience in enduring the folly of other men. For otherwise it so falls out
diverse times, that because we cannot suffer their foolishnes, we make it
become ours, and soreceiue much harm thereby. For first it makes us lose our
judgments, then it causes us to hurt our selves, till in the end we throw our
selves headlong into that danger which we would willingly avoid. This passion
also may be very well and fitly likened unto great walls or houses when they
fall, which break and bruise all that they light upon: and she is so earnest in
procuring another man's evil, that she has no respect at all unto her own
good. Add unto all this that has been spoken, that she is very inconsiderate,
and for the most part unjust: and to speak the truth, offense and revenge is
but one sin, that has diverse excuses: for both of them have one end, and
that is to mischief other men. Therefore let us be diligent and careful, that
we do not suffer any such passions to arise in our minds: but as soon as any
thing does begin to move us any whit, or touch us to the quick, let us pause
and think upon it a while: for if we could but once find in our hearts to
reason the case with our selves, we should be well able to stop the course
of this cruel fever of the mind. For look but upon the actions and gestures
of men when they are once in choler, mark how ill every thing becomes them.
Contra^ily, let us recount with our selves the fruit of clemenci^ and
gentleness, how it makes us seem gracious and acceptable to others, and
profitable or commodious unto our selves. This is a loadstone of power
attractiue to draw men's hearts and goodwils unto her.

Let us therefore accustom our selves to forgive all the whole world. Let not
the greatness or grieuousnes of the injury withhold us from pardoning them: but
on the contrary side let us think, that the greater the injury is, the
better it deserves to be pardoned, and that the more just our revenge is, the
more our gentleness is to be praised. But especially such as are seated by
fortune in the highest degree of honor, should take heed to their motions
that they be remiss and temperate: for for as their actions are of greater
importance, so their faults are harder to be cured. The heaven it self
presents them daily with an example and doctrine of avoiding all manner of
haste and precipitation, in showing them that Saturn the very highest of all
the Planets, is most remiss and slowest in his course. And Astronomers say,
that Jupiter alone by himself is able to shoot forth profitable and pleasing
lightnings and good abodes: but when there is a question of sending forth
hurtful and revenging storms and lightnings, then he cannot do this of his
own authority, but is to crave the counsel and assistance of twelve other
gods. And is it not a very strange case, that he that is the greatest of all
the gods, that ^an do good unto all the whole world, is not able to hurt one
person, but after a solemn counsel and deliberation? so that Jupiter himself,
though that he be very wise, yet is he afraid least he should ouershoote
himself in a matter of revenge, and therefore thinks he had need of good
counsel to advise him. Wherefore if at any time we happen to have feeling of
this passion within us let us repair unto our friends, and ripen our cholers
with their pleasant discourses. For take the best man that is in the world when
he is moved, and you shall see whether he be able to do any thing as he ought
to do. For reason being hindered with passions, stands a man in as much stead,
as wings do birds when they are caught with lime-twigs fast by the feet. And
this is the reason why we should study to lift up our hearts from the earth,
and place the^ in a quiet and peaceable estate, if we desire to make our
souls capable of al good and virtuous actions. We must never leave till we
have brought our minds to be of such a disposition, as the highest region of
the air is, which is never darkened with clouds, nor shaked with
thunderbolts, but enjoys a continual fairenes: for so the mind should never
be darkened with sorrow, nor moved with choler. And if once a man could bring
his mind unto this pass, he should very easily rule his other actions, and
bring them unto their wished end: for then doubtless he would follow nature
hard by the heels, tread altogether in her steps, and join himself by a
pleasant and temperate affection unto those other parts of the world, of which
man is the knot, the marriage knot which linketh heavenly and earthly things
together.

The effects of this soft and temperate affection which man bears toward
other things of ye world, are called duties, as if they did show us our duties
and behauiours toward other things. Therefore if we would learn to rule and
moderate this duty, and to be informed in the right use thereof, we cannot
have a better mistress then Nature to teach and inform us. For she has
established an order and dispos^tion in every thing, by virtue whereof she
commits things one under another, and yet chaineth them altogether with the
linkes of mutual respect which they owe one to another, which she has
engraven in the forehead of each thing, as Princes stamp their images in their
coin, to show that they are good and lawful money. Let us therefore in every
thing consider the order and course of nature, and we shall straightwaies know
the value of it, whether it be current or no, and how much will be given for
it. Good being the object of man's will, where perfect and true good is to be
found, there our will ought to be moved.

This being granted, it must needs follow that the strongest and chie^est
affection of man, ought to be accounted that which joins us together with the
author and fountain of all good, to wit, godliness: for by it a man is reunited
and substantiallie ingra^ted in his first cause, as being the root which
keeps him (as long as he abides and dwells in it) in his full perfection:
^ut contrarily, being separated from it, withers and dries away
incontinently. Now the principal effect of piety is to teach us how to know
God: for the honor and respect which we bear unto anything, proc^edeth from
the true knowledge of it. Therefor first of all we must bel^eue that there is
a God: secondly, that he has created the world by his mighty power, bounty
and wi^edome, and by them governs it: then, that his providence watch^th over
al things, yea the smallest things in the world. Again, that whatsoever he
sends unto us, is for our good, and that our evil comes not but from our
selves. For if we esteem those chances evil which God sends unto us, we
shall oftentimes take occasion to blaspheme him; because that naturally we
honor them which seek our good, and hate them which procure us any evil. And
therefore we must resolve with our selves to be obedient unto him, and take
in good part whatsoever comes from his hands. And seeing that his knowledge
is most perfect, his power thrice infinite, and his will most loving and
charitable: what rests th^n, but that we should conclude that God sends
nothing unto us, but tends to our great good? And albeit we for our parts
cannot conceive the good which we ought to receive of that which he sends
us; yet nevertheless we hope all is for the best: supposing, that as the
Physician does oftentimes many things for the safety of the body, which may
seem at the beginning to hurt it: so God in the guiding of our lives does save
us by means, which may seem grievous and hurt full.

The Physician diverse times pricketh the eye to recover a ma^s sight: and
oftentimes GOD almighty uses to prick and wound our hearts with sharp
afflictions, to restore our minds unto their brightness. Under the seal of
this assurance we ought to commit and submit our selves unto him, confessing
that we come into the world not to command, but to obey, finding laws already
made which we ^ught to follow. And therefore continually we ought to have in
mind (as a profitable lesson of our wise obedience unto Gods ordinance) these
noble verses of Cleanthes:

My God direct and guide my feet^
in thy most known way:
For willingly I Will follow thee
forthwith, without delay.
For fear lest bound in fetters strong,
I be not there held fast,
Where against my will, being once fast bound,
I cannot come in have.
But as a man that honest is,
I may thereto at taine,
Whereto the fates and destinies,
my sta^e of life ordain.
And so for the rest, let us never address our prayers and petitions unto him,
but to obtain that at his hands which he has purposely ordained for us. For
to ask any thing at Gods hands against his providence, were as much as in us
lies to corrupt the Judge and governor of the world. The best prayer that we
can make unto him both for his honor and our profit, is, that he would
vouchsafe to preserve our affections pure and holy, and to rule and govern
our will, that it may always be directed toward the attaining of that which
is good.

The sacrifice which he requires at our hands, is nothing else but an innocent
life: he desires not our goods, only his will and desire is, that we should
make our selves worthy of his: for there is not so small an offering but
pleases him well, if it be presented unto him with chaste and innocent hands.
Again, there is no sacrifice be it never so rich and costly, but displeases
him as much, if it come from polluted and defiled hands. Apollo being upon a
time demanded how he liked the sacrifice of an hundred oxen which was offered
up unto him, gave this answer:

Hermions ca^e which he to (...)
in earthen vessel ga^^^
Pleased me full well^ and for the sa^^
he had what he did crave.
As if he should have said in other words^ A virtuous and wise man is the only
true priest of the great God, his spirit is his temple, wherein he offers up
daily sacrifices, his soul is his image, his affections are his offerings, and
the greatest and solemuest sacrifice which you can offer unto him, is a true
and virtuous imitation of him. I say not this, as if the usual ceremonies in
each country were not to be observed, so that there be an honest moderation of
them without excess or covetousness, but because I am of opinion that God
will be served inspirit. And therefore to conclude this point, this is that I
say, yt the best manner of serving and worshipping him is, after we have
ascribed all praise and glory unto him, and decked him with all manner of
titles which man's spirit can imagine, to hold this for a most constant
resolution, and confess it publicly, that we have presented nothing unto him
worthy of his divine Majesty; the fault being not in his Godhead, but in our
impotencie and weakness, which can never conceive so highly of him as he is.

From this worship and honor which is due unto God, proceedet^ t^is opinion
which we ought to have of him: that he is always present to view and ma^ke all
our actions, whether it be that we come and present our selves before him, or
else converse with me^. And therefore we must so speak unto God, as if men
heard us, and so live amongst me^ as if God saw us. But above all other things,
we must be very religious in inuocat^ng him for a witness of the truth: for the
due obs^ruation of an oath, is the principal part of godliness and piety. For
an oath is nothing ^ls but an image of that vniue^sall law which proceeds from
the goodness of God, for containing of all parts of the world in their place,
and making them to be tha^ which they ought to be of righ^. It is a band which
(...) men's will^^ together, it is the guardian and ^utor of constancy and
truth, the knot of civil soci^ti^, which ^loseth and shuts up all things
most strongly with the name of God almighty, the chief president and ruler of
all men's actions. And yet for all this, this is most certain and true, that if
a man can obtain so much credit and favor with me^, by living honestly and
godly amongst them, as that his word may be taken without any further ado^ it
were better not to use any oath at all: but if it may not be otherwise, but for
^estimonie of the truth we must neede^ swear, we must look that we use to
do it as soberly and sparingly as we may. For the use of any thing whatsoever,
if it be too vulgar and common, makes it to be neglected and despised. And in
any case look well to it, yt it be used to no other end but for assurance and
confirmation of the truth; representing GOD before our eyes, sitting on high as
protector of the faithful, and sharp punisher of perjured persons.

Now from the honor duevnto God, the first cause of all, we must descend as
it were a step lower unto that duty which we owe unto the heavenly powers,
ordained by God, for administration and government of the world, and in them
also we must acknowledge a kind of excellency and constancy of virtue in
their perfection, admiring the greatness of their creator, and honoring their
ministry, employed for preservation and protection of us men.

From thence let us go a little lower unto the reverence and respect which we
owe unto them, by whose means as through pipes and conduits chosen by God, we
are derived into this world. And in this place we shall find that our
country may justly challenge her prerogative, which under a fained and
compound name, co^prehendeth an unfeigned, true and natural love. For good
cause we owe of duty more love unto our country, then unto al otherthings
contained in the world: because indeed it contains infolden and wrapped
within her safety, the safety and good of every thing that we do love and
cherish: and contrariwise with her all the rest will soon perish and be
brought to naught. Out of the fountain of this worthy affection, what a
number of worthy and excellent deeds have gushed and streamed forth? of some
that have spent their lives for the good of their country: and other some
which have been content to forgo their own private injuries, for fear least
if they should have sought to have revenged them, they should have prejudiced
the Commonwealth: of others that have chose to lead a miserable and sorrowful
life, to the end that they might procure their countries quiet rest and
happiness. Still represent and lay before your eyes your country which has
brought you into this world, and here preserves you in ^afetie, suppose that
she is ever a redemanding and asking of you the rights of piety, and requiring
the duty and deuoir of a good and loyal citizen, and that she does conjure
you to seek and covet after her good by the country of your nativity, by the
laws of your city, by the faith of civil society, by the safety of your
parents, children and friends, and lastly by your own safety and good. I
beseech you therefore to have more care of your country, then of all the world
besides, and never prefer your particular profit before the good thereof:
seek not to avoid the evil which is falling upon you by turning it upon he
head.

Now your country being onc^ served in all dutiful sort, next after in order
of respect follow o^r parents to be regarded. For God having chosen them as the
means whereby he uses to dispense and impart life unto us, as he has in some
sort made them partakers of his virtue, so is he willing to communicate unto
them some part of his honor. If God has granted us wi^e and virtuous parents,
we ought to estee^e them as gods upon earth, given unto us not only as means
whereby we may live, but live a happy life, by their wi^e and virtuous
educatio^. If they be wicked and evil yet still we must remember that they are
our parents, and therefore with patience endure their authority over us: and
for the very names sake of father and mother, yield them help and succor o^
every thing which we receive of them: that is ^o say, of our goods, persons and
lives. And if we do so, we show that we bear homage unto nature, and yield
condign thanks unto her for all her benefits.

From our parents let us enter into consideration of our children, whom though
we do not reverence with like affection, yet have we like care or rather a
greater regard of their welfare. For seeing that God has placed and put us in
this world to guard and keep it, it seems that before we go out of the
world, we are bound and obliged to subrogate and substitute others in our
places to minister and serve the sovereign power in this common temple. The
bringing ^oorth of children is ours but in part, there be many things herein
which contribute with us, but the bringing up and institution of them is
altogether in our hands, which we must owe of duty, first unto God to whom
we must present and offer them: secondly to our country, for whose service
they are borne: and lastly to our selves, which are to look for at their hands
(if they be well and virtuously brought up) for all manne^ of help and succor
in our old age. Therefore for these and the like respects, we ought to be most
vigilant and careful over them, and to procure as far as in us lies their
good.

Now after our children follow our wives, who being united unto us by the law,
and entering into society and fellowship with us, under the dear pledge of
children which they bring us, have a reasouable great part in our affections.
The sharp sauce of our life is sweetened by the sugar of their friendships, by
their care the care of our business is abated, nay we may safely rest our
selves under their labors and industry: let us therefore have such a
respective care over them, as they have over us; let us think and dream upon
nothing but upon their rest and quietness, as being the moytie and the other
half of our selves. But especially let us make it known unto them, that we do
not honor them for any pleasure which their youth or beauties may afford us;
as well for fear least if we do so, we happen to puff up their courages,
and make them take more state upon them then necdeth: as also in this respect,
that whereas this affection is founded and grounded upon such a slipperie and
running thing, it is to be feared least the heat thereof be soon quenched:
but let us respect and worship them for the faith and loyalty which we look
for at their hands, for their good qualities and modest behauiours: and last of
all, for the especial care which they have of their children^ which are common
between v^ and them. And the better to provoke and stir them up to love and
cherish us, let us show that we will not appropriate anything from them unto our
selves, but make them equally partakers of our goods, thoughts and affections.
For this community of all things may greatly serve to nourish good will and
amity between us, which is clean lost and abolished in the diversity of
wills and determinations.

This affection passes from our wives unto their kinsfolk, which are allied
unto us by nature, their running together with their blood, a secret
inclination of good will and affection toward all them which are sprung from
the same branch, and accordingly as they are nearer unto us in blood, so are
we more lively affected toward them, and bound to perform and yield unto
them nearer duties and services. Therefore herein as well as in all other
matters to observe the order of nature, as being the sovereign ornament of all
creatures, let us (as I have said before) so dispense the love and affection
which we owe unto our parents, as they do nearer concern and regard us,
yielding them all manner of help and succor which can possibly be devised.

Hitherto nature has as it were with her own hand moved our affections: now
we must of necessity come to speak of the motions and inclinations which
virtue gives, which binds us to love and honor virtuous and wise men. And
truly of all the goods which we enjoy by the benefit of common society, there
is no one that ought to be more esteemed and cherished, then the friendship
and amity of honest men: for it is the very pillar and vpholder of our
happiness: it is she that gouernes our lives, sweetneth our sour, and seasoneth
our sweet: she gives us in prosperity one upon whom we may bestow part of
our goods and enjoy the comforts of our prosperity, who in time of affliction
will be ready to succor and comfort us, one that can teach and instruct us in
our youth^ help and relieve us when we be old, assist and second us in our
middle ages. And as the possession hereof is precious, so we ought to employ
our wisedoms to have this friendship as perfect as may be. And to this end and
purpose we must hunt and seek after men of the greatest merits, honoring and
cherishing them as if they were sent from God to join with us in a society of
certain noble and worthy actions. We must seek to purchase it by honest
occasions: and having once gotten it, studie^ to preserve it by a due
performance of all duties. For all creatures, and principally men, are borne
with a kind of inclination of love toward that which may any ways profit or
avail them. And yet for all this, a virtuous man does never measure his profit
by the ell of goods (as we call them) or riches: but by the commodity which
he receives and reapeth by his friends in the study of virtue. And if it so
fall out that there be any commodity, be it never so small, to be parted
between us and our friends, touching our goods and honors, or such like
things, it shall be our parts to give place unto them: for all this cannot be
better employed then in purchasing of true friends. On the contrary side, there
is but one only reason which may excuse us from leaving their friendship and
amity, and that is when they abandon reason and philosophy, which joins and
combineth us together. And yet this must be done very warily: for we may not be
at plain enmity with them for all this. We must rather unrip then rent their
friendships from us, and seek out all reasonable means (if it be possible) to
bring them back again unto their duties, without blaming their actions, or
checking their opinios: never fighting with them, unless it be by way of
disputation and discourse, which are the sacred weapons of true frie^dship: but
though we lose al hope of prevailing with them this way, yet we may not become
their open and professed enemies. For though a good man leave his friends when
they leave off to be virtuous: yet not withstanding so it is, that in
forsaking that friendship and familiarity which has been in former time
between them, he retains that common affection which ought to be amongst
men, which binds them to wish well unto those which have not well deserved at
their hands: telling them that this is to imitate God, which as he loves the
good, so he does not hate the bad. And therefore we have a common saying, that
a good man has no enemies at all, because he hates no body.

Thus you see the degrees of affection which are between man and the things
which are without him. But because it comes so to pass many times, that they
do draw us unto diverse ends, and so hold us suspended in doubtfulnes and
incertaintie, therefore we must establish a rule unto our selves of preferring
the former duties before the latter. We ought to make great account of an oath,
and yet it were better broken then kept, if by keeping of it we offend God. We
must of force highly reverence our fathers and mothers: and yet if their wills
do contradict right reason, which is appointed by God himself to govern us,
we must rather forsake them, then forsake God and reason. Our kinsfolks are
to be esteemed dear unto us, but yet if they seek to annoy and molest father
or mother, we may lawfully diss^nt from the^. Friends may prevail much with a
man, his wife and children much more: and yet for all this, there are certain
particular and private duties which are rather to be performed to them which
are further off from us, then to them which be nearer: but commonly it is in a
matter of no great weight when civil society (because of the common
necessity of men) incrocheth and usurps somewhat upon nature. As when we
say we should help our neighbor in fetching in of his harvest, and not our
kinsman, and in such like cases.

I have hitherto, as you see, represented unto you the respect which man owes
unto things which are without him: it is now high time to cause him to descend
into himself, and bring back his affections unto his own proper person, as
lines are reduced unto their center. A wise man without doubt yields much
respect unto himsel^e: and though no body regard him but his own conscience,
yet he will be very careful that he do neither speak nor do any thing
which is not fit and convenient. For right ordered reason, which ought to
govern all his actions, is unto him the seuerest judge and censor of his
actions that can be found. And therefore we must study as well pub^kely as
privately so to frame and fashion our actions in such sort, that we may not
have occasion to blush and be ashamed of them: and that nature which ought to
be ^he rule of all our actions, be not violated in any sort. Now it has
pleased nature to give us a body, as a necessary instrument for the
preservation of man's life. Therefore we must take care for the body, but no
otherwise then we would do for a thing which is under the protection of the
mind, which must be careful for the safety thereof, but no ways
serviceable unto it: he must entreat it so as if he were a Lord and no tyrant
over the body, still nourishing it without engrossing or fatting it: so that
it may evidently appear unto all men that he does not live for it, but that
he cannot live without it.

A cunning workman is not a little forward in his business, when he has gotten
all his tools about him in a readiness: and so he that loves philosophy does
not a little thing profit himself, if he do but once know how to serve
himself with his body, and make it a fit instrument for him to exercise
virtue. Now the body may be preserved in health two manner of ways: the one
is by moderation in his diet: the other, by good order in his exercise. For why
the nature of things here beneath is so slipperie and uncertain, that unless
a man do continually repair that which time does waste and consume, things
will by little and little come in the end to naught. Therefore we must
sustain and help the body once decaying by use of meats; but with this
prouiso or caveat, that we do not make it, by making too great cheer,
heavy, dull, and unfit for contemplation: nor by too spare diet and ill
entreatance, weak and sickly: so that it be neither effeminated with riot,
nor by neglect of it accustom it self to filth and beastlines.

After meat follows exercise, although they seem to be confounded and to
follow one an other indifferently. For first we exercise our selves, and then
we take our repast: and after meat then we fall a fresh to exercise: the
first exercise serves to prepare us to the better appetite and receiving our
meats: the second, to waken nature, and keep the parts of the body in
continual motion. We must use our exercises so, that the body may be the
better for them, and our mind nothing the worse: but we must not seek such
exercises as wrastlers use, and such like, which do all things by compass and
measure, and many observations, which serve indeed to keep the body upright
and strong, and to no other use: but thereby they weaken the strength of the
soul, and take away from her her true and natural motions. It is an
absurdity for a wise man to be careful for to find out fit exercises for the
body, seeing that he may find every where so many as are requisite and
needful for the health thereof.

After the body is once nourished and exercised in such sort as I have showed
you, it is most easily fashioned and framed unto modest and seemly actions,
which we should so much regard and labor to attain unto, that in our very
countenances and gate should appear a great tranquillity of mind, mixed with a
sober and pleasant kind of gravity. I do not speak this as if I would have
you to use any affectation in your countenance and gestures, as to look with
the flatterers smile, or the Philosophers frown. For as a sober gravity
makes a man to be reverenced of all: so a kind of portlike and constrained
austeritie, makes him to appear ridiculous and odious unto all.

But because it is speech which gives life unto our countenances and dead
gestures, therefore we must take great heed that we be able to rule and
govern it. And surely the best precept which we can give any man in this
case, is silence. For to know how to be silent with reason is a great
advantage, if a man mark it, to him that means to speak well: ^or it is not
possible for a man to speak well, and to speak much, one man cannot do both.
Silence is the father of discourse and fountain of reason: contrarily in much
talk there is much offense. They that aim directly at anything, shut one of
their eyes and wink with the other: and wherefore do they so? but to
strengthen and increase the virtue of their sight. This teaches us yt the
senses being cast abroad, do by the very pouring forth of themselves wax
feeble and weak: and even so is it with the spirit, being cast abroad by
speech, and scattered and difused into many words, it loses his force and
virtue. But on the contrary side, if it be restrained with silence, it
gathers his wonted strength, and stores himself with prudence and wi^edome.
The use of words when occasion bids us speak, ought to be this: to aid the
truth, and to carry the candle before her that she may be seen: and
contrariwise to discover and reject lies and untruth: to praise that which is
good, and blame that which is otherwise. We must not acco^panie our speech with
too great veheme^cie or contention, for this shows our passions. Again, we
must not use to discourse of matters that do happen in common assemblies or
Theaters, or to entertain them that be in our company with such or the like
discourses: for this shows much leisure and small profit.

Furthermore, it is not convenient to stand much upon our actions, or to tell
men what we have done, and what has chanced unto us in our times: for there is
much vanity herein. Others peradventure take not so much pleasure in hearing
you talk, as you do in telling and recounting your own vanities. To speak of
other men's actions, without offense, is a very dangerous and hard matter: for
either we commend them without reason, or else blame the^ without knowing their
intention. But above all other things, let us take heed of making songs of
men, or laughing and gibing at them: for so does every common iester, and it
makes us lose our reputation with good men. Besides, these jests are for the
most part mixed with filthy and lewd words, which we should shun and
avoid. Now the liberty of speaking dishonest and vns^emely words, draws
after it the like effects. But we must strive (if it be possible) that our
words may redound to the profit of them which shall hear us, that they be
stuffed with good and wholesome precepts, that they serve to bring them back
unto the study of virtue which wander in the way of sin and wickedness. In
our common discourse we must avoid too profound and subtle questions. For a
man may compare the^ to creyfishes, which afford a man more picking worth then
meat: the end of them is nothing else but braules and contention: and most
commonly it so ^areth with them as it does with men that have weak stomachs,
which vomit up all that which they cannot well digest. As we desire to have
audience when we speak our selves, so must we be attentive to other men's
speeches, and hear them to the end without interruption. We must not accord
and agree unto all that is said: for there be some which will not stick to
say anything, and others that will contradict them as fast: some be flatterers,
others be rash and inconsiderate: but we must yield our consents to that
which is evidently true, and peremptorily deny that which is evidently false,
and in doubtful things suspend our judgments, till we have found some reason
or ground to stand upon.

Now because a man's words and gestures are framed by long custom and
imitation of others, we should not sort our selves too much with the common
sort of people, or haunt the Theaters and common places of assembly, or have
often recourse to feasts and banquets: for in every one of these places it is
not possible but a man should draw some vile humor or other from the common
people. If it so happen that we must needs be there for ourhonours and
credits sakes, yet we must always have our minds so straight bound, that we
will not remit a jot of our courage and resolution, that is, to govern our
selves in like sort as I have showed you before. And the better to strengthen
and fortify our selves, let us in each thing that we go about, lay before our
eyes the examples of wise and grave men, and imagine with our selves what a
Socrates or a Zeno would have done, if they had been in our places: and by and
by you ^^all see their virtues will minister unto us an example of well doing.
But the best lesson of all which Philosophy can teach us to behave our selves
in all our actions, is carefully to set down^ and examine with our selves the
proceeding and ending of every business which we do take in hand, to measure
our strengths and ability, and try whether it be not proportionable unto our
desseignements. He that takes wise counsel before hand, shall soon arrive at
his wished port: but he^ that takes no counsel, is like unto him that flotes
up and down in a river, he^ does not go whither he^ would go, but is
violently carried away against his intended course, and so committing himself
unto the mercy of the floods, arriueth at length at the sea: that is to say, a
vast and turbulent kind of incertitude.

Therefore before we enterprise any matter, let us wisely foresee what the end
of it is likely for to be, then let, us consider what means we have to atchieue
it, and so we shall be able even in thought to prevent all evil chances that
are likely to encounter us. Would you ^aine be one of them which exercise
themselves at the games of Olympus? think then how much it behooves you to
bestirre you, if you will do it for your credits sake, you must live by rule
and square, diet your self to certain meats, and certain hours, accustom
your self to heat and cold, annoint your body with oil, then have dust
thrown over it, enter within the lists, be hurt, and it may be ^leane
vanquished and disgraced. After you have wisely foreseen all this, consider
the habitude and disposition of your body, whether it will brook this kind
of exercise or no, and then undertake it if you please. If you have a desire to
be of the Philosophers profession, represent and lay before your face the
manifold troubles which your poor ^oule must be contented to endure: as to be
deprived of many pleasures and commodi^ies, and with great patience to suffer
all the world to gibe and jest at you. If your courage will serve you to endure
all this and a great deal more, you may take this course of life upon you: but
when you have one undertaken it, forgo or forslow it not at any hand,
constantly persevere and follow your determination as a law inviolable. For
besides this inconvenience which comes by changing our purposes, that it
makes our minds doubtful and uncertain, there is this harm in it, that it
causes us to become ridiculous unto others: where on the contrary side,
constancy in the end makes us to be admi^ed of them which at the first laughed
and iested at us.

And because I would not have you be terrified with men's judgments which they
shall give concerning your actions^ let this be al your care and industry,
that your actions be such as they ought to be. Do not study to conceal or
hide them from them which say they do not like them; if they be not good, it
behooved you not then to have done them; and if they be good, the better they
shall be known the more assurance shall you have of them. I do not speak
this as if my meaning were that you should covet to be seen in well doing, or
call all the people about you to see your virtues, as they do which betake
themselves unto Images for sanctuary. As the color shines and glistereth in
the day time, yet seeks not the Sun to come and gild it; only stands ready
pressed to receive the light thereof when it shines: even so virtue ought not to
seek and hunt after glory, but only be ready disposed to entertain and
admit of it, as the testimony of those which judge vn^ainedly of he^ merits.
He that loves praise and ostentation, forsakes reason to follow opinion: for
he^ sets down this as a maine rule unto himself, that he had rather please
another man then himself.

There is nothing which can help us so much to make that sort well which we
have luckely undertaken, as the taking of times and opportunities. For time
carries with it certain moments, which are the seasons and opportunities of
business. If you lose them, or let them slip, you lose all your labor and
pains. But if occasion be once taken with opportunity, and followed with
diligence, you shall seldom miss of your purpose, but have always good
success in your affairs. And therefore we must look that that which has
been maturely deliberated and thought upon, be speedily put in execution: and
let us not accustom our selves to post that over to the morrow, which may be
as well done the same day. But when we do anything, though we do it never so
wisely, take all advantages, choose all opportunities, use all possible
diligence: yet for all this we must know that the greatest part of the event is
altogether over mastered by Fortune. We are lords and masters of our counsels
and determinations, but all the rest depends upon other matters which are not
in our power. And therefore we can do no more but undertake a matter with
wisdom, pursue it with hope, and be ready to suffer whatsoever shall happen
with patience. If good enterprises have bad success, the answer which the
noble man of Persia made, may serve for an excuse to all them which are wise,
but unfortunate. One was desirous to know of him wherefore (seeing yt he knew
him to be a very wise and valiant gentleman) his affairs went no better
forward. Because (quoth he) in my affairs I can but give good counsel, that
is all I can do, the success belongs altogether unto Fortune or God that is
Lord over her. Therefore it is sufficient for us if we do all that belongs
unto us, that is, if we attempt nothing but with a good end, and follow it not
but by lawful and honest means.

Thus at the length (to grow to an end) you have heard discoursed unto you the
principal laws which the Stoickes think expedient to use for the better
ordering and governing of man's life: but because laws without judgments are
nothing worth, but like dead words, therefore if we will make our profit and
benefit of them, we must every day in the evening narrowly ^i^t and examine
our selves, to see whether our actions be conformable unto the rules which have
been taught us, smoothing that which is rugged, and closing up all chinks and
holes: and last of all, making that which is crooked right, by rectifying and
righting it according unto the rule of reason: but if we ^inde that all things
sort as they should do, and that every thing is very conformable unto these
holy ^^d sacred laws, we shall receive a secret joy into our hearts, which
shall be the pleasant fruit which we shall reap of our innocent and
unspotted lives. This shall be in my opinion the sweetest and most melodious
nigh^ song which we ca^ sing unto God: for I am verily persuaded that he takes
not so much pleasure and delight in any thing here in this lower world, as in
seeing man his dearest and costliest work, keep and maintain his beauty and
per^ection wherein he was at the first created. But because such is the nature
of things created, by reason of the natural infirmity and weakness which they
do carry about with them, that the good which God bestows upon us as soon
as we are borne, does daily waste and consume away, ^^lesse it be continually
repaired and supplied by the flowing streams of his bounty and liberality
which run continually: and whereas our natural forces can never be
sufficient of themselves to keep us in this per^ection, let us add unto the
former canticle an Epode or sacred song of enchantment, in invocation of his
divine favor; let us (I say) continually all the days of our life, at the
very same hour close up this present action with this prayer, saying: O
almighty, all wise, and all merciful God, which have given us an
understanding mind to know how to govern and direct the course of our lives;
make us to know and love the excellency where with thou have adorned us,
(...) the end that when it shall come to move the powers of oursoules, it may
find our members and senses purged of all manner of passions, ready and prompt
to follow and obey it. Take away from the eyes of our minds the trouble some
clouds and mists which ignorance or covetousness does cast before them, to the
end that our reason being cleared by the light of thy divine truth, we may
always address our selves unto the searching and following after that which
is the true and everlasting good, which shall continue for ever and ever.

FINIS.

