A REMONSTRANCE OF THE DIRECTORS OF THE NETHERLANDS East India Company,
presented to the Lords States General of the united Provinces, in defense of
the said Company, touching the bloody proceedings against the English
Merchants, executed at Amboyna.

TOGETHER, With the Acts of the Process, against the said ENGLISH.

AND The Reply of the English East India Company, to the said Remonstrance and
Defense.

Published by Authority.

Printed at London by John Dawson, for the East India Company, 163^.

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
THe Remonstrance of the Netherlands East India Company, hereafter in the first
place following, was by the same Company presented to the Lord States General,
of the united Provinces: in November, Anno 1624. for Answer of the Relation of
the English East India Company, touching the unjust, cruel, and barbarous
proceeding against the English at Amboyna, and for justification of that
infamous process, the Coppie of which Remonstrance being imparted to the said
English Company, they forth with writ the subsequent Reply, and sent the same
to be presented to the said Lords States General, for a counter-poyson
aagainst the said Remonstrance: At that time the English Company intended not
to have published it in Print, thereby to make so many Judges of the cause as
now they must, but upon fair hope then given them out of the Netherlands
trusted (by the justice of the Lords States General, joined with that of their
own Sovereign) to obtain an issue of this cause, according to the merits
thereof. But the Ambassador of the said Lords States being here in England, in
June 1625. and moved by his Majesty for satisfaction for the lives of his
subjects, that were so treacherously but chered by theirs at Amboyna, as also
for restitution of their goods so made forfeit, and recompense for the damage
of the English Company, by this and other actions, used such excuse and cullor
(as it seems out of the ground of this Remonstrance: (which after many
provisionall disputes finally concludes for delay of trial) that at the last,
in September the same year, they obtained of his Majesty a respit of 18.
months for the calling home of the Governor Harman van Speult, and the rest
of the Judges in the said bloody process, from out of the Indies, to answer
the matter here themselves, and for satisfaction of all the other Complaints of
the English Company. To whom although this respit was irksome, having already
borne so long delay, in a cause of such impatient nature; as also having a
suspicion of the sinister intent of the Dutch Company: in this new respit;
nevertheless considering, that this was a favor craved by the said Lords
States in their first Embassage to his Majesty, and their very congratulations
of his happy success to his rightful Crowns, they held it their duty to
conform themselves to his Majesty's grace herein. As also the same English
Company having confidence in the sincere dealing of the Lords States General,
whose Letter of the 31. of December. 1624. for calling home of the said bloody
Governor and others, was committed to their conveyance, and by them sent into
the Indies, hoped that their remedy though slow and long, would yet at last be
sure, and serious* and so they put on a new patience, and expectation of some
issue of this likely course. But having waited out this respit, which expired,
some years now past, they find all things fall out contrary to their hope so
grounded upon the Lords States promise and Letter, but altogether verifying
their suspicion of the drift of the Netherlands Company before mentioned. For
the said Letter of the Lords States being by the English President at Iacatra,
safely delivered to Carpentier, Governor General of the Dutch, in the Indies,
he (when Harman van Speult the late Governor of Amboyna, and head of the
bloody treachery against the English there) arrived at Iacatra) received him
with great honor, yea with triumph, and instead of sending him for Europe, to
answer the complaints of the English, according to the direction and
commandments of the Lords States, by their said Letter; made him chief
Commander of a fleet of ships, sent from thence to Surat, and other Northern
parts of the Indies. The English President and Council at Iacatra, in vain
protesting here-against, and urging his remission to Europe, in consequence of
the Letter of the Lords States aforesaid. Neither have the Officers of the said
Netherlands Company in the Indies, in all that respit of 18 months, nor in all
the time since, made any restitution or reparation to the English as was
promised and pretended, nor any preparation thereunto, but rather have added
new grievances. So that it now plainly appears, that the said Netherlands
East India Company, in their earnest suite to the Lords States, to procure his
Majesty to give respit for the due trial of the cause of Amboyna, inserted in
the latter end of this ensuing Remonstrance; intended nothing less then such a
true trial, but a cooling and blunting of the edge and zeal of the English
Company, in pursuing of their due remedies, hoping (as it is in the fable of
him, that undertook to teach the Ass to speak) that in long delay and respit
of time something might happen, utterly to elude and frustrate the real
performance: In the mean time, besides the goods of the English that they
detain, they enjoy the whole trade of the Mulluccoes, Banda, and Amboyna, the
true, though wretched motive of their abominable process, against the
Innocents, and have raised the Nutmegs, Maces, Cloves, (being by this means
solely in their own hands) to more then double the price of that they were at,
in these parts, when the English had their share in them. Whereby it appears
how sincerely this following Remonstrance slighteth this matter as a poor end,
though it so much enrich the Dutch Company; as likewise how much, not only the
whole Realm of ENGLAND, but even all the Kingdoms and Common wealths in
Europe, that are thus served with those Spices at such high rates, are
interessed in this cause. And yet besides all the premises, the English Company
find another and more proper cause of their recourse to the press at this
present, otherwise for all the rest they could perhaps attend other remedies.
But they find that in this Interim, of the cause and motives whereof the world
could take no notice, many not only of the Dutch, but English also, begin to
conceive worse of the English cause: presuming that if it had been such as the
discourses formerly published in this argument imported, they think
certainly, ere this, to have heard of some exemplary punishment upon so
execrable a fact, or at least of some serious preparation thereunto. In
particular the English Company understand, that some of the bloody College of
Judges, being returned into the Low Countries, and living free, and well
countenanced there, have of late, upon confidence (as it seems) of the
effectual working of their elusory Artifice, craked and vaunted, that they
will justify their process of Amboyna, even to the face of his Majesty,
(which are their own facing words) although the same parties at their first
arivall in Holland; kept themselves close, and were not ^owne where to be
found, when the Ministers of this state sought after them. Which bold face
being put upon this bad matter, has so far countenanced the same, as that
some of our own Nation there, allied to the Dutch, ^^ue in private stepped up in
defense of the said barbarous butchery, and seem at least to think the matter
aggravated above the true desert, Wherefore least the poor innocent English
that have already suffered so many and so grievous ^^rtures, and afterward a
reproachful death, should now ^^aine after death, suffer in their good names
also, which is, or ought to be, dearer then life it self, least also the
English East India Company, that have likewise suffered too many indignities,
and such damages from the Dutch, should seem to have made a great cry without
as just a cause; They now find it high time to vindicate their own
reputation, and the fame of their innocent servants and Countrymen, by
accquainting the world with the true state of the business, as also to defend
and maintain their former true relation from the exceptions taken against it,
by (...) following Remonstrance of the Dutch; And because the Acts of the
process of Amboyna, are often mentioned, as well in this Remonstrance, as in
the Reply thereunto, the same also are inserted between both, to clear the
relative passages on both parts. ()

A REMONSTRANCE of the Bewinthebbers or Directors of the Netherlands East India
Company lately exhibited to the Lords States General in justification of the
proceedings of their Officers at Amboyna against the English there.
Translated out of French.
High and mighty Lords:
THE Directors of the united Company and Society of the East Indies did in the
month of July past, present unto your Honors a Deduction concerning that
which was past in the Province of Amboyna, and of the execution there made in
March 1623, with a prouisionall answer of the Objections which then were made
and known against it: But where this Cause by that means could not be ended,
and for as much as daily there are found and spread abroad great Bruits against
that which is mentioned in the Deduction aforesaid; therefore the said
Directors in regard of their charge and office, as also for the defense of
their Servants, so far as reason permits, and not to be thought destitute
and naked of good defense, yea that they may not leave the matter for
condemned, as diverse have spread abroad, and gladly would make the world
believe, cannot forbear to make, after due reverence, this more particular
Instruction in form of Remonstrance unto your Honors.

In the first place then, the Directors do yet persist Amboyna which is a
College admitted and sworn) and against which no proof, much less any vain
and frivolous suspicion should be admitted, They the Directors absolutely
believe (so long as they see no more to the contrary) that the said English
Conspirators and other Confederates which were in our service, were well
apprehended, and the fact (in our opinions) so well proved according to Law,
and the use and custom in such case observed, the proceedings have been leg
all, and in pursuir thereof the punishment which they have sustained was
inflicted according to the common Law, with good moderation of there have been
many Writings and Deductions, as the Directors until this time perceive and
discover, sowed and spread against this cause as well in England as in these
parts: among which (for as much as we know) the first is a summary of News out
of Letters dated the 10 of June 1623, written by the English Factors at
Batauia, which immediately will be judged by every one who never so little and
superficially shall read the same, to be full of passion contrary to the
Truth, and without any proof: For first the proceeding by the Justice at
Amboyna upon the Confederates there, is blamed therein, and by preiudication
called an unjust Murder, wicked and barbarous, the fashion and manner of the
rack or torture likewise described and exaggerated with great vehemence and
passion: And also it is not true that therein is said, that the other Indians
(besides the English) confederates in the fact were Servants of the English
Company, whereas it appears otherwise, to wit, that the Indian confederates
were Servants of the Dutch Company, as is well known to be true; and yet this
writing has taken great place amongst great and small, and has been showed
as a pattern or model whereupon the other griefs have been formed against
the said Justice of Amboyna. Upon which incontinently The true Relation of the
cruel and barbarous torture and execution committed by the Flemings upon the
English in Amboyna.

In the Introduction whereof proceeds impertinently a description of Amboyna,
and of the Garrison and force of the Dutch in the same place, and this only to
the end, as appears, to show thereby that there is no appearance that the
English should consult of the taking of the said place as a thing impossible;
As if, by reason of the small understanding and simple foundation which the
Conspirators had to put their design in execution and in effect (omitting all
other accusations) they had not in any kind merited and deserved any
punishment: the contrary whereof appears to be practiced daily in the like
crimes; And to cite this presumption unto the annihilating Indian nations
bordering there, openly and by public violence to make such unaccustomed
outrages upon the Subjects of the Castle, that the Governor might be
constrained to go forth from thence with all his forces for to appease and
quiet the said Rebels, and to bring them to their ancient obedience. And
thereupon the English should have assailed and invaded the Castle and the Town
(as being destitute by the retiring and departure of the Army) then when the
Dutch should be most feeble and in their greatest necessity as well of men as
of Dutch ships, which should have been employed in this voyage. And concerning
the force of the English which were in Amboyna, they alone would not have
enterprised the attempt, but would unto this purpose have called unto them all
the slaves which they had in great number in their Factaries: Neither would
they have begun the same before the ariuall of certain English Ships in
Amboyna: The people whereof they would also have set on work and employed to
the attempt: The retinue also, which daily the accomplices did underhand procure
(as Gabriel Towerson Cape Merchant of the English had ordered) should have
been much augmented, the rebel subjects of the Castle should have weakened the
force of the Dutch and augmented the force of the conspirators; And further
(which is the principal point) the end and design of the Conspirators was not
to force and constrain the Castle (only) by violence, open war, or siege,
(to which purpose all these imagined fortresses of the Castle, and the power of
the Dutch, might have their consideration) but the plot was, to invade the
Castle by Treason, and with the aid and Iaponian Soldiers which were then in
the service of the Dutch at Amboyna aforesaid: which small number of Iaponians
were not slightly to be regarded, in respect of the valor and prowess of that
Nation, and their extraordinary resolution in hazarding their lives in any
dangerous enterprises; Insomuch as a certain small number of the Iaponians
only of themselves and without any aid or support have undertaken and
accomplished the most great attempts and designs in places of the greatest and
most puissant government in the Indies. As among other things it appears by
that which passed in the kingdom of Patany: where certain Iaponians forced
and pillaged the Town, afterward made their retreat in good order and with
good composition. And in the Kingdom of Siam in the Town called Iodea, full
of thousands of persons, the King whereof himself can in a short time bring
into the field above one hundred thousand men of arms, and heretofore obtained
great victories upon many great Princes his neighbors, who then were and as
yet are of great power; in that town (I say) which is the capital Town of
the Kingdom, certain Iaponians surprised first the Castle and Royal Palace,
and being entered thereinto by force, afterward they took the King in person
prisoner, they kept him in their custody, and being wholly become masters of
the said Castle, they made by means of threatenings (as to put the King to
death, and otherwise) an honorable and aduantageous composition: By which the
said small number of Iaponians went away and departed without any damage out of
the Kingdom of Siam, with great glory and magnanimity, and very great riches.
Which exploits are without comparison much more great and dangerous then the
said attempt of Amboyna against an open Town and a Castle empty and naked of
forces, into which also the Iaponians might have their daily access with the
English who were held and reputed for friends: So that whatsoever is mentioned
in the Deduction of the English upon this presumption, to draw into a doubt all
the actions of the Confederates, is altogether without foundation, in a Cause
so notorious and publicly convinced. Of the like Amboyna, and to remain sole
Masters of the Trade in those quarters: But if such had been the intention of
the Dutch Company, they might easier and with more appearance and pretext have
forborne to receive and admit the English at the beginning in Amboyna in the
year 1620, then have thrust them forth in such a manner: and God forbid that
any one should undertake to perform or effect such a thing by such unjust and
malign proceedings, and with such effusion of blood, only to thrust forth the
English from Amboyna. And concerning the Dutch Company here Europe, never any
such thing came into their thoughts, nor did they ever give any Commission for
the putting forth of the English, by warrant whereof the Officers of the said
place in general might have had ground to begin any thing to such an end. And
concerning the Officers themselves, they are by those that know them esteemed
and reputed to be honest and worthy men: who in like manner would no ways
entertain a thought of such an Action.

And to say the Truth, why should the Officers with such feigned wrong accuse
and put to death the English and the Confederates being innocent: seeing that
(as aforesaid) they had no Commission, and if they had any given them (which
cannot be well imagined) yet the Governor and Counsel of Amboyna are such
people as would not have yielded or given obedience thereunto. And the same
Governor nor other Judges which are fourteen in number, could not have drawn
any profit or advantage by their so doing. For admit it were so that the
English came in this regard for to leave Amboyna, this could no ways advantage
them in their particular; but to the contrary, returning unto Europe, they
themselves should be (besides the burden and remorse of their own
Consciences) charged and aggrauated with great blame and infamy, hatred and
malice, and put in great danger of their persons; So that, of such a thing they
could not expect otherwise then detriment, disadvantage and disgrace, yea
punishment and chastisement upon themselves. Now if this be not so, then may
not this presumption of the English be true, nor in any wise admitted and
received, who maintain and inhumanely say, that this molestation and
destruction was offered and done to the English, to the end to deliver and free
Amboyna of them, and to retain it only by the Dutch. For the Dutch Company
do declare the amity of the English Company to be unto them of chief and
special importance; and they desire for to enjoy the same with all confidence:
And furthermore we could produce and allege many reasons why we yet desire
that the treaty being religiously and piously observed from the one part to the
other, we could willingly and gladly be content to give way to the rate and
portion in Trade permitted to the English Company by the Treaty (...) the year
1619. without by exclusion of the English (the Treaty being by them observed)
to acknowledge or think of any profit or advantage in general or in
particular.

We undertake further for our officers of Amboyna Iaponian in our service, who
walking at undue hours upon the Bulwarks of the Castle, and inquiring very
curiously of the force and constitution of the Garrison and setting of the
watch, was apprehended, and presently the clew of this great and execrable
conspiracy was opened and discovered, as the English Deduction it self
confesses.

And if the Dutch had designed and undertaken (as most calumniously it is
suspected and reported) to thrust the English out of Amboyna by the unjust
report and accusation of their servants there, without any appearance of any
true conspiracy: why did this Iaponian come upon the walls and so curiously
enquire, and also being apprehended and examined so pertinently speak of the
conspiracy? If this Iaponian had bin a person suborned for to charge and accuse
the English, the Dutch would not have executed him; which yet legally followed,
whereby it appears that his declaration and testimony was true, as well in
accusing the other Iaponians his fellows which were in our service, as in the
charge of the other English, and of himself: why also were the other Iaponians
indicted and executed, if the Dutch sought it but only upon the English, as is
without color pretended? for the Iaponians have ever been in good esteem with
us, and have always been much trusted, and not having any occasion of malice,
or rancor, or fear of them, or against them; where now to the contrary by this
transgression it behooves our nation to be always in mistrust of the
Iaponians, and not so confidently to use or be served of them as before. And it
ought not to seem strange that during this Examination of these Iaponians
(which as aforesaid, was begun and ended before any thing was done to the
English) that the English for the space of three or four days (although
herein Amboyna, of which the English accomplices could not be ignorant; so that
they were constrained to put on a good face, cheer, and countenance, the
better to shun the peril and danger.

But it further appears that that which the English Iaponians: For they
began to examine the Iaponians the 24 of February, and the 25 the English
were arested, so that there was but one day between them both, and therefore
that which is mentioned in the English Deduction is not true. Also for the
confession of the first Iaponian, as likewise of all the rest of the Iaponians
unto the number of twelve, they do not only accuse the English, but themselves
also; so that there cannot be any suspicion or doubt of false accusation,
seeing that they themselves could not have any advantage in the preservation of
their own persons; as otherwise there can be no suspicion of calumny: which in
such a case could not be nor happen in any fashion or manner.

That which is contained in the English Deduction, Iaponians, appears to the
contrary by the Acts of the Process and the confessions of all, and
particularly of Towerson, made without Torture or Fetters, long after his
examination. So that from these contrarieties and dissimulations are
discovered, many other signs and tokens for to believe that the English
Deduction does wander and stray very much from the truth, and that all which
may be construed to the contrary is true, in consequence of that which the
Dutch Company of the East Indies do sustain in the just defense of their
Officers and Ministers.

But that whereby the said Deduction is enlarged Europe, and so in the
Low Countries; And if such torture has been given to some of the English, it
was surely done upon good and pregnant evidence, and weighty proofs, and
confessions of others, whereof some may have been brought to a more rigorous
examination, according to the exigence of the case, without doing or executing
any injustice.

If also the Judges of the Dutch would have wrongfully

And if they proceeded herein with such excess,

But to win the Reader by compassion the manner England (where there is no
such kind of torture used, unless it be in case of high Treason,) how moderate
and gentle soever it be, as the pain of the torture of the water, which is
much more civil and less dangerous then other tortures of stretching or
pressing, which is in diverse manners used in Europe: for such torture and pain
of water does but cause and produce an oppression and anxiety of breath, and
respiration, and not the swelling of the body of the Patients (as is abusiuely
mentioned in the English Deduction) and is without fraction, bruising or
mutilation of the members which others are subject unto: So that all which is
comprised and contained in the same description is only set down for the
embellishing and adorning of the said Writing, to the end only to move the
Reader to compassion, to make him insensibly to draw in and swallow all the
other errors and untruths under these close conueighances, and give them
credit to the advantage of the drift of the said Deduction: But he which to the
contrary will sound and search out the truth, and whether that which is therein
declared and related be proved, and ought to be admitted and received or not,
let him be pleased further to observe, as follows.

That all which is said therein is without proof, and if that any proof be
found therein, it is of very few persons, yea such as in a cause that
concerns themselves, and wherein they were once iudicially convinced, may not
be admitted for witnesses against the Judge and the proceedings past against
themselves, nor against the legal confession which they once and oftener made
and confirmed with their own subscription, which now by other depositions or
particular declarations, cannot be made vain and elusory against the
testimony and certificate of fourteen Judges, who were present in and at all
passages, whose reputation and wisdom is so well known, that such wicked,
unorderly and unjust proceedings as the English pretend, may not be in any
sort or manner charged or imputed upon them.

Lastly, concerning certain Declarations and

This Argument makes little in the cause; for first it ought to appear that
there are indeed such Declarations and Writings of the English: But the truth
can be testified by them which were present, and about them at all times, that
there is no such thing; much less that which is said concerning certain
pretended miracles which had happened in witness of the innocence of the
executed, so that there should have seemed that they had moved heaven and earth
to hide and conceal this detestible deed: but howsoever it be, who would
presume that honest men of reputation and wisdom known and public would
have shown themselves so impious and unhuman, as wrongfully and innocently to
accuse the persons executed: and much less it cannot be presumed unto the
charge of a College established and sworn.

And although that which is aforesaid appear and Amboyna, in such manner that
more cannot be required in justification of the behauiors of the Dutch
Officers: So it is that the Directors notwithstanding find it necessary
(although superfluous) to repeat and make mention here of many particularities
which much more fully and all at a blow do show that the reports spread and
sworn with such vehemence by the English against the truth do contrary the one
the other, so that nothing more can be had nor rest of suspicion, whereby the
proceedings and executions at Amboyna may be accused, much less condemned,
and in consequence likewise, which the great haste and assiduall precipitation
used herein, has been wholly done in post, for to learn and show the world
the truth of the discovery in the business; as hereafter shall appear more
clearly and evidently.

In the first place then, so it is that the Company after the first Deduction
of July, have further understood by the last Ships out of Battauia arrived here
in September, and that by Certificate or Attestation deposed by Mr. Frederick
de Houtman, chief Counceller of the Indies, and ancient Governor of the Isles
of Mulloques; that it was firmly and undoubtedly believed in Amboyna thoughout
and of every one, yea by himself as he yet does believe, that the English of
the said place, and the Iaponians, had truly and really conspired to invade the
Castle of Amboyna at their best opportunity; so that none ought in any wise to
doubt hereof.

Secondly, for strong proof of that which is aforesaid, the said Governor de
Houtman coming from the Molucques to Hitto in Amboyna in the month of April,
anno 1623, a certain Englishman called George Sharock, Assistant, (which
before had been also prisoner, and examined upon the said conspiracy, and by
favor released and pardoned by the Governor and Council of Amboyna,
notwithstanding that the said Sharock was a good while privy to the said
Conspiracy, and had promised his assistance) kneeling down upon his knees and
prostrating himself before the feet of the said Governor de Houtman, (who
looked for no such matter) declared with great zeal and good affection, that
he was and should be all his life time bound and obliged unto the Dutch
Company, because (as he then again confessed) that favor had been done to
him, and he was left unpunished for the fault and offense which he had
committed and perpetrated; and this was spoken by the said George Sharock, to
the said de Houtman, about the 20. of April 1623. when he was already absolved,
released, freed, and out of all fear to be any more molested, or questioned
for the said fact and offense committed as aforesaid.

Thirdly, the said Governor de Houtman being at Batavia, and being present
when John Beomont English Merchant, (who also was a confederate in the said
conspiracy at Amboyna, and obtained his pardon) being sick, was brought before
the Governor general; and the said Beomont being come in the presence of the
said Governor general, and of the said M. Houtman, confessed his fault before
made and committed, and implored, and most humbly desired mercy and pardon of
the said General, which having obtained, he humbly thanked them.

In the fourth place, That many people at Batavia, yea he the Deponent himself
had by good information and knowledge, certainly understood, that the said
John Beomont being afterward come before the English President and English
Merchants resident at Batavia, he the said Beomont recited and confessed the
whole business and conspiracy: But when this pleased not the said English, the
President of the English aforesaid, for to obscure the cause, and to shun the
dishonor of the Treason, seeing the free confession of Beomont which much
astonished them, he caused him for this cause to keep close and not to speak
to any body, because that the thing by the voluntary confession of the said
Beomont against the intent of the English principalls, should not further be
discovered and confirmed.

Fifthly, concerning the persons which were employed as Judges in the cause of
Amboyna in the matter of the condemned, and specially the Governor Van Speult
(because he is best known) they are such, that there cannot be any the least
suspicion or doubt of them, that they had wrongfully or without sufficient
ground caused the English to be accused, or ill handled, or much less to be
put to death, if they had not been found really in fault, worthily to have
deserved the punishment: the Governor Van Speult being held for an honest man,
of credit, and fearing God, by all those that have conversed with him: and by
consequence, there may not be admitted such a contrary suspicion of his
impious and malign proceedings.

In the fifth place, concerning the Torture of Water, which the Dutch have
always used in the Indies, as the most assured and civil: which is not a
torture so rough and dangerous as the tortures which are ordinarily used in
this Country, and throughout Europe, which are far more severe and dangerous
then that of Water; whereby the health of the person cannot any way be
offended, nor the membrs lamed or bruised.

All which things aforesaid, in representation and maintenance of the truth in
this case, and which further might be in conformity of what is aforesaid,
represented by the coming and arriving of many other persons out of the
Indies, who also have knowledge of that which passed at Amboyna: May it please
your Honors to take into consideration, and to consider whether there be not
sufficient matter and cause given to the English East Indian Company, for to
leave and remit the fault unto them, who were the authors and practisers of
this abominable conspiracy, and of their own misfortune, which they thus drew
upon themselves, and not to defend them, and aggravate against the Judges of
the Dutch: to which end the Directors in defense and maintenance of their
Officers, and unblameable Ministers in the East Indies aforesaid, cannot omit
to beseech your Honors, that the cause may not be precipitated, but that
covenient time might be given and granted for a more exact research, (if need
be) of the truth, yea in all to grant them such protection, as all good
Subjects and Patriots of the United Provinces are to attend from your Honors in
equity and justice. For now can this business be so inverted, that in stead of
the dishonor and blame which ought to dwell upon the Confederates, on the
contrary now, they will blot and smother the truth of the thing, and to accuse
and charg the Dutch Officers, as if they had had no honesty or conscience:
which cannot be presumed of substantial people, of good renown, upon any
either voluntary (though not true) or suborned and false deposition, of such
as may not be admitted to testify in their own cause against the judicial
Acts of a College of Judges, sworn, and in so great a number, which have of a
long time been so employed; when it appears not otherwise by any other
legal proofs.

The intention of the Directors never was, nor yet is to maintain any
injustice, outrage, or imposture, if in these proceedings there were any used:
but as long as it appears not clearly (as it ought in this case, against a
College, and against a cause judged) nothing else, under reverence, can be
done in the business, but to grant time for to make more exact and serious
search (if need be,) and that by the authority and intervention of your Honors
(as it shall appertain) all misunderstanding, contrary Deductions, and ill
expositions, griefs, and designs, may cease and be surpressed, until such
time as the contrary may (if need be) appear. The said Defenses are such (in
our opinion) as under reverence this ought to be done. And although it were so,
that the cause of the English against the Judges of Amboyna, seemed wholly to
be clear and proved, (which hitherto has proved to the contrary)
nevertheless the proceedings of the said Judges may not in any wise be
condemned (as touching the substance thereof*) without hearing the Judges
themselves, whom the cause properly touches and concerns, and not the
Directors; who only mediate, for as much as according to the information and
knowledge which they have of the cause, it seems to them to be in effect just
and fair, and therefore the humble remonstrance or representation and prayer
of the Administrators, or Directors, have ever been, that it would please
yours Honors to give and grant covenient time for the inquiry, information,
and re-search of the business, until such time as the ships of Batavia, shall
be arrived here; to the end that the matter may more plainly and truly be
discovered and known; and without doubt there will come, and be transported
therein from thence, some that will neutrally and in such sort maintain unto
your Honors, the particular informations of the proceedings passed in Amboyna,
that they may be wholly believed and received: as at this present there is
come, and fallen out by the coming and return of M. Frederick de Houtman,
chief Councellor of the Indies, and ancient Governor of the Isles of
Molucques, who has deposed and by oath testified the points in manner as they
are recited and related in order as above, which brings not a little light in
this cause, but may wholly tend and turn to the overthrow of all contrary
expositions and calumnies, which heretofore have been used and set forth, with
such differences and vehemence, whereby we hope that your Honors will in all
points, and that with equity, right, and reason, give and cause to be given
such content, that all discontent (at least by provision) may cease, until
such time as the whole truth may more and abundantly come to light, by advice
from the Indies, to the full satisfaction of those whom it touches or
concerns. For may it please your Honors to know and understand, that the best
and most pertinent and true knowledge of the business, must come from the
Province of Amboyna to Batavia, and from thence hither. Notwithstanding, so it
is, that since the departure of the Pinace called the Hare from Batavia, which
was in the beginning of January, 1624. (by which the first notice of the
execution was brought) until the departure of the last ships which also came
from Batrvia, there is not, nor cannot have come any news from Amboyna to
Batavia, concerning this business, because the wind called the Western
Moussons blow continually from November until April. And for to come from
Amboyna to Batavia, an Eastern Mousson is necessary; and that begins first
in May: so that without that; it is a thing impossible to send or get any
advice or ships from Amboyna to Batavia.

We hope also that your Lordships will find this reasonable, and that due and
reasonable time required shall be granted and permitted in justice, for the
more ample search and information of the cause, (if need be) and we cannot
conjecture, (being a thing incredible) that any one will condeme any cause or
persons, without first hearing the justification of the parties, which always
has been held and observed inviolably of all nations, which would judge
according to right and equity. Therefore we hope that it will be thus granted;
yea it is not reasonable that any reparation should be required, before the
due defenses and informations of the business be made and taken, and the same
ought to be made and taken by and from the persons whom the cause concerns,
appertains, and is known, and who also pertinently know how to refute the
objections and circumstances alleged, and heretofore urged to the contrary:
which unto us is impossible to do, not having been present: but only for the
defense of our Officers, for so much as is just and reasonable, we can
allege that which they have written unto us from the Indies, and what else we
have certainly perceived and understood.

Also we cannot in the mean time conceal from Indies, and that thence may be
drawn so strong and vigorous proofs, that the Truth shall fully and
sufficiently appear to the full discharge of the innocents, and the confusion
of those which will defend and maintain a bad cause; And this may be proved
there besides the points above alleged.

First, that all the Iaponians, accomplices in the conspiracy have signed each
with their own hands their confessions, and afterward jointly and all
altogehet have persisted therein after the end of the examination, without
torture or fetters, at many sittings and full assemblies of the Council at
Amboyna, without revoking any thing, or desiring to diminish or augment any
thing from or to their said confessions.

In the second place, That the English Accomplices at sundry times of their own
accord, without pain, irons, tortures, or menaces, ratified the same, and
respectively signed their confessions: upon which confessions, they were
afterward again examined three or four times, and re-examined in a full
Council and Assembly; and after their examination have persisted therein,
without revoking or changing any thing.

Thirdly, that the Governor of Amboyna (after that all the accomplices had
respectively four or five times ratified their confessions, and persisted
therein a little before the execution, seriously remonstrated, exhorted,
represented, and demanded, of the said accomplices (as before had done unto them
in particular) That in case any one of them had by apprehension of justice,
fear of menaces, or terror of pain, said, confessed, and signed any thing,
by which he was surprised and made guilty, and whereby others might come and
fall into danger or hazard, that he should speak and manifest it openly, that
he might discharge the party thereof. For the Governor protested that he was
not desirous of the destruction and death of any that was not guilty. Upon
which proposition every one of them shrunk up their shoulders and said, that
what he had confessed and signed particularly was true, and therefore he
persisted therein.

In the fourth place, One of the accomplices called William Webber, in his last
examination confessed, that he had received a Letter from John Clarke, by which
he was advertised, that something of great weight and consequence was handled
amongst the English; hut he could not understand what it might be* the which
letter containing as aforesaid, the said Clarke confessed also in the abscence
of Webber, that he had written it.

Fifthly, that Edward Collins being examined, and making his confession without
any torment or torture, (as appears by the Acts) offered to confess all of
his own freewill: yea he declared the same before Gabriel Towerson and all
the other English, and that he did not think that the said Towerson and all
the rest which were there faulty would dare to deny it, but would presently
confess it, as also the said Towerson being brought to Collins (and the said
Collins falling upon his knees and requiring mercy and pardon) he said, and
told it him to his face, admonishing the said Towerson that he would presently
declare and confess all as he had done, saying, I must speak and confess the
truth, and I mean not to suffer or endure any pain for the love of you.

In the sixth place, That Emanuel Tompson two days after the examination
finished and ended, and when he was free and at liberty, being inquired by the
Commissioners which had assisted in the same examination, wherefore he had so
long persisted in his denials and endured the severe examination, said, the
reason was because Captain Gabriel Towerson had oftentimes reprehended his
drunkenness, saying, that he should take good heed that thereby the matter
should not be discovered; For which cause he said Tompson did by a great oath
swear to himself, that howsoever it went he would not be the third nor the
fourth by whom the matter should be known, whatsoever pain (in his opinion)
he could have been put unto.

Seventhly, the said Emanuel Tompson certain days after his examination being
visited by certain Commissioners said unto them that he was very glad that
God had caused the business to be brought to light, because much innocent blood
would have been spilt, and although he confessed that he had deserved once,
yea twice to dye, he asked mercy seeing that he was a man of about fifty
years, etc. And so after so much favor was given to the said Tompson for to
draw a lot with Coulson and Collins which of them three should be released and
freed.

In the eight place, that two or three days before the execution, Captain
Towerson being in the Hall with other the convict English, said in the presence
of the Governor and all the Council, and to the rest of the English in
general by reproach, that their ill and disordinate lives, their whoredom and
drunkenness was the cause that it pleased God that they should not keep
secret the intended enterprise; and that by reason thereof they were now fallen
and brought to such misery.

Ninthly, that Gabriel Towerson author of this conspiracy, in his last
extremity prayed the rest of his accomplices to pardon him, because that by him
Towerson they were instigated and brought unto the said enterprise, and were
reduced to that case, and that the business was come to be discovered by the
all seeing God, and that he must of necessity dye, and therefore having brought
them into this danger and ill chance he prayed them to pardon him, as they also
did.

In the tenth place, The said Towerson a little before his death writ a Letter
to Samuel Coulson, which letter is yet in the hands of the Governor of Amboyna
Herman van Speult, by which the said Towerson said and alleged unto the said
Coulson, that he the said Coulson was the first and principal cause which had
made the agreement and condescending unto the act of inuading and making of
themselves masters of the Castle, but notwithstanding at the present he
pardoned him.

Eleuenthly, that the ship called the Unicorn saying from Amboyna to Batauia,
the two English Merchants Edward Collins and John Beomont which were pardoned
were transported therein, unto the end to ^npetrate and obtain their full
pardon in Batauia aforesaid, and they two English Merchants being requested by
the officers of the ship to come sit down and eat at the Table of the
Commissioners, during the said voyage; the said Collins said, excusing of
himself, that they were not worthy to sit by the said Commissioners, because
that the said English had had such an ill purpose and design against the Dutch,
and yet they were by them in that fashion entertained, and were exempted of the
punishment: and therefore they could very well eat apart: which excuse
notwithstanding was not received nor accepted by the Commissioners of the Dutch.

In the twelfth place are adjoined and annexed the de Houtman concerning the
confessions of the said two English Merchants made before the Governor
himself, and afterward before the President and principal English, and that
which further may be declared at Batauia, whereof diverse persons there have
notice.

In the thirteenth place, concerning the torture in the proceedings used at
Amboyna, they can give certain proof of the truth it self, that many persons
mentioned in the English Writing to have bin tortured with water and fire, have
not one been once touched.

In the fourteenth place, concerning the particularities and petty points of
the said Writing in English touching the examination of certain persons
therein mentioned for the discharge and innocence of the English, the same
shall be proved never to have been done nor heard, by depositions of those
which have been present at all, and by persons before whom such things must
needs have been spoken and declared.

In the fifteenth place, it shall also be found that the pretended miracles
were devised only for the discharge of the English, and in their favor.

These said points and many others which are yet Directors, may be clearly and
by good proof shown in time and place, if due and convenient time be given
and granted unto the cause and re-search thereof: which in a matter so
important and of such weight, coming also from so remote parts, cannot (under
reverence) be denied to any: So that your Honors may please to desire the same
of his Majesty of Great Britain, without which the Directors can very ill
propose any other means which would not be mingled either with injustice, or
the great prejudice and disadvantage of the Dutch Company.

We also surely hope that his said Majesty according to his great wisdom and
justice cannot refuse or deny the said respite for the examination of the
business more exactly and particularly; which we beseech your Honors in all
reverence to interpose and mediate, and by all means to effect and obtain;
that (as reason requires) neither the Company in general, nor the Masters in
particular may not during this interim be any way grieved or prejudiced in
their just defenses. Which doing, etc.

AN AVTHENTICK COPY OF THE CONFESSIONS AND SENTENCES, AGAINST M. TOVVERSON, AND
ACCOMPLICES, CONCERNING THE BLOODY CONSPIracy enterprised against the Castle of
AMBOYNA.

The which by the manifest grace and providence of God, was discovered the 23.
day of February, in the year 1623.

As also the Resolutions of the Governor Van Speult, and of the Council taken
in this business.

Translated out of their own Copy.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN DAVVSON, for the EAST INDIA COMPANY 1632.

AN AVTHENTICK Copy of the Confessions and Sentences against Mr. Towerson, and
Accomplices, concerning the bloody conspiracy enterprised against the Castle of
Amboyna, the which by the manifest grace, and providence of God was discovered
the 23. day of February, in the year 1623. as also the Resolutions of the
Governor Van Speult, and of the Council taken in the business.
The Translation.
WHereas on the 23. of Februry 1623. by the manifest grace and providence of
God, it was discovered; That a certain Iaponesse called Hytieso, at night, and
at unlawful hours at Sermon, and Prayers time* contrary to order, and to his
condition, did pass diverse times along by the Ramparts, and before the Points:
and at diverse times there where he found the Soldiers young and unexperienced,
made enquiry how many Soldiers of the Low Countries there were in the Castle,
and how many times they changed the watch every night: The Worshipful Harman
van Speult, Councellor of the Indies, and Governor of Amboyna, upon great
reasons taking his actions and demands for suspicious, caused the said Iaponeze
to appear before him and the Council, and examining him of the truth, he
confessed as follows, Datum vt supra: Being signed

Harman van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Iohnso^
vischer, John van Leeuwen, John Iacobson-wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Ianson
Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John van Nieupoort, Peter Ianson van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.

Hytieso Iaponois of the age of 24. years, borne at Fernado in Iapon denied
the same, but the Soldiers being produced before him, of whom he had diverse
times, and in diverse places asked those questions, he confessed that he had
done it out of a merry disposition and for pleasure: whereupon his Worsh: said
unto him, that such things at unseasonable times could not be asked for
pleasure of the younger and unexperienced Soldiers, but that of necessity it
must be otherwise: and in pursuit thereof being of that opinion, he with those
of his Council, caused him to be brought to the torture: the Prisoner having
been tortured a while, desired that they would cease, and he would confess
all that did belong to the business, and then he confessed that a certain other
Iaponeze, being also Soldier to the Dutch Company in the East Indies, called
Sidney Migiell, (who had heretofore been servant to the honorable English
Company) had desired him to enquire of the thing aforesaid, and moreover he
confessed, that he had been asked by the said Migiell, if he would lend his
aid amongst other Iaponezers, to deliver the Castle into the hands of the
English, to the which he answered, he would upon condition of good recompense,
which was offered him by the said Iaponeze, in the name of the English.

He confessed, that he had communicated and consulted concerning the delivery
of the Castle diverse times, as well in the quarters of Mardiques, as in the
English house with diverse other Iaponezes, and with Mr. Timothy Johnson
English Merchant, and Abell Price English Barber, and that within three months
last past.

He says that the Iaponian Soldiers which were in the Castle, did agree to
deliver the said Castle into the hands of the English, and that they had
engaged themselves to serve them.

Further he confesses, that they would put this exploit and treason in
execution, when any English ship should have arrived in this place.

He says, that the Iaponezes did consult for to keep two men in every Corner
of the Castle, and the rest in the Hall, for to seize upon the Governor, and
that they would have killed all that were not on their side:

Thus confessed the 23. of February 1623. in the Castle of Amboyna, and it was
subscribed, the mark of Hytieso Iaponois.
Harman van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
Vischer, John van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogel, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen van Zanten,
Harman Crayevanger Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


By reason of which conspiracy and treason, the Governor Van Speult being
moved and troubled, kept the Prisoner by him, and presently caused the Gate to
shut and looked to, and the points of the Castle with double guard, and
likewise the Arms of all the Iaponezes to be taken away, and themselves to be
put in Irons: giving command that none should stir out of the Castle, until
such time as he should be better informed, and all things were set in order:
knowing well that there was great danger in delays, and that for the finding
out of such conspiracies and offenses, he was not to make any pause, but to
search out the end thereof; for which cause he commanded Sidney Migiell to
be sent for, and commanded the Advocate Fiscall de Brune, with the Council,
to take diligent information: who after some torture, the said Migiell and
others made the confessions following.

Done in the Castle of Amboyna the 23. of Feb. Anno 1623. And it was
subscribed; Harman Van Speult Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John
Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin
Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen
van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Sidney Migiell Iaponeze, of the age of 24. years, borne at Nangasaque,
confesses that he did enquire of another Soldier being a Iaponeze, called
Peter Conge, how many Dutch Soldiers were in the Castle.

He confesses, that Abell Price English Barber within 2. or 3. months since
asked him, if he knew a way for to get and induce the Iaponezes to deliver the
Castle to the English.

He says, that afterward he consulted with the Iaponezes about the said
business, and that all of them agreed thereunto.

He says, that diverse times he consulted concerning the prosecution of the
business, and concerning the time with Captain Towerson, M. Tompson, John
Clarke, Abell Price, and other English.

He confesses also, that they would have put in execution this plot or
treason, when any English ship or Pincke had arrived here, and that then with
the English, and their slaves, they would have attempted to make themselves
Masters of the Castle, and have killed all that were not on their side.

He says, that they had appointed two Iaponezes to be in every point of the
Castle, and the rest in the Hall, for to seize upon the Governor Van Speult.

He confesses also, that the English did promise to every Iaponeze 1000. Ryals
of Eight, over and above their share in the booty. Thus confessed the 24. of
February, Anno 1623. Stilo Nouo, in the Fort of Amboyna. And it was subscribed.

This is the mark of Sidney Migiell. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de
Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John
Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob
Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger,
Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Peter Congi Iaponeze, aged 31. years, borne at Mangasaque: confesses, that
the said Migiell questioned him concerning the Soldiers of the Dutch, how many
there were, and that he enquired of the said Hytieso.

He confesses, that he did consult as the other Iaponezes did with the
English, concerning the deliverie of the Castle, and he promised his service
therein.

Thus confessed the 24. of February 1623. in the Castle of Amboyna. The mark
of Peter Congi. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom,
John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq,
Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter
Tansen Van Zantem, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals
Secretary.


Soysimo, Iaponeze of the age of 26. years, borne at Ferando: confesses, that
he had likewise knowledge of the consultation of the English, and that he had
presented his service to the said English to win the Castle. Confessed, Dated
in the same place, and it was marked, signed, Soysimo Iaponeze.

Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Thome Corea Iaponeze, of the age of 50. years, borne at Mangasaque:
confessed, that he with the rest of the Iaponezes, had knowledge of the
consultation of the English, and that he should likewise have been employed
in their service. Thus confessed, the 24. of February 1623. and was signed.

The mark of Thome Corea. Harman van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement
Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop,
Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogel, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John van
Nieupoort, Peter Iansen van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger Rowland Tailler, Vincent
Corthals Secretary.


Tsiosa Iaponeze of the age of 32. years, borne at Firando Soldier:
confesses, that he with the rest of the Iaponezes should have been assistant
in the surprising of the Castle for the English. Datum ut supra: and was signed.

The mark of Tsiosa Iaponeze. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck,
Clement Kersseboom, John Iobnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson
Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John
Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler,
Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Quiendayo Iaponeze, aged 32. years, Soldier, borne at Coreats: confessed,
that they being 12. Iaponezes, thought to have made themselves Masters of the
Castle with the aid of the English. Confessed and signed as aforesaid.

Signed thus the name of Quiendayo. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck,
Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson
Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell. John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John
Van Nieupoort, Peter Ianson Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler,
Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Sinsa Iaponeze, of the age of 32. years, borne at Ferando, Soldier:
confessed, that they 12. Iaponezes did intend to deliver and betray the Castle
to the English. Confessed in the said place, and on the said day subscribed.

The name of Sinsa Iaponeze. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck; Clement
Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leenwen, John Iacobson Wincoop,
Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van
Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler,
Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Tsauinda Iaponeze, aged 32. years, borne at Tioucketge, Soldier: confesses
as the rest, that they 12. with the assistance of the English, intended to make
themselves Masters of the Castle. Thus confessed the 24. of February 1623.

And was subscribed. The name of Tsauinda. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de
Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John
Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Iansen Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob
Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger,
Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Zanchoo Iaponeze, aged 22. years, borne at Fisien, Soldier: Confesses as
the afore-going. Dated as the aforesaid, and was vnder-signed.

The mark of Zanchoo. Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement
Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacokson Wincoop,
Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van
Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler,
Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Sacoube Iaponeze, of the age of 40. years, borne at Ferando, Soldier:
Confesses, that he also had knowledge of the consultation of the Iaponezes,
but being old and sick, he did not present his service. Dated the 25. of
February 1623.

The mark of Sacoube. Harman van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement
Kersseboom, John Johnson vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop,
Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van
Nieupoort, Peter Ianson Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler,
Vincent Corthals Secretary.


His Worship understanding by all the precedent Confessions the design of the
Agent of the honorable English Company of Amboyna, with the Merchants and
other Confederates; and although that he was sufficiently informed: that he
might have taken them into custody, yet he would not have thereunto: but first
he caused to be brought before him Abell Price English Barber, who for other
offenses (as an Incendiarie, for using violence in other men's houses) was
already in prison: and after the said Prisoner was told the place, persons, and
times where he had consulted with the Iaponezes, and with other English upon
the consultation aforesaid: they understood by him that which follows. Dated
the 25. of February 1623. Subscribed.

Harman Van Speult Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


The Confession of Abell Price, aged 24. years, borne at Neles in Wales in the
County of Pembroke. Confessed;

That he by the command and order of Captain Towersan, had conference with
Sidney Migiell Iaponeze, concerning the taking of the Castle, promising unto
every Iaponeze their share in the booty.

Further he confesses, that he did treat two or three times in the Quarter of
Mardriques with M. Thomson, M. Johnson, and John Clarke, and the Iaponezes
concerning the said matter.

Further he confesses; That the said Migiell Iaponeze was three or four times
in the English house with him, and conferred with him and them diverse times,
and they informed Captain Towerson of their discourse.

Confessing further, That the said treason should have been put in execution
when any English ships should arrive.

Further he confesses, that all the Merchants of the Facturies, resorting to
Amboyna, had knowledge of the said treason.

Further he says, That they intended to put it in execution when one of their
ships should come.

Further he confesses, That if they had taken the Castle, they would have done
all the damage and offense possible to the Citizens, if they agreed not with
them. And this he confirmed with his name Abell Price.

His Worship understanding this, he thought good for to send for Captain
Towerson to the Castle, the which he did presently by a certain Merchant, who
went to the English House, and presently returned to the Castle with M.
Towerson: who was very much troubled and altered, and then his Worship said to
him, that he was very much amazed and sorry for that which he had understood
by the Iaponeze and the Barber; having many times admonished the said Captain
Towerson, that he should not entertain or draw unto him (as he did) the
English, Iaponeze, and Spanish Prisoners, which were in the service of him and
the Low Countries. That it did cause and give suspicion of ill consultation,
and other things, but as he thought Captain Towerson did not know any thing:
but that now he marked in him a great alteration and astonishment.

The Governor Van Speult with his Counsel found good that they should retain
by way of provision the said Captain Towerson, and M Thomson; and he was told
presently that he should stay there as Prisoner, and should take a lodging in
one of the Chambers of the Merchants. But the said Master Towerson desired that
by reason of his quality, they would grant him to be Prisoner in his own
Chamber, in the House of the honorable English Company: to the which his
Worship agreed, upon condition that first he should cause to come, or send all
his men into the Castle, the which was done; and that he should be there
Prisoner with some Keepers.

Captain Towerson being gone, his Worship holding a Counsel thought good
presently to examine all the English one after another, and they were examined;
some before torture, others after a little torture confessing as follows;
Done the 26. of February 1623. Signed.

Harman van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Ianson Van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


The Confession of Timothy Johnson Factor, borne at New Castle; aged 29. years.
Confesses; That he was in one of the houses of the Iaponezes, in the Quarter
of the Madriques with M. Thomson, John Clarke, and Abell Price, three or four
times, for to consult of the taking of the Castle, and of massacring those of
the Low Countries, which consultation, was kept six or seven days ago.

Further he confesses; That Captain Towerson on New-yeares-day last, having
all his Merchants assembled with him, proposed unto them how that the
Hollanders did great injuries to the English: and asked them if they had not
the courage to help to revenge all their wrongs: for his own part, he knew the
ways and means, both within and without, with the aid of certain Soldiers
Iaponezes, that were lodged in the Castle, to make himself Master thereof. And
they all answered that they had.

And he confesses; That their exploit should have been put in execution,
when the Governor should be out of the Castle upon some exploit, and those
that were in the Castle should be weak and ill provided.

And also that all the Merchants of other Facturies resorting thither, had
knowledge of the said Treason.

And further he says; That they would have shared the booty with the
Iaponezes, and this is confirmed with the sign and name of Timothy Ianson,

The Confession of Robert Brown, borne in Edenburrow in Scotland, aged 24.
years.
Confessed; That Captain Towerson about Newyeares day last past, called an
Assembly of all his Family and the foreign Merchants, and told them that he
would have them take an oath on the Bible for fidelity and secrecy, the which
they did accordingly.

Further he says; That afterward the said Towerson propounded, that the
English had suffered great wrong by the Hollanders, asking them if they had the
will and courage to revenge the same. To the which some of them answered, that
they were to weak to effect it. But then the said Captain Towerson answered,
that they would wait the opportunity of the arrival of some English Ships:
whereupon all of them agreed to make trial, to make themselves Masters of the
Castle.

Also; That Captain Towerson reported that the Iaponian Soldiers that were
within the Castle were at his service.

Says moreover; That Captain Towerson at the arrival of some of their Ships,
should cause all their Merchants and slaves of the other Facturie to come
thither for that purpose.

And further he says; That they would have killed all that should have made
any resistance against them. And it is subscribed by the mark R. B.

The Confession of John Fardo the English Steward of the age of 42. years.
He confesses; That about two months since he was in conference with others,
wherein he took his oath upon the Bible to be faithful and secret.

He says; That Captain Towerson with their aid, intended to make himself
Master of the Castle.

And further he says; That some whereof he Prisoner was one, answered that
they were to weak in men: and Captain Towerson said, that he knew a way to
find men enough, and that they should refer the business to him, and that
they only should do their endeavor.

Further he says; That he amongst the rest offered his service and endeavor.

Furthermore he says; That about 14. days since, when he was with Captain
Towerson, for money for the Kitchen, Captain Towerson asked him the same, and
if he would do his best for to take the Castle, to the which he answered,
that he among others would do their best. And it was confirmed by the sign of
John Fardo.

The Confession of Edward Collins English Merchant, borne at London, aged 25.
years or therabouts.
Confesses, That he amongst others was at the said consultation, and took his
oath upon the Bible, to be faithful and secret.

And further; That he amongst others did consent to do his best in the taking
of the Castle.

Item, That within three or four days after the said consultation, they
assembled again: and then Captain Towerson told him, that he had at his
devotion the Iaponian Soldiers, and that at his appointment they would make
themselves Masters of the Points, and that some should attend in the Hall for
the Governor, when he should come forth upon the noise.

Item; That they would put their design in execution, when one of their Ships
should arrive.

Item he confesses, That if so be they could have gained the Castle, they
would have done the Citizens all the hurt and damage possible, unless they
would agree with them. And it is confirmed under Edward Collins his hand.

The Confession of John Beomont English Merchant, borne in Barke-shire, aged
48. years.
Confesses, That on New-yeares-day last past, he was in conference, and among
others took his oath upon the Bible to be faithful and secret.

Item he confesses; That Captain Towerson required all their aids for the
taking of the Castle. Other circumstances at present he remembers not, having
been sick, and having an ill memory, and growing in age. And it is confirmed
under the hand of John Beomont.

The Confession of Ephraim Ramsy, borne at Carelstow in Scotland, aged 21.
years. Assistant to the English at Lohoe.
He confesses, That upon New-yeares-day last, he was at Lohoe, and therefore
he could not be at the said conference with the English.

Further he says; That this is the first day that he has understood, that the
English did consult on New Years day for the taking of the Castle in a time
convenient.

The Confession of John Sadler, borne at London, aged 20. years, English
Steward at Larico.
He confesses, That at the time aforesaid he was at Larico, and that he knew
not of any consultation.

The Confession of William Grigs of Dunstable in the County of Bedford, aged
28. years, English Merchant at Larico.
He confesses; that he was present at the consultation upon New-yeares day
last, and that amongst others he took his oath upon the Bible to be loyal and
secret

Further he confesses, that he offered his service for to take the Castle.

Item, Captain Towerson did make great complaint of the wrong which the
English did receive from the Hollanders; and for the revenge thereof with the
aid of the Iaponian Soldiers, slaves, and some Spanish Prisoners, he
intended to make himself Master of the Castle: if every one of us would aid
him, the which if we would do, he knew a way to keep the Castle in spite of
the Hollanders teethes.

Item he says, that they would have killed all those which should make any
resistance, and taken the rest prisoners.

Further he says, that within a few days after they should have had another
consultation, and that then Captain Towerson would give order for all things,
and have given a sign to the Iaponezes, at which they should have gone about
the business within the Castle.

Item he says, that they would have divided the goods and booty among
themselves: And it was confirmed under the hand of William Grigs.

The Confession of John Clarke, borne at Ordington, aged 36. years. Assistant
to the English.
Confesses, That he treated and spoke with the Iaponian Soldiers concerning
the taking of the Castle.

Item he confesses, That he was in the consultation on New-yeares day last
past, and that Captain Towerson caused them to take an oath upon the Bible to
be faithful and secret: saying that it was necessary so to do, for if that
which he should say unto them should come to be known, it would cost them all
their lives.

Confesses moreover, That Captain Towerson said afterward, that he intended
with the help of the Iaponian Soldiers, and them, to make himself Master of
the Castle.

Item he says, That Captain Towerson said, that when time should be fitting,
he would send for all his men and slaves of the other Factories.

He says moreover, That they resolved to kill all those that should resist
them, and that they should have shared all the moneys and goods amongst them.
And this was confirmed under the hand of John Clarke.

The Confession of William Webber, borne at Tyverton in Devonshire, aged about
32. years.
He confesses, that about five weeks since, he received a Letter from John
Clarke of Hitto, wherein among other things it was written, that the English in
Amboyna had consulted concerning the taking of the Castle.

Item he says, that he has no other knowledge of the treason, nor he did not
consult with any person concerning the same. And it was confirmed under the
hand of William Webber.

The Confession of George Shacock, of the age of 31. years, borne at
Westchester, Assistant to the English at Hitto.
He confesses and says; That he was not in Amboyna since the 1. of December
last past, and therefore he could not be at the consultation held here by the
English at New-yeares tide last.

He confesses, that about a month or five weeks since he understood of John
Clarke of Hitto, being in the Gallery that the English in Amboyna had consulted
and resolved for to take the Castle.

Item, that he promised to John Clarke his aid concerning the business. And
it was confirmed under the hand of the said George Shacocke.

The Confession of Samuel Coulson English Merchant, borne at Newcastle, aged
39. years.
Confesses; That he was at the conference of the English, and had taken an
oath upon the Bible for to be faithful and secret, as others.

Item he confesses, that Captain Towerson complained of the great wrong and
injuries that the Hollanders did them, and if that they would aid them he knew
with the help of the Iaponian Soldiers, a way to take the Castle.

Item he confesses, that he promised his aid in the same act.

Further he confesses, that the time of the putting of the same in execution,
was not yet determined, but with opportunity, Captain Towerson would tell him.

Item, in case that their intention had taken effect, they resolved to kill all
that should make resistance, and take the rest Prisoners. And this was
confirmed by Samuel Coulsons name.

The Confession of Gabriell Towerson, Agent for the English in Amboyna, of the
age of 49. years, borne in London.
He confesses, That he was in conference with the English, and with the
others, he took an oath upon the Bible to be faithful and secret.

Item he says and confesses, That he had an intention, and diverse times
consulted with his men for to make himself Master of the Castle.

Item he confesses, That all his men were consenting to it, and that he would
have put the same in execution the next time that the Governor Van Speult, had
gone forth with his Curricuries.

Being asked what should move him thereunto, he answered, desire of honor and
profit.

Further being asked of whom he looked to receive that honor, and for whom he
would have kept the Castle, he answered, that if his intent had been
achieved, he would have informed those of his Nation in Batavia, and require
their assistance: the which being sent him, he would have kept the Castle for
his Company: but if they did not, he would have kept it for himself, and
seek some agreement with the Blacks, and so by some way or other have had his
intent.

He confesses moreover, That he gave order to his men for to get him men and
companions to effect the same; as M. Thomson, M. Johnson, John Clarke and Abell
Price, and they had already negotiated with the Iaponian Soldiers.

He says, That the Iaponezes were twice in his house, but that he himself did
not speak with them but he caused them to be treated with by others.

He says, That as yet he did not appoint the time because it was too soon.

He says, when time should come convenient, he would to this intent have sent
for all his men and slaves from the other Factories.

Further he says, that no person whatsoever gave him any order, instruction,
or charge for the said business, but only he was the first inventer and
author of this enterprise and plot, for the reasons aforesaid.

Item he confesses, That on New-yeares day last he consulted with the
Merchants, and those of his Family concerning the taking of the Castle, and
made them all swear upon the Bible to be faithful and secret.

Further he confesses, that he has not given any order to any person
whatsoever, to confer with those of Lo^ho^, Hitto, or Cambello, concerning this
matter. So far was he from promising them any powder, Ordnance, Bullets or
Muskets, or any other Ammunition of war, at the arrival of the Ships. Signed
Gabriell Towerson.

The Confesson of Emanuel Tompson English Merchant in Amboyna, borne in
Hamburrough, of the age of 50. years.
He confesses, That on New-yeares day last past, a day after or before, he,
with other English Merchants was sent for to the chamber of Captain Towerson,
and that the said Captain Towerson then said unto them, that he had a
business to impart unto them, but first they must take their oaths upon the
Bible to be faithful and secret to him; the which they all did.

Afterward Captain Towerson told them in what manner the English were
esteemed in that Country, and that every where they must be the lowest, and
that they could not receive justice in any kind, and that he had found a way
to be revenged thereof, and that he could be Master of the Castle if they would
assist him. Unto the which they all agreed.

Item the said Captain Towerson said, that those of Lo^ho^ would come with
certain Curicorrowes to assist him.

Item he says, that eight days after the conference, Captain Towerson told
him, that he had sent M. Johnson and M. Price forth to treat, and get the
Iaponian Soldiers to consent to the same.

Further he confesses, that after the said conference, he had sundry times
asked Captain Towerson how he proceeded in the business, but he was still
answered, that he should content himself, and leave the business to those that
were wiser then himself; and that he should take heed, least by his
drunkenness the business should be discovered. Signed Emanuell Tompson.

The Confession of John Wetherall English Merchant, dwelling at Cambello, borne
at Glaston in the County of Rutland, aged 31. years.
Confesses, That he was at the conference with others on New-yeares day, and
took his oath as others did on the Bible, to be faithful and secret.

That Captain Towerson after he had told them, how that the English had
endured a great deal of wrong by the Hollanders; and that he with the aid of
the Iaponian Soldiers and with the Blacks* knew a way how to get the Castle,
if they would all aid him: they presently promised to do it.

This exploit should have been put in execution when their ships should have
arrived.

Item, He confesses that the next day they were again assembled, to animate
and encourage one another in the advancement of their design. Signed John
Wetherall.

The Confession of John Paul Assistant to the English at Cambello, borne in
Bristoll, aged 31. years.
Says, that he has not been near the Castle of Amboyna this five months,
and that he knows not any thing therein.

The Confession of Thomas Sharke, borne at Colchester, aged 36. years.
Says, That he has not been in Amboyna this six months, and that he
knows nothing.

Augustine Peers Marinho Captain of the Slaves, aged 36. years, borne in
Bengala.
Confesses, That two months since, he was asked by a Iaponeze called Hytieso
in the name of Captain Towerson if he would together with the Iaponezes
assist the English in the taking of the Castle the which he consented to. Thus
confessed in the Castle of Amboyna, the 3. of March 1623.

The Worshipful Harman Van Speult Councellor in the Indies, Governor in
Amboyna, etc. having seen and understood the conformable confessions of diverse
persons and Nations, being kept in diverse places, and examined at diverse times;
does not think any ways necessary by reason of the enormitie of the offense,
that the cause could, nor ought not to suffer any reference: because at the
present they were charged with more then 40. Prisoners, and they did not know
what enemies might be besides, either within or without. Yet notwithstanding,
for the abundant satisfaction of the Honorable English Company and Nation, it
was thought sit to be debated by Council, whether the cause could suffer any
referring, or no.

Whereupon by a general voice it was judged and resolved, that the fact and
crime should be punished in the place where it was conceived and concluded, for
example to others: and the rather because at the present the Tarnatans and
Mores hereabouts contrary to their custom, did a while since (in likelihood by
the instigation of the English) begin to rebel, and had slain and killed
certain of the Dutch Nation, and servants of the Company. Therefore his
Worship caused the Fiscall Brune for to form such demand and conclusion
against the said Prisoners, as in reason he should think fitting. Thus done,
and resolved the 8 of March 1623. Subscribed.

Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
Vischer, John Van Leeumen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Whereas by the preceedent Acts and confessions it appears sufficiently, that
Gabriell Towerson Agent for the Honorable English Company in Amboyna, with
his creatures and Confederates aforesaid, has committed treason, and sought
the overthrow of the State, of the privileged Company of the Low Countries in
Amboyna; wherein depends the greatest part of the prosperity of the said
Company: and by a horrible murder and efusion of blood, wholly to ruinate the
same; Therefore the Advocate Fiscall Isaac Brune, nomine officij, forming his
Demand, concludes, that the said Gabriell Towerson with all the other
Delinquents, as well English as Iaponezes, above named (except Ephraim John
Paul Assistant to the English, Thomas Sharke, and John Sadler) should be
carried to the place accustomed for execution of the Law and Justice, and that
they should there be beheaded, and put to death with the confiscation of all
their goods. And that the said Towerson after his death should be cut in four
quarters, and his head should be set up upon the Gate upon a pole, and
every-quarter should be fixed upon a Gibbet. Done in the Castle of Amboyna the
8. of March, 1623. And it was signed Isaac de Brune Advocate Fiscall.

The Worshipful Harman Van Speult, Councellor of the Indies, Governor of
Amboyna, etc. with the ordinary Council of his Worship, as also those in the
ships named the Rotterdam, Amsterdam, the Unicorn, Edam, and the Little-Hope,
having heard the demand and conclusion of the Advocate Fiscall de Brune, made
against the said Delinquents, after they had called upon the name of God, that
he would be pleased to assist them in their course during this heavy
assembly, and to inspire into them nothing but equity and justice, after
mature consideration in all that was necessary. To you the Delinquents as well
English, as Iaponezes; to wit, Captain Gabriell Towerson, Samuel Coulson,
Emanuell Tompson, Timothy Johnson, William Grigs, John Clarke Abell Price,
Robert Brown, John Wetherall, John Fardo, Augustine Peers Marinho. The Slaves,
Hytieso, Sidney Migiell, Pedro Conge, Thome Corea, Tsiosa, Quiandao, Sinsa,
Tsavienda, and Zancheo. Declare that you having committed treason, having
conceived and complotted together a horrible massacre and treason, to be
Masters of the Castle, and so have compassed not only to overthrow and ruinate
the State of the East India Company in the united Provinces of the
Low Countries, which the conservation of this place much concerns: but also
to ruinate the United Low Countries themselves, and their prosperities; partly
consisting in Navigation and traffic to the Indies, which by this means
would have been undermined and weakened. In pursuit whereof, and in the name,
and in the quality of Governor of the high and mighty Lords the States,
General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, have condemned the said
Delinquents, as by these presents we condemn them, to be carried to the place
where Law and Justice is ordinarily executed, and there to be punished with the
sword in such sort as death may ensue: with the confiscation according to the
Law of their goods proper and in particular. And the heads of Gabriell
Towerson, Sidney Migiell, Hytieso, and Pedro Conge, for example unto others
shall be set upon poles.

Thus pronounced in the Castle of Amboyna, the ninth day of March, one thousand
six hundred twenty three. And it was subscribed Harman Van Speult, Laurence de
Marschalck* Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John
Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob
Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van Zanten, Harman Crayevanger,
Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Whereas the said Governor Van Speult for the service of the honorable
English Company, has thought good to spare two of the said English Merchants
Pro tempore, for the grace and pardon of the Lord Governor General Peter de
Carpentier, to the end that with other Deputies of his Worship they might look
to the goods of the said honorable English Company. His Worship for certain
reasons has chosen for one of them John Beomont, English Merchant in the
Factorie of Lohoe. And ordains that M. Collins, M. Thomson, and M. Coulson
should draw lots between them three, which of them should enjoy the like
favor. Declaring notwithstanding that their proper goods shall be
perticularly confiscated according as the others. And his Worship pardoned
Ephraim John Paul, Thomas Sharke, and John Sadler, as having little and no
knowledge of the said plot. Done and resolved the 8. of March 1623.

Master Coulson, Thomson, and Collins, being brought in a place together, and
the Lots being presented to them, after a short prayer which every one made,
they drew: first M. Thomson, next M. Collins, and last M. Coulson: the which
being opened, it fell to M. Collins to be saved. Done in the Castle of Amboyna
the day aforesaid. Subscribed.

Harman Van Speult Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogell, John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


Whereas Augustine Peers Marinho of the Slaves, had knowledge of the treason
and conspiracy aforesaid, and being that he promised his aid, it is concluded
of him, as is aforesaid: and that the wife of Augustine Peers which has been
a Slave of the honorable Dutch East* India Company, who was given to the said
Augustine in hope of his good carriage, for the present, she shall return to
her ancient Masters of the said Company, until such time that she shall be
otherwise disposed of by the Governor. Done in the Council of Amboyna the 9.
of March 1623. And was subscribed.

Harman Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson
Vischer, John Van Leeuwen, John Iscobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson
Vogell. John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Ianson Van
Zanten, Harman Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.


We here vnder-named, do declare for a truth in stead of an oath, that
Gabriell Towerson after he was examined concerning the said plot, and the
Governor Van Speult condoling with him for that which is aforesaid, asking him
if that was the recompense of his former friendship showed to the said
Towerson? The said Towerson with a deep sigh answered him and said, alas! if
it were to begin again, it should never be done.

Done the 9. of March, in the Castle of Amboyna. Subscribed. Harman Van Speult,
Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, Harman Crayevanger, Peter Van
Zanten, Leonard Clocq.


The 9. of March 1623. in the Castle of Amboyna it was resolved; That the
English Prisoners that were for the present reserved to the pardon of the Lord
General de Carpentier, as M. Beomont, and M. Collins, as likewise those that
had none or little knowledge in the said intended Treason, should be again
remitted to the English lodgings, with others appointed by the Governor Van
Speult, to keep and look to the goods of their Company, until the arrival
of some English Ship, for to dispose thereof, as should be found most
necessary and profitable for the said Company.

Thus done in the Castle of Amboyna the day above written. Subscribed. Harman
Van Speult, Laurence de Marschalck, Clement Kersseboom, John Johnson Vischer,
John Van Leeuwen, John Iacobson Wincoop, Leonard Clocq, Martin Johnson Vogell;
John Ioosten, Jacob Cooper, John Van Nieupoort, Peter Iansen Van Zantem, Harman
Crayevanger, Rowland Tailler, Vincent Corthals Secretary.

Under was written, collationed with the Original, and found to agree with the
same in substance.

Done the 29. of March, 1623. in the Castle of Amboyna. Subscribed. Frederick
Houtman, Martin Souck, John Iacobson Wincoop, Garrit Frederick, Delbit
Vesterman, Laurence de Marschalck, John Van Leeuwen, Leonard Clocq, Isaac
Migielson Bogace, Peter Iansen Van Zanten.



We whose names are here underwritten, being servants unto the honorable
English Company in the East Indies, having been required by the Worshipful
Harman Van Speult Governor of Amboyna, to examine the process of Captain
Towerson and his Accomplices, being written in Dutch and English. We have heard
and read the said Process in two Languages, and according to our judgments,
and as we can comprehend it, the substance of both the translations agree in
substance.

Thus done in the Castle of Amboyna the 23. of May 1623. Stil^ Angliae. And is
subscribed by those whose names hereafter follow. To wit; Richard Welding. John
Cartwright, Henry Gill, John Van Nieupoort, Rowland Hollers, George Williams.

Collation being made of this Translation with the Authentic Copy sent from
the Indies, and subscribed as aforesaid, is found to agree therewith. The 12.
of August 1624.

By me the Secretary of the States General, of the United Provinces.

I. Van Goch.



FINIS.
A REPLY TO THE REMONSTRANCE of the Bewinthebbers or Directors of the
Netherlands East India Company lately exhibited to the Lords States General,
in justification of the proceedings of their Officers at AMBOYNA, against the
English there.
THe Directors of the Netherlands East India Company, finding it needful to
defend their Officers at Amboyna by this Remonstrance, refer themselves in
the first place unto a former deduction which they had exhibited unto the Lords
States in July last: Wherein they profess still to insist. And considering
(say they) the infallible Indicia that preceded the discovery of this
conspiracy, and the just and Legal proceedings used against the Accomplices,
appearing by the iuditiall acts signed as well by the parties examined, as by
the Governor and Council of Amboyna, who are a College or Court of Judges
admitted and sworn; against which no proof, much less any vain and
frivolous suspicions ought to be admitted, they therefore conceived (until
they see the contrary) that the Consperators (as they call them) were lawfully,
and rightly apprehended, the fact well proved, according to the Law and
Custom of the Low Countries, and consequently that the punishment was lawfully
inflicted, with moderation of the rigor of Justice and with clemency.

This deduction of the month of July here mentioned, has not been yet
imparted to the English East India Company. Otherwise they would have examined
the same, as they did the Relation printed in the Scheme of a letter Missive.
Which yet they verily believe to be the very same in effect, and compiled by
the same pen; for that it appears by comparing of the printed Pamphlet, with
the Acts of this Process at Amboyna, here mentioned (copy whereof was
communicated to the said English Company) that the body of the said Pamphelet,
(the preamble excepted) was wholly taken out of the same acts; only with some
sophistication, of the act touching Master Towersons pretended voluntary
confession, noted in the Answer to the same Pamphlet. Wherefore although it may
be supposed that this deduction here referred unto, is already sufficiently
answered in the said answer to the Dutch Relation; yet because in this very
recital of the Directors, there are certain general heads, either
recapitulated out of that deduction, or laid for new grounds of the
justification of the Dutch proceedings; it will not be amiss to examine them
as they lie.

And first for the infallible Indicia pretended to have preceaded the
discovery; it is showed in the answer to the Pamphlet, that the Indicia to
torture the first Iapon (which was the beginning of the whole Process) were
insufficient in law: the behavior that this Iapon used, and upon which he was
apprehended, being none other, then that which is and may be used by any
Soldier in the place where he serves, without blame or suspicion. For other
Indicia, there was not the least; neither of provisions of the English for such
an exployte, nor of Letters to or from any Complice, nor of suspicious
conferences, messages, or intelligencies, nor of flight or close keeping of the
parties; nor any other agreeing with the rules or examples given by the Law, or
the Authors commenting thereupon. But being destitute of these and the like
lawful Indicia, the Dutch Officers were feign to fetch their Indicia out of
the Rack, and to make the confession of one tortured person Indicium to
torture another, contrary to the very express direction of the Law. Some
confessions indeed, were without actual torture of the persons themselves: but
even such had heard the cries and seen the bodies of others tortured and
martyred before them; which fear of the Torture is by the Law equalled to the
torture it self, as has been showed in the said answer.

The second general ground here laid, is the juditiall acts of the College of
Judges at Amboyna, showing their just and legal proceedings. The Acts indeed
of any Court of Justice being orderly kept, yield a very sufficient proof in
the point of fact in Court: that is, they prove that such and such
examinations, confessions, proofs, and evidences were taken and made; and such
judgment thereupon given as is therein entered. But for the point of Justice,
that must be judged by the comparing of the proofs with the sentence grounded
upon them. Now as touching the orderly keeping of these Acts imparted to the
English East India Company as aforesaid: the same are neither agreeable to the
forms of other Courts, nor uniform in themselves. For the point of
conformity to other Courts, it is not here meant to require, that the Acts of
the Council of Amboyna should in every point agree with the forms of every
Court in the Low Countries; the several Courts whereof have their several
forms and style, and some differences in points not substantial. But some
general Requisites of form there be, which are observed in all Courts; yet
omitted in these Acts of Amboyna. As first the date of every days passages
ought to be prefixed or annexed unto them; which is not observed in these said
Acts. But in these Acts the examination of all the English, being 18 several
prisoners, goes under the date of the 25. of February: although the
confessions are so many and so large, as could not possibly be taken in one
day: yea three of the same prisoners, to wit, Powle, Wether all, and Ladbrooke
were but apprehended first upon the 26. of February, and that at Cambello the
outmost factory in Seran, and arrived not at Amboyna (where these examinations
were taken) until the second of March stilo nouo. So that they could not be
examined at Amboyna the 25. of February as the Acts import. Next, it is a
solennitie in all Courts, to note in the Acts, the day of the examination of
the Prisoner upon the Torture, or in the place of the Torture; and then the act
of his subscription to his confession upon another day. For these two may not
be done upon the same day by the Law: but the confession must be iterated and
confirmed by the Prisoner being free of bonds and irons, at least a day after
the sense or sight of the torture: else it is not held for good, and concluding
against the party that confessed it. But in all these Acts of Amboyna, there
is but one date and one Act for both these: contrary to the Law it self, and
the Custom and form of all Courts. Thirdly, the Acts ought to specify
whether the Prisoner confesses upon Torture or without. But these Acts do not
so: but only in the general; in the beginning of the Acts of the 26. of
February, it is entered, that some confessed before Torture, others with little
Torture as follows, etc. Whereby it appears not, who was tortured and who
not; nor what was confessed with, and what without torture. Fourthly, the Acts
ought to specify what finally becomes of every prisoner; but in these Acts
there is no entry made what became of Sherrocke, Webber, and two of the Iapons,
to wit, Soysimo and Sacoube; these being by the Acts neither condemned, nor
absolved, nor repriued; and yet all four are de facto dismissed and set at
liberty.

As for the point of Uniformity in the Acts themselves, Collins and Beamount
are disposed of by special Act; yet Sherrock, Webber, and the two Iapons (all
in the same case) are discharged, as before, without any Act for it. Yea there
is an Act entered for disposing of the Portugalls wife, though she were neither
accused nor examined: as if she had been a party to the Process, rather
then Sherrock, Webber, and these two Iapons, against all whom the Fiscall
craved judgment. Further, some of the Examinations have the Governor and his
Councels names subscribed to them, and some not: some of the confessions have
the prisoners names subscribed and some not; with diverse other defects and
disconformities, which easily and plainly discover that they are not allowable
for orderly and authentical Acts of a Court of Justice.

Thus has been showed what credit may be given to these Acts in the point of
fact therein recorded. Now for the point of Justice, appearing by comparing the
proofs against the prisoners with the sentence, it is in the first place to be
noted, that there is no proof nor evidence of any thing entered in all the said
Acts, no not so much as a witness named, much less deposed, of the least
Indicium against the prisoners, or any of them; but only the mere confessions
of the prisoners themselves, drawn from them by the pain or just fear of
torture. Which mere confession of the parties, without other Indiciu^ or
proof, is no sufficient ground to condemn any by the Law of the Low Countries.

Secondly, it is a Requisite of their Law, that the prisoners subscribe their
confessions being free of bonds and irons. Now neither is there any mention in
all the Acts of any such free confession, and all our people that escaped are
ready to confirm upon their oaths, that from the first apprehension until
the hour of going to the execution, there was no intermission of the fetters.

Thirdly, the same confessions are full of contrarieties: as one while that the
plott should be executed when some English ship or ships should be there
arrived, the people whereof should assist in the exployt: another while, that
when the Castle was taken, then Master Towerson would first send to Iaccatra
for assistance. Likewise, one while that it should be attempted when the Dutch
Governor was abroad upon some enterprise: another while that the Governor
himself should be killed in the Castle. Further, one while that all the Iapons
were won to the plotte before Master Towerson opened it to the English, and
consulted with them; another while, that he sent out some of the English eight
days after that consultation, then to win the Iapons. Also one while that
the Iapons had consulted diverse times with Master Towerson himself in the
English house; another while that they never treated with Master Towerson
himself, but with others in his name; with other like contradictions,
differences, and incertainties. Further, the place, persons and time were
specified to Abel Price in his examination, contrary to the Law. In the last
place the thing confessed to be plotted, was not only impossible to be
achieved by such means and manner of execution as was confessed: but as
impossible also to come into the imagination of any man in his wits: as is
already sufficiently showed in the answer to the Dutch Relation. By which
premises appears, that as well through defect of other proof, besides the
mere confessions of the prisoners, and that in Irons; as in respect of the
incertaintie, inconstancy, and contrariety of the same confessions, the
specification and leading examinations, together with the impossibility of the
truth of the thing confessed, there is in these Acts no lawful ground for the
sentence of condemnation.

The third general ground that is laid in this Remonstrance is, that the Acts
were signed by the prisoners themselves, and by the Council of Amboyna, which
is a Court or College of Judges admitted and sworn: and therefore no proofs,
much less any vain and frivolous suspicions may be admitted to the contrary.

As for the subscription of the Prisoners to their confessions; of what value
that is without other Indicia and proofs has been already declared. Now that
no proofs may be admitted against sworn Judges, is a strange Maxim: which
being granted must needs infer either that such Judges cannot err and judge
unjustly; or else that how ever they carry themselves, their doings must not be
examined, much less punished. So that then the Law has in vain provided
punishment for a Judge in case of wrong imprisonment, causlesse unorderly
torture, and of unjust absoluing or condemning, and the like; for which there
are so many and so diligent provisions. It may be thought indeed, that under
this confidence this whole Process was begun and followed; as the safest and
fairest way to be ridd of the English, without such reckoning as was formerly
made for the courses of open hostility. But if this way go for current,
though toward a foreign Nation: how comes it that by the Law and custom of
Nations, so many Reprizalles and wars have been made for injustice done by
the Judges of one Nation to the people of another, when none other redress
could be obtained, yea and many times in such foul causes as this, without any
demand of redress?

These grounds aforesaid, being thus laid, this Remonstrance England as in the
Low Countries against the Dutch cause of Amboyna: the first, a brief
Collection of the effect of certain Letters written by the English Factors at
Iaccatra, dated the 19. of June 1623. The second, a more ample Writing,
entitled, A true Relation of the cruel and barbarous Tortures and Execution
of the English at Amboyna by the Dutch there. The former of these this
Remonstrance charge with passion and great vehemence; because it does by way
of prejudice, enstile the Process of Amboyna, an unjust and barbarous murder:
and aggrauateth the fashion and manner of the Tortures. So it vouchsafes this
none other answer; but this note of passion; and that it falsely names the
Iapons executed to be the servants of the English; Whereas in truth they were
the servants of the Dutch at Amboyna. What or whose this Discourse thus
excepted against and thus answered is; the English Company knows not. Yet they
believe not that any of the English party, would (except it were by a slip of
the pen) call these Iapons, servants of the English: the same being contrary
to all the reports and aduertisements that came from Amboyna and Iaccatra; it
is likewise to be presumed, that if in that Writing there had been any thing
else, which they could have answered, they would not have dismissed it as they
do. For, as for the terming the execution, An unjust and barbarous murder;
that were no more cause to reject the Discourse without further answer; then
the like style given it in the very title of the second and larger Writing,
which nevertheless has obtained a more particular answer.

Having given the first Writing this quick dispatch, Remonstrance proceeds
to the answer of the Relation set out by the English East India Company; and
in the first place charge it with an impertinent description (in the very
introduction) of the Castle of Amboyna, and the Dutch Garrisons and Forces
there; to the end (says this Remonstrance) to show that there was no
likelihood nor probability that the English there would undertake the surprise
of the Castle; being a thing impossible to be done: as if (says the
Remonstrance) the want of understanding in the Conspirators, and the foolish
ground of their project (all other accusations ceasing) should have excused
them from punishment: the contrary whereof is every where observed.

Here in the very first step of the Answer, the end of the English Company
in setting out the impossibility of the fact, is either mistaken or traduced.
For if the conspiracy had been sufficiently proved according to the direction
even of the Laws by which the Dutch are governed; then the probability or
possibility of the fact had never been alleged. For in such case it is true,
that the foolishness of the plott excuses no man. But when there is no other
proof or evidence, but the mere confession of the prisoner, (which is the
present case) then the very text of the Law of treason, enioyneth the Judge to
consider the person of the prisoner ( which is the present case) then the very
text of the Law of Treason, enioyneth the Judge to consider the person of the
prisoner; whether he be able to execute such a thing as he is accused of,
whether he ever practiced the like before; what he meant; and whether he were
in his wits of no; and such like; For without these considerations the slippery
confession of the tongue ought not to be the ground of the punishment. This is
their Law, according to which if they had proceeded, the English had never
needed to allege these impossibilities; which the Judges themselves ought to
have considered. But not having done it, they have made themselves guilty of
unjust Judgment; which to prove, the impossibility of the fact is both
pertinent and necessary.

But the better to enforce the former answer, the Remonstrance

All this is but a Rhetorical flourish, and being examined, will vanish into
the air as a mere sound. For first for the notoriousnesse of the pretended
conspiracy; although now ex post facto, they cry it out for notorious; yet at
the time when the notorietie should have been considered, which was before the
apprehension, torturing, and execution of our people; there was not the least
breath of such a fame. It is now too late to allege a notorietie, that
themselves have made who allege it. As for the proofs here mentioned; Why
have they not at any time specified them? If there be none other proofs
besides the mere confessions (as other the Acts do not so much as mention)
why then are proofs and confessions here distinctly acumulated; as if there
were any other proofs besides the said confessions? As for the conscience and
testimony of those that managed the Process, being a public and sworn
College of Judges; it is not at all to be reckoned of; when it appears that
they have not proceeded according to the Law. And if this plea might be
admitted, no Judge should ever be found guilty of Injustice. Further, if the
very quality of the Judges be considered, it will rather hurt then help them:
there were none amongst them that had any ordinary knowledge in the Law,
whereby they undertake to judge causes: besides their young years and wicked
lives: which if it were pertinent to the cause in question, might be set forth
by many special instances. But if they were never so learned, experienced, or
well famed; yet that would not avail when they have proceeded against the
prescript of their own Law (to say nothing here of the treaty) as they are
sufficiently proved to have done.

But this Remonstrance not trusting to this Answer, in slighting the
improbability and impossibility of the fact, as not worth the considering; yet
for all that, in the next place labors and sweateth to make the fact seem
probable and possible, the contrary whereof in us that hold the contrary part,
it rejects as impertinent; Is it impertinent for us to show the
improbabilitie and impossibility of the fact; and yet pertinent for them to
show the contrary probability and possibility? But let us see and consider
their presumptions. First (they say) they have already proved, that the English
for a diuersion of the Dutch Forces in the Castle, had invited and induced all
the Ternatans, Seranians, and neighboring Indians to rebel, and do violence
to the Dutch, that when the Dutch Governor should have drawn the maine of his
Forces of men and shipping that way, then the English might with ease take the
Castle so emptied and denuded of her Forces.

How vain this point is, is already manifested in the Answer to the Dutch
Relation. And as for the proofs here mentioned; there is in all the Acts not
so much as any offer made of any proof of this point.

But it is worthy again to be noted, that here the device and Scene is
changed. For where in the Dutch Relation it is said, (though no where proved)
that the Ternatans of Loho should have come with their Curricurryes to assist
Master Towerson at Amboyna, and that the Dutch Governor must have been
killed there in the Castle by the Iapons; now he must be gone with all his
Forces out of the Island to tame those Ternatans and the rest of the Seranians
and neighboring Indians: that the English might surprise the Castle in their
absence. As for the ships of the Dutch, which now also must have been
absent: it is well known, that the service here pretended would neither need,
nor could have use of their great ships, but only of Currycurries and small
Vessels, which also the Dutch after used, leaving their great shipping in the
road by the Castle.

The strength of the Dutch thus extenuated, in the Remonstrance pursuing the
argument of possibility, amplifieth the Forces of the English. And first it
delivers, that the English had a great number of slaves in their Factories,
which great number is already truly confessed in the answer to the Dutch
Relation, to be just six and all boys. Next it is added, that they would also
have stayed their actual attempt of the Castle, until some English ships
were arrived there; which point is also at large refuted in the said Answer.
Thirdly, here is alleged, that Master Towerson had given charge unto his
other English, to have daily labored and won by underhand practice, other
subjects of the Dutch, thereby to augment their own party, and to weaken the
strength of the Dutch. Of which point, as there was no probability; so in all
the Acts, there is no shadow of proof thereof made, or so much as endeavored:
how ever now the desperate cause requires the help of so gross a fiction.
Fourthly (which is vaunted for the principal argument) it is here seriously
observed; that the Castle should have been surprised by treason and not by
siege; and so like enough the English (though but few) might by this means do
wonders. A very poor note; as if the English Relation had cited
impossibilities by way of siege, and not as well by way of treachery. But
besides that, this argument beggeth the maine question; to wit, that there was
indeed such a treason: was there ever any such treason or stratagem practiced
in any Country, to surprise a Castle by a small force; without a competency of
seconds to make good and hold that which was so entered and possessed? Yet this
argument is further Iapons had to betray the Castle; themselves serving as
Soldiers therein; but also by the extraordinary valor ane hardiness of that
Nation, set forth by two several Apochriphal Legends of strange feats of other
Iapons; without specifying of the number of them that performed these wonders,
but leaving a blanke to help the tale at their pleasure. But let it be granted
that the Iapons are all Giants, and had opportunity being trusted: yet is it
likely, that the Dutch Governor in his expedition here supposed against the
Rebels of Seran and the other Indians, would have left such Worthies idle in
their Castle at home, and not have taken them with them, according to their
Custom? Would they have withdrawn their Dutch, and trusted such strangers
with their Castle, being yet so suspicious of them, that they would torture
them for asking an ordinary harmless question? O miserable presumptions! And
yet here we have all the particulars that are alleged, or could be invented.

In the next place, the Remonstrants return to the English Relation: finding
themselves grieved, that their Council of Amboyna is charged to have forged
this crime against the English, thereby to be ridd of their company, and so to
enjoy the trade there alone. For their purgation wherein, here are diverse
arguments alleged. As first, that if they had not liked their company there,
it had been easier and fairer to have kept them out, when they were out, then
to have so cast them out after their admission of them by the Treaty, Ann.
1619. And God forbid (says the Remonstrance,) that any should use such wicked
and bloody means for so poor an end, as only to drive the English out of
Amboyna.

It is true ordinarily; Turpius ^ijcitur etc. It is more discurtesie to turn
out a guest, then at first to deny him entertainment. But sometimes there may
be such a necessity, as that a man must needs, for avoiding of a greater
inconvenience, entertain the guest, whom he is as glad to be ridd of, as he
was unwilling to receive him. And sometimes a man entertaineth a guest in hope
of some benefit to be made by him; whereof afterward being frustrate, he will
gladly be quit of his guest as soon as he finds himself defeated of his
hoped ends. Both these considerations have had their place in this entertaining
of the English by the Dutch at Amboyna and other places. For the former, all
that are acquainted with the occasion, and the passages of the Treaty of the
year 1619. know very well, that there was then none other or better way or
mean for the Hollanders East India Company to give satisfaction to the Kings
Majesty for the blood of many of his people, and the inualuable damage done
unto the English Company by the said Hollanders unjust taking of their ships
and goods only in respect of their lawful trade into the Islands of the
Moluccoes and Banda; but the accommodation of the whole matter, by admitting of
the English East India Company into the participation of the trade in those
Islands, and this of Amboyna. Which being yielded unto with great difficulty;
yet the said Dutch with might and maine reserved the Forts which they were then
possessed of, in their own hands: thereby still retaining the power and
opportunity to master the English, and weary them of their lodging at their
pleasure. In the next place, it seems by their after-course that having so
assured themselves of the Forts and Mastring power, they hoped to make benefit
by this partnership; by the ordering of their Accounts in such manner, as that
the English should pay their part of the charge as well of the Garrisons as of
their new buildings, and of the wars which they undertook for enlarging the
Duchess Dominion, and all this in ready money, whilst the Dutch furnished
their own share in commodities, and at what prizes they list. Now when the
Dutch in the Indies saw, that the English there would not suffer themselves to
be thus bridled and sadled; but made their protests and complaints against this
dealing: they sought means to be quit of them. And finding that the blunt way
of fact would not be well taken, but give a new offense to the King,
(especially after the Treaty to the contrary) they devise this new mean to
thrust out their unwelcome guests, with less bloodshed then they before had
kept them out with, and with less fear of accompting for the same, being done
under the fair color of Justice; which point being clearly enough touched in
the very Introduction of the English Relation, this Remonstrance professing an
answer to the whole, yet passes over this with a dry foot, and deep
silence: yea, it minceth the very matter whereof it seems to take notice,
making the charge against them to be only the driving of the English out of
Amboyna, where the English Relation charge them to have contrived and
executed this bloody business, with intention to drive them (the English) out
of the Moluccoes and Banda also, as well as out of Amboyna. Which end and drift
of the work how ever it is slighted hereby the Remonstrants, yet it appears
of what value it is in their secret estimation, by that which they have
formerly done to keep the English from the trade of those Islands.

Yet further to clear themselves of this end and design, Netherlands East
India Company here in Europe never gave any Commission to their Officers at
Amboyna, to put such a thing as this in practice, nor could have any benefit
thereby, but rather loss: and the Officers themselves were too honest and wise
to have executed such a Commission: especially since themselves should have no
profit by it, but incur great danger of giving account for the same.

For the point of Commission, the English Company does not charge the Dutch
Company, nor the whole College of Directors, with any such project or
direction. Neither do they think that any one amongst them would by his
private advice incite the Governor of Amboyna to this or the like fact in
particular. But they cannot tell whether some one or few amongst them of
special place and authority; and of like respect with their Officers in the
Indies, may not upon some discontent or dislike of the Treaty and the effects*
thereof, have given advice to the principal Officers of the Dutch in the
Indies, to lay hands and make use of any colorable occasion, to weary the
English of the trade established by the Treaty; and so the Governor of Amboyna
may have fallen upon this particular out of such general grounds of advice.
Which suspicion of the English Company, arises not only from the earnest and
strayned defense and justification which they now observe to be made of this
execrable fact; but also from a passage that fell out here in London
immediately after the Treaty An. 1619. which now this dispute calls to their
remembrance. And here in they report themselves to the memory and conscience
of those of the Dutch directors, that were then employed in the forming of an
explanation of the Articles of the Treaty, entitled; The Order of Execution,
etc. whether one of them appearing highly discontented, for that the English
would not condescend to a proposition of theirs, about the order of selling out
the Spices here in Europe, did not then in a vehement manner threaten the
English (that dealt with them about that point) that they should repent them of
their dissent herein: which the English not understanding by all the disputes,
how it could come to pass in the course of trade, if the treaty were
observed, still persisted in their former resolution. Whereupon the said party
with the rest of the Dutch desired that it might be noted in the Iournall of
the Conference; that they had forewarned them, that there would a great
inconvenience follow by reason of this dissent of the English, which was noted
in the same Iournall accordingly. What this carriage might portend, or what
directio^s might be given in consequence of this discontent, the English
Company leave to be judged by others: having themselves never since in the
course of their sale of the Spices, without observation of the order (then
desired by the Dutch) found any inconvenience but rather advantage; As for the
benefit of the Dutch by driving the English from the trade of the Moluccoes,
Banda, and Amboyna, it may be esteemed (as is before noted) by the courses that
the Dutch formerly took to keep the English out of that trade. And for their
contrary benefit here also pretended by holding the English in the communion of
that trade: It is true, that as long as the English would pay ready money, the
Dutch paying in wares, would bear their share of the charge of Fortifications
and Conquests, whereof the benefit accrued wholly to the Dutch, as long as they
would join with the Dutch to find the Enemy work in one place, while the
Dutch might thereby the easier win for themselves only in another place: so
long the Dutch might easily make benefit of their partnership, and abide their
sharing with them for one third part of that trade. But when the English showed
themselves sensible of this Leonine Society, and protested against it, and
refused to pursue the Action of defense in such a course: Then it was time to
seek out an occasion to be utterly freed from their partnership, now proouing
otherwise then was before hoped. As touching the honesty of their Officers at
Amboyna here alleged, there has been enough said already. And for their
benefit also by thus ridding themselves of the English, who knows not what
benefit may be expected by being an Instrument of so great profit, atchieuing
it by such a conueyance, wherein who ever gives Commission, is by joint guilt
obliged to gratify and promote his instrument even for his own safety?
Besides, their Officers had their own private quarrels against the English
for their daily complaints against their riotous living, and the great expense
thereof, derived in the greatest part upon the English by the arts
aboue-mentioned. Especially the Governor himself had a maine grief, that the
English had often complained to the Council of Defense at Iaccatra, of the
extraordinary and excessive charge of his Table and other expenses: which by
the Iournal of the consultations of the said Council appears to have bin a
matter of much dispute there, and was at last promised by the Dutch party to
be reformed. Another quarrel also the same Governor had against the English
at Amboyna, about a Dutchman that was executed for killing of an Englishman;
Which Dutchman when the Governor could not fairly save (the fact being too
foul and manifest to bear it) he was so offended with the English prosecution
of the matter, that he solemnly vowed, if ever any of the English came within
his compass, such should repent that none of them had interceded for the life
of the said Dutchman. Lastly, it must be remembered, that at the time of this
forged crime, the news of the Match with Spain was very rife and hott at
Amboyna; where with how all the Dutch there were enraged, and what insolent
speeches they used of the Kings Majesty, is well enough known; though thought
unmeet to be here recited.

Having thus labored to clear the final cause of Remonstrants return to
charge the English (that are executed) with other arguments of their pretended
treason. As (say they) if it were not a true treason, why came the Iapon (that
was first apprehended upon the walls) and made such curious inquisition about
the setting of the Watch, and of the Dutch Forces in the Castle? How came it
that being examined, he forthwith spoke so pertinently of this treason? If he
were suborned by the Dutch, why then did they execute him? Why did he accuse
his own Countrymen as well as the English? Why should the Dutch thus use the
Iapons, whom they had no cause otherwise to hate?

The first of these questions is already answered before, to wit, that the
Iapon did nothing herein, but what any Soldier may lawfully, and is wont to
do, without blame or just suspicion. It imports every Soldier to know the
strength of the place where he serves, and the order and course of the
service, as is said in the answer to the Dutch Relation. The second question
would be as easily answered, if it had seemed good to those that kept the Acts,
to have kept faithful Record in them of the Interrogatories ministered to this
Iapon in his tortures. But the English Relation in the Examinations of Collins,
Sherrock, and Beamont, has discovered the Art used in all the rest; to wit,
the leading Interrogatories, or rather Directories, specifying to the prisoner
what he might say to come quitt of the torture: As for the suborning of this
Iapon by the Dutch here mentioned in the third question; The English easily
grant that he was not suborned, but (which is worse) he was tortured to make
him accuse both the English and his own Countrymen) the Iapons; which also
answers the fourth question of this Rhetorical Dialogisme. And for the fifth
and last question, why the Dutch should also practice the Iapons destruction:
it is easily conceived, that else the English should have seemed to have had no
Accomplices, nor hope of assistance of other Nations, which would have made their
crime appear more impossible to be a true charge then now it does; although
(as now it is) it is utterly void of all probability and possibility. And is
it any wonder they would sacrifice the blood of ten Infidells for that end,
for which they spared not ten Christians, and those of that Nation which
mostagreeth with themselves in Religion, and to whom they are of all other
Nations most beholden?

In the next place, the Remonstrance proceeds to English, that the Iapons
being examined three or four days before them, they yet fled not: whereby
they showed their innocence. To the consequence of which argument the
Remonstrance first answers, that the English did this to avoid great
suspicion, being sure enough they could not fly: the Governor had (even to
their knowledge) taken such order to stop all passages, as well of all other
Merchants that then frequented Amboyna as of the English.

This is a mere fiction: for the Curricurries and other Vessels departed as
freely from Amboyna while the Iapons were in examination, as at any time
before. And if the Governor had used never so much circumspection herein, and
the English had known of it, yet how could so many guilty consciences have
contained themselves, and not one of them all have attempted to fly or hide or
disguise himself in all this time? All men know that a guilty conscience
provoke men to attemptescapes above and against all reason. And therefore the
Law ever enquireth of the flight or shrinking of the accused as a special
indicium of their guilt. Why did not the Dutch then in their examinations
question and sift out by what consultation and agreement all the English came
to be of one mind, to show such confidence in this case?

But to make a further and better answer to this argument, the Remonstrance
charge the matter of it with untruth: Saying that the examination of the
Iapons began the 24. of February, and that the next day after, to wit, the 25.
the English were seized; So that here was but one days respite for the English
to shift for themselves.

This impudence is very strange; for, the Acts of Iapons to be the 23. of
February, and the resolution to seize the English to be the 26. which is the
third day after inclusiue. It is well we have a copy of their Acts, (such as
they are) else we see into how many forms this Proteus would turn, to avoid
the true discovery.

After this the Remonstrants with the like modesty English Relation, where it
affirms that the English had not any conversation with the Iapons; the
contrary whereof (say the Remonstrants) appears as well by the confessions of
the English as the Iapons, and particularly by Master Towersons voluntary
confession, made long time after his examination.

What credit the Acts and confessions may deserve, is already showed: and the
very persons themselves therein assigned to this conversation with the Iapons,
had no language to serve them therein. And for Master Towersons voluntary
confession pretended to be made so many days after his examination; besides
the foul play of the Dutch used in alleging it so, already discovered in the
answer of the Dutch Relation (which by this very touch appears to be the
work of the same Pen that wrote this Remonstrance) that pretended voluntary
confession has not one word or mention of the Iapons in it: And yet this
Remonstrance (having thus stoutly proved this point) triumphs over the
English Relation; saying, that these contrarieties and dissimulations show that
the same marvelously strayeth and wandreth from the truth; and that the
contrary thereof in all points may be taken for true.

After this, the Remonstrance comes to the examination of the English
prisoners, set down in our Relation Maerschalcke (whom they have now deposed
in other points) have said something to these; being himself the second person
in the Council, and acquainted with all that passed? Well, since they be
proved here by six Witnesses, let them yet stand for true, until this
promised Counterproofe arrive.

But for the point of torture, the Remonstrance answers in the Interim, that
if the case lawfully require, it is no fault in the Judge to examine upon the
torture: being the Custom in all Europe, and particularly in the Low
Countries. And if any were tortured, that was done upon pregnant and weighty
Indicia, proofs and confessions of others.

This has been sufficiently replied to in the English Answer to the Dutch
Relation, where it is proved, first that the English were not lawfully subject
to the jurisdiction of the Governor of Amboyna, and therefore unlawfully
tortured. Secondly, that the kind of torture used, was not agreeable to the
Law and Custom of the Low Countries: and lastly, that there was no sufficient
Indicium for the torturing of the first Iapon, nor none other proofs or
Indicia against the English, but the forced confessions of the tortured Iapons;
which ground of torture is prohibited by their own Law.

Yet further the Remonstrants fetch an argument out Amboyna. If (say they) they
would have drawn confessions out of the English by tortures; why did not they
torture all the English?

This riddle is plainly unfolded by the same English Relation: where it
appears, that after they had tortured, Johnson, Collins, and Clarke; glad was
that Englishman that could devise any thing to confess, to please the Fiscall,
and avoid the torture. Yea, Sherrock prayed to God to assist him in this
kind. Others asked those that had been formerly examined, what they had
confessed; saying, they would do the like, thereby to shun the cruelty of
the torture. As for those that were acquitted (as having confessed nothing) the
Dutch plot could not reach them. For having laid the consultation of this
pretended conspiracy at Amboyna, where none of these four were upon
New-yeares day; they had no color to torture them, whom their own people that
stood by, knew to be so far absent: And no man imagines that all the Dutch
that were by at the torture, were privy to the intention of the Governor; who
in this case was to carry himself so, as that he must not make the business so
gross, that all that stood by might understand it. It sufficed him that he
caught the chief of the English there, and such a number by whose example all
would afterward abandon the fatal places.

Lastly, the Remonstrance gathers that there was English were pardoned; to
none other end (forsooth) but to give testimony of their whole proceedings.

This indeed is a point wherein the Dutch used the quintessence of their skill:
so to handle the matter as that they would seem to mix clemency with Justice;
to make their Process to pass the easier and fayrer, both among their own
people there, and after when it should come into Europe. But he that will but a
little consider what the Dutch Governors end and aim was, will find, that as
he and the Fiscall labored in all the Process to reach Captain Towerson the
chief of the English there; never satisfying themselves with any confession
that made not him guilty (as appears in the English Relation:) so when they
had caught him, and so many other of the chief of the English there, it was a
small matter for them to spare a few of the meaner sort: being assured that the
execution of the rest, would be a sufficient warning for all other Englishmen
ever after to keep their distance far enough from that place. And this took
so right (according to the intention) that all the English as well at the
Moluccoes and Banda, as the poor remnant at Amboyna forthwith upon the news
of this Tragedy, quitted their Factories in all those Islands: choosing rather
to leave the places and their trade there, then their lives for it. For the
Dutch had spoken loud enough, and plain enough in this action, for all the
English to understand their meaning: who therefore would not stay till the
chief of them also were thus cut off, and the rest dismissed with their life
for a prey, and for an argument of the Dutch Officers clemency. But if these
few English were saved to this end, in the Duchess intention, to give testimony
of all their proceedings, as here is alleged: Why then do not the Dutch
receive and allow of their testimony? For these all with one month accuse the
Dutch to have proceeded by treachery and most execrable injustice in this whole
action: although indeed some of them that were absolved, confess upon oath,
that they conceive the reason and end of the Dutch in sparing them, to have
been in hope that for that favor they would have given testimony on their
part, when this business should come to be examined here in Europe: if yet the
cause should ever come to be reuiewed here; for some of the Dutch at Amboyna
declared plainly, that they made account the Spanish Match would prevent the
accompting for this business.

The next point that the Remonstrants note in the English Water and fire: which
(they say) is finely and prolixly set forth and embelished, to move
compassion, and to inueagle the Reader, to swallow the rest of the errors and
untruths of the Relation. But that, albeit all torture is in it self rough and
harsh; especially seems so to the English, because none is used in England,
but in cases of high treason, yet the torture of Water is the most gentle,
civil, and safe of all other kinds of torture: only causing an oppression
and anxietie of breathing and respiration, but no replenishing and swelling of
the dodie, as the English Relation sets it out, etc. Yea that all that the
said Relation delivers touching these Examinations, is but a bare narration
only without any proof: or at the most is witnessed but by a very few
persons, and those such, as the cause concerns: in which being themselves
once iudicially convicted, they may not now be admitted and allowed as
witnesses against the Judge and his proceedings, against a Court and Council
of fourteen Judges, persons well known to be of worth and virtue; and
against their own confessions legally taken, and confirmed with their own
subscriptions.

For reply to all this: first, for the description of the tortures, which is
here (scoffingly) said to be so labored and adorned, to move compassion, and
make an easy way for untruths; it is remitted to the reader to peruse and
judge it. It will be found as void of this art of painting, as it is of the
untruths which the Remonstrants mention, but specify not, least they should be
cleared, as other pretended untruths are already in this reply. The cause of
the English needed no such helps. The truth of the things delivered in the
whole Relation so shines in the mere Series and circumstances of the fact,
that it disdained those borrowed colors, feathers, and trash, wherewith the
Remonstrants have trimmed up this their answer. But it is a sign of their
penury of matter, that they thus carpe at the style of the English Relation. As
for the gentleness of their torture of Water; that is also left to be judged;
yea even by the words of this Remonstrance, that acknowledges it to be an
Oppression and stopping of the breath: then which what strives more with the
very life of a man, or more forces the noblest and tenderest parts? It is no
marvel that some of their own Adventurers tell these Directors in Print,
that they can cut of another man's ear, with as little feeling as of an old
shoe. But our people that have tasted of this Water-torture of Amboyna, and
have heard those that suffered both there make the comparison, say, that this is
more terrible and insupportable for the time, then the torture of fire: how
ever the wound of the latter rests longer in the flesh. The same men also
tell us, (and that upon their oath) that it is not only a stiffling and
oppression of the breath; but also a replenishing of the body till it be
swollen and stretched, as in Clarks examination is set down: contrary to that,
these Remonstrants here affirm. Yea, but (say they) these witnesses are but a
very few, and the same also parties in this cause, and ought not to be heard
against a College of Judges, honest and substantial men, nor against their
own former confessions. That they are so few, we may thank the Dutch that
left us no more. But all that they have spared us, agree in one unanimous and
constant testimony. Neither can there in this case be any other proof
required. What? Would the Remonstrants have us prove these things by the
testimony of the Dutch that were employed in this Process, and are themselves
guilty of this masqued murder? Should we have brought a Certificate hereof
under the seal of Amboyna, with the Governor and his Councels hands to it?
What other proof is the nature of the cause capeable of, but such as we
bring? And whereas the Remonstrants say here that our witnesses are parties,
and formerly convict in the cause; they seem to forget, that their own Acts
show, that some of them were absolved expressly, others never condemned. As
for the Credit of the College of Judges, so often repeated, it is already
examined in the beginning of this Reply, as also in the answer to the Dutch
Relation.

Finally, for the Declarations and Writings of Master Towerson, Coulson,
Griggs, and others, set down in the English Relation, these Remonstrants seem
to doubt whether any such be extant. And for the strange signs of the storine,
the sudden madness and death of Dunkyn, and the new sickness at Amboyna,
following the execution of the English, which they term pretended miracles;
they say, that the truth can be witnessed by those that were present and about
them at the execution, that no such thing happened. And here they add, that
the English stir heaven and earth to conceal and cover this detestable fact.
But who will suppose (say they) that substantial people, (men of approved
worth and virtue) would show themselves so impious and inhumane to torture and
execute innocent persons? Much less must this be presumed of a Court of Judges
sworn and established.

As for the Writings of Master Towerson, Coulson, Griggs, and others,
mentioned in the English Relation (now doubted of by the Remonstrants) we
report us unto the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council, that have seen
them, and to the friends of the parties that know their several hands; and
lastly, to the same Writings themselves still extant and kept to be showed upon
any occasion. As for the signs related, they are sworn by our men that came
thence, and further to be proved by Letters written, from some that then
served, and (we suppose) do yet serve the Dutch at Amboyna, if they be not
since dead, whereof no news is yet come. But what Witness do the
Remonstrants bring, that those things so set down with their circumstances,
and so the easier examined, were not so? The truth (say they) may be witnessed
by those that were present and about the prisoners at the execution. But who be
those? Why does not Maerschalcke in his desperate oath (anon to be examined)
attest that there was no such matter as the English pretend? Or why shall we
reject our peoples testimony, and believe these Remonstrants without any
witness? But we shall have witnesses hereafter. In the Interim then, let the
thing so already witnessed remain for true, till it be contradicted by more
and better witnesses. As for the English stirring heaven and earth, not to
conceal or cover a detestable fact of their own people (as the Remonstrance
speaks) but to discover a most damned practice of the Dutch, and to procure
Justice upon it, they conceive they are not to be blamed herein: yea that it is
their duty to move heaven and earth against them, that have moved hell
against Innocents.

Now for the honesty and credit of their Governor and Council at Amboyna, a
string often harped upon: although it be evident that there is a great
difference of the stuff between the Judges of Amboyna, and all other Judges
in the parts of Christendom: yet the honesty and credit even of the best
Judges is no sufficient defense for them against such apparent proofs of
Injustice, as are extant in this cause, even in the acts of the Process it
self, as is before declared. For the Judge that in his Process observes not
the order prescribed by the Law, is reputed as a private person. Otherwise
indeed, the Judge is not without proof to be presumed to have done unjustly:
but this will not serve these Judges. Neither is any party accused, to be
presumed guilty, without Indicia or evidence: but every man to be presumed
good until the contrary be proved. Which should have moved those Judges of
Amboyna to have been tender and careful in the Indicijs that were made the
pretexts to torture the first Iapon: and not to torture a poor man for asking
an usual and harmless question, yea, and needful in the place of his
service; as is showed in the answer to the Dutch Relation. Much more ought
they in this respect to have been tender of taking the extorted confessions of
the Iapons, for a sufficient Indicium against Master Towerson; not only in
regard of his quality, as being the Agent and Cape Merchant for the English
there; but also of his innocent and harmless, (yea godly) behavior at
Amboyna, and all his life before. For as he was a man of note, and known to
most men of his quality here in England; so all that knew him (especially that
were well acquainted with him, whereof there is no small number) join and
iumpe in this one opinion and commendations of him, that he was of a most fair
condition and sweet disposition, harmless, and without spleen or gall; and
(in a word) the unlikeliest Englishman that ever went into the East Indies, to
be a plotter or practiser of such a fact, as he was condemned of.

The Remonstrants having thus finished their answer English Relation, affirm
that by their deduction of July, and this answer, they have sufficiently
justified the proceedings of their Officers at Amboyna; nevertheless ex
abundanti they produce further evidence out of an attestation of Signeur
Houtman their late Governor in the Moluccoes. Which because it is afterward
again repeated in several Articles, shall be there with the rest answered.

In the mean time, they appeal to the Lords States English Company, to abate
and let fall their suit, leaving the blame upon the Authors of this abominable
conspiracy (as they call it) and of their own misfortune. Nevertheless, not
daring to go to trial of the maine cause upon these their allegations and
proofs, they pray that there may be no precipitation used, but a fit respite
granted them for the exact enquiry of the truth in the Indies: and that in the
mean time, they may have the protection of the Lords States, and all
misunderstanding and contrary deductions may cease; at least prouisionally. For
put case (say they) that their Officers be truly guilty (as the English
pretend) yet they must be heard before they can be condemned. And in their
opinion (say they) the ground of the Conusance of this cause must come from
Amboyna to Battauia, and thence hither: and time convenient being given, there
will doubtless come daily more and more clear proofs and light in the cause.
As for themselves, they at last plainly confess, that they cannot answer the
objections and circumstances alleged and proposed; but that this must and can
be done by them only, whom the cause touches and concerns: to wit, their
Officers at Amboyn^,

Here they renounce all the defense and justification which they have already
made; as impertinent and insufficient. They might have done well then to have
spared all this labor, and at first to have left the cause to them whom it
concerns, as the English Company by their Letters requested them. As for
precipitation in the cause, the English Company require none. But because the
Acts of the Council at Amboyna themselves contain all that can be legally
pleaded in justification of the Officers, (for, if in them there be no just
ground of the condemnation and execution of the English, all superuenient
proofs come too late to excuse the Judges, even by their own Laws) therefore
the English Company presume and maintain, that there is already ground
sufficient, out of the same Acts, and out of the Treaty, whereof this Process
is a plain breach, for the Lords States general by an Act of State publicly
to declare the Nullity and Injustice of the Process. But for the judicial
proceedings against the particular persons that have committed this vnparareld
Injustice: there may be such order and course taken, as his Majesty and the
Lords States shall find the nature of the cause to require. Wherein also the
greatest care and expedition that can be used for the apprehension of the
parties, will be no precipitation; considering the manifest proofs of their
Injustice, appearing in their own Acts, as is before declared.

Having finished their prayer to the Lords States Dilation and respite in the
cause: yet as it were repenting them of their former rear and declination of a
present trial they come on a fresh with new proofs, which they affirm to be
so strong and vigorous, that they are of power, more then sufficiently to give
their Officers an entire discharge, and to confound their Adversaries: and that
without help of the points before alleged. And to make good these great
words, they produce eleven several Articles taken by deposition of Laurence
Maerschalck their late Cape Merchant at Amboyna, and now returned into Holland,
and sworn to the same Articles before the Senate of Delfe the 4. of November
last stilo nouo; whose name in this Remonstrance they conceal. Next they
annexe the report and deposition of Signeur Houtman their late Governor at the
Moluccoes, before mentioned. And in the last place, they repeat some points
already by them alleged in this Remonstrance, and so shut up their whole Work.

For the testimony of Maerschalck, it is to be considered in the general; that
he is a party, being the second man of the Council of Amboyna: and therefore
what is before said against the whole Council, falls upon him in his
particular with more enforcement. Nevertheless, this protestation against his
incompetency to be a Witness in this cause being thus premised; we will
peruse and examine the particulars of his Attestation: yet with this leave, a
little to inuert the order of the Articles, (but without prejudice of the
substance of them) thereby to take all the matter of one nature together, to
avoid prolixitie and needless repetition of the same thing in diverse parts of
the answer.

The first, second, and third Articles affirm, that as well the Iapons as the
English, not only signed their several confessions with every of their hands
respectively, but jointly and severally confirmed and persisted in the same,
even out of the fetters and irons, at several sessions of the Council; yea
the English three or four several times, without retracting or reuoking or
changing of anything: albeit the Governor seriously admonished them to alter
or revoke any thing which they had falsely confessed through pain or fear etc.
But that all the English shrinking up their shoulders confirmed all they had
confessed to be true, and craved mercy and not Justice.

These impudent fictions are answered by that which is already noted concerning
the Requisites and Solennities of the Acts of all Courts of Justice: which by
prescript of the Law itself record the passages of every Session, with the
date thereof. But in all the Acts of the Court of Amboyna, (unless they have
given a false Copy, which yet were to be taken for true against themselves
that so falsified it) there is no mention of any more confession then one of
every prisoner, nor of any freedom from fetters, nor of any such admonition by
the Governor as is here pretended. Besides the English that are escaped, as
well those that were absolved, as the rest, utterly deny these several points
to be true. Yea the gesture here added of the contracting or shrinking up the
shoulders, being no English gesture, sufficiently refuteth this fiction.

The fourth Article says, that William Webber one of the Accomplices confessed
he had received a Letter from John Clarke, intimating that there was some
extraordinary matter and of great importance in hand by the English at Amboyna:
and that John Clarke confessed to have written such a Letter.

The confession of Webber touching this Letter, is acknowledged in the English
Relation: but whereas this deposition says, that Clarke also confessed the
writing of such a Letter, the Acts themselves wherein Clarks confession is set
down by the Dutch Actuary, refuteth it, not making mention of any such thing,
nor of any question ministered to Clarke touching this Letter, or his meaning by
that intimation; Which would not have been omitted, if the Fiscall had not
perceived that Webber had feigned this matter only to avoid torture.

The fifth Article being of the same nature with the eighth and ninth, shall be
anon with them answered.

The sixth and seventh Articles recite certain pretended voluntary
confessions of Thompson made before some of the Council apart: to wit, that he
had endured so much torture without confession, because he was often vpbraided
by Master Towerson with drunkenness, and warned that he should not in his
cupps discover the pretended plott. Whereupon he had vowed and sworn to
himself, that he would not be the third nor yet the fourth man that confessed:
what ever torture he suffered. But afterward he confessed (says the seventh
Article) that he was glad that God had revealed the fact, for the saving of
innocent blood, and that he had doubly deserved death: yet craved mercy. Here
let the course of the Dutch in making Affidauit of the pretended voluntary
confession of Master Towerson before six of the Council apart (and entered
into the Acts) be considered, as it is truly set down in the answer to the
Dutch Relation: and it will manifestly appear, that this confession of
Thomsons (if any such had been) was of much more importance to the clearing of
the Dutch proceedings, then those obscure words of Master Towerson: and so
would the rather have been brought by way of Attestation into the Acts, as the
other were. But in the Acts there is no entry of any such confession of
Thomson: who also going to the execution, and being reproched to be a Schellam
or villain, openly and boldly answered, that he was as honest as the Governor
himself, and by and by took his death that he was innocent.

The fifth, eighth, and ninth Articles affirm, that Collins confessed all
without torture, and being confronted with Master Towerson before the
Council, auerred his confession, and persuaded him to do the like, also that
Master Towerson being another time before the Council with the rest of the
English prisoners, reproached them with their drunkenness and disordered
lives, and imputed the discovery of the conspiracy to Gods judgment upon
their wickedness: yet that at last Master Towerson confessed himself to be
the Author and instigator of the rest, and asked them forgiveness.

Of all these matters being far more pregnant (if they were true) to have
been the ground of the sentence then any thing entered in the Acts, there is no
one word or mention in all the Process, although these things are here
affirmed to have passed before the body of the Council. But it seems that
Maerschalk (since his arrival in Holland) is showed the defects of the
Process, and so would supply them by his own testimony. But he comes now
too late to make new Acts, after the Copy of the Process imparted to the
English. In particular, Collins was tortured with water in such sort, as the
view of him afterward made Coulson confess without torture, as is set down
in the English Relation, and yet auerred by those also that saw him come out as
Coulson did. Further, how senseless had the speech of Master Towerson been,
to impute the discovery of the plott, to Gods justice upon the bad life of his
pretended Accomplices, and not rather upon himself for being the inuenter and
Author of the conspiracy, in it self more heinous, then any thing he could
charge the rest withal? Lastly, it is already sufficiently proved by more
competent witnesses then Maerschalk, that Master Towerson and the rest were
never together before the Council, from the first apprehension until the last
sentence: and that in all that time, he spoke with none of the English, but
Coulson, Griggs, and Fardo; so impudent is this attestation of Maerschalck,
that he used the speeches here pretended, unto Collins and the rest; and that
before the Council.

The tenth Article says, there was a Letter written by Master Towerson to
Coulson, charging him to be the prime and sole cause that moved him to this
enterprise of making himself Master of the Castle: and that the same Letter
was in the hands of the Governor of Amboyna.

If this be true, how could Master Towerson make himself the first author of
this conspiracy, as the Acts and Maerschalcks own relation in the former
Articles present him? How comes it, that there is no mention of this Letter in
the Acts, nor the same Letter or any authentical Copy thereof sent over for
justification of the cause, being so pregnant and pertinent a proof?

The 11. Article tells a tale of Collins his refusing to sit and eat with
the Dutch Merchants in their passage from Amboyna to Iaccatra in the ship,
when he and Beamont were sent thither: upon scruple (forsooth) to eat with
such honest men, being himself a traitor.

This as it is frivolous and of no value in itself, Collins being then as a
condemned man to stand to the mercy of the Dutch General at Iaccatra: so the
truth of it is utterly denied by Beamont that passed with him in the same
ship, and together with Collins did eat at the same Table with the Dutch
Merchants without strayning of any courtesy for the matter.

But to help the testimony of Maerschalk, that swears Remonstrants in the
next Article, supply him with a Contestis, beyond exception as they pretend: to
wit, Signeur Houtman their late Governor in the Moluccoes. Who coming thence
to Amboyna after the execution, heard and saw some things pertaining to this
business; whereof, (being now returned into Holland) he makes report and
deposition, in six several points, viz: First, that it was firmly and
without question or doubt believed at Amboyna generally, and by every man in
particular; yea by himself also: that the English and Iapons there had truly
and in effect conspired the taking of the Castle. Secondly, that the said
Signeur Houtman coming through Hitto, George Sherrock (one of the English
Accomplices) fell at his feet, and acknowledged the great favor that Governor
Speult and the Council at Amboyna had done him in pardoning his delict.
Thirdly, that he was afterward present at Iaccatra when John Beamont (another
of the English Accomplices) confessed his fault before the Dutch General
Carpentiere, and craved mercy for the same. Fourthly, that himself and diverse
others at Iaccatra, had good and sure information and notice, that Beamont
freely confessed the conspiracy also to the English President there; but that
the English President thereupon locked him up close from speaking with any man;
thereby to prevent the dishonor of the treason. Fifthly, that the Governor
Speult is reputed for a man of worth, honorable and godly, by all that have
conuersed with him: and the rest of the Council also, such as cannot any way
be doubted or suspected guilty of so foul a fact, as to accuse or misuse the
English, much less to put them to death, if they had not been guilty.
Lastly, that the torture of Water is always used by the Dutch in the Indies,
and is not so cruel nor dangerous, as other kinds of torture used in the Low
Countries, and in all Europe.

First, the English that were saved from the butchery of Amboyna, do not yet
believe, that Signeur Houtman has deposed, as is here inferred. For when he
was at Amboyna, and labored to be brought in expost facto, for the saluing of
the business; he openly professed: that he would wash his hands of it, and
that Harman van Speult had begun it, and Harman van Speult should end it. And
this presumption of theirs is further confirmed by the manner of citing this
Signeur Houtman, even in this Article, where his deposition is not simply and
clearly alleged; but with this doubtful variation: Les dires et depositions
du Signeur Gouerneur Houtman, etc. Neither is it specified, where or before
whom or when he took his oath: which yet is according to the Custom set down
touching the deposition of Maerschalck: to wit, that he took his oath before
the Senate of Delft the 4. of November 1624. But admit he be sworn to these
Articles: let us examine their particular import. The first is only of a
common opinion and fame that he found at Amboyna, that it was a true treason.
Is it any marvel that the Dutch, that had made the people believe that the
English meant to have ripped up the bellies of the women with child (even of the
Natives) and to make choice by the beauty and feature of the several infants,
which to save and which to slay, had prepared a sufficient rumor against the
coming of Signeur Houtman, to win his opinion to their cause? Next, it is
not likely that he spoke with any, but those of the Castle: who were most of
them parties in this but cherie: and therefore would make no report to him, but
what served their own turns. Further, the judgment being passed against our
people, their fact (though never done) might be presumed notorious in Law: and
therefore no marvel he and others gave credit to it. Yet who knows not,
that much false judgment happens, notwithstanding the notorietie induced by
the Acts and sentence? It were an easy matter for a Judge to answer any
Injustice thus. But when the judgment and the Judges are questioned of
Injustice, the notorietie that themselves have made is no plea for them. Yet if
the Acts contain sufficient proofs for ground of the sentence, then such
notorietie may help them. But in this case, the Acts showing that they have
proceeded contrary to Law, infer their Injustice to be notorious, as is
before showed. For the second and third Articles, concerning Sherrock and
Beamonts confession of their faults extra iudicially, and while they were yet
in danger: they are of no moment, to prove their guilt, much less the guilt
of those that were executed, of whom these confessions make no mention; nor
especially can they give any succor to the cause of the Governor and Council
for their proceedings: who ought to have had the grounds of their sentence in
the Acts of the Process, before they condemned and executed our people. More
particularly, Sherrock indeed confesses, that with humble obeisance he
complained to Signeur Houtman of the Duchess daily reproaching him with
treason, and prayed him that he would deal with the Governor Speult, to take
order with them for their inciuilitie. For (said he) although I had been
guilty, yet being now pardoned, why should they thus reproach me? Other
confession then this, he utterly denies to have made to Signeur Houtman.
Beamont also confesses, that when he came to Iaccatra, being sent thither to
stand to the mercy of the General; who then told him, that he came thither to
die; he was much amassed. But when suddenly the General in better earnest told
him, he forgave him; then he gave him humble, and open thanks; but made no
confession of his fault, nor was by the General urged in the least thereunto.
For the fourth point, that Signeur Houtman and others had such notice, as is
here pretended of Beamonts confession to the English President; who also clapped
him up for it: it were here requisite that Signeur Houtman (if he have thus
attested) did name his Authors if he will be believed. For himself is but
testis ex auditu. In the mean time, not only Beamont denies these things,
but Collins that lodged in the same chamber at Iaccatra with him, auerreth,
that his restraint and close custody is utterly feigned; neither did he ever
hear any word or inckling of such his confession to the President. Master
Augustine Spalding also then one of the English Council at Iaccatra, (but now
returned into England) gives the like report. For the fifth point, being the
fair testimony of Signeur Houtman touching the person of his brother Governor,
Van Speult, and his Council; It is a point of civility in him, to help them
with a good word in the general: but it is far too light to lay in the
scoale against the several and pregnant proofs of their foul Injustice,
before in this reply at large specified, by the witness of all our English
that were saved (as well those that were absolved as the rest) by clear
circumstances of the whole business, and by the Acts themselves of the
Council of Amboyna. Lastly, for the Water torture, it appears without
Signeur Houtmans testimony, to be used by the Dutch in the Indies. The poor
Polarones and the English witness it with a mischief. But to make it lawful;
it should be proved to be used in the Low Countries: as has been already
showed. But why does Signeur Houtman, nor the Remonstrants, in all this
discourse say nothing for the Fire-torture, which was also used, and that in
most barbarous manner and degree upon the poor Iapons, and diverse of the
English?

The Remonstrance having thus pressed the testimony of Maerschalck and Signeur
Houtman, in the next place (being the 13. Article) tells us without any
witness: that diverse persons (which the English Relation mentions) to be
tortured with Fire and Water, were never once touched.

If this were true and certain, it had been easy for the Remonstrants to
have named the persons touching whom such error is committed. The English
Relation names none but Johnson, Thomson, and Clarke to be tortured with Fire.
Which of these will the Remonstrants deny to be so handled: against such
clear evidence of our part?

The foureteenth Article promises, that the particulars and petty matters (as
they are here termed) shall be disprooued by the depositions of those that
were in presence, and should have known them if any had been. Therefore
until they be thus disprooued, (which will never be) let them remain for
true; especially being already proved by the oath of credible persons, and
carrying truth in the very circumstances.

Lastly, for the extraordinary signs that happened at the time of the
execution, which are here (scoffingly) termed miracles, the same are also
proved by oath, and further by Letters written from some of the servants of
the Dutch themselves at Amboyna, ready to be exhibited upon occasion. And as
it had been a silly part of the English to have feigned such matter, so is it
no less impudence to deny that which so many as well Dutch and Indians as
English saw, and knew to be notorious.

After all this new charge so confidently given, yet Remonstrants fall off
again, and not desiring to put the trial of the cause upon these, nor all the
rest of their allegations; they return by way of conclusion to pray the Lords
States General, that there may be a convenient respite given for the better
examination of the whole matter: and to that end that they will mediate with
his Majesty, to content himself also therewith.

But the English East India Company upon the grounds before at large deduced,
doubt not but that the cause will appear as well to his Majesty as the Lords
States, to be ripe and ready for such an Act of State as is desired, and for
the apprehension of the Authors of this odious and execrable Process, as soon
as they, or any of them can be gotten. And then the judicial Process against
them may follow, as shall appertain to so foul and infernal a Fact. ()

FINIS.

