CERTAIN ARGVMENTS AND MOTIVES, Of special moment, propounded to the
consideration of our most noble KING and State: Tending to persuade them to
abolish that unhappy and unhallowed government of our Church by Bishops; and in
stead thereof to set up the government of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy
Ordinances, in their purity and power.

Isaiah. 26.13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over
us.

Lamenta. 5.8. Servants have ruled over us: there is none that does deliver us
out of their hand.

Math. 15.13. Every plant, which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be
rooted up.

Math. 5.13. If the salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be salted?
It is thenceforth good for nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under
foot of men.

ANNO M.D.C.XXXIV.

CERTAIN ARGVMENTS and Motives, of special moment, propounded to the
consideration of our most noble King and State: Tending to persuade them to
abolish that unhappy and unhallowed government of our Church by Bishops; and
instead thereof to set up the government of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy
Ordinances, in their purity and power.
THe Archbishops and Lord Bishops of England are the maine hinderers of the
free passage of the Gospel, and of the growth of godliness in that famous and
flourishing Realm.

1 They stop the mouths of the faithfullest and fruitfullest Ministers in the
land; some one of which has (by his labors in the Church) done God more good
service, and gained more souls to Christ by his Ministry, then all the Bishops
have done, that either now are, or ever have been in the kingdom, since the
Gospel began last to be preached and published amongst us. What a woeful
havoc did they make in our Church, in the beginning of King James his reign;
when they turned out at a clap four hundred of the ablest and most
conscionable Ministers in the land, for not yielding to such things as B. Vaghan
some of themselves then openly confessed to be trifles and nifles, gewgawes
and gamboles, fitter for children then for men of discretion? Howsoever the
King carried the name of it, yet these wicked Prelates put him upon it, and did
egregiously abuse both him and his authority to countenance their own cruelty.
His commandment and commission was, that they should first convince men's
consciences, before they proceeded against them. But they fall pell-mell upon
them, and turned them out, leaving them to the wide world, to seek for
satisfaction where they could find it; they knowing that they were able to
give them none. How have they gone on ever since, though not altogether so
boisterously, and with so much violence, yet weeding out by degrees, one after
another, the most painful and profitable workmen in the Lords harvest, and
such as did him the best and the faithfullest service in this vineyard of his?
And to what exigents and extremities are both the Ministers and members of our
churches at this day exposed; who, as it is well known, do daily in troops
and great multitudes, not without much grief, quitt the kingdom, to shelter
themselves in foreign countries from the unjust usurpation, and merciles and
matchles tyranny of these Antichristian Prelates, the tenderest of whose mercies
are cruel? Prove. 12.10.

2 They being, either all, or the most of them, corrupt and unsound in their
judgments, do favor none of their clergy, as they call them, but such as go on
in a plain and direct way to Popery, or look terribly a-squint toward
Arminianisme, and Pelagianisme; either of which whosoever opposes (especially
if he do it professedly and in good earnest) they will be sure to crush him,
if they can, though he be never so conformable, according to their own
hellish Canons, and though he be so painful in the work of his Ministry,
and so unblameable in the course of his life, that they have nothing to lay to
his charge. How then is it possible that the Gospel should thrive and prosper
amongst us, and how can it be expected that it should run and be glorified,
when these Tyrants, who sit at the stern, and affect the Title of Fathers of
the Church, countenance none but men of corrupt minds, like themselves, and
cry down, with might and maine, all such as do but look toward syncerity? In
their devilish Canons (of which Hell it self would be ashamed if there were
any shame there) they anathematize, and curse with Bell, Book, and Candle, all
such as mislike and profess against their Romish Hierarchy; they pronounce
them excommunicate ipso facto. O monstrous wretches, that dare give such unjust
sentence, and thunder out such a direful and dreadful censure against those
faithful servants of Christ, which bear witness to the truth of his, which will
stand, when all they that oppose it shall melt away like snow before the sun:
B. Bancroft.
Some of them have grown to such a height of impudency and impiety, that they
have not stuck to say, that if S. Paul himself were a Preacher in the land, or
any other man as richly stored and furnihed with the graces of Gods Spirit, for
that great work of the Ministry, as S. Paul was, unless he would conform
himself to the orders of the Church now established, they would suspend, and
deprive, and degrade him, and cast him out of their Synagogue; so little regard
have they of any man's abilities and indowments! It is wonder that they do not
expunge out of the Canon of holy Scripture sundry of S. Paul's epistles, which
make so directly against them and their government. Most certain it is that if
that blessed Apostle were now, upon any complaint made against him, to give an
account of his life and doctrine before them, he should find less favor at
their hands, then he did at the hands of Felix, Act. 23.35. they would not
stay till his accusers came, but they would force him by their cursed oath ex
officio (which was hatched in hell) to accuse himself, or else to prison he
must, there to ly long enough, without bail or maineprise. What pity is it
that such ungracious wretches should be put into any place of eminency, which
know no better how to use it? When the righteous are in authority, the people
rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people sigh, Prove. 29:2.

3 Their poisoning of the fountains, and those violent courses which they take
against Ministers, discourage Parents from sending their children to the
Universities. How well would our Naioths and our Bethels, our schools of the
Prophets, be furnished with young Students, which would be ready upon all
occasions to be called forth to serve God both in the Church and in the common
wealth, if these wretched miscreants did not nip in the bud, and crush in the
shel, and strangle in the birth the very beginnings of grace in those young
plants, which would otherwise increase with the increasings of God, and would
grow up like Cedars in Lebanon? There is an evil eye cast upon them, if once
they do but begin to walk in the ways of God, and run not with others to
the same excess of riot. And of what strain or garb so ever they be, there
is a very strict order taken, that unless they will both subscribe, and take a
most shameful Oath, they shall take no degree in schools, to testify their
progress and proceeding in humane learning. Nor is there any preferment to be
had, or to be held, except men will yield to the corruptions of the times;
which are now grown so great, that they are not to be endured. Which makes
Parents many times to put the best and most towardly of their children upon
other employments; and if they send any to the Universities; they be such, for
the most part, as are good for little but to serve the times. Wherein these
Adversaries of the grace of God bring such a damage and detriment to our King
and State, as they will never be able to recompense, as that good Queen
Hester speaks in another case concerning their brother Haman, Hest. 7.4.

4 They disharten young Scholars from applying themselves to the study of
Divinity, by their denying admittance and entrance into the Ministry to all
men, though never so singularly and extraordinarily qualified, except their
consciences be made of cheveril, and will (like Kids leather) stretch every
way; and unless they will by their practice of conformity justify a great
number of things, which they know to be grossly and palpably evil. And when
men are in possession of Pastoral charges, they are put to so much drudgery in
the execution of their Ministerial fuction, that they were better to rub horse
heels, then, as the case now stands, to be Ministers in the church of
England, and to live in such base servitude and slavery under those
Antichristian and accursed Prelates. No attire must serve their turn, when they
come to discharge their duty in the Lords Sanctuary, but the habit of the whore
of Rome, and the very massing garment it self of that filthy trumpet. They
must cross, and crouch, and cringe at the command of those their Lords and
Masters. They must admit to the Sacrament of the Lords supper whomsoever these
Catercaps allow of, though never so unworthy; and they must reject and repel
from that holy Communion and company all such as will not kneel in the act of
receiving, though they know right well that they do refuse it only out of the
tenderness of their consciences, because they dare not sin against their God
in so doing; and albeit they are persuaded in their very souls, that they be
in all other respects the fittest Persons in their Congregations to come to the
Lords Table. They must at their beck cast out of the church, by the fearful
sentence of Excommunication, many times the best Christians in their Parishes
for very trivial businesses: as for not appearing in one of their Courts, when
happily they had no warning; or for nonpayment of a fee of four pence to a
paltry Apparitour. They must read in their churches, as Canonical Scripture,
those Apocrypha-bookes, which are full of fables and fictions, of lies and of
leasings. They must baptize, if they be required, in a house merely private,
which nourishes a superstitious opinion of the necessity of Baptism; and they
must use conditional Baptism in the public Congregation, after the child
has been privately baptized. They must housle the sick, mary with the Ring,
Church women, and do a thousand such things, any one of which a man that makes
conscience of his ways dare not adventure upon for a world. And yet all these
things must a poor Minister do, if he will hold his place, and enjoy his
Ministry. Which makes many of our best and finest wits to betake themselves
to the study of the law, or physic, and to abandon and put out of their minds
all thoughts of entering into the Ministry; which, as things are now carried,
they hold to be a calling not fit for an honest man. What a heavy and
doleful account shall these Vermin one day give to our God for devouring his
pleasant plants? And what shall become of these Foxes, which thus destroy the
Lords vines? Cant. 2.15.

5 They have had an intention a long while, if not wholly to put down, yet at
least to diminish and lessen preaching. Which though they durst not assail
with open violence, for fear of the people, amongst whom it would have made
them more odious then they are already; yet have they these many years been
secretly undermining it. About the beginning of King James his reign, or the
later end of Queen Elisabeths of blessed memory, B. Bancroft.
the Prelate of London called before him all the Ministers of the City, and
gave them express charge that they should preach but once upon the Lords day:
and if any of them would do any thing in the afternoon (which he neither
required, nor did greatly approve of) he told them, that he would have them
Catechize. No Catechism he permitted them to use, but the ordinary, What is
your name, etc. for so he expressed himself. And if any amongst them would
needs explane and open the same, he told them, that the less pains they
took for that which they delivered, it were the better: for, says he, it is
not needful that the people should know too much. O horrible treachery and
cruelty against the precious souls of Gods people! Who would ever have looked
for such words out of the mouth of a very rakeshame in times of so great light?
Since that, they have had a project to suppress Lecturers; which in some
countries they did desperately set upon, and proceed in with a rage that
reached to heaven. In other places they have likewise attempted it, but
somewhat moreley surely and insensibly. And doubtless they had prevailed in this
plott had not the Lord himself extraordinarily stirred up the heart of a noble
man, who heard of it, to go to our gracious King, and to acquaint him with the
vileness and odiousnes of the design of theirs; and by that means they were
disappointed of their purpose, when they made no question but they should have
got it ratified by his Majesty's royal authority. If they had prevailed in
that, it is to be thought that their next attempt would have been, to have
taken the Bible out of men's hands, and so to have brought the people of this
land back again to that Cymmerian and Egyptian darkness, in which our
forefathers for many years together did heretofore ly buried. B. Ravis.
One of that cursed crew lies entombed in Paul's church, with one book at his
head, and another at his feet. That at his feet is thought to be the Bible,
which these godles Prelates tread under foot. That at his head is supposed to
be the book of common prayer, which he carried with him as a Crown to the
place whither he is gone. But whither these monsters (which are neither
Ministers, nor members of any of our Congregations) I profess I know not;
unless it be to the place whither their fellow traitor Judas is gone before,
Act. 2.25. there to remain among such as the Apostle speaks of, Phil. 3.19.
For it can not be imagined that there should be any place in heaven for these
wretches: but as they hate Gods people here upon earth with a perfect hatred so
it is to be thought that the Lord will set a great gulf, and make an eternal
separation between them, and the vessels of his mercy, Luke 16.26. 2 Thessalonians.
1.7.8.9.10.

6 They have suppressed that famous and worthy work of buying in, and
restoring to the church Impropriations; which was a most charitable, and
useful and hopeful business, and likely to have brought more advantage to the
Ministry of England, then any one thing of that nature, which has been
undertaken in any man's memory. Diverse were brought in, and brought back again
to the Church, by those men which were trusted with that business; who carried
themselves very faithfully in it; and many great sums lay ready, which would
have been frankly and freely given for the buying in of more, if that work had
gone on as it began: whereby much glory would have redounded to God, as much
comfort to thousands of poor souls, which now are like to want it. In many
places where the maintenance of the Minister was short and scant, the feoffees
did, out of those Impropriations which they had in their hands, make a supply
and addition, to make the living competent for an able and an honest man. In
other places, where there was most want of preaching, they set up Lectures, and
put in men of good abilities, and such as would teach the people to be
obedient to God, and loyal to their Sovereign. And where there were Lectures
before, which had not a competency of means allotted to them, they increased
their allowance, that so he Ministers might go on the more confortably in the
work of their Minstery. But this made our Bishops sick of the spleen. They
cried out that this would be the ruin of the Church of England. The truth is
they feared, but without cause, that this would in time have clipped their
wings, and have abridged their authority, whereof they are much more jelous
then of Gods glory; and that caused them to set the matter so much to heart. It
is true that the fatal blow was given to that work in another Court: but
these ungratious Prelates kindled the coals, and blew that fire, which has
consumed and brought it to nothing. Wherein they have showed themselves to be
like to their father the Devil, who, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking
whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8.

They have put down the meetings of the men of several shires and counties,
now dwellers in London, which were wont to assemble together once a year, and
did a great deal of good to those countries where they were borne. There they
set up, and do to this day maintain at their own charge, Lectures in Market
towns, and other places of greatest resort, where they supposed they might do
most good, and where there was greatest want of preaching; which was a great
ease and comfort to the Christians in those parts: and more they would have
done every year for the good of those places, if these meetings of theirs had
not been thus unseasonably interrupted and broken off by these men which bear
ill will to Sion. But the name of a Lecture is enough to crush and quash any
such pious and good work. I know well that the places, where they used to
meet, were denied them by another authority: but the Prelates were the plotters
and contrivers of this mischief, out of that inveterate malice and hatred
which they bear against preaching. Wherein they resemble their Predecessors,
the Scribes and Pharisees, which shut up the kingdom of heaven against men, and
will neither go in themselves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in, Mat.
23.13.

8 They urge and press upon Ministers a Subscription not only against reason,
but directly against Law. The statute of the 13. Elizabeth requires of
Ministers no subscription but to the Articles of religion, and that also no
further then they concern faith and Sacraments only. But these troublers of
Israel, and disturbers of the peace of our church, will have them subscribe not
only to that whole book, but to four other books also, namely the book of
common prayer, the book of Ordination, and two books Homilies; in some one of
which said books it is well known that there be many hundreds of foul and
gross corruptions. And if a man have subscribed in his younger years, when
he knew no better, and was unable, and it may be unwilling also to examine,
and try things by the true touchstone, and to weigh them in the balance of the
Sanctuary; if afterward he renounce, or do but revolt from his subscription,
and shall refuse to justify by his practice that to which ignorantly and
unadvisedly he did formerly subscribe with his hand; though he have done God
faithful service in his Church for the space of many years, and have taken
more then ordinary pains in his ministry, they turn him out with a great
deal of wrath and indignation, and expose him, his wife and children, to
misery and beggary. And if in these cases men be content to leave their native
soil, and shall seek to secure and safeguard themselves in other nations from
the fury of these Tigers, yet thither will their malice follow them, and their
arms are now grown so long, that even there also they can reach them. But
there will a time come, when these wretches shall know to their cost, and by
miserable and woeful experience, when it will be to late, that it is the Lord
Jesus himself whom they persecute, and that they kick against pricks, Act.
9.5. And he that has those stars in his right hand, Revel. 1.16. and
accounts of them as his Jewels, will one day render into the bosom of their
Persecutours, and that with more then ordinary severity, all the wrongs which
they have done to those poor servants of his, and will then be thoroughly
avenged of all his and their malicious and despitefull enemies.

9 They thrust Christ out of his chair of Estate, and will not suffer him to
rule and reign amongst us, according to his own holy will revealed in his
word, by Pastors, Teachers, and Elders; which he has ordained and appointed
for the governing of his Churches, and for the perfecting of the Saints, etc.
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the soon
of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ, Romans 12.7.8. and 1. Tim. 5.17. Ephesians. 4.12.13. Wherein they plainly
profess, and proclaim openly to the whole world, that they are fighters
against God himself, and maine opposers of his grace and goodness. How would
the Gospel flourish in our land, and what glorious success and intertainement
would it find in the hearts of men, if the Lord Jesus might once be permitted
to rule in our Congregations, by his own Officers and ordinances; and if that
holy government of his might be set up amongst us in perfect beauty? What a
goodly sight would it be to see every Congregation of Christians in this
kingdom to be a complete and entire spiritual body within it self, without
having any dependence upon these Romish Prelates, and their Popish Canons? It is
that which the great God of heaven looks for at the hands of our State, to
which he has vouchsafed so many and so great mercies. The Lord Jesus Christ,
who is a great King, and the Lord and Lawgiver of his Church, has fitted and
furnished men extraordinarily for this great work and service. And the hearts
of all the people of the land, which are any whitt well affected, took that
way; as appears by their continual laboring for it ever since the beginning
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth of pious and happy memory. Only these wicked
Bishops oppose it, which never did good nor ever will do. They can not endure
the name of Discipline, but have always set themselves with tooth and nail,
and with might and maine, against the kingdom of our blessed Savior, and his
sacred soveraignety. But let them look to it, and remember what is like to be
their doom, if they mend not their manners: Those mine enemies which would not
that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me, Luke
19.27.

10 They hinder, as much as in them lies, the publishing of all books, though
never so modestly written, in the defense of Christ's holy cause, and that
unalterable government, which he in his last will and Testament has
prescribed to his Churches. And if by their scoutes, which they have in every
corner, they can discover and find out the Printer of any such Treatises, they
deal very rigorously and roughly with him. Himself they commit close enough
to Prison, and there they let him ly as long as they please, even till they
have ruined him, his wife, and children; they seize upon his Press and
letters, and sell them away before his face for a song; they rifle and ransack
his house, and carry away, by those helhounds their Pursivants, as much of his
goods as they list, without ever making any restitution of that which they do
so wrongfully and and feloniously take from him; when as in the mean while
they suffer the Printers of popish Pamphlets to go on in their way with out
interruption. Nay when such notorious Offenders are brought to them, and put
into their hands, they send them away, if not with a reward, yet certainly
without any check or punishment; so well do many of these lazy lubbers and idle
drones like of those Romish varlets and their Religion. Yea, whereas printing
by the blessing of God has been a special means of spreading and divulging
the Gospel in the Christian world in these later times; it is verily believed
by many, that these wretches have a purpose, if they can handsomely and cleanly
accomplish it, wholly to suppress that rare mystery, and most noble and famous
Art. Diverse Printers complain (and I suppose not without cause) that they can
get nothing licensed, They, who are authorized and appointed for that purpose,
do not simply and absolutely deny to do it; but they delay them
extraordinarily, and beyond all measure. When they have attended them, and
called upon them, month after month, and one year after another, their
answer in conclusion is, that they are not at leisure to read over their
treatises. Nay, it is reported by some, but how true that is time will show,
that they shall not be suffered to print their old copies, which they have
formerly printed with privilege, till the Licenser do certify anew, under his
hand, that he has carefully read over every passage both in the body of those
books, and in the Epistles prefixed before them, and that there is nothing in
them repugnant to those tenants, which these grand Clergy-masters do now hold.
Which if it be true, it is high time both for Printers and Bookesellers to go
and learn some new Trade; for they will not be able to live of the old. By
this means these vipers do closely eat out the bowels of our church, and they
run a course directly and pointblanck contrary to that of the holy Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1. whose desire was, that the word of God might have free passage and
be glorified.

It were to be wished therefore that our King and State would turn out these
Abbylubbers, and pluck those fat morsels out of their mouths, and cause them
to get their living by the sweat of their brows, as other poor Ministers do,
which labor in the word and doctrine. And it will manifestly appear to be a
work most fit and necessary to be done, if these things following be well
weighed, and rightly and duly considered of. 1 Their places and callings are
abominable, and accursed, and Antichristian. Gods Bishops, out of all question,
they are not. He knows no Lord Bishops, nor will he ever acknowledge and
own them for his. Man's Bishops they themselves confidently affirm they are
not; though the B. Whitgift.
discreetest and moderatest of theirs Predecessors have heretofore ingenuously
confessed, that their callings are of humane institution, and that it in the
power of the Magistrate to turn them all out at his will and pleasure; and
that he may do it without sin against God: But this our Prelates now-a-daies
disclaim, and will not endure to hear of it. Being then neither Gods
Bishops, nor man's, they must of necessity be ordained and set up by the
Devil, whose eldest son is the Pope of Rome, and these pety Popes, our
Bishops, are all younger brethren to him; there going but a pair of sheets
between them. Their Lordly authority has certainly no foundation nor footing
in the Scripture, but is directly contrary to the institution of Christ, and
his blessed will and Testament; and it has been the ground of that
Antichristian Hierarchy of the man of sin, whom God will consume with the
spirit of his mouth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Their civil power deserves rather to be
exploded then refuted. Christ expressly forbids his disciples such Lordly
dominion, Luke 22.25. He himself refused to be made a King, John 6.15.
professing that his kingdom was not of this world, John 18.36. He refused to
part an heritage betwixt brethren, Luke 12.14. He would not give sentence
against the woman taken in adultery, John 8.11. What intolerable presumption is
it then for our Prelates to exercise such authority, as our blessed Savior
neither practiced himself, nor permitted to his disciples. Nor is the
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which they usurp over the Ministers of the
Gospel, any whitt better, but is Antichristian and naught, as well as the
other. Christ Jesus took upon him the form of a servant, Phil, 2.7. He came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Math. 20.28. (and the servant is
not above his Lord, Math. 10.24.) He forbids his disciples all such
dominion and sovereignty, Math. 20.25. Mark 10.43. His Apostles receive equal
power and authority from him, Math. 18.18. John 20.23. They claim no
superiority or primacy one above another, but style themselves servants, 2.
Cor. 4.5. Ministers and dispensers. 1. Cor. 4.1. and Ambassadors, 2. Cor.
5.20. They send Peter and John as their messengers to Samaria, Acts 8.14. which
argues equality. Peter disclaiming all such superiority equalleth himself
with the Ministers and Elders of the Church, calling himself their fellow
elder, 1. Pet. 5.1. and forbids Ministers to usurp any Lordship over Gods
heritage, ver. 3. S. John rebukes Diotrephes for affecting pre-eminence,
Epist. 3.9. Nor did ever any man take upon him to be a Pastor of Pastors,
but that man of sin, and Lord Bishops, which are his genuine offspring, and
are lineally descended from him. As therefore their offices and functions were
hatched in hell, so it would be a very happy thing for this state of ours, if
it would please God and our King, that they might be returned and sent back
again thither; that our church, which these many years has borne them as a
heavy burden, may be no longer cumbred with them.

2 No man living upon the face of the earth may presume to prescribe a pattern
according to which the Churches of Christ should be formed; nor may any
creature in heaven or earth, without a commission from the son of God,
appoint laws for the guilding and governing of his house: that being a glory
which the Lord Jesus Christ has reserved in his own hands, and will
communicate neither with man nor Angel; it belonging as properly to him to rule
his church according to the good pleasure of his own will, as it belongs to
him to save it by the merit of his sufferings. He by the appointment of his
father is the only head, King, Lord, Lawgiver, and supreme Governor of his
Church, which he has washed and made white with his blond, Ephesians. 1.22.
James. 4.12. Revel. 7.14. He has not left his Church, which is his body,
maimed or imperfect, destitute of laws and Offices needful for the governing
of the same, but has appointed a Ministry for it, with a calling thereunto,
and with laws limiting their function and governments, leaving nothing therein
to the will of man, Col. 2.18. This government, with ail the offices and
functions thereto appertaining, are set down in the written word of God (the
only rule both of doctrine and discipline in the church) which is able to make
the man of God perfect to every good work. 2. Tim. 3.17. The offices appointed
by Christ for the ruling of his churches are those of Pastors, Teachers, and
Elders; whose several gifts, properties, and qualifications are distinctly and
at large set down in the Scripture. These offices and ministeries, and the
laws concerning the same, are sufficient for the ruling of Christ his Church
here on earth; and that form and frame of government, prescribed and left by
our Savior for the ordering of his house, is every way complete of it self,
and needs no help of man to make it perfect. Else Christ can not be
honored as a perfect governor of his Church; and otherwise both the Scripture
and Christ's body are imperfect. And if these be not perfect, then may man
erect new offices, and add new Ministeries, and he may also take away, and
alter any of these at his own pleasure. Then also is the Church of the new
Testament inferior to that of the old, which received all the laws and
ordinances from God himself. But to affirm all or any one of these it is
impious and absurd. And as this government appointed by Christ is sufficient
and most perfect, so is it perpetual, and may not be altered by men or
Angeles. Timothy is commanded to keep this platform, and all the ordinances
concerning it, to the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus, 1. Tim. 5.21. and
6.13.14. All the offices of this church mentioned Romans 12.6.7.8. are called
members of the body of the church, ver. 5. and 1. Cor. 12.27.28: which is the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 1.22.23. If therefore the church of Christ, which is his
body, must continue perfect till his coming, these offices and ministeries
must also continue; for if any one of them be taken away, his body is maimed
and mangled. And if Christ shall continue to be governor of his churches, he
must continue to rule and govern in them by his own Officers, and by those
laws and ordinances which he himself has prescribed in his word; otherwise
he is not the governor of them. If his Officers be refused, he is rejected;
and if the order of government appointed by him be thrust out, and another
substituted in the room of it, then is he, upon the point, deposed from his
regency, and the scepter is taken out of his hands.

3 If this holy government instituted and ordained by the son of God himself
might be erected and set up in our churches, there would be such a confluence
and concurrence of all good things, contributing jointly to the happiness of
this kingdom, as our eyes have never yet seen. Gods blessing does ever
accompany his own ordinance. But if that be either slighted or neglected;
though men take the wisest and the most politic courses, that their silly and
shallow brains can devise, for the attaining of the same ends which God aims
at the Lord blows upon them, and blasteth them, and brings them all to
nothing, that they do no good; as might easily be exemplified in many other
particulars, as well as in this of Church government, if need required. For
he destroys the wisdom of the wise, and brings to nothing the
understanding of the prudent, 1. Cor. 1.19. the foolishnes of God being wiser
then men, and the weakness of God stronger then men, ver. 25. But to keep to
the point in hand. This government of the church by Archbishops and Lord
Bishops was first brought in, and has been very unhappily continued in our
land under a pretense of preserving the peace and unity of the Church, and for
the preventing of schisms and divisions in the same. But the woeful experience
of many years shows, that these strange Lords, who by their places should
be fathers and fosterers of the church, have been, and are to this day,
cruel and cursed Stepfathers to it, and in stead of preventing distractions
and dissensions among us, they have been from time to time the sole cause and
original of all those most lamentable divisions, and of those heavy pressures,
which our poor churches have groned under, ever since the Gospel came into
this kingdom. What error and heresies have they of late brought in and
countenanced by their authority, to the hearts grief of many of the best
affected people of the land? How do Arminianisme and Bellarminianisme prevail
by reason of that favor which these linsey-woolsey lukewarm Laodiceans show
to those which set their faces that way? What a rent have they lately made in
our church by their strict pressing of people to come to their own
Congregations when there is no preaching, and by their urging of crouching and
cringing at the name of Jesus, and before their Altars, and other such like
trumpery? What a number of our best and most judicious Christians do they daily
drive out of the land by their harsh, and base, and uncivil usage of them?
Since therefore the Gospel is so much opposed, and oppugned, and trodden down by
these Antichristian Prelates, what a blessed and worthy work would it be, and
how acceptable a service to God, if it would please our most gracious King to
depose and thrust our these proud usurpers, who have too too long domineered
and tyrannised over Gods heritage, and to set the Lord Jesus Christ upon his
Throne and to take order that he may rule his churches according to his own
will revealed in his word? Which glorious and happy enterprise, if his Majesty
would seriously set upon, and go through with, I dare be bold to say, that the
Lord would make good to him, and this state, as much as he once promised and
did accordingly perform to the people of the Jews, upon their onset and first
beginning to set forward the building of his Temple, Hag. 2.18.19. He would
from that very day remove all those heavy judgments which have these many
years waited upon that cursed government of Bishops, and in stead of them he
would shower down such abundance and variety of his choysest mercies and
blessings upon our King and his kingdoms, as would make all the world to
wonder, and to stand amazed at it. Oh, that his Majesty would but try what the
Lord would do in that case! England would then be as Jerusalem sometime was,
the praise of the world, the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the whole
earth. Then would the Lord dwell amongst us, and be a father unto us, and he
would rejoice over us and delight in us to do us good. Then would our exiles
return, and the poor despised, and dispersed, and distressed servants of God
would sing for joy of heart, and the voice of weeping would be no more heard
amongst us, nor the voice of crying, for these Wolves, and Leopards, and Lions
being thrown out of those places wherein they do daily such a world of
mischief, there would be none to hurt or destroy in Gods holy Mountain: our
land would then be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the
sea.

4 Whereas his Majesty has at this time much use and many employments for
money; if he would be pleased to turn these brute creatures a-grazing, and
seize upon their Bishoprics, and take into his hands the Cathedral Churches
(as King Henry the eighth sometimes did the Abbeys, and those irreligious
houses) he might, to his own hearts content, be plentifully supplied at the
present for all his occasions, and have a large yearly Revenue coming in,
sufficient to maintain an Army in the field to suppress and subdue all the
enemies of his Crowns and Kingdoms, and to help down with that man of
sin, who is drunk with the blood of Gods Saints. And why will our renowned
Sovereign suffer such a happy and golden opportunity to slip out of his hands?
It is thought by some, that if King James had lived, he would have done it,
and would have tasted their flesh. And why should not our noble and religious
King (who in other things is an imitatour of his fathers virtues) effect that
which his father so much affected, and had a good mind to do, if time had
served for it? What should hinder him? I confess freely, I know not. These
Lordly Prelates never did any good in the Church of God; nor do they any at this
time; nor will they ever hereafter do any, but a great deal of mischief. Idle
they are above measure, and many of them grossly and palpably ignorant: and
they are grown to such an extreme height of pride, and ambition, and tyranny,
that it is a great wonder how the State can thus long bear them. Most odious
they are both to God and man; and the very name of a Bishop begins now to
stink in the nosethrils of all the people of the Land, that savor the things
of God, or have any relish of Religion, though they look not toward
syncerity, nor bear any love to it: And for their Collegiate Churches, what
be they, for the most part, but dens of thieves, and cages of unclean
Birds? There is a great deal of superstitious and false worship nourished and
maintained in them, to the dishonor of Almighty God, to the scandal of that
holy Religion which is professed amongst us, and to the rejoicing and
encouraging of Papists, who laugh in their sleeves, and are in good hope to
have their Ronish religion one day set up again in this Kingdom, seeing we
retain such monuments of their Idolatry and superstition still in the midst of
us, and do re-edify and repair them with such zeal, as if therein we did God
good service. What pity is it that such an infinite mass of money, as is
raised yearly out of these Bishoprics, and the livings belonging to those
Cloisters, should be so vainly, and basely, and irreligiously consumed and
devoured by such useles, and worthies persons, as are good for nothing but to
cleave wood with their heads, when as in the mean while our dear and dread
Sovereign wants it for better purposes? What an advantage would it be to
our King, and what an advancement of the revenue of the Crown, if the increase
and profit which arises and issues out of these large and ample possessions
(which is now merely and wholly to no purpose wasted) might be brought into
his Majesty's Treasury, there to be preserved to his use and to be always in
a readiness to be disposed of by him according to his godly wisdom, to the
glory of God, and in the service of the State; and might be there carefully
stored up, as a means of supply, and as a stock of provision, for the
accommodating of his Majesty, when, and as often as he shall have use of it,
and for the fitting and furnishing of those many necessary and just occasions
which he has to employ and expend the same upon?

5 It would be a mavelous ease for this Kingdom, if by the merciful
goodness of our God it might once be freed from these Antichristian Prelates,
and their Courts, which rob his Majesty's subjects of an exceeding great
sum of money every year. One would not imagine how much they extort from
Ministers, Churchwardens, and the rest of the people of the land, for fees, and
by means of those unjust vexations which they put them continually unto. Many
men are persuaded that they, and their Chauncellours, Commissaries, Officials,
Doctors, roctours, Registers, Pursivants, Apparitours, and others of that
cursed crew, do rake and scrape from the Subject more then would suffice to pay
to our King two or three Subsidies every year. And what becomes of all this?
It maintains a company of idle Belly-gods, and a number of ungodly and
ungratious persons, which are unprofitable burdens of the earth, and are only
whips in Gods hand to scourge and chastise his people withal: whose service
when the Lord has used a while for that purpose, he will then most certainly
throw his Rods into the fire, Esaias. 10.5.12: And if in the mean season our
most wise and judicious King would be pleased to sqeaze them, and to take from
them that thick clay wherewith they are overladen; he should do a work
acceptable to God, and such as wherein his soul might take a great deal of
comfort here, and which would much further his reckoning in the day of the Lord
Jesus, when he shall come with power and great glory to judge both the quick
and the dead.

6 His Majesty shall do a work of singular charity and mercy to the souls of
these Bloudsuckers, if he will be pleased, in compassion and commiseration of
their deplored and desperate condition, to pluck them out of those
pestilentiall places, which they do unjustly usurp, and most tyrannously
abuse, to the provocation of the wrath and displeasure of the great God of
heaven, and to the opening of the mouths of the enemies of the Gospel; who by
the exorbitancies and insolences of these proud men take occasion to blaspheme
and speak evil of that sacred truth which we profess, and to traduce and
malign our government, to the dishonor of our nation, and the disgrace of our
King and country, both at home and in foraine parts. Most certain it is, that
if they be let alone in their course, they go on desperately in a way that
leads to death, the issue whereof will be hell, and eternal woe and misery
in another world: whereas if their prefermets, with which they are even fatted
and glutted above measure, might be taken from them, and they put upon the
work of the Ministry, which they were bredde and brought up to, it might
please God that that might be a means to pluck them out of the fire, and to
save the souls of some of them, if amongst that cursed company there be any
that belong to the election of grace; whereof I confess there is a great deal
of question to be made. For the most of them do maliciously and despitefully
oppose the truth, and do with a high hand set themselves against the good ways
of God, and do most furiously and fiercely persecute all those poor Christians
that set their faces toward Sion, and endeavor to walk with their God in the
truth and uprightnes of their hearts, and will not be drawn for fear or
favor to conform themselves to those shameful corruptions in doctrine and
discipline, which they multiply daily, and press hotely upon men, without
either fear or wit, to the ruin of our Church, and the supplanting and
undermining of our most holy and heavenly Religion, the bringing in of which
not many years since cost a great deal of blood. And as for those few of them
in whom there is any spark of goodness, the eye of whose understanding is not
yet quite put out, that which they in the course of their government do against
the truth, and servants, and cause of God, they do it against the persuasion of
their own hearts, and against the checks of their consciences, which pursue
them so close, and do so terrify and affright them, that without all boubt they
can have little or no peace at all, having such an adversary within them, as
will never suffer them to be quiet, but is still accusing and tormenting them
whether they sleep or wake. Which made Sr. Francis Hastings.
one say wittily long ago, that of our Bishops the best were the worst;
because that which they did, they did clean against the hair, and knew right
well that they sinned against God in the doing of it; which is a fearful
aggravation of their iniquity. He that was B. Vaghan.
Bishop of London when that lamentable havoc and spoil was made amongst our
Ministers about the beginning of King James his reign, after that he had in
the Consistory suspended and deprived some of the Ministers of London, was the
whole night following in such a heat and sweat (it being then a cold season
of the year, about the beginning of February) that although there was a good
fire in his chamber, and they which attended him plied him with hot clothes,
as fast as they could possibly warm them at the fire, and bring them to him
lying then in his bed, yet could they not all that night, with all that they
could do, cool him, and dry up his sweat; as some yet alive can testify, who
then waited upon him in his chamber: He was so perplexed and terrified with
the thoughts of that which he had done, that he could take no rest; nor did
he ever claw it off, but died very quickly after it. Within a few days after
(for he lived not many) he said openly at his table, that the Persecutions of
those times were worse then those in Queen Mary's days. B. Morton.
One who sat at the table with him, then a Deane now a Bishop, hearing him say
so, spoke to him in latin, and prayed him to forbear such speeches, telling
him that if they came to the Kings ear, they would be ill taken. For answer
whereunto he said again in english, with a great deal of vehemence and
earnestnes, that the present Persecutions were greater and far more grievous
then those in Queen Mary's dates were; and he gave his reasons for it. For
then, says he, men were quickly dispatched out of the way, whereas now they
are forced to live in misery; and a languishing life every man knows to be a
lingering death. Then men were permitted to speak freely for themselves;
whereas now at the first dash, says he, the Oath is tendered to them, which if
they refuse, to prison they go without any mercy or pity; no bail will serve
the turn. What would this man have said if he had lived to see these times? A
strange kind of creatures these Bishops be: they are neither fish nor flesh,
nor yet good red herring, as the old Proverb is. A man cannot tell what to make
of them. Papists they would not be thought to be, and yet many of them are
little better. Good Protestants surely very few of them be. Those amongst
them, which be not downright Papists, look shrewdly that way, and maintain
many of their gross and absurd opinions, and make no bones to affirm openly,
that there is not such a distance between them and us, but that we may meet
them in the midway; nor such a discrepance and difference betwixt their
religion and ours, but that they may be easily reconciled, if men were
peaceably minded. And accordingly B. Mountague
some of them have mediated most shamefully both in Pulpit and in Print for a
Pacification. and have indevoured to make a hotch-potch and a Gallimawfrie of
both religions mixed and blended together, to the utter subverting and rooting
out of that glorious Gospel of our blessed Lord and Savior, which has been
heretofore for many years most courageously and constantly professed and
maintained amongst us against all adversaries whatsoever. If the Lord be not
the more merciful to us, they will bring us back again into Egypt before we
are aware; for it appears plainly now to all the world, that that is the
thing which they aim mainely at; and it seems that they care not who knows
it. Nor is it any new or strange thing that Bishops should look toward
Popery; for so have their Predecessors done before them: An Blackwel.
Archpriest many years ago being prisoner in the Clinke, where diverse
Ministers of the Gospel were also prisoners at the same time, said to one of
them, that he marvelled of what religion the Bishops of England were. Us,
says he, they committ because we are Papists, as they term us; and you they
commit, because you will not be Papists. That they persecute us, says he, it
is not much to be marvelled at, because there is some seeming difference
between them and us, though it be not much: but that one Minister of the
Gospel should persecute another, and that one Protestant should pursue another
to bonds and imprisonment for religions sake that is a strange thing. But of
the two, says he, they love us the better. A Papist they like well enough, if
they durst shewit, but Puritanes they hate with their heart; and that all the
world may see. Surely he spoke the truth. For Papists they love, and like, and
hug in their bosoms in secret: but Puritanes, as they nickname them, and all
purity and syncerity they do utterly abhor. Are these wolves then fit to
have the government of the sheep of Christ? Nay is it not more then time that
they should be unhorsed, and thrown violently out of their places, before
they ruin and spoil all, which they will do very speedily if they be let
alone? They have already brought this Kingdom into a most lamentable
condition; and if they be not looked to the sooner, it is to be feared that
they will put all into a confusion and combustion; for they are desperately set
upon mischief.

7 It is a matter worthy to be considered of, how our State can quitt it self
of guilt and sin against God, in that it tolerateth, and has not in all this
time with indignation cast out these Antichristian usurpers, which are so
pernicious and prejudicial both to our church and commonwealth. The
Magistrate, by the ordinance and appointment of God, is to take care that both
the Tables of Gods law be duly kept. Now, these proud Prelates are delinquents
against both of them; and they transgress with a high hand. As their places
are accursed, so their demeanor and deportment in them is most tyrannous and
cruel. They rob God of his glory, and the Church of a great deal of comfort;
and the commonwealth they pill and pole above measure. And yet these
sacrilegious and traitorous Time-servers are not only tolerated, but
countenanced also, and upheld amongst us; the more is the pity. For most sure
and certain it is; that when sin in a state is not duly punished, the land
is defiled, and Gods wrath is provoked; which will not be pacified but by
inflicting due and deserved punishment upon Transgressors. Numb. 35.33. In
which regard there if good hope conceived, that our King and State will take
this matter into serious consideration, and will now at last execute the just
vengeance of our God upon these enormous and agregious Malefactors, who have
so long and so despitefully trodden under foot the holy and blessed Ordinances
of Christ, and in stead of them have advanced and set up the fond and foolish
devises of their own giddy brains; which is such a high dishonor to our Lord
Jesus Christ, and such a horrible indignity offered to him, as we have good
cause to hope that this Christian State will no longer endure; especially when
all these things abovementioned shall be laid together, and well weighed in
the balance of Gods Sanctuary;

FINIS.

