TWO TREATISES. The one, Of Repentance, The other, Of Christ's Temptations.
Both penned, By the late faithful Minister of Gods word, DANIEL DYKE,
Batchelour in Divinity. Published since his death by his Brother I D. Minister
of Gods word.

MATTHEW: 3. 2. Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand. LONDON, Printed by
Edward Griffin for Ralph Mab, and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the
sign of the Greyhound. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST VIRTUOUS LADY, the Lady Harrington.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THe Lord has not left himself without many witnesses to call upon us for the
same work, for the which this work does call. An argument that people are
backward, and the duty necessary. If either the men were more forward, or the
duty less important, Quorsum haec profusio? To what end were this waste? What
needed this waste of paper and ink; nay, of the spirits and lungs of Gods
messengers, crying early and late: if people were not too late in that duty,
wherein they cannot be too early? It was not for nothing, that our Savior
yoakes these two petitions together; Give us this day etc. And forgive us our
trespasses. Surely, me thinks, he teaches us, that so long as we have need
to say Give, so long we have need to say forgive, and that daily repentance is
as necessary for the soul, as daily sustenance for the body. And yet such is
the worlds folly, that while they make one to be of an absolute necessity, they
shuffle off the other as a matter of indifferency, at least conceit it not of
that present necessity which we urge. Most deal with Repentance, as country
people with Physicians, they love not to have to do with them, till they fear
they are gasping their last breath, and conceit as great an efficacy in these
five words, Lord have mercy upon me, spoken with their last breath, for the
translation of their souls into heaven, as the Papists do of their five words
of consecration, for the transubstantiation of their host. Nay, without
question many think of their Repentance before their death, as diverse
ridiculously do, of making their wills; That if they make their wills in their
health, it is an ominous presage of their death; That because many make not
their wills but when they die, therefore they must needs shortly die if they
make their wills: The like think many of Repenting in their life time, that
because most make it a deathbed duty, therefore to do this duty, will hasten
them to their death. And so many fearing it in their life, are denied it at
their death. But for the necessity, the worth, the speed of the practice of
this duty, I spare to speak ought. It is the sum of the following Treatise.
A Treatise not of mine own; but of his, whose labors need not fear the light.
Many and worthy indeed are the labors of others, that are extant upon this
argument; and indeed so many, that amongst such a multitude, I should scarce
have adventured this small Treatise, if the general gracious acceptance of his
former works, which I published, had not made way for it. The kind welcome
that it found at the hands of most, seemed to promise that these present labors
should not be fruitless. Thereupon I took heart both to perfect and to
publish this Treatise. And being perfected, I have made bold to commend it to
your La. By your patronage the work may receive grace from you: and by your
diligent perusal of it, you may receive increase of grace from it. The Lord
grace you with all spiritall blessings, till he bring you to Glory, the
perfection of Grace Epping in Essex. April. 18.

Your Honors to be commanded. IER. DYKE.

A TREATISE OF REPENTANCE.
CHAP. I. What Repentance is.
THere is no one point in practical Divinity of greater consequence then this
of Repentance. A nail that all the Sermons both of Prophets, and Apostles were
continually hammering. Christ himself as he continually beat upon it, so in
his last farewell ascending into heaven, in special manner he commended the
preaching, and pressing thereof to his Disciples, telling them, that it was
necessary that Repentance, and Remission of sins should be preached in Luke
24 37.
his name among all nations. In which words Repentance has a double
commendation. 1. That it is joined with remission of sins, and that so, that
none can feel the sweet of it, that feels not the sour of this. 2. That it
is made a doctrine fitting all sorts and conditions. Some doctrines are for
Governors, some for Subjects, some for Rich, some for Poor, some for young,
some for old, some for the wicked, some for the godly, some for the Court,
some for the Country; but Repentance being for sinners, I came to call sinners
to Repentance, Matthew. 9.
it is for all, none can exempt himself from the reach thereof, unless
withal he can free himself from the touch of sin. Therefore it must be
preached among all nations.

Repentance then never being unseasonable, surely not now; when God, what by
our sins, what by his judgments, calls unto weeping and mourning, unto
baldness and girding with sacke-cloath. Is. 22.
And yet behold joy and gladness, slaying of oxen and sheep, Epicure-like
eating of flesh, and drinking of wine. It is high time therefore both for
Press and Pulpit, to ring loud peales of this argument. Which though it be
much in many men's mouths, yet is it little in their reins, being more spoken
of, then understood, and yet better understood then practiced, better known
then felt. Wherefore for our more happy direction in it, let us first see what
it is. Now I think it may not amiss thus be described.

Repentance is a supernatural grace of the sanctifying spirit, whereby a
believing sinner so humbles himself for sin, that he turns from it to the
Lord.

1. I call it a Grace. Some think it only an action. Repentance is a grace
But that phrase Ezech. 12. 10. of pouring the spirit of grace, (meaning
Repentance) on the house of Judah, seems to argue it to be a quality, or
infused gift, so as faith and charity are. So also that phrase of giving
Repentance Acts 5. 31. and 11. 18. for if God give it, we receive it. Now we
cannot properly be said to receive an action which we do, but the power,
gift, or grace whereby we do it. That speech also Matthew. 3. 8. Bring forth
fruits worthy Repentance, shows that Repentance it self is not an outward
action, as the Papists would make it, but an inward grace to be expressed in
outward actions.

2. I call it a supernatural grace, not only in regard Supernatural
of corrupt nature, for so every grace is supernatural, but also of innocent:
for though Adam before the fall had love, fear, temperance, etc. yet Faith and
Repentance had he not; for he needed them not.

This shows that Repentance is not a Legal, but an Evangelical grace. For
all legal graces And therefore Evangelical.
were naturally in Adam. Repentance then belongs to the Gospel. 1. Because
properly it is commanded, as is also justifying faith, in the Gospel. Mark. 1.
14. Christ preached the Gospel. One might think what was that. The next verse
tells us; saying, Repent, and believe the Gospel. 2. It is promised in the
Gospel, in the Covenant of grace Ezech. 36. 26. I will take away the stony
heart out of your body, and give you an heart of flesh. Which that it is a
promise of the Gospel, appears plainly verse. 22. I do not this for your
sakes, but for mine own names sake. And so Ierem. 32. 40. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will never turn away from them to do
them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me. And this is further evident, because Repentance is sealed in the
Sacraments of the Gospel. For Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance.
Luke 3. 3. because it seals up to us Gods promise of Repentance 3. It is
wrought in us by the Ministry of the Gospel, Galat. 3. 2.
whilst it sets before our eyes Christ crucified, and so causes us to lament.
Ezech. 12. 10. Therefore Christ commanded that Repentance should be preached in
his name, who by his obedience has merited it for us as well as remission of
sins Luc. 24. 46. 47. and in this regard is said to be raised up of his
father, to give Repentance to the house of Israel, Acts 5. 31. As for the Law,
it being the ministry of death. 2. Cor. 3. how can it work Repentance which
is unto life? 2. Cor. 7. 10. Acts 11. 18. Repentance is required unto the sense
of mercy and forgiveness. The Law then knowing no forgiveness, neither knows
it any Repentance. When the Law is broken, it requires the suffering of the
curse, and not any Repentance for the avoiding of the curse. It sends us down
to the dungeon of damnation, and seals it upon us with an unremovable stone,
not giving us the least inckling of any recovery. Nay the Law setting out unto
us that most rigorous and precise Justice of God, and his infinite, and
implacable wrath against sin, does in a manner forbid all Repentance. Telling
us it is in vain to seek by our tears and lamentations any mercy at his hands,
who is a consuming fire, a God of pure eyes, and cannot behold iniquity. The
Law then of it self leaves a man in utter desperation, then which what can be
more contrary to saving Repentance? and is no otherwise a schoolmasters unto
Christ, then as the minister of the Gospel makes use of it contrary to it own
nature to drive us unto Christ, by showing the sinner condemned in the Law,
that it were not best for him to trust any longer to the Law, but to accept of
the grace offered in the Gospel.

The Use. 1. If Repentance be a part of the Gospel, then know we it is not so
sour and crabbed a thing as most think. Indeed the Law is pure vinegar. But
the Gospel is refreshing and suppling oil, even the sovereign balm of
Gilead, and of this Gospel, the glad tidings of peace, is Repentance a part.
Yea, it is one of the legacies of the new Testament. A rich treasure purchased
with the blood of Christ. Luc. 24. 46. 47. Sorrow indeed is bitter and
unpleasant to our corrupt nature; yet many things are wholesome, that are not so
toothsome. The sheep of Christ know that to feed upon this salt marsh is the
only preservative against the rot. Therefore nothing is there they less
repent themselves of, then this Repentance, nothing they rejoice more in, then
this sorrow: and good reason. It is a piece of that blessed Gospel.

2. If the difficulty of Repentance discourage thee, remember that the
commandments of the Gospel have grace annexed; by reason the same things that
are commanded in the Gospel are also promised: and so this yoke is sweet and
easy.

3. If the weakness of thy Repentance trouble thee, remember it is an
Evangelical grace: and how little a mite will the Gospel accept? even a penny
for a pound. A desire to repent is Repentance here: and to grieve because we
cannot be grieved, goes current for godly sorrow.

3. In the description I add further, that it is a Wrought by the Spirit, even
grace of the spirit, to show that the Spirit is the author thereof, as
appears, Ezech. 12. 10. I will power the spirit of grace upon the house of
Judah, and then they shall lament. Before we can power out one tear into Gods
bottle, God must power the water of his spirit upon the dry and heathy ground
of our hearts. Romans 8. 26. We cannot breath out so much as a sigh, but the
spirit must first breath it in. We cannot suspirare, unless God do first
inspirare. That we may truly say here with David, in every repenting sigh,
sob, tear, Of thine own, Lord have we given thee. We power out, because thou
have first powered in. Peter weeps, but first Christ looked on him. The waters
flow, but then specially when the wind blows Psalm. 147. 18. Oh to how low an
ebb will the waters of repenting tears come, if this blessed wind of the
Spirit blow not? It is the fire of the Spirit in our hearts (like as in a
Still) that sends up those dewes of repenting tears into our heads, that
drop forth of our eyes.

repentance we break the strong snares of Satan, wherein we are hampered, And
what power shall 2. Tim. 2. 26.
enable us to do that, but that which is stronger then Satan, even the power
of the spirit? Man is like a wild Asses colt, Job 11. 12. will he ever be tame
of himself? no, it is the spirit that must tame and humble him by conuincing
his conscience of sin. Ioh. 16. 8. Man is like a silly lost wandering sheep.
Will he ever be able to get into the high way of himself. No, he must hear
the voice of his shepherd crying behind him, This is the way, walk in it.
Is. 30. 21. Else he will wander in the wrong way irreturneably. Therefore while
that voice sounds in our hearts, while we are called upon by it to day,
harden we not our hearts. While the Spirit stirs in thy heart, as once the
Angel in the poole Ioh. 5. take the opportunity. The Spirit who is the worker
of repentance is not at thy beck. Thou can not set him on work when thou
would, suffer him then to work, when he would. If we could humble our
selves we should never be humble: foreuen this power of humbling our selves
would make us proud. God therefore has reserved it to himself, and his own
Spirit, that so we might be humble indeed; yielding our selves to be wrought
upon by him when he comes, yea and in humility attending upon him, and
waiting for his coming in the exercises of the Word and prayer, as they Acts
1. 4. 14. But how many may be charged, as they Acts 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked,
and of uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted the holy
Ghost. And therefore are ye so hard hearted, and stiff-necked, because you
have resisted the holy Ghost, when he would have bow your necks, and softened
your heart.

4. It is said to be a grace of the sanctifying spirit, The sanctifying Spirit.
to distinguish it from the legal repentance that is sometime in the
reprobate, having received the spirit of bondage unto fear: for this
repentance is a fruit of an effectual calling, Ier. 31. 19. After I was
converted, I repented: and so is peculiar to the regenerate. And hereby also
is it differenced from that blush, and near resemblance of Repentance which is
in such reprobates, as have received the enlightening spirit.

5. It follows in the description; whereby the In order of nature it is after
Faith.
believing sinner. I make the subject of Repentance to be a sinner: for so does
Christ Matthew. 9. showing that such as are perfect need Repentance no more then
whole men do physic. But withal I call this sinner, a believing sinner, to
show that faith must go before Repentance as the ground and root thereof. In
time Faith and Repentance are both together, but in the order of nature, faith
is first.

Reasons. 1. Repentance and grief for displeasing God by sin necessarily
argue the love of God: for a man would never grieve but rather rejoice at the
offense of him whom he hates. When Christ wept for Lazarus, the Jews said, Lo
how he loved him. Ioh. 11. and Christ imputes the repenting tears of that
sinful woman Luc. 7. to love; Much is forgiven her, for she loved much. And
whereas Acts 20. 21. Paul makes Faith and Repentance the sum of the Gospel,
the same Apostle 2. Tim. 1. 13. makes faith and love the sum of it: which
shows plainly that Repentance comes from love, and so consequently from
faith, because faith works by love, Gal. 5. 6. and it is impossible we should
ever love God, till by faith we know our selves loved of God. 2. Repentance
being unto life must needs be drawn out of Christ the fountain of all
spiritual life, and quickening grace. So that a man must first receive Christ
before he can receive Repentance, or any grace from Christ. Now faith is that
which receives Christ: Ioh. 1. 12. 3. Repentance being the softning of our
hearts, and the changing of our natures, how shall our stony hearts be molten,
but in Christ's blood? and what can bathe them in that blood, but faith? And how
shall such wild olive branches as we be changed, but by being engrafted into
Christ as into the natural Olive? And what can ingraft us into him, but faith?
4. It is impossible that a man apprehending nothing in God but rigor and
severity, should ever relent toward him, or come in and submit himself. No,
there is mercy with thee o Lord that thou might be feared, Psalm. 130. This
is it that brings in the sinner creeping and crouching before God; as the
Syrians to Ahab, because they had heard the Kings of Israel were merciful.
Christ's 1. Kin. 20. 31.
gracious aspect cast on Peter drew forth the tears. Gods gracious revealing
of himself not to the ear only, but eye also of Job, made him abhor
himself, and repent, Job 42. 6. hence the exhortations to Repentance are
founded commonly upon the mercy of God in the Gospel, as Ier. 3. 14. O ye
disobedient children return, for I am your Lord. So Matt. 3. Repent for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, in which Christ is ready to dispense mercy and
forgiveness to the repenting sinner: so Os. 6. 1. Joel 2. 13. Romans 12. 1. 2.
Cor. 7. 1. There must be faith then to apprehend at least some hope and
possibility of mercy, or else the sinner will harden his heart, and enrage his
affections, and grow furiously desperate against the Lord. 5. As the legal
Repentance cannot be without Faith, believing the threats of the Law, so
neither by like proportion can the Evangelical Repentance be without faith in
the promises of the Gospel going before.

Ob. Mar. 1. 15. Repent, and believe. Repentance is set first: and so Acts 20.
21.

Answ. 1. The order of placing things in Scripture is not always according to
the order of nature. But sometimes one thing is set first, which in order of
nature is last, as the effect before the cause, and then the cause comes after,
to show how we should obtain the effect. As faith is set after a good
conscience and pure heart, 1 Timothy 1. 5. when yet it is faith that purifieth the
heart, Acts 15. So here: first repent, and then, that ye may repent, believe.

2. Things in Scripture are often propounded according to the order of our
sense and feeling. Now though faith in order of nature be first, and the act of
Faith before the Act of Repentance, yet it is not so lively and strong, and so,
not so sensible to us till after Repentance: for the promises are made only to
repenting sinners.

Ob. Matthew. 21. 32. Ye repented not that ye might believe.

Answ. Sometimes then name of Repentance is given to the first preparatory
beginnings and introductions thereof. Now the preparations to Repentance are
those legal fits of fear and terror which are both in nature and time to,
before Faith.

The Use. 1. Against the Popish Repentance, which is made to go before mercy
and forgiveness, as a meritorious procurer thereof. But as we have seen
Repentance is caused by the taste of Gods mercy by faith. Therefore the Baptist
exhorts to repentance, not that the Kingdom of Heaven may come, as earned
out by the sweat of penance, but because the Kingdom of Heaven is come.
Again, there cannot possibly be any true repentance in Popery: because
repentance springs from the particular apprehension of Gods mercy by faith,
which Popery cannot endure.

2. Against the Libertines abusing Gods mercy, and easiness to forgive, unto
wantonness. As the grace that Kings use to show against Parliaments makes many
thieves. But indeed they are beasts, and no men that sin because of Gods mercy;
and it is an argument that they never by Faith tasted of Gods mercy in the
pardon of their own sins. For they that feel much forgiveness, love much
Luc. 7. If a man should tell a condemned Traitor that his Sovereign would
forgive all his treasons, and restore him to all his former dignities, would
not such mercy make his heart even to melt, and knit him faster in love, and
duty then ever?

3. Here is comfort to all true Repentants that mourn for their sins, and
purpose a new course. This repentance of theirs is an evident argument of their
faith that has tasted of the sweetness of Gods mercy, or else their hearts
would never thus yield, nor relent toward God.

6. It is further added, so humbles himself for It consists of two parts
his sin that he turns from it to the Lord. In which words I set down the
two maine, and essential parts of Repentance, namely, Contrition, or,
Humiliation, and Conversion or Reformation.

That both these are required to repentance may appear,

1. By the very names which Repentance has both in Hebrew, Greek and Latin.
In Hebrew it is called both Nacham and Teshubha, the former (...)
signifying erking, the latter turning. Answerable in the Greek, Metameleia
signifies, after-griefe, (...)
or anxiety of mind after the doing of somewhat; Metanoia, after-wit, or
after-wisdome, when (...)
seeing our error or slip we are better advised, and change our mind. So
Poenitentia, as the word imports the pain of grief, and Resipiscentia the
minds recovering of wisdom, or becoming wiser after our folly. This harmony
of languages as touching the names of Repentance shows plainly there must be
in it these two things, grief for that which is done amiss, and a change of
our mind from that it was before.

2. By the phrases and manner of speech which the Scripture uses touching
Repentance. Sometimes repenting for, or of, as uncleanness, 2. Cor. 12. 21.
for idolatry, Revel. 9. 20. which cannot otherwise be understood then of grief
for the committing of such sins. But sometimes we meet with Repentance from.
Repent from thy wickedness, (...).
Acts 8. 22. And Repentance from dead works, Heb. 26. 2. which cannot in any
congruity of speech note grief, but only a change, or departure from sin.

3. By the description of it in this sort in the Scripture, when it calls men to
repentance; as Joel 2. 11. Turn to the Lord with weeping. Rend your hearts,
and turn to the Lord. That is in one word, Repent. So James 4. after that
Psalm. 8. he had said, Draw near to God, which is the general, or whole of
Repentance, afterward explaining it in the particulars, he adds first, Cleanse
your hearts, and purge your hands. There is Renouation, or Reformation: and
then Psalm. 9. 10. Suffer affliction, that is, be touched with smarting grief
for your sins, as if you were in some grievous outward affliction, Let your
laughter be turned into weeping, humble your selves under the mighty hand of
God. There is the other part, Contrition, or Humiliation. And 2. Chron. 7. 14.
God promising mercy to his people upon condition of their repentance, he thus
describes their repentance. If they shall humble themselves and turn from
their evil ways, making repentance to stand in these two points, in humbling
themselves for, and turning themselves from their sins.

Ob. 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow works Repentance. Here sorrow is
distinguished from repentance, as the cause from the effect.

Answ. Repentance, as may appear by that already spoken, sometimes signifies
only one part of repentance; sometimes only the change and alteration of
mind; sometimes only the touch of the affections. An example of the former is
the place objected: as also Ier. 18. If they repent, it shall repent me of the
evil I had thought, that is, I will alter my mind, and repeal my threatenings.
And Acts 11. 18. where the Jews having heard Peter relate the descents of the
holy Ghost upon the Gentiles in hearing his sermon, conclude thereon; Then has
God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto life. There was no mention
made of any sorrow, or humiliation, but only of the wonderful descent of the
holy Ghost causing them to speak strange tongues, and to magnify the name of
God. Which strange change of their minds by the holy Ghost it seems they
call repentance. But there are examples of the latter also, where repentance
only signifies sorrow, and displeasure with our selves, as Genesis 6. It
repents me I made man. Luc. 17. It repents me; the speech of a trespasser
crying him mercy whom he has offended. And Acts 26. 20. That they should
repent and turn to God. Where Repentance being so plainly distinguished from
Conversion, must needs be restrained to the signification of sorrow and
humiliation. But as from this place we may not gather that Repentance is not a
turning to the Lord, no more may we from that other 2. Cor. 7. that it is not a
godly sorrow.

Ob. One part is not a cause of his fellow-part. But sorrow is a cause of the
change of mind, 2. Cor. 7. 10. Therefore sorrow and change of mind are not
fellow-parts of Repentance.

Answ. One part may be a cause of his fellow-part. As sanctification of the
soul is the cause of the sanctification of the body. And yet both are parts of
sanctification.

Ob. Contrition seems to be a part of the change and alteration. For what
greater change then for a hard heart to turn soft, and a stony to become
fleshie. And this is contrition or humiliation. Therefore Humiliation and
Alteration are not well distinguished.

Answ. The Apostle plainly distinguishes them, when he says, Godly sorrow
causes Repentance, that is the change of mind. For though godly sorrow be a
part and piece of that passive change which is wrought in us at the first
instant of our calling by God, yet it is a cause of the active change, whereby
we change and alter the purpose and resolution of our hearts before set on
sin, and now turn them to the Lord. For were it not that we felt the
bitterness of our sins, and were truly touched in conscience for them, we
would never in good sadness forsake, and abrenounce them.

Howsoever then some late Divines take the word Repentance more restrainedly,
some only for a godly sorrow, others only for a turning from sin to the
Lord, yet the truth is, that Repentance accordingly as it is described in the
Scripture is the connection of them both.

Use. Here then is the trial of our Repentance. If humiliation and
Reformation both meet together, then is our Repentance accomplished. But
either of these single make but a half, and a halting repentance. An
unreformed sorrow is but deformed. And a sorrowlesse reformation is but a very
sorry one. Humiliation without reformation, is a foundation without a building.
And reformation without humiliation is a building without a foundation. To lay
a foundation, and not to build on it, is to no purpose, but to expose our
selves to laughter. Luc. 14. This man began: but could not finish. To build
without a foundation is to play the foolish builder, Luc. 6. 48. for that
building will soon fall, and so all our labor will be lost. Here then is
discovered a double error in repentance.

1. Of such hypocrites as make much ado, and seem to lay their sins much to
heart, and yet still continue in them, bathing and cherishing, not drowning and
choking them in their tears. Such a one was Ahab; who crept and crouched, and
put on sackcloath, being threatened for his cruelty against Naboth. But without
any true reformation, for presently after he fell to as bad cruelty against the
holy Prophet Micaiah Judas was grieved for murdering Christ; yet no change
ensued: he fell to murdering of himself. The Israelites being threatened by
God when as they meditated a return into Egypt, wept and howled. And yet at
the same time being commanded not to go the next way to Canaan, but to fetch a
compass about, they disobeyed. But these men sorrow not aright, because they
sorrow not as the Corinthians did unto a transmentation, unto a change of their
thoughts and purposes from evil to good. It is not possible a man should
truly grieve, and be displeased for his sins, and yet continue in them without
a change. For as one very well says, unless sin be made a wanton it will
not stay. It likes no grimme entertainment. The sad countenance, the weeping
eyes, the frowning forehead dash it quite out of countenance. It is not able to
stand before them. The tears of true Repentance have a purging and a raising
virtue: and therefore the Prophet exhorting to Repentance, says, Wash ye, make
ye clean. These tears therefore Is. 1. 16.
are washing and cleansing tears; where they fall they make clean work,
scouring away the filthiness of our sins. The abundance of natural rain
makes the ways foul that before were fair. But contrarily the more
abundantly this rain falls, the cleaner and fairer are the ways of our
hearts, and fitter for the feet of the Lord to walk in. For this is that same
preparing of the way Matthew. 3.
of the Lord, which the Baptist requires. Worldly sorrow works a change in the
body; it brings gray hairs on the head, and furrows and wrinckles in the
face. It turns youth into old age, and strength into weakness, and so
causes death. But the change of godly sorrow is quite contrary: It turns old
age into youth, and a weakness and sickness into health and strength. No
distillations of waters heal our bodily diseases so, as this water does our
spiritual. This salt brine takes away all our raw humors, and makes us sauory
meat for the Lord. This rain dissolues the clouds of our iniquities, and o
what a pure cleerenesse is there in the heaven of our hearts? And therefore
justly may we suspect their repentance, whose sorrow brings not with it this
happy change.

2. So also may we theirs, whose change and alteration proceeds not from godly
sorrow, and touch of conscience for sin. Let it not suffice us that in many
things we have reformed our ways. For so did Herod, Judas, and many other
temporary believers. But alas this reformation was not grounded upon true
humiliation, and so at length it came to naught, as an vnfounded building. And
therefore by humiliation first dig we deep in our hearts, and cast out the
rotten and unsound ground, and so build we. Excellent is the counsel of
Christ to lukewarm Laodicea, be zealous, that is, reform the fault of thy
luke-warmnesse, Revel. 3.
but withal he adds, and Repent, namely, of thy lukewarmnesse, let the
reformation of thy fault be grounded on sound sorrow for it. So may I say to
the covetous, be liberal, and repent; to the unclean, be chaste, and repent;
to the neglecter of Gods worship, frequent the Church and exercises of
Religion, and repent. Many Professors have made a goodly flourish, and of
covetous have turned liberal, and of profane devout, and who so forward as
they? But when they turned religious they did not heartily repent, and repine
at their former profaneness, grieuing and grudging at the service which
formerly they did Satan. They sowed not the seed of their obedience in tears,
nay with the stony ground they began in joy, and therefore end in sorrow.
Before harvest comes, all is withered, and they become unfruitful. They
began not in humility, and therefore end not in glory. Nay they began in
pride, and therefore end in shame. They began in impenitency, and therefore
end in despair. And thus have we opened the definition of Repentance.

CHAP. II. In what order Humiliation is wrought.
REpentance then consisting of those two parts, Humiliation and Reformation,
let us speak of them both severally. And first of Humiliation, where consider
first the grace it self: And secondly the contraries to it.

In the grace it self four things are to be considered. 1. The Nature. 2. The
Measure. 3. The Use and Excellency. 4. The Practice.

1. For the nature two points must be considered. 1. The nature of Humiliation
in two things.


1. In what order it is wrought. 2. What are the qualities and propeties of it
being wrought.
For the former; it is thus to be considered.

1. The spirit by the shrill trumpet of the Law arouseth the sinners drousie
conscience, sets his 1. The order of it.
sins in order before him, and presents him with that fearful spectacle
of eternal death and condemnation. And that so, that the poor sinner
selfe-conuict, and selfe-condemned holding up his guilty hands before Gods
Tribunal, and receiving the sentence of death, does not only see hell with a
wide and gaping mouth ready to devour him, but even in a manner feels
himself in hell already; the terrors of God fighting against him, and the
envenomed arrows of the Almighty sticking in his ribs; so that in this
perplexity being brought down to the very gate of hell, and feeling the very
flashings of hell fire in his conscience, he cries out, Miserable man that I
am, who shall deliver me? Who shall descend into this deep, to Romans 7.
help me out of the mire, wherein I stick so fast?

A man in this case is like a rock which with some mighty shaking is made to
tremble, but yet still retains his hardness; or as an iron vessel which with
some violent strokes is broken into pieces, but these pieces remain whole and
hard, and are not yet molten by the fire. Now unto humiliation there is
required not only a broken, but also a contrite spirit. And Contrition is when
all is stamped to very dust, and ground as it were to powder, so that there is
a through dissolution of that which before was firmly hardened and compacted
together. But the Law of it self cannot dissolve and soften the hard heart of
man: Therefore the sinner though never so violently shaken and battred with the
thunderbolts of the Law, is not as yet truly humbled, but only prepared for,
and in the way unto humiliation. As when a thing is torn and broken, though
into great and solid lumps, it is nearer to dissolution, then when it was
whole and entire.

2. Therefore the spirit by the hammer of the Law having broken us, does in the
next place by the fire of the Gospel melt us. For the word of God Ierem. 23.
9. is both a hammer breaking the rocks, and a fire. A hammer in the Law: A
fire in the Gospel, which with the heat of Gods love in Christ does melt,
mollify, and dissolve our hearts into the tears of godly sorrow. For after
that in the Law we have seen our miserable and desperate estate in our selves,
we should presently rave, and rage against the Lord, did he not in this our
extremity give us some hope and inckling of mercy; presenting unto our eye the
infinite merits of Christ, the indefinite promises of the Gospel, calling all
without exception to the fruition of those merits, excluding none but such as
exclude themselves, and despise the grace that is offered them. But when once
mercy is tendered to us that stand condemned in the Law, and that only upon
condition of our humble and submissiue embracing of it, Oh then the working of
our bowels! the stirring of our affections! the melting and relenting of our
repenting hearts! reasoning thus with themselves; And is it so indeed? has the
Lord given his own Son to the death to save sinners? and does he offer us the
benefit thereof, who having been such desperate Rebels against him stand cast,
and condemned even in the sentence of our own consciences? What marble breast,
what oaken heart is there whom such kindness would not affect? How can we choose
but out of love and affection toward so sweet and gracious a God, grieve, that
ever we have so grieved him?

And now has Contrition it perfect work in us, when the blood of the Lamb
has melted the Adamant, and the Sunshine of Gods love in Christ has thawen
the ice of our hearts. For before it was the fear of hell, and so indeed
self-love, and in a manner pride that humbled us, because we would not be
miserable. But now it is the love of God that humbles us, because of the wrong
we have done him, who has done us so much good. Before it was the hatred
only of punishment that made us to grieve, but now it is the hatred of sin
(that brings the punishment) and that specially, because displeasing to the
Lord our good God, that causes all the trouble.

And thus we see in what order, and by what degrees Contrition is wrought.

But here certain questions may be moved.

Quest. 1. Whether the sole threatenings and curses of the Law are not of
themselves available unto true contrition? forasmuch as Iosiahs heart melted
in godly sorrow, upon the hearing of the 2. Chro. 34. 27
threatenings.

Answ. Those threatenings were not merely Legal, but such as were qualified
with some tincture of mercy in the Gospel. Afflictions soften our hearts, but
how? no otherwise then as we apprehend Gods mercy in them: So did Josiah
apprehend mercy in those threatenings, and that they proceeded from Gods love,
and so accounted them as the wounds of a friend, and thence came the melting of
his heart. David relented even at Shemeies bitter reuilings, but it was through
the sense of Gods sweet mercy in them.

Quest. 2. Whether God keep the order spoken of constantly in humbling his
children, so that none can truly be grieved for sin till they have been
cast down with legal terrors?

Answ. 1. Many may have the first degree of humiliation by the Law, which never
come to the second by the Gospel. As Judas, Caine, and other Reprobates
utterly overwhelmed with the terrors of the Law, as children sometimes in the
travel are killed with the pains thereof, before they can be borne. But as
there can be no birth without the pains of the travel going before, so
neither no true Repentance, without some terrors of the Law, and streights of
conscience. None can have the second degree without the first.

The Reason is plain. None can have Repentance, but such as Christ calls to
Repentance. Now he calls only sinners to Repentance. Matthew. 9. 13. even sinners
heavy laden with the sense of Gods wrath against sin. Math. 11. 29. He comes
only to save the lost sheep, that is, such sheep as feel themselves lost in
themselves, and know not how to find the way to the fold, Romans 8. 15. Ye have
not again received the spirit of bondage unto fear; which shows that once
they did receive it, namely, in the very first preparation unto conversion,
that then the spirit of God in the Law did so bear witness unto them of their
bondage and miserable slavery, that it made them to tremble. Now there under
the person of the Romans, the Apostle speaks to all believers, and so shows
that it is every Christians common case.

2. Yet all are not handled alike. Though none wholly escape, yet some have
gentler fits then others, and some are but sprinkled in this baptism, wherein
others are even doused over head and ears, and some do but sippe of that
cup, whereof others drink to the very dregs. It is with the travel of a
sinner in his Repentance, as with a woman's in childbirth. None travels here
without pain, yet some are like those Hebrew women Exodus 1. and have a far
quicker dispatch then many others. Those conuerts Acts 2. in their Repentance
had some grudgings and pricks of conscience, but yet they had none of Jobs nor
David's fits which held them many days together. For the same Peter that
wounded, presently healed them, and being filled with the joy of the holy
Ghost, they comfortably conuersed with the Christians. Matthew as it is thought
at his first conversion entertained Christ with a feast, and so did Lydia the
Apostles, which they could not have done, if they had been in any extremities
of the agonies of conscience. God applies himself here to the several
natures, conditions and dispositions of his children.

1. Some have been more heinous sinners, and of longer standing then the rest.
Now the more festred and dangerous the wound is, the sharper must be the cure.
Some sores will as easily be let out with the pricking of a pin, as others
with the Surgeons launching. The more viscous and glutinous the humor is, the
stronger must the purge be. The greater the burden is, the greater will be
the pain of the back. Hence it was that Paul being a more heinous offender
then the rest of the Apostles, as being a malicious persecutor, whereas they
had been honest and sober fishermen, hence it was I say, that he tasted
deeper of this cup then they, as we see Acts 9. insomuch that he says the Law
slew him. Romans 7. Hence also it is that such who in their tender years by
means of religious nurture have been seasoned with the grace of God, dropping
by little and little into them, before any grosser defilement of actual
transgression, do not behold that grim and severe countenance of the Law,
which those commonly see who stand idle to the twelfth hour.

2. God means to employ some in more worthy services. For the which he sees
it fit to prepare them by the deepest humiliation. For the higher, and greater
the building is, the deeper must the foundation be laid in the earth.

3. Some are of greater places and parts then others, some naturally of a more
crabbed and crooked disposition, some more stout, bold, hardy then others. Now
the hard knotty wood must have a hard wedge. An angry word or look works more
upon a softly, then an hundred blows would upon a cross and sturdy spirit.
Both these reasons hold also in S. Paul that Prince of the Apostles, ordained
of God to be a worthier instrument then the rest, being a man of great parts
and singular learning, and withal, as it should seem by the story, of a
fierce and fiery spirit. So great personages whose high places puff them up,
that they may truly repent had need to be taken down thoroughly with a deep
sense of the legal terrors. For even we poor worms that have nothing almost
either in regard of our parts or places to make us swell, see yet, what a do we
have to be humbled, and what need we have of the wedge of the Law, and
afflictions to be driven in thoroughly into our hearts.

Quest. 3. To what end and purpose does the Lord thus exercise his children,
whom he brings to repentance?

Answ. There are more especially six reasons of Gods proceeding in this manner.

1. To urge them to seek unto Christ, as the hunted beast flies to his den,
and the pursued malefactor to the horns of the altar, and as under the Law
the chased man-killer to his city of refuge. Thus Agar confounded with the
sense of his own brutishness fled unto Ithiel, and Vcal, that is Christ
Jesus. Prou. 30. 1. 2. 3. Paul likewise when so followed by the Law that being
almost out of breath, he cried out, Miserable man that I am, hides himself in
the hole of this rock, even in the wounds of Christ. I thank God through
Jesus Christ, Romans 7. Thus the destroying Angel drove the Israelites into
their chambers, and made them lurk there. Exodus 12. 32. Is. 26. 20. and David's
deepes made him send forth many a deep sigh, and strong cry to the throne of
grace Psalm. 130. 1. as Christ himself did in the like case. Hebr. 5.

2. To bring their tastes into better relish with Christ. Thirst makes us
relish our drink; Hunger our meat. The full stomach of a Pharisie surcharged
with the superfluities of his own merits, will loath the hony-combe of Christ's
righteousness. Their heart is fat as grease (says David) but I delight in thy
Law. By the opposition showing that Psalm. 119. 70.
it is only the lean heart, pined and pinched with spiritual famine that
feels delight in the promises. This was it which made that young Prodigal to
relish even servants fare, though before wanton, when full fed at home.
Nothing more unsavory to a senseless brawny heart then Christ's blood. No more
relish feels he in it, then in a chip. But o how acceptable is the fountain
of living waters to the chased Heart panting and braying? The blood of Christ to
the weary and tired soul? to the thirsty conscience scorched with the sense of
Gods wrath? He that presents him with it how welcome is he? even as a special
choice man, one of a thousand. The deeper is the sense of misery, Job 33. 19.
23.
the sweeter is the sense of mercy. The traitor laid down on the block is
more sensible of his Sovereigns mercy in pardoning, then he who is not yet
attached. Therefore cxcellently S. Paul, God has shut up all under sin, that
he might have mercy on all. As though he could not show mercy without showing
justice, because we cannot taste the sweet of his mercy, unless before our
mouths be imbittered with the wormwood of his justice. With thee the father
lee shall find mercy, says repenting Hos. 14. 4.
Israel. When a man is brought into the straits of a poor desolate shiftlesse
orphane, then is he fit for mercy. Sweetly Bernard, God poures not the Deus
non infundit oleum misericordiae nisi in vas contritum.
oil of his mercy, save into a broken vessel. For indeed whole vessels are
full vessels: And so Gods precious oil would run over, and be spilt on the
ground if powered into them. Therefore first must they be emptied of their evil
liquour; and that they cannot, unless Gods hand shake, tumble, batter and
break them, and then will they be capable of that oil.

3. To work a more perfect cure of their sins. For the cure of the stone in
the heart is like that of the stone in the bladder. God must use sharp
incision, and come with his pulling and plucking instruments, and rend the
heart in pieces, ere that sin can be got out of it. Even as a tree that is
deeply rooted in the earth, cannot be plucked up by the very roots, but the
earth though firm before, must be broke up. And as in a lethargy it is
needful the patient should be cast into a burning fever, because the senses
are benumbed, and this will wake them, and dry up the besotting humors; so in
our dead security before our conversion, God is feign to let the Law, Sin,
Conscience and Satan loose upon us, and to kindle the very fire of hell in our
souls, that so we might be roused: Our sins stick close unto us as the
prisoners bolt, and we are shut up under them, as in a strong prison: and
therefore unless, as once in Paul and Silas their case, an earthquake, so
here there come a mighty heart-quake, violently breaking open the prison
doors, and shaking of our fetters, never shall we get our liberty. We go on
resolutely and stoutly in our sins, and unless we be scared as once Balaam
in his covetousness by the naked sword of the Lord threatening destruction, we
will never turn back. How violently did Satan drive Paul in the way of
persecution? Would he ever have given over, if a contrary wind had not
encountered him, and blew him off his horse, and smit him down to the ground
dead and blind? But then he had his lesson given him for ever persecuting
more. How now Paul is it good persecuting? how now unhappy venturous child is
it good running near the fire, the water, when thy father shall take thee up by
the heels, and scorch thee, and drench thee, and almost let thee quite fall
in? How now Lot, is it good staying in Sodom, when fire and brimstone are
coming about thine ears? If David like of his broken bones, let him fall
again to murder and adultery. If thou like the sour sauce of a guilty
hellish conscience, fall to the sweet meat of thy sin, and eat unto surfeit. But
this sour sauce makes the Elect of God loath their meat, though never so
sweet. When they see they cannot retain their right hands, eyes and feet,
without such aches, such tortures, yea and danger of the overthrow of the whole
body, then they yield them to the cutting and mortifying hand of the Surgeon.
Then farewell profit, farewell pleasure, treasure and all, rather then I will
endure such a rack, such a hell in my conscience.

4. To make us the more pliable to Gods will. How refractary was the woman of
Samaria, till Ioh. 4.
Christ sat as a Judge in her conscience, and pinched her with that close
imputation of adultery. There was no dealing with Job till the whirlwind
schooled Job.
him. An vnhumbled sinner is as unfit for Gods instruction, as an unbroken colt
for the saddle, and as the hard and clotty fallow ground not subdued by Ierem.
4.
the plough is for the seed. Who can weilde a mighty hard rock? but let it
be broken to fitters, and stamped to dust, the hand of the Artificer may work
it as he will. When Isay Is 6. Acts 9.
and Paul were tamed with the terrors of the Lord, then, Lord here I am. What
will thou have me do? When the Lions and Bears are meekned, then a little
child may lead them. Is. 11. Hence those speeches, The Lord shall direct the
humble. Humble Psalm. 25. Mic. 6. 2. Chro. 30. 8. Ierem. 44. 10.
thy self to walk with thy God. Be not stiff-necked, but give the hand to
the Lord, to be lead by him. They are not humbled, neither have they walked in
the ways of the Lord. There is no more resistance in a bruised heart against
the Lord, then in soft wax against the seal.

5. To procure us the sounder comfort. Whole sores throb and rage. Ease is by
breaking. The deeper the wound is searched and teinted, and the sharper
corrasiues be applied, the sounder will the flesh be afterward. The lower ebb,
the higher tide. The deeper our descent in Humiliation, the higher our ascent
in Consolation. Therefore when Christ promises us his spirit to be our
Comforter, he shows this shall be the first groundwork of Comfort which he
shall lay, the conuincing of our conscience of sin. I will send the
Comforter, and he Ioh. 16.
shall convince the world of sin. A miserable Comforter one would think; no,
but mark whether this Conviction of sin tends. For it is added, that he
shall convince them of righteousness; After he has soundly convicted them of
sin in themselves unto condemnation. He shall to their comforts convict their
judgments, and persuade their hearts of righteousness in Christ unto
justification. So the Prophet shows how his peace was wrought out of his
trouble, When I heard, my belly Hab. 3. 16.
trembled, my lips shook, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled,
but mark the end of all this, that I might rest in the day of trouble. Surely
after the most toylesome labor is the sweetest sleep. After the greatest
tempests the stillest calmes. Sanctified trouble establishes peace. And the
shaking of these winds makes the trees of Gods Eden take the deeper rooting.

6. God herein has respect to his own glory which he gains to himself in
working thus by contraries, joy out of fear, light out of darkness, heaven
out of hell. When he meant to bless Jacob Genesis 32.
he wrestled with him as an adversary, even till he lamed him. When he meant
to prefer Joseph to the throne, he threw him down into the dungeon; to the
golden chain about the neck, he laded him with iron ones about his legs,
and caused the iron to Psalm. 105.
enter into his soul. When he meant to make a most beautiful and orderly
world, he makes first a vast gulf, a gross Chaos, wherein was nothing but
darkness and confusion: and yet out of it he caused light to shine, and out of
it brought he this goodly frame of heaven and earth which now we see. Even so
in the second creation which is by Regeneration, first there is nothing but a
hellish Chaos of darkness in the mind, of Confusion in the heart, and yet at
length comes forth the goodliest creature that ever was, the new creature in
Christ.

The Use of all this is,

1. To discover their error who think they have true Repentance, when they
have only some legal qualmes of sorrow, some stirrings and stingings of
conscience, which even the fiends in hell have, who yet are incapable of
Repentance. Indeed these are preparations to Contrition as we heard in the
Elect, and are as the pricking of the needle before the thread. But contrition
it self is a further matter. Christ biddes the heavy laden come unto him, and
learn of him to be humble. A man therefore may be heavy laden, and as yet
not come to him, nor truly humbled. When those whom Peter pricked asked what
they should do to be eased of that pain, he prescribed them Repentance, as
the salve for that sore of a wounded conscience. A man may have a sore, and
feel it, and yet want the salve that should heal it. And yet the feeling of
the sore is the first step to recovery. For this makes us enquire after the
salve.

2. To terrify such as being stupefied in conscience, and are wholly
insensible of sin, can carry it away lightly as Sampson did the gates of the
city, and their backs never complain of the burden. These blocks, that never
in their life were moved with Gods threatenings, never in any straight of
conscience, never groaned under the burden of Gods anger, they have not so
much as entered into the porch of this house, or lift the foot over the
threshold of this school of Repentance. In David's Repentance for numbering the
people, this is noted at the first step, his heart smote him, So in 2. Sam. 24.
his Repentance for adultery, he notes this to be the ground, My sin is
ever before me. The terrible Psalm. 51.
image thereof affrights me continually. But for these Brutes, their sin is
ever behind them. Nothing is before them, but their profits, their pleasures,
their bags, their barnes. And the delightful image of these things so
bewitches and besots them, that they will never see the face of sin, till
they feel the fire of hell. And just it is, that such who will not see sin
here by the light of Gods word, should at last see it for ever by the light of
the Devils fire.

3. To comfort such as are distressed in conscience in the apprehension of Gods
wrath against their sin. It is a special work of the spirit thus to
discover unto them their misery, and in the sight thereof to touch their heart.
Ye have not again received Romans 8. 15.
the spirit of bondage unto fear, says Paul. The word Received implies that
the trouble of conscience is to be accounted of, as a gift: and the word Spirit
shows the author of the gift. Here is comfort then; thou art in the way to
salvation, thou have received the first gift which the spirit bestows upon
all those whom it brings to Repentance, in that thou see thy bondage, and
tremblest. Yea, but poor comfort thou will say, to behold and feel God as an
enemy, with his sword wounding me, and then with his nail continually raking
in the wounds, with his axe continually hewing and hacking me, yea, and quite
cutting me down, and laying me flat on the ground. Silly man who see not the
depth of Gods wisdom. Gods wounds are not mortal but medicinable, the wounds
not of a Swash-buckler, that gives a gash and runs away, but of a Surgeon
that wounds and then heales; God sees the Devil has given thee many a secret
wound which will fester, unless he heal them with these wounds of his. Gods
axe hewes thee down not for the fire, but for the building, that thou may be
a pillar in his house. The Revel. 3.
Mason pluckes down an house, but not with an intent to destroy it, but to
re-edifie it, and raise it up again in better form and fashion. God brings
thee down to the belly of hell, but it is but to bring the up into the bosom
of Abraham. He sends his Sergeant to arrest thee for thy debt, commands thee
and all thou have to be sold. But he does but dissemble, and hide his
fatherly affections, as once Joseph did his brotherly; His meaning is in
conclusion to forgive thee every farthing. He scorches thee with the heat of
his wrath, and afflicts thee with a marvelous thirst like that of Dives. But
in the midst of thy extremity he releeues thee as once Hagar, opening thine
eyes to see that Zach. 13. 1.
blessed Fountain issuing out of the pierced side of Christ. He troubles thy
heart, and stirs up the mud of thy guilty conscience, but it is no otherwise
then the Angel troubled the poole of Bethesda; Genesis 9.
now may thou expect health and help. The rainbow though it threaten
rain, yet it is a sign the world shall no more be drowned with rain. So the
wounds and terrors of conscience, though they threaten damnation to the Elect,
yet are they a sign, that they shall not be overwhelmed with it. Nay as the
sottish security of the wicked is a sign of undoubted destruction, as in the
old worlds profane worldliness, and Baltashars sacrilegious carousings: so
contrarily, here terror and trouble are forerunners of assured peace. As when
they cry peace, peace, heaven, heaven, hell and perdition are at hand: so when
these in their distress cry, Hell, Hell, damnation, damnation, Heaven and
salvation are at hand. And surely, much better is this hell which leads unto,
and ends in an eternal Heaven, then that transitory heaven of secure
worldlings, which ends in an everlasting hell. Happy then are we if we have
so our hell in this life, that we may have our Heaven for ever in the life to
come. Be not afraid of this hell which will deliver thee up safely into Heaven:
fear not that fall into Gods dungeon which shall rebound thee back into his
palace. Fear not that hand which in killing quickens, in oppressing eases: nay
even in the valley of death, may thou boldly say, Thy rod, even thy smiting
rod, comforts me; In the midst of these sore travels and troubles, looking
with the Psalm. 23.
travailing woman to the joyful issue, the happy birth of saving Repentance.
Remembering that the short pain of this Surgeons cutting of thee, shall ease
thee of that continual and far heavier pain of the stone in thy heart.
Surely, as when Christ called the blind man the Disciples said. Be of good
comfort, he calls thee: so may I boldly say to all burdened in consciencc:
Be of good comfort, Christ Jesus calls you, saying, Come unto me all ye
that are heavy laden that I may ease you. If thou feel the weight of this
burden now, there is Matthew. 11.
one that will translate it from thy shoulders to his own. If not, thou shall
certainly feel it in the life to come; when thou alone must bear it for
ever. Is it not then a happy turn, that since thou must be thus burdened
here, or hereafter thou art laden here, where Christ may ease thee, so that
thou may avoid that clog in hell, easelesse and eternal.

CHAP. III. Of the properties of Humiliation.
Having seen the order how Humiliation is 2. The properties,
wrought, in the next place we must consider of the properties thereof; which
though they be many, yet may be comprised all under that one of Paul's, 2. Cor.
7. 10. Godly sorrow.

For this sorrow or humiliation may be called It is godly in four respects.
Godly in diverse respects.

1. Because it makes us grieve for the offense of 1. It grieves for the offense.
God by our sin, and not so much for the offense of our flesh by the
punishment. For Paul opposes it to worldly sorrow which is for crosses and
punishments. The repenting Israelites sorrow is thus described by Ezechiel,
They shall remember me because Ezech. 6. 9.
I am grieved for their whorish hearts, etc. and they shall be displeased in
themselves for all their abominations. The ground of their grief was that they
had grieved God with sinning, and not that God had grieved them with punishing.

By this we may judge of our sorrow. For godly sorrow laments after the Lord;
as it is noted in those Israelites, 1. Sam. 7. 1. not after our own ease and
freedom from pain. Godly sorrow says with David; Take away the trespass,
not with Pharaoh, 2. Sam. 24.
the plague. Nay, it submits it self to any punishment, so the sin may be
pardoned. Let thy hand be upon me, and my fathers house. And though there were
no punishment, yet it would grieve in kindness toward so merciful and
forgiving a father, that is offended. The humiliation of the wicked is not so.
If there were no sparks of fire in hell, there would be no drops of water in
their eyes. Their humiliation is wrung from them only by the sting and guilt
of conscience, which may enforce them to let go their hold of sin, and wish
for the time to be rid of it. The distemper and pain of the dogs stomach,
not the dislike of the meat in it makes him cast up his gorge. For afterward he
returns to his vomit. And so does the humbled hypocrite to his sin. Which
shows he fell not out with his sin, but with his affliction; whereas godly
humiliation in true Penitentiaries proceeds from the love of God their good
father, and so from the hatred of that sin that has displeased him. As it
was the sent of the mirrhe Christ had dropped upon the bar that wakened Cant.
5. 4. 5.
the drousie spouse, and made her bowels to fret within her in godly
indignation. And the sweeter that mirrhe did smell, the more filthy was the
sent of her sin in her nostrils.

2. Because where the least seed of it is, it drives 2. It drives to God.
us to God in our greatest extremities, to seek ease and remedy of him. The
Reprobate in their sorrow run away from God, even as a dog from him that
whippeth him. Judas in his terrors ran to the high Priests the enemies of
Christ, and to the halter. Cain to building of cities. Saul to music, to a
witch, and at last to his sword. But the godly they even out of the deepes with
David, and Psalm. 130. 1.
out of the belly of hell with Jonas call upon God. Even when wounded by God
they go to him to Ion. 2. 2.
be healed. Come let us return to the Lord, he has Hos. 6. 1.
wounded us, and he will heal us. The Reprobate in hell weep and wail, and
yet no godly sorrow there, because they cannot cry to God. Excellently Luther,
Hell were no hell if the least whispering unto God could be heard there.
Despair stops the mouth of the Reprobate, that they cannot speak one word to
God in their deiections, so as the godly do. As Jonas complaining of God in the
whales belly, complains yet to God, Thou have cast me out. Whereas a Reprobate
as Calvin notes, would have said, He has cast me away, in the third person.

Here then is further trial of our sorrow and Repentance, if as Paul speaks
in another case, We mourn not without hope, if as the Lord inuites us, we 1 Thessalonians. 4. Is. 1. 18. Mar. 1. 15.
can come, and reason with him, if as Christ commands we repent, and in
repenting believe, that as our sin, so also Gods mercy be ever before us. The
wicked as they believe without repenting, their faith being presumption, so
they repent without believing, their repentance is desperation. And therefore
they mutter and murmr, like the chafe which when it is shaken, flutters in
the face of the fanner, as angry with him. But the Godly are good wheat falling
down at the feet of the fanner, as those conuerts that humbled themselves and
sought for ease of him that pricked them, Men Acts 2.
and brethren what shall we do? And the reason is, because they have faith
supporting them, that they sincke not in the Deepes of Desperation. As in David
in the 51. Psalm; when begging mercy, his wounded conscience objected, the
greatness of his sins, faith opposes the greatness and multitude of Gods
mercies. According to the multitudes of thy compassions. And again to that
objection of the deep rooting of his sin, because he had lien in it three
quarters of a year, Faith answers, Wash me thoroughly. There is no stain so
deep, but thy hand can fetch it out. Here David's faith plucked him out of the
mire, and made him come to the Lord clinging and clasping about him.

3. Because it is offered up to God as a service 3. It is voluntary.
and sacrifice, and that with a free and voluntary spirit, Psalm. 51. The
sacrifices of God are a broken and contrite spirit. The Godly are Agents in
their sorrow. For because it is mingled with the sense of joy in the
apprehension of Gods love by faith, they take delight therein, and their tears
become their meat, Psalm. 42. This voluntarinesse of sorrow in the Godly
appears in two things.

1. In the Use of all good incentiues and prouokements thereof. They work and
labor their hearts what they can thereto: according to that commandment James
4. Suffer affliction. And nothing grieves them more then that they cannot
grieve. But the wicked are mere patients in their sorrow, because wanting
faith to temper the cup they drink nothing but pure gall, yea, deadly poison.
Hence those strugglings, those wrastlings with, and murmurings against God.
With the sturdy horse they irefully champ the bit, and desire nothing more then
to have the deadly arrow fall out of our side. Hence those so many sleights of
their feasting, music, mirth, pastime to drive away this so unwelcome a
ghuest. Which the Godly have both invited and welcomed with sack cloth,
ashes, fasting, going into the house of mourning, rending of clothes, and
pouring forth whole buckets of water, as some expound that 1. Sam. 7. 6.

2. In turning every thing unto sorrow, worldly not only griefs, but even
joys also. According to that of James, Let your laughter be turned into
weeping: that is, let your laughter be made the matter of your weeping. Let it
be the fuel to feed that fire. So does repenting Solomon Eccl 2. out of the
honey of his abused pleasures he gathers gall, contrary to the Be, sucking
sweetness out of bitterness. The pleasant witted man will turn every thing
to a lest, even sad and serious: but the touched sinner every thing unto
sorrow, even sweet and joyful. The practice of Bradford that worthy M.
Samsons preface to his Sermon of Repentance.
Repentant in this kind was very memorable: who to this purpose booked every
notable accident each day that passed; and that so, that in the penning a man
might see the signs of his smitten heart. For if he did see or hear any good
in any man; by that sight he found and noted the want thereof in himself,
craving mercy and grace to amend. If he did see or hear any plague and misery,
he noted it as a thing procured by his own sins, and still added, Lord have
mercy on me.

4. Because it keeps our hearts in a blessed frame 4. It fits for holy duties.
of godliness; fitting them for prayer, meditation, reading, hearing,
conference, admonition, or any other spiritual duty. Worldly sorrow is a heavy
leaden thing, making a man fitter to sleep then to pray, as we see in Jonas,
and the Disciples. But godly sorrow in the sense of Gods love is fresh and
lively and full of spirits. We never pray or perform any Christian duty
better, then when our hearts are fullest of this sorrow.

Again, it makes the heart exceeding soft and tender, and so sensible even of
the least sins. As David's heart smote him for cutting off but the lap of
Saul's coat, and for the entertainment of evil motions, Why art thou
disquieted, why frettest thou my Psalm. 42.
soul. It makes the heart like the eye that will feel the least mote, or like
a straight shoe that cannot endure the least pebble stone, which in a wide one
would never be perceived.

And thus we see the properties of true Sorrow or Contrition, that it is both a
loving Sorrow, proceeding from the love and affection of our hearts toward the
Lord, and a believing Sorrow, coming to God, and fastening upon his mercy, and
a willing and voluntary Sorrow, delightfully bathing it self in her tears,
and lastly, a soft and tenderhearted Sorrow, working a disposition unto
devotion. And therefore woorthily called godly Sorrow. And of the nature of
humiliation so much.

CHAP. IV. Of the measure of Humiliation.
THe next point is touching the measure of Humiliation or Sorrow for sin.
Where I 2. The measure of it.
propound three rules.

1. Rule. Of all other sorrows, sorrow for sin must be the greatest.

Reason. 1. Grief is founded in love. According as our love is, so is our
grief. But our love of God, and his favor is the greatest love, and therefore
our grief for his offense by sin, the greatest grief. Therefore as David
says, Thou have given me Psalm. 4.
more joy in the light of thy countenance, then they have had when their corn
and oil abounded: So on the contrary must every Christian say, I have had more
grief in procuring thy displeasure by sin, then the worldlings have had in
the miscarriage of their corn and oil. 2. According to the greatness of the
Evil must sorrow be proportioned. Now of the two Evils, the Evil of sin is
far greater then the Evil of punishment. For it is only sin that grieves
the spirit of God, and depriues us of the favor of God. Affliction and Gods
spirit can agree very well. Therefore David describing true blessedness
remooues nothing from it but sin, as being that which only makes us
miserable. Surely they [the blessed men] work no iniquity. And not, surely
they suffer no adversity. Psalm. 119. 3.
Sin therefore being the greatest Evil, craves the greatest sorrow. 3. The
precepts and examples in the Scripture show as much. Though in worldly sorrow
baldness was forbidden the Jews, yet in sorrow for sin it was commanded
them. The Lord calls unto mourning, etc. and unto baldness, Isay 22. 13.
says Esaias. A plain argument of a greater sorrow expected for sin, then
they ought to have for any outward worldly cross whatsoever. David says, his
eyes gushed out with rivers of water for other men's Psalm. 1 19.
sins. What then did they for his own? Great is that Hyperbole, and it
argues an hyperbolicall and excessive sorrow; I caused my bed every night to
swim, Psalm. 6. 6.
and not only so, but water my pallet that lies beneath my bed, with my tears.
Implying, that if his head could contain so much water, the grief of his
heart could furnish it. In the same sense do some take that of the repenting
Israelites, that they drew 1. Sam. 7.
water, and powered it out before the Lord. And thus does Zachary describe the
sorrow of true Repentants, that even after plenty of tears and lamentations
Zach. 12.
in public, yet the fountain shall run still in private, and flow from the
Church to the private closet, every soul mourning in secret by himself. And
which is strange, that the lamentations of one poor woman weeping solitary in
her closet, shall equal that great mourning of the whole multitude in the
valley of Megiddo for the death of Josiah.

Far then are they from Repentance, who though they can cry and howl on
their beds when their money, their houses, their lands are gone, what speak
I of so great matters? The death of a cow, or the loss of a few pigges will
pinch them sore. And yet their maine, and fearful sins could never yet draw
so much as one tear from their eyes, or fetch one sigh from their hearts.

Quest. 1. Are Tears necessarily required in this sorrow.

Answ. 1. Sometimes want of tears proceeds from abundance of grief, so
oppressing the mind that it cannot ease it self by weeping. As in him that
weeping at the death of his friend, could not yet weep at the death of his
own son.

2. Sometimes the constitution of the body will yield no tears. The trial
here is the same, as in the matter of memory. If a man have a natural defect
in his memory, which is the cause he can remember but very little of a sermon,
then neither will he remember much of a tale, of a play, of worldly matters.
So if the constitution or complexion deny tears in sorrow for sin, neither
will it afford them in worldly sorrow. But as thy ability to remember worldly
matters, when thou have none to remember Gods, argues no natural infirmity,
but a sinful corruption of memory, so is it here. If thou can weep
plentifully for worldly losses, and yet have dry cheeks for thy sins, this is
from the corruption of thy heart, not from the constitution of thy body.

Quest. 2. May not the child of God feel more grief for some worldly
crosses, then he does for his sins.

Answ. 1. Sorrow may be considered either as it is in the will, and so it is
nothing but the displeasure and dislike of that which the understanding
apprehends as evil. Or as it is in the sensitive faculty of the soul,
common with us to the beasts. In the former way Gods children feel greatest
Thom. supplem. qu. 4 art. 1. Bellar. de poen. l. 2. c. 11.
sorrow for sin. Their will sanctified and directed by the spirit detests,
abhors nothing more then to sin against God. But yet all the children of God
do not feel such a sensible stinging smarting grief for their sin in the
sensitive faculty, as they do for diverse outward afflictions. For the more
corporal a thing is, the nearer is it, and more familiar to the sensitive
faculty, and so pinches more there. For example: in extremity of toothach, or
in the burning of ones finger, there is a more sensible grief felt, then in a
lingering fever, or then is sometimes in death it self. And yet the will guided
by right reason dislikes the fever and death far more then the toothache.

2. Greatness of grief may be measured either by the violent intension, or by
the constant continuance and duration. Now that which is wanting to the grief
of Gods children for their sins the former way, is recompensed, and made up
in the latter. Their grief for sin is not so extremely violent, because of
the joy and comfort of the holy Ghost, which they feel in the midst of their
heaviness: and yet this joy does not any way lessen the displeasure of our
wills against sin (though it qualify the sensible smart) nay rather it
increases it. For as joy and delight in learning makes the scholar learn the
better, so delight in godly sorrow sets us forward in it, but yet as we said it
mirigates the extremity of passion so, that oftentimes the children of God are
for the time more violently tormented for their crosses, then for their sins.
As David cried out vehemently, O Absalom, Absalom, but not O Vriah, Vriah. Yet
his grief for Vriahs death was a more settled and constant grief, as
oftentimes the stillest waters are deepest. My sin is ever before me, so was
not Absolons death. That was soon over. Job says, that he possessed the sins
of his youth, Job. 13. 26.
even in his old age: but he says not that he possessed the afflictions of
his youth. Time had worn away those sorrows: for they are but like a sudden
dashing tempest, but sorrow for sin is like the still, soft, but soaking
raines that wets to the very roots. The one is like a mighty torrent or
land-flood, soon dried up, or a blaze of thorns soon extinct, the other like
a little spring always running, or a constant fire holding out the whole day.

Ob. We are bidden rejoice always, how then can we sorrow always for our
sins.

Answ. 1. These two may well stand together, because godly sorrow ministers
matter to us of joy. Let the Repentant always sorrow and rejoice Semper doleat
poenitens, and de dolor gaudeat. Pro. 14.
in, and for his sorrow, says Austin. As in profane joy, even in laughing the
heart is sorrowful, so in godly sorrow, even in weeping the heart is light and
cheerful. Though sin grieve us, yet our grieuing for sin pleases us. As
when we see a good man wronged, we grieve at his wrong, but rejoice in his
goodness. 2. Though actual sorrowing and rejoicing may seem not so well to
agree, yet habitual may. Yea, habitual sorrow may stand with actual joy; and
contrarily; now when we say, A Repentant must always be sorrowful, we mean
habitually, in regard of the preparation of heart, so that he do nothing
contrary to this sorrow, which should take away the disposition of his heart
thereto, but always maintain a purpose to dislike, and be displeased with
sin. And thus are all those precepts, of rejoicing, praying, giving thanks
always to be understood.

The Use. This gives a check to the slightness of our sorrow for sin. A
sigh and away, no, but we must feed and nourish this sorrow, never satisfy
our selves, but wish with the Prophet, that our heads were continual,
vnemptiable fountains of tears. Ierem 9.
Mine eye droppeth without stay, says the repenting Church of Israel. But how
soon are our tears dried up? If this plaster of sorrow begin to smart a
little, presently we pluck it off, and think it is enough: whereas we should
let it lie on till the sore be thoroughly healed, which is not till death, when
as all tears, and so these of godly sorrow shall be wiped away. Paul in the
height of his Christianity still continued mourning, I am carnal, etc.
Miserable Romans 7.
man, etc. Even the best of us carry about us the matter of our humiliation,
the poisoned root of sin, which is continually branching forth some
corruption or other. Our hearts are continual fountains of sin, and
therefore our heads also must be continual fountains of sorrow, to allay in
some measure the stench of that filthy puddle. Peter after his bitter tears
was yet thrice pinched with that nipping question, Simon love thou me? that
he might yet be more seriously humbled. And to the same Ioh. 21.
purpose would God needs speak the second time out of the whirle-winde, to
Job though repenting at the first speaking. So repenting Jonas must be Job 40.
thrown into the sea, and humbled, David must be further humbled with the
loss of his child, with the treasons and villainies of Absolon. God would
never have the wounds of godly sorrow so skinned up, but that they may be
ready to bleed a fresh upon every occasion. Yea, he would have a continual
issue kept in them. David mourned at Nathans rebuke: but that mourning could
not content him. He goes to it a fresh in the 51. Psalm, and even soakes and
souses himself in this brine. It is a deep and piercing sorrow that God
requires. Even such a one that should drown all other sorrows. As when the
stone and gout meet together, the pain of the stone being the more grievous,
takes away the sense of the gout: even so should it be with us here. When
sin and affliction Cumque sit exilium, magis est mihi culpa dolori. Est que
pati poenam, quam mernisse minus.
are both upon us at once, the desert of the punishment should so grieve us,
that the punishment it self should not be heeded. But it is contrary: Worldly
sorrow blunts the edge of Godly.

2. Rule. Though this sorrow must be the chiefest, yet it must be moderated,
for though we cannot exceed in the displeasure of our wills against sinnne;
yet we may in the testification of this displeasure in weeping, fasting,
pining, and macerating the body. Besides that in the best there is a mixture of
the Legal humiliation with the Evangelical; and it is one of Satan's wiles to
draw us from godly sorrow to desperation. Whereupon Paul wills the
Corinthians to look that the incestuous person should not be swallowed up of
too much heaviness. 2 Cor. 2 7. 8 11.
For as too much honey is not good, so neither too much wormwood. That weeping
is not good which blindes the eye of our faith, but only that which quickens it.

3. Rule. Sorrow must be proportioned to our Quam magna deliquimus tangranditer
defleamus. Cypr.
sins. The greater our sin the fuller must be our sorrow. David was not so
much afflicted for his other lesser infirmities, as for his murder and
adultery. The medicine must be answerable to the malady. The antidote to the
poison.

CHAP. V. Of the use and excellency of Humiliation.
THe third point to be considered in Humiliation 3. The use and excellency of
it in that
is the Use and Excellency thereof, which shows it self in many particulars.

1. It is the ground of all true renouation and reformation. 1. It is the
ground of reformation.
We cannot alter the form of our vessels of metal which dislike us, unless
we melt and dissolve them, and then may we cast them into what mould we will.
Such vessels when they are broken may be bound up, or helped by soddering, but
that's nothing, unless they be molten, and so made new again. No more will
any thing help thoroughly to amend our sinful hearts, as long as they
remain in their hardness, till they be thoroughly liquefied and molten in
true humiliatition; Ierem. 5. 3.
They have made their faces harder then a stone (says Jeremy) they have
refused to return. Therefore Iam. 4. 8. 9. 10.
the Apostle bidding us to cleanse our hearts and purge our hands of our sins,
withal bids us to suffer the affliction of godly sorrow, and to humble our
selves under the hand of God: showing that sin sticks so close to our hearts,
that we shall never get it out unless we even wring and rent them with this
Joel. 2.
sorrow.

And here is a special excellency of godly sorrow, Mulctatus est quispiam
pecunijs, tristatus est, mulctam non emendauit: filium amisit, doluit, mortuum
non resuscitauit etc: peccauit quis, tristatus est, peccatis deleuit, dissolum
delictum. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Romans 5.
which shows indeed that sorrow has little or no use any where else, save in
humiliation for sin. For grieve we never so much for loss of friends, goods,
good name, we cannot get rid of our crosses, but together with our grief they
abide by us; But sorrow for sin shakes and batters it in pee-peeces, and
eases the conscience of it. Sorrow therefore is never well bestowed, but here.
It were absurd to apply a medicine for the head to the feet; So to apply
sorrow the salve for sin to afflictions and crosses, where it does no good.
Weep therefore for thy self, not for thy beasts, fling not away such precious
sweet water into the channel or sincke-hole, but keep it for to sent the
closet of thine own heart with, against the evil savors of thy sins.

2. Humiliation is the procurer of all other graces. God resists the proud,
but gives grace to the 2. The procurer of grace. 1 Pet. 5.
humble, For all the grace that God gives is obtained by prayer. But proud
Pharisees that feel no wants, well may they give thanks, but pray they will
not, Luc. 18. 10. 11. The rich are too stout to beg, only the poor speak
with supplications, Prou. 18.
says Solomon. Only the poor in spirit that mourn in the sense of their
hunger, and thirst, will open their mouths wide in the cries of hearty prayer,
and therefore they only shall be filled with good things, when the rich shall
be sent empty away. Therefore Christ calling sinners to him, in the first
place biddes them to be humble and Matthew. 11.
meek. For meekness fits us to converse sweetly with men, but humility first
prepares us to receive those graces of God, which makes our conuersing with men
sweet and amiable. The Lord is near Psalm. 34.
(says David) to the contrite in spirit. God is high above all, but lo a
mystery, says Austin. The lower a Christian is, the nearer is he to this high
God. For the Lord has two palaces, as it is in Isay: one of glory, and that's
in Heaven. Heaven is my throne etc. Another of grace here on earth; and that's
Is. 66. 1. 2.
the heart of a contrite sinner.

3. Humiliation is the preserver of grace procured. 3. The Preserver of grace.
And therefore compared to a strong foundation, upholding the building against
the force of wind and weather. Only those streams of grace hold out, that
flow out of the troubled fountain of a bruised spirit. An vnhumbled professor
quickly starts back, even as an unbroken egg, or chestnut leapes out of the
fire. Grace is no where safe, but in a sound and honest heart. Now only the
humble heart is the honest heart. Only a rent and Non est cor integrum nisi
sit scissum.
broken heart, is a whole and sound heart. The dross cannot be purged out of
the gold, but by melting. Crooked things cannot be straightned but by
wringing. Now humiliation is that which wrings, and melts us, and makes us of
drossie pure, of crooked straight, and upright, and so, sound, durable, and
perseuering Christians.

4. Humiliation is that which commends all our 4. The Commander of our services.
services, making them both profitable to our selves to our brethren, and
acceptable to the LORD. Christ preferred the tears of that repenting woman
before all the delicates of the Pharisees table. Bottles has he for the least
drops. So precious are they with him. A little of this sovereign baulme water
is worth in Gods account more then a whole poole of the mudde of confused,
distempered worldly sorrow. The Sacrifices of God are a broken and contrite
spirit. The plural number is in Psalm. 51.
steed of the superlatiue degree with the Hebrews, and so notes the excellency
of this sacrifice, as being the salt that seasons all other sacrifices. To him
Is. 66. 2. 3.
will I look (says the Lord) that is poor, and of a contrite spirit. He that
kills a bullock (namely, without this contrite heart whereby he must first
kill his own corruption) is as if he slew a man, or blessed an Idol. In
effect thus much now. He that receives the Communion without Humiliation, is
as if he went to the Mass. For though God would not have his Altar covered
with the tears of worldly sorrow, Mal. 2. 13. yet he would of spiritual, as
not rellishing any sacrifice without them. What good does all our hearing do
us, as long as we want Iosiahs melting heart? no more then the strokes of the
hammer do the anuile. All our prayers what are they but idle prattle, if they
be not piercingly darted out of the Publicanes smitten heart? no prayer strikes
Gods ears, but his whose heart was first stricken with Gods hand. Neither
commonly do any exhortations prevail with others which proceed not from an
affected heart. Origin Sanctorum enim non tantum verba, sed and ipsi aspectus
spiritali gratia pleni sunt. Chrysostom.
after his fall reading for his text that Psalm. 50. What have thou to do to
take my word into thy mouth etc. and not able to speak for tears, set all the
Congregation a crying. So effectual is the very silence of a touched heart.
See the example of the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4. 39. mightily prevailing with
her neighbors, Christ having before humbled her.

5. Humiliation is the way to true exaltation. 5. The way to exaltation
Godly sorrow is the mother of true joy: for it gives a vent to sin, that
lies heavy upon the conscience, as lead, and so the heart eased of that
burden, is light. Blessed are they that mourn (says Matthew. 5.
Christ) for they shall be comforted. But woe be to you that laugh: for ye
shall weep. Because the fire of Gods mercy and love could not make you weep
here the fire of hell shall hereafter. Blessed are they, that weep here
where there are wiping hand-kerchers in the hands of Christ. Else they shall
weep hereafter, even when they shall see all the tears of the mourners in
this life wiped away; Happy art thou if thou weep here, where thy tears may
be water to quench the fire of thine own concupiscence; Else shall thou weep
where thy tears shall be oil to feed those eternal flames. Happy art thou,
if in godly indignation thou gnashest thy teeth at thy sins here. Else shall
thou in a desperate murmuring gnash them in hell at thy punishment, and gnaw
out thy very tongue for sorrow. Miserable is that mourning in hell, where the
Devil the tormentor is at hand with his Scorpions. But happy is the mourning
here, where the Spirit, the Comforter is at hand with his oil to supple thy
wounds. Repenting tears are the wine of God, and his Angels. Well may thou
expect from them the oil of their comfort, when thou have given them the wine
of thy tears.

CHAP. VI. Of the the examination of our hearts by the Law.
THe last point follows, and that the chiefest 4. The practice of Humiliation
in two things.
of all, namely the practice of Humiliation.

And it consists in two points 1. In the inward working of it in the heart.
1. Inward working.
2. In the outward expressing of it when it is wrought.

In the inward working of it two spciall duties must be practiced. 1. In
consideration of our own ways.


1. Consideration of our own ways to God. 2. Of Gods ways to us.
1. For the first; There will be no sorrow for an evil not known. Sin must
be seen, before it can be sorrowed for, I agnize my sin (says Psalm. 38.
18.
David) and am sorry for mine iniquity. Only sinners, that is, such as know
and feel themselves to be Matthew. 9.
sinners, are called to Repentance. Jeremy calling Ierem. 3. 13.
the Church to Repentance, first biddes her know her iniquity. After Christ had
discovered to Laodicea Revel. 3.
her miserable estate of poverty, blindness, nakedness, he bids her repent.

Now unto a true sight of sinnne, there is required a narrow search after it,
and serious consideration of it. Man suffers for sin, says the Prophet: But
how shall we know for what sins? The next Lam. 3. 39. 40.
words show, Let us search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord. The heart
is deep and deceitful, and (as in such houses where malefactors are hid) many
Ierem. 17 9.
secret lurking holes are there for sin, unespied, unless a more through
search be used. There fore the Prophet exhorting to this duty, says, Gather
your selves, that is, gather your wits together, that dispersed and wandered
about vanities, and intentiuely Hagg. 2. 1.
fix them upon the consideration of your own estate. Indeed in the
examination of a close and cunning companion, the Judge had need have his eyes
in his head. In the practice of Repentance we sit as Judges upon our selves,
and our sins, and therefore in the examination and trial of them had need
have our wits about us. And therefore the Prophet bids us examine our hearts on
our beds, in the still silence of the night, when there Psalm. 4.
is nothing to distract us, and when after our first sleep our wits are
freshest.

And this he prescribes as the only way to true humiliation. Tremble, and sin
not. There is humiliation. And that ye may do so, speak in your selves,
commune with your own hearts, examine your reins,

This is the first thing noted in that Prodigals Repentance. He came to
himself (says Christ) and said etc. By his sin, as he wandered from God, so
Luc. 15. 17.
from himself, he was a stranger at home in his own soul. He was as it were
a mad man, besides himself, he had not the use of his reason, to consider his
own estate, and therefore now beginning to bethink himself of his doings, he
is said to come to himself. A phrase of the same nature is that of Salomons
concerning the Repentance of the Israelites, When they shall turn to their
own hearts and return. 1 King. 8. 47.
The beginning of returning to God, is this turning to, or upon our own
hearts, and taking notice how matters go there. The mind has many motions
and turnings about: but the best is, when in this grave and sad consideration
it turns and reflects upon it self. Else what is it for her to mount up into
the heavens, to compass about the whole earth, to fly over the seas, to
descend down into the bottom of the Deep, if whiles thus busy abroad, she
be idle at home, and knowing other things remain ignorant of her self?

David though a King, and had many things to think upon, yet neglected not
this. I have considered Psalm. 119. 59.
my ways, says he. And what followed? Upon consideration lamenting them, I
turned my feet into the ways of thy testimonies. It is impossible the straying
traveler should return into the way, that marks not, nor minds not his way,
that thinks not with himself, Am I in the right? When God will bring the
wandering lost sinner home, he puts such thoughts as these into his heart, God
has placed thee here in this world, made thee after his image, endued thee
with reason and understanding; surely, to do some thing more then brute
beasts do, who mind only things present; even to seek and serve him
according to his Word. But tell me now o my soul, do thou answer this end
of thy creation? do thou set God before thine eyes? nay rather, do thou
not the clean contrary? so Ezechiel describes the Repentance of the
Israelites, Then shall ye remember your own ways and Ezekiel. 16. 61. Ezekiel. 18.
28.
courses, and be ashamed. And again, Because he considers, and turns away
from his transgressions. For this Consideration instructs a man thoroughly in
the knowledge of his estate. And after I was thus instructed, I repented, says
Ephraim. We see in nature Ier. 31. 18. 19.
there is the same instrument of seeing and weeping, to show that weeping
depends upon seeing. He that sees well, weeps well. He that sees his sins
thoroughly, will bewail them heartily.

Lo then the cause of that great hardness of heart, and senslesnesse that
reigns this day in the world; Even that brutish in consideration, that men go
on, walking rashly, and mind not what they Leuit. 26.
do, or in what case they stand to Godward. No man repented, says Jeremy, but
why? no man said, What Ierem. 8. 6.
have I done? But as the horse rusheth into the battle, so they into their
sins, blessing and flattering themselves therein; and putting away all such
thoughts as should but once offer to make their courses questionable.
Bankerouts will not endure the sight of the counting-booke, nor foul faces of
the looking glass. Guilty Rahels will be loath to rise when searching Laban
comes. Nay, Elephants out of the conscience of their own deformity, will be
troubling the waters.

But if indeed we desire to work our hearts unto godly sorrow, we must then
deal faithfully with them, and truly inform them of their estate. And to this
purpose an Inquisition must be erected, an Audit must be kept in them. Many a
man prays, and confesses his sins, and performs Matthew. 6.
such like outward exercises of Repentance, yet without any inward touch,
because they do not as Christ counsels, enter into the closet, and secret
parlour of their hearts, and there behold their many, and grievous sins; the
sight whereof would make them pray with grieved and troubled spirits, and even
pour out their souls unto the Lord in the tears of Repentance.

It were to be wished that we had the fore-wit to consult of that we do
before hand, and to say, what am I a doing? But if here we be inconsiderate,
we must yet at the least have the after-wit, to examine that which is done, and
to say, what is this we have done. In the creation when God reviewed at the end
of every day, the work of the day, and at the end of the six days, the whole
and all the parts, and seeing all to be good, and very good, how think we was
he cheered? The repenting sinner when he shall recount his days past, and
take a suruay of his several actions therein, and find all naught,, and very
naught, how can so ruefull a spectacle, but work much grief, and pensiveness
of mind.

A dead carcass when whole, sends forth a filthy stench; much more when it is
cut up and opened. Sin considered in gross is odious and ugly enough. But
when by examination it shall be anatomized, and every particular thereof
discovered, o how terrible must such a sight be, and how available to a
through humiliation.

But of the necessity and use of thy Examination and search of heart, and life
in the practice of true contrition, there is no question. All the difficulty
is, how we should examine.

For our direction therefore herein know that in this search we must labor
to find out two things.

1. Our sin. 2. Our misery by reason of sin.
In the search of sin, both Original and Actual sin must be found out.

1. For Original sin, we must know that in it are two things.

1. The Guilt of the first sin of Adam, in eating the forbidden fruit. For in
Adam as the root of all mankind we all sinned. And if we had no inherent
sin of our own, this imputed sin of Romans 5.
his were enough to damn us.

2. That which necessarily follows upon the former; The general corruption,
and deprauation of our whole nature: and it consists in these two points.

1. The whole man is in Evil. Every part and power of soul and body is
infected with this leprosy: from the Crown of the head to the soales of the
feet, there is nothing but boiles and botches.

2. Whole evil is in man; that is to say, the seeds of, and so a fitness to
all sins, even the most odious. As the Chaos at the first creation had the
seeds Genesis 1. 2.
of all creatures, and wanted only the spirits motion to bring them forth: so
this Chaos and mass of sin has the seeds of all sins, and wants but the
powerful motion of Satan, and warmth of his temptations to hatch even
Cockatrices, and such like poisoned monsters. O how should this humble us to
think what venomed natures we have, so that never was there any villainy
committed by any forlorn Miscreant whereunto we have not a disposition in our
selves. We cry out of Cain, Judas, Julian, the Sodomites. Why, we carry them
all in our own bosoms. They are but glasses to see our Prou. 27. 19.
faces in: as in the water, face answers to face, so does the heart of man to
man, says Solomon. As there is a full agreement twixt the living face, and the
representation in the water, so twixt Judas his heart, and any other man's: as
there is the same nature of all lions, so of all men.

Let then the schoolmen go and teach that Thom. in supple.
Contrition is not for Original, but only Actual, and those mortal sins.
But he that shall in searching see what a bottomless gulf, what a filthy
sincke it is, shall see what cause he has to bewail it with Paul, and with
David. Romans 7. Psalm. 51.


II. For Actual sins, we must search out what we can.

1. The number. 2. The heinousness of them.
1. As touching the number, diverse directions for search may be given.

A man may consider himself according to those diverse relations wherein he
stands bound to God, to himself, to his brethren, either in the Church as a
Minister, in the Commonwealth as a Magistrate, in the family as father,
mother, child, master, servant, husband, wife. Now a man should carry himself
along through all these considerations, and examine himself of the discharge
of his duty, and in every one of them.

Or else he may divide his time according to the several places and
conditions, wherein he has passed it. So much time spent in my Parents
family: so much in apprentishippe: so much in single life: so much in marriage:
so much privately: so much in this or that public calling: so much in this
town, so much in that: so much in this house, so much in that. And here he
must examine himself how he has filled up the empty spaces of his hours;
what good he has done in these several portions of time.

But the best way of examination is by the Law of the ten commandment truly
understood, and applied. For many will acknowledge themselves sinners in
gross, but come to the particulars of the Law, and then they are innocent,
they never brake either the first, or second, or third etc. commandment. Like
as if a man saying he were sick, and being thereupon asked where, and led a
long from his head to the feet, should yet then be well in every particular
part. The reason is, because the Law is not understood by them; For by the Law
Rom 3.
(understood) comes the knowledge of sin.

Therefore to help us in examining our hearts by the Law, these rules of
interpretation must be remembered. 1. Under the negative, the affirmative is
comprehended. When evil is forbidden, the contrary, good is commanded. 2.
Under one good or evil action, all of the same kind or nature are
comprehended, yea, all occasions and means leading thereto. 3. The Law is
spiritual, and binds even the heart and thoughts thereof. 4. The Law requires
not only our observation, but preservation, that is, that we do not only keep
it our selves, but cause others also what in us lies to keep it. And therefore
it forbids not only the doing of evil our selves, but helping, or any way
furthering of others, though but by silence, conniuence, or slight reproof, as
that of Eli to his sons. This rule is gathered out of the fourth
commandment; Thou, thy son etc. which by proportion must be applied to all
the rest. 5. That specially we must search our selves by the first and last
commandment: for that they pierce deeper then the rest, even to thoughts not
consented to.

Thus conceiving of the Law lay it to thy heart, and try thy self by it, and
lo with Ezekiel still shall thou see new, and fresh abominations

1. Command. Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

Thou will say, I believe that there is only one true God, maker of heaven and
earth, and I defy all the Idols of the Heathen.

Answ. Yea, but the Law is spiritual, and claims the heart, the affections,
the thoughts. In the which look how many sins are cherished, so many false
gods are there chosen, as it were Barrabasses rather then Christ. Look how
many creatures thou inordinately love, fear, trustest, reioycest in, so
many new gods have thou coined: and will thou then plead not guilty this
commandment arraigning thee?

2. Command. Thou shall not make any graven image.

O says one, I abhor the Popish images, and the idolatry of the mass. Yea,
but under the negative, the affirmative is comprehended. Do thou love the
true worship of God, as thou hate the false. Thou detestest Popish fasting;
love thou true fasts? Thou loathest the mass: Delightest thou in the supper
of the Lord? Thou despisest the Priests of Antichrist: Reuerencest thou the
ministers of Christ? These interrogatories will pose and pulse many.

3. Command. Take not Gods name in vain.

I hear thee saying; I cannot away with swearing. Yea, but do thou reprove
others swearing, Leu. 5. 1. for the Law must be preserved, not observed only.
Again, under Gods name is comprehended his word, works, and whatsoever it is
whereby he makes himself known, According to the rule, under one kind etc.
And did thou never hear sermons vnpreparedly, irreuerently? etc.

4. Command. Keep holy the Sabbath.

Why we work not; we travel not. We come to Church. Yea, but the Law is
spiritual, and requires even the rest of thy heart from worldly thoughts,
much more of thy tongue from worldly speeches. And how often have thou here
offended.

5. Command. Honor thy father etc.

O I should be unnatural if I did not so. Yea, but thy Magistrate, thy
Minister, thy Husband, thy Master, thy Superiors are thy Fathers also. And
have thou no way failed in performance of honor to all these? And thou that
art any of these fathers have thou preserved this Law? or rather by an
unbeseeming carriage have thou not invited thy inferiors to contemn thee?

6. Command. Thou shall not kill.

Here thou think thy self innocent indeed. Yea, but there is a murder of
the heart, hatred, wrath etc. Perhaps by greeuing the heart of thy brother
unjustly thou have shortened his days. Or if free from bodily murder, yet
happily thou have murdered his soul by thy negligence, by thy evil example.

7. Command. Against Adultery.

Here also the lust of the heart, yea, the use of any prouokements thereof, as
idleness, drunkenness, gluttony, wanton books, looks, pictures, dances,
speeches, vesture, gesture are sufficient to make thee guilty before God: yea,
winking at it in others.

8. Command. Against stealing.

Here even Covetousness is a Pick-purse before God. Yea, and not to uphold
the estate of our brother is stealing, for the poor are made owners of part of
our goods. Prou. 3.

9. Command. Against false witness bearing.

Where lying, flattering, detracting, listening to tales, yea, not giving
testimony to thy brothers name, and commending Gods grace in him, makes thee
guilty.

10. Command. Cuts to the very quick, condemning the very first motions of
sins springing out of our hearts, though rejected presently.

Well then, this filthy dunghill, how ever unstirred it did not annoy us, yer
after this raking in it the stench will be intolerable. Though in our
blindness we might please our selves, yet when our eyes are opened to look
in this glass, o what ugly creatures shall we think our selves then? Though
in the dark seeing no danger, we were fearelesse, yet by this light
discerning not only the beams, but even the least moates, and seeing so
infinite a swarm of sins, yea, an army of iniquities incompassing us, how
can we choose but be confounded in our selves, and forced to cry out with Job,
Not one of a thousand: and with David, If thou markest what is done amiss, who
shall abide it. Psalm. 130. 3.


2. Besides the number of our sins, their heinousness must also be found
out. A sore which at first seems nothing, by reason of the small quantity of
skin that is broken, afterward being searched, and launched, and the dead flesh
taken out, the hole is much greater then before. So sins which seem small
and petty sins to carnal civil men, such as they think may easily be
washed away with a few formal cursory prayers, when once they begin to search
them by the Law, they appear out of measure sinful.

There is no greater hinderer of serious humiliation, then that trick of
extenuation, whereby men deal with their sins, as the steward with his
masters debts, for an hundred, he set down fifty. But Luc. 16.
if we would make our hearts bleed in godly sorrow, we must strictly press
every circumstance, whereby it may be aggrauated. It is noted in Peter's weeping
that he first weighed his sin, and considered the heightning circumstances,
the person Mar. 14. 72.
denied, Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, his own person that denied, a
Disciple of Christ, the means he had to have kept him, Christ's admonition, the
manner, with swearing and cursing, and that not once but often. So does David
amplify his sin by his knowledge, Psalm. 51. Thou have taught me wisdom in
my secret parts. I cannot plead ignorance, Psalm. 51. 6.
thou have most familiarly and fully acquainted me with thy will.

In this search also the place where, and the time when the sin was committed
would be inquired after. Drunkenness on the Sabbath, swearing in the
Church-assembly, receive increase of filthiness from the holiness of the time
and place. Hosea thus brands the drunkenness of the Nobles. In the day of the
King, wherein either his birth or Hos. 7. 5.
coronation was solemnized, which craved Prayers rather then Cups, even then
they made themselves drunk with flagons of wine.

Inquire also whether the sin have been repeated often, and specially after
Repentance, and how long it has been continued in: for custom and daily
practice ripens sin. Idleness to the twelfth hour is greater then to the
sixth. And this is the search we must make for our sins.

2. As our sin, so our misery procured by sin must be considered and beheld
in the Law. Even the curse of God begun here, and to be perfited hereafter in
torments easelesse and endless. Cursed is every one that abides not in all
the things written in Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
this book. And this curse must be applied to every particular Commandment,
and not to the whole Law only.

When thus we shall know our estate, our nature to be poisoned, our lives
laden with innumerable, and those heinous and horrible rebellions, bringing us
into the state of condemnation, on our parts wholly unavoidable; when a man
shall know all this, what flinty breast is there that cannot be moved? Strike
the rock of thy heart, with the rod of the Law, discovering thy sin, thy
misery, and rivers of water will gush forth.

And this is the first duty for provoking of godly sorrow the consideration of
our own ways. 2. In Consideration of God ways of


The second follows, the consideration of Gods ways, both of

Justice. Mercy. 1. Justice, And Lam. 3.

1. Of Justice: It works much upon the heart, when a man considers how the
Lord has met with him in his sin, and has shaped answerable punishments. My
soul has them (namely the gall and wormwood of my afflictions) in
remembrance, and is humbled within me, says the repenting Church. So Haggay
provoking the Jews to Repentance. Hagg. 1. 6.
Consider (says he) your ways in your hearts: but so, that withal ye
consider Gods ways proportionable in the punishment, to yours in the sin.
Ye have sown much, and have reaped little, ye have eaten and have not been
filled, drunken, and not satisfied, etc. mark the long tail of punishments
your sins have drawn after them.

So the Church of Ephesus being called to Repentance, is first bidden to
remember from whence she is Revel. 2. 5.
fallen by her sin, what she had lost thereby, viz. the presence of the
spirit, boldness of faith, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, free
access unto God in prayer. Such losses thoroughly thought upon will pierce the
heart with godly sorrow, and make the fallen Christian say with Job, Oh that it
Job 29.
were with me as in times past, and with David, When I remember these things my
soul is powered out within Psalm. 42.
me.

2. Of Mercy; where the patience, providence, 2. Of mercy.
bounty, and kindness of the Lord is seriously to be recognized of us; knowing
as the Apostle speaks, that it leads us to repentance. But here specially
Romans 2.
excels the meditation of the death and passion of Christ; wherein thou
shall see both the infiniteness of thy sin, and Gods love. And here
consider thy sins as the Judas that betrayed, the soldiers that apprehended,
bound, smote and wounded thy Savior, as the gall and vinegar in his mouth,
spittle in his face, thorns on his head, nails in his hands, spear in his
side. Surely, if a man but unwittingly should kill, though the silliest and
basest man that is, it could not yet but be a great trouble unto him. What then
should this be to us, that we have wilfully murdered the Lord of glory, the
son of God himself?

Behold also Gods infinite love, and see Christ doing the same to thy sins,
which they to him, and in suffering death at their hands, inflicting death on
them, and all other thy spiritual enemies: for God does that to his enemies to
make us relent, which he bids us do to ours: If thine enemy hunger give him
meat, if he thirst give him drink. Nay, Romans 12. 20.
when we Gods enemies were dead he gave us life, and that by the death of his
own son, and so has heaped coals of fire on our heads, to melt our hearts
in godly sorrow. The way then to pierce our hearts with sorrow for sin, is to
behold Christ pierced with nails on the cross. Then shall they look on me
whom they have pierced, and lament. Ezech. 12.


And this is the consideration both of our own, and Gods ways, required as an
incentiue and prouokement of godly sorrow. The which shall be far more
effectual, if we keep iournals or day-bookes of them both, both of our
special sins, and Gods special mercies: for then in the exercises of
Repentance may we the more easily set our sins in order before our eyes, and
for the better affecting of our hearts, may we spread the catalogue of our
sins before the Lord, as Ezekiah did Rabsakehs 2. Kin. 19. 14.
blasphemous letter. This course holy Bradford took, and some think Job did
so, because of that speech, Not one of a thousand.

CHAP. VII. Of Confession and Deprecation.
HVmiliation wrought in the heart, must be expressed outwardly both in word
and action. 2. Outward expressing it in word.


In word by his Confession of sin, and Deprecation.

In Confession consider 1. Parts. 1. In Confession. In it 1. parts which are 2.
2. Manner.

The parts of confession are two. 1. Accusing of our selves. 2. Judging of our
selves.

Both these are necessary duties. For by accusing 1. Accusation In which.
our selves we prevent Satan; by judging our selves we prevent God. When we
have accused our selves what can Satan that accuser of the brethen say, which
we have not said before, so his mouth is stopped: He comes too late: we being
Accusers, God is our Discharger, and what then shall Satan be but a Slanderer?

By judging of our selves, do we likewise put God out of office: for he will
say, lo how this man judges himself: I will not therefore judge him. If in
Ahabs hypocryticall judging, see thou not 1. Kin. 21. 29
how Ahab humbles himself, I will not therefore humble him, how much more in
the sincere and severe judging of the Godly. Indeed in judging of others, Judge
not least ye be judged; but in judging Matthew. 7. 1.
of our selves, judge that ye be not judged. 1. Cor. 11.


Now for the former, namely the accusing of our Three things
selves, there must be these three things therein.

1. A particularizing of our sins. In an accusation 1. Particularizing of
sin.
it is not enough to accuse in general, but we must come to particulars, and
charge the accused with this or that crime. How can the Physician help him
that says he is not well, and will not tell him where. Many deal with God in
the confession of their sins, as Nebuchadnezar with his Inchanters Dan. 2.
about his dream: that he had dreamed he told them, and desired an
interpretation; but what his dream was he could not tell. So many confess
themselves sinners, and desire pardon. But wherein they have sinned, and what
their sins are, they cannot, or will not tell. General Confessions, and in
gross, are too too gross. No, they must be particularly remembered, and
ranked, and sorted together in order.

2. And being thus set in order, some of thy chiefest sins must be culled
out, which have bin 2. Calling out the chief.
most dishonorable to God, and discomfortable to thine own soul. Thus Paul
in his confession insists specially in that grand and capital sin of
persecution. I persecuted the Church of God. And so those Israelites. Besides
all other our sins, we have 1. Tim. 1. 13. 1. Sam. 12. 19.
sinned in asking a King. For he that truly and seriously repents of one
sin, specially his dearest and sweetest sin, will much more repent of his
other lesser sins. He that will shake off his greatest friends, will much
more forsake the meaner, and less respected. And indeed usually Repentance is
first occasioned by some one special heinous sin laid to heart. The Apostles
Acts 2. do specially press the murder of Christ upon the Jews, and Acts 17.
Ignorance upon the Athenians, and Christ adultery upon the woman of Samaria,
calling her to repentance. As in battles, though they fight against the whole
Army, yet specially against the Head and General; as Fight neither against
great, 1. Kin. 22.
nor small, but against the King of Israel: so specially we must set our selves
in our confession against our Master sins; the King being caught, the rest
will never stand out.

3. Though we must specially dwell upon some of our most special sins, yet
the rest must not be 3. Yet not neglecting the rest.
neglected: for as Confession must be particular, so also must it be full. And
our more grievous offenses must bring the rest to our remembrance. As David's
murder and adultery brought even his birth-sinne to his mind. And that sin of
strange Psalm. 51.
wives many other sins to Esraes mind. As we in correcting our children for
one fault thereupon Esr. 9.
remember them of, and reckon with them for many other before; and as in
accusation, when a man is endited of some special crime, his enemies upon that
occasion bring in whatsoever else they can get against him, further to disgrace
him: so here in accusing our selves nothing willingly must be omitted. Take
we heed of spiritual guile in hiding ought. Thou may hide God from thy
self, thy self from God thou can not. To the Physician thou will discover
even thy most shameful diseases, the fruits of thy filthy wickedness. If
thou should conceal but one circumstance of such a disease, it might kill
thee. And six thieves being entered into thy house, if thou should let but
one of them alone unsearched, and undiscovered, he would serve the turn to
cut thy throat, and steal thy treasure. Thou must then power out thy whole
heart as water, as the Prophet Lam. 2. 19. opened.
speaks: which some of the Ancient have interpreted of a full confession,
when nothing is left out. As in pouring out of water every drop goes out, not
so in pouring out of oil.

Yet in some cases the omission of some particular sins is excusable. As
first, in want of knowledge and memory. Here to cry out with David; Psalm. 19.
Who knows the errors of his life? Cleanse me from my secret sins, shall be
accepted. Secondly, in want of leisure; as when a man is suddenly prevented by
the hand of God, as the thief on the cross, or by extreme and violent
sickness. Here to remember thy chief sins, as he his stealing, and for the
rest to confess generally is accepted in mercy of the Lord.

The second part of confession is the judging of 2. Judging our selves. Job.
39. 37. Prou. 30. 2. 2. Sam. 24.
our selves. First, for the nature, or quality of our sins; wherein we must
be most severe against our selves, so was Job. I am vile; Agar. I am not a
man, I have not the understanding of a man in me; David. I have done exceeding
foolishly. Though before he thought he had done exceeding wisely. So Paul
judges himself the head of sinners, the least of the 1. Tim. 1. 15. 1. Cor. 15
9.
Apostles, yea of Saints, yea less then the least. He gives himself the
highest place among sinners, the lowest among Saints. Secondly, for the desert
of our sins. Here we must pass the sentence of the Law, adiudging our
selves to death, and so stand before Gods tribunal as guilty persons with
ropes about our necks. Ezech. 36. 31. Then shall ye judge your selves worthy to
be cut off. Daniel. 9. Shame belongs to us. Luke 15. I am not worthy to be
called thy son.

These be the parts of Confession: the manner follows; 2. Manner of it in 6.
things.
wherein six things are required.

1. Confession must be in Faith of Gods mercy, 1 In Faith.
for forgiveness of, and help against the sin confessed. We must confess,
not as the convicted malefactor to the Judge, as Achan to Joshua, who assures
himself of certain death, and looks for no favor; but as the sick man to
the Physician, that has hope to be cured by him. And here our faith is surer a
great deal. For we cannot so assure our selves either of the will, or skill of
the Physician to heal us as of Gods: neither that in the matter of shame he
will be so faithful to us, as God. Wicked men confess as Judas, I have
sinned, but despair swallows them up. When they acknowledge their fault, they
seek not Gods mercy; as the Prophet excellently brings in God coupling
these Hos. 5. 15.
two together, Till they acknowledge their fault, and seek me. So did Daniel,
yet there is mercy and forgiveness: Dan 9. Ezr. 10. 2.
And Shecaniah, we have sinned: yet there is hope in Israel concerning this.

2. It must be in shame, with annihilated, dejected and confounded spirits, as
Esra. O my God I am ashamed, 2. In shame. Ezra. 9.
and confounded to lift up mine eyes to Heaven: for though faith be confident,
yet not impudent. Though Esra had faith, and called God his God, yet was he
ashamed with his sin, though not with the shame of a condemned malefactor,
yet of a good Son or Subject offending his Father, or Sovereign. The wickeds
presumptuous faith is a shameless faith; it makes them shameless in sinning:
and their shame is a faithless and desperate shame; They cannot in their shame
call God their God with Ezra: But both these must go together. Many in
confessing beg mercy with the Publicane, but their eyes are not cast down in
godly shame as his were. They are not touched with any serious sense of their
own vileness, to think with Job, dust and ashes good enough for them. I have
sinned says Saul, yet I pray thee honor me in the sight of the people. Lo a
proud and high mind in 1. Sam. 15. 30.
confession, where our intent principally should be to shame and abase our
selves.

3. In sorrow with a bleeding and melting heart, 3. In sorrow.
as David, Psalm. 51. In confessing, every sin confessed should be felt as a
dagger pricking us at the heart. Else the confession of sin is worse then the
sin confessed, the remedy is worse then the disease; and after such
confessions, we had need to reconfesse our selves for our confessions. It
would more anger us to see those that have wronged us confess their wrong with
an impudent forehead without relenting, then the wrong it self did which they
confess.

4. With a free-heart; not extorted by the pain 4. With a free heart.
of the wrack as Pharaohs was, who when he was of the wrack, bit in his
confession again, and recanted; not wrung nor wrested from us by the dint of
argument, as Saul's was by the force of Samuels reasons. Our own hearts must
smite us with David, before Gad the seer come to smite us, and they 2. Sam. 24.
must urge us out of love to our God offended, to come and confess. God loves
a cheerful confessor; who needs not to be labored upon by his minister,
friends, or neighbors, nor to be haled and pulled to confession by sickness,
or such like extremity: for the vilest hypocrite will stoop then. Balaam when
he saw the Angels naked sword could say then I have sinned. Number 22. 34. 5.
With an angry heart.


5. With an angry and impatient heart against sin, and our selves for sin.
The repenting sinner though he be the most patient to God, yet the most
impatient to himself, and full of indignation to his sins. Thus was it with
David befooling himself in his confession, 1. Sam. 24. 10. and calling
himself beast, in confessing his distrust in Gods providence. Thus was it with
Job, abhorring himself Job. 42. 6.
in his confession, and with the Publican knocking himself, showing what mind
he carried to his sin, even to do the like to it, and with Ephraim Ier. 31.
9.
in anger smiting himself on the thigh. This is the way to fall in with God,
to fall out with our selves; to be friends with God, to be enemies with our
selves.

6. It must be with an honest heart, in confessing 6. With an honest heart.
of sin, forsaking the sin confessed. He that confesses, and forsakes his
sin, etc. Confession and confusion Prou. 28.
of sin must go together. Here many errors in Confession are discovered.

First many confess their sins in a bravery, as Paul did his religion: I
confess, says he, that after Acts 24. 14.
the way they call heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers. So many
graceless men there are, that do joy to make long and large accounts of their
lewdness, feeding their delights with their lives past, as the dog
returns to smell of his cast gorge, and the horse to his doung: yea when by
Confession they have disgorged their sin, they presently with the dog lick
up their vomit again. Others there are that are fully set upon sin in
confessing, As those Israelites that said, we have sinned: we will go up. As
much as to say, we have Deuteronomy. 1 41.
sinned: we will sin; for God forbad them flatly to go up. Others there are
that, as the Papists, presume to sin because of confession, thinking by it to
be eased, as the drunkard by vomiting. And though some in their good moodes
may seem in confession verily to purpose amendment, yet these are no sound, no
settled, no sincere and honest purposes, but sudden flashings conceived by
their deceitful hearts rather to avoid the judgments felt or feared, then
truly to please God. But we in our confession must imitate that good
Shecaniah, who in confessing sin entered into Covenant Ezra. 10. 2. 3.
with the Lord against the sin confessed. We have sinned: now therefore let
us enter into covenant with the Lord. Otherwise confession the remedy against
sin is turned into sin. The remedy increases the disease. Some of the Heathen
in the days of sacrifice to their Idols for health, did riotously banquet to
the prejudice of their health. So to too many of us in the very self same
days we confess our sins we run afresh to our sins. And God in his just
judgment punishes hypocritical confession with a further greediness of
sinning. When the heart is not rent with the garments, the rending of the
garments sowes the sin faster together: when the heart and conscience is not
knocked together with the breast, that knocking will never batter sin, but
consolidate and compact it more firmly together, Tundens pertus, and non
corrigens vitia, ea consolidat. Aug.
it will be as the knocking of a nail, which drives it further in.

In the next place to Confession we must join 2. In Deprecation.
Deprecation, with strong cries craving pardon, even as the poor hunger-bitten
beggar does an alms, or as the cast malefactor pleads for his life at the
bar before the Judge; Thus did David, Have mercy upon me o Lord, according to
the multitude of thy compassions, Psalm. 51.
etc. And Daniel, O Lord hear, o Lord Dan. 9.
forgive, again, and again repeating his cries.

In these penitential prayers we may note these two things: First, that they
be deeply serious: the guilty thief pleading for his life, goes not about to
entertain the Judges ears with quaint phrases and fine words, but he studies
to show the passion and affection of his heart. There are some lusty beggars,
that in begging will keep a flourishing in their Rhetoric, such as it is. A
wise man will never be moved to compassionate them: He will think they are
not thoroughly hungerbitten, they would use another kind of dialect then, and
leave their fooleries, and fall to humble and pitiful complaints and groans.
As Solomon says, The poor man speaks supplications; so the repenting sinner
Prou. 18.
being poor in spirit, speaks supplications. The best flowers he can garnish
his prayers with, are his sighs, his sobbes, his groans, his cries. This is
the Rhetoric of repentance in prayer. The affectation of carnal eloquence in
prayer, shows there is little repentance in such prayers.

2 That oftentimes affection in them is so strong that words fail, Romans 8.
26. David when Nathan had wounded him cried out, I have sinned. Why, will some
say, did he not go on and crave pardon? his inward grief was such that he
could not in words: in desire of heart he did: his heart was full, and the
seeds of the 51. Psalm were then in his breast. So the Publicane said no more
but Lord be merciful to me a sinner, yet there was affection and Luke 18.
meditation enough to have spent a whole day in prayer, and not only to
furnish that one short sentence, Lord be merciful. Some have more words then
matter in their prayers: but humbled repentants have more matter then words:
and so are streighted, as great throngs of people pressing out at some narrow
passage stick fast, and cannot go forward but very slowly. Some are very
short in prayer for want of matter and affection: but repenting sinners are
short, because of the abundance of matter and affection; being as full
vessels that do not run presently at the first piercing, or as the flesh
that in deeper wounds bleeds not presently. Thus was it with the repenting
prodigal: he purposed to speak thus, and thus to his Father, Luc. 15.
Namely, Father I have sinned, etc. make me but as one of thy hired servants.
Now this last clause he leaves out when he comes to his Father, by reason his
heart was so surcharged with grief; his passions drunk up his speech, as we
see how Christ's tears made his speech broken and imperfect, Luke 19 41. And
fit it is indeed there should be this sweet harmony betwixt the repenting
sinners heart and tongue, his broken heart, and his broken prayers.

The use. Seeing the practice of true humiliation consists in these exercises
of Confession and deprecation, let us in Gods fear buckle to the serious
practice of them. Have thou sinned? Suffer not sin to lie upon thy
conscience; Cast up thy confession suffer not the impostumation any longer to
pain thee with the swelling, but give a vent to the humor and so get ease.
David professes that neither in silence, nor in roaring he could find any
ease, till he came to confession. But I thought I would confess and then thou
forgauest: Among men indeed Psalm. 32 Deo peccatum dicere sufficit, et
solicitur. In hominibus vero contrarium peni^us cum peccatores confessi fuerint
tunc magis puniu^tur. Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. hom. 3. 1. John 1. 2. Sam. 24.
in their Courts confession brings no such privilege, there, confess and be
hanged; after confession follows condemnation: but here confession and
justification go together: If we confess, God is faithful to forgive; it
must needs be some special service which God promises so great a reward unto.
David after his sin of numbering the people, proves himself to be Gods
servant, because he confessed it, Take away the trespass of thy servant: yea
but how dare thou call thy self Gods servant, who have so lately and so
grievously sinned? He answers, for I have done foolishly. Though I am not his
servant in playing the fool, yet in confessing my folly I am his servant. Job
among many fruits of obedience, as Justice, Mercy, Chastity, whereby he would
prove himself Gods servant, reckons also this of Job 31.
confession: If I have hid my sin as did Adam, equalling the confession of
his sins with the best of his virtues. For as he only can tell his dream
that is awakened out of his dream; so he only can confess his sin, that is
truly and thoroughly awakened out of his sin by the spirit of God: far are
they from repentance, who in stead of a free and childlike confession after
their sin are ready to use shifts, excuses, extenuations, minsings,
mittigations, daubings with untempered mortar; nay that do sow cushions under
their elbowes, and lay pillowes under their heads, that thy may sleep securely
in their sins. A pitiful thing it is, that whereas God has given shame to
sin, and boldness to confession, the matter should be so inuerted, Pudorem,
et vere undiam Deus dedit peccat^: Confessioni fidutiam. Inuertit rem Diabolus,
et peccato fiduciam praebet, confessioni pudorem. Non pudet peccare poeuitere
pudet. Chrysostom. Josh. 7. 19. Dan 9.
that men should be impudently bold in sinning and yet ashamed to confess when
they have sinned. Well in concealing thy sin thou do but keep the Devils
counsel, his secretary thou art, whose policy it is thus to overthrow thee.
He knows right well the next way for us to get glory from God, is to glorify
God. And then do we glorify him, when by confession we shame our selves.
According to that of Joshua to Achan, My son give glory unto God, and of
Daniel, Glory to thee O Lord, shame to us. When man will not glorify God by
shaming himself, God will glorify himself by shaming man. When man will not
open his mouth to plead against himself, and his sins, God will stop his
mouth when he would feign plead for himself before his judgment seat, and
strike him dumb that he shall not have one word to say in his own defense. It
is deceit enough that the Devil should bring us to sin: it is double deceit to
make us hide and excuse our sins, and so to prevent us of that mercy which is
promised to simple and ingenious confession. Having sinned therefore, lay not
in the way of Gods mercy the Noli opponere obicem defensionis sed aperi sinum
confessionis Aug. Psalm. 51. 1. 2. 3.
stumbling block of thine own justification, but open the lap of thy
confession to receive it; as David does, Have mercy upon me, etc. but why? for
I know, or acknowledge my iniquity. Well may he open his lap to receive Gods
mercy, that opens his mouth to confess his own misery. Open thy mouth Psalm.
81.
wide, in hearty prayer and confession, and I will fill it with the sense of
favor and mercy.

CHAP. VIII. Of real Humiliation.
THe expressing of our Humiliation in Deed 2. In deed.
follows: And it consists in three sorts of actions.

1. Such as respect our selves. 2. Such as respect God. 3. Such as respect our
brethren.
1. For our selves. And that is, the restraint of 1. In regard of our selves.
our selves in the use of the comforts and pleasures of this life: as meats,
mirth, marriage, music, apparel, company, etc. This restraint must be
sometimes Joel 2 15 16. 17. Exodus 33 4.
in action, when in more special sort we humble our selves in fasting, but
always in affection, so that we be not devoured, and eaten up of any earthly
pleasure, but may rejoice as though we rejoiced 1. Corinthians. 7.
not. In wearing of sumptuous apparel be no more puffed up, nor make any more
reckoning of it, then if it were sackcloth, in faring more dantily be no more
provoked to excess in gluttony, or to satisfying of our appetite, then if we
sat at a poor lean table. Repentance is the sobriety of mind, but wordly
pleasures make the mind drunken. This is the heaviness spoken of Luc. 21. 34.
Take heed lest your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness. It
is a drunken heaviness, not the heaviness of godly sorrow. And indeed this is
the reason that many are so eager in the pursuits of their pleasures, because
they would make Gods Sergeant, their own conscience, that pursues them drunken
with these pleasures: just as many men use to do, getting the Sergeant that
comes to arrest them into the Tavern, and there making him drunk, that so
they may escape. This excess that is in pleasures shows how little men have
tasted of true humiliation. If they did bathe themselves in salt tears could
they bathe themselves in this sweet milk? If they did consider what Christ
suffered for their sins, his want of all these outward comforts, even of an
house to hide his head in, his hunger, thirst, nakedness, his vinegar on the
cross. Could they so fill and glut themselves even to satiety and surfeit with
the pleasures of this life, and spend their whole precious time in them? would
they not rather steep their own dainties in this vinegar of godly sorrow, and
delay this strong wine with this water, and eat their meats, as the Jews
their Passover, with sour herbs? If Exodus 12.
their spiritual joy in that Sacrament, where Christ was given to the
Believer, was to be seasoned with this sorrow, how much more should this
outward temporal joy? Thus did David notably express his humiliation: I cause
my bed every night to swim, Psalm. 6. 6.
and water my couch with my tears: His bed is the place of his ease. Now
look how he qualefied that one ease, and comfort, so by proportion did he all
the rest. Not our beds only, but our boords, our gardens, our fine buildings,
all our delights must be washed with this water, as good Bradford usually at
his dinner used to shed tears on his trencher. So the woman Luc. 7. sat
weeping and wiping, while they were eating at table. Joseph of Arimathea makes
his garden or place of pleasure, to be a place of Humiliation, by building a
sepulcher therein. Thus also does Jeremy, bring in the repenting sinner
testifying his humiliation: He sits Lam. 3. 28.
alone, retyring himself into his closet from his vain and delightful
company, he shuts him up himself close, and lays his mouth in the dust, what
then shall we say to our Epicures, to our good fellows, and the rest of that
crew, but that of Amos 6. Woe be to them that are at ease in Zion, not sitting
alone, not washing their beds with their tears, but with their quaffings and
carowsings, They lie stretching themselves on iuory beds, eating the lambs of
the flock, and the calves out of the stall, and sing to the sound of th violl.
etc. For as they forget Joseph's affliction, so they forget their own sins:
were they remembered, they would be sour sauce to their sweet meat, and would
be as gall and wormwood to imbitter unto them all their vain delights.

2. Such as respect God. And those actions are 2. Such as respect God are
twofold.
twofold.

1. Fear, trembling, silence at his rebukes and 1. Fear.
threatenings, Is. 66. 2. I look to him that is of an humble and contrite
heart, but who that is, he shows by the words following, and trembles at my
word. A man whose courage is cooled, and natural spirits wasted, and his very
heart broken with crosses in this world is soon taken down. A little thing
daunts such a poor soul, whereas a man of spirit and courage will not be
terrified with ones threatenings. Before our Repentance, oh the stoutnesse and
stiffenesse of our hearts against God! Though the Lion roared never so much,
we would not tremble: but when with the hammer of the Law, and happily of some
afflictions besides, God has broken these stout hearts of ours, then alas what
a little thing will make us stoop? An angry word, or an angry look will more
humble us then, then angry strokes and stripes could do before. Thus was it
with broken heartd Josiah: he heard the book 2. Kin. 22. 10. 11.
of the Law only read in a private place, by a layman, and yet his heart
melted. Alas we hear the same threatenings not read only but preached at
large, with an edge set on them, in the open Church by Gods Ministers, and yet
we tremble and relent no more then the seats we sit on, and the stones we
tread on. So contrite Hezekiah, when Is. 39. 8.
Isaiah threatened him, he bowed, he took not the boldness and
foole-hardinesse of Ahab against Micaiah, and which many now take, to kick
against the Minister and his doctrine, and to say, It is not good which thou
say, as Ahab said, but the word of the Lord, says he, is good. Thus was it
with David, and so is it with all tender hearted Christistians, that when God
hides his face, and looks but a little awry on them, then are they sore
troubled. So was it with humbled Job, Behold (says he) I am Job 39. 37. 38.
vile, what shall I answer thee, I will lay mine hand upon my mouth, Once have
I spoken, but I will answer no more, yea twice, but I will proceed no further.
So Jonah testifies his repentance, by closing his Prophecy with Ion 4.
his silence. But many are like those impudent castawayes at the last day, that
will not stick to give God the lie when he rebukes them by his Ministers,
Matthew. 25.
Lord (say they) when saw we thee an hungry, and sed thee not? as if they had
said, why do thou challenge us of that whereof we were never guilty; and so
they charge God to charge them falsely.

2. Humble patience in all our afflictions: I say 2. Humble Patience.
humble patience; for there is a threefold patience. 1. Constrained and
perforce, when a man bears that which he would feign be rid, of, as the damned
in hell. 2. Voluntary and cheerful. But now one may suffer cheerfully when
he that afflicts deals unjustly. And this patience argues a virtue rather in
the sufferer, then any justice in the inflicter of the punishment. 3. There is
therefore an humble patience, when a man acknowledges the righteousness of his
afflictions in regard of his sins: when a man frees and iustifies God, and
blames himself altogether. So Lam. 3. Wherefore is the Lam. 3. 39. 33. 34.
living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sins, for God does not punish
willingly, nor afflict the children of men: In stamping under his feet all the
prisoners of the earth. This is that which is called in Scripture, Humbling our
selves under the hand of God. When we take Gods part against our selves in our
crosses, and not our own parts against God, as the humbled sinner sits alone,
and keeps silence, and puts his mouth in the dust, and gives his cheeks to
smiters. So the Repenting Lam. 3. 28. 29. 30.
thief, we are indeed here righteously. So the poor woman acknowledged the
name of a Luc. 23. 41.
dog at Christ's hand, Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat the crummes that fall
under the table. So the Lord Matthew. 15.
says of the Israelites, that their uncircumcised hearts Leuit. 26. 41.
should be humbled, and they should willingly bear the punishments of their
iniquities. When then we murmr, and like the angry horse stamp, and champ the
bit in our crosses, and do not with the Prophet say, I will bear the wrath of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him, we know not as yet what true
humilation is. Mic 7. 9.


3. Such as respect our brethren: and these actions Such as respect our
brethren. 3. 1. In quiet bearing of injuries.
are threefold.

1. In meek and quiet bearing all injuries, unkindness, and disgraces
whatsoever. An vnhumbled wretch cannot suspect the least wrong, but he swells
presently. Whereas if a man be truly humbled, his humility will tell him;
thou deseruest thus to be used, thou art worthy of these wrongs. Lo then true
humiliation will make us not only to take Gods part, but even our wicked
enemies part against our selves, as David took Shemeis against himself, Let
him alone. David being humbled 2. Sam. 16.
thought there could come no disgrace to him which his sins deserved not. So
Hezekiah; and his people held their peace when Rabsakeh rayled on them. For
none can think or speak so vilely of 2. King. 18. 36.
an humbled repentant, as he himself thinks of himself. Who could have said
more of Paul then he himself did, when he said he was the chief of sinners.
1. Tim. 1. 15.
The wicked call Gods children hypocrites, proud, covetous, wordly. Why alas!
they call themselves so, and accuse themselves with heavy hearts of all these
sins unto the Lord. And whereas they use to be humbled with the sense of
these sins, they will be so far from being moved with these clamours of the
world, that they will rejoice rather that there is matter, and occasion given
them to show and express their humiliation. It is an ill sign when a man can
put up no injury. Moses being a meek man humbled with the sense of his own
unworthiness, with silence passed by the grudgings of Aaron and Miriam. And
David when he was reviled was as a deaf man that heard not, and Numb. 12. Ps.
38. 12. 13.
as a dumb man, in whose mouth was no answer.

2 In not preferring and advancing our selves above our brethren, but in making
our selves equal 2. In not advancing our selves above our brethren.
with those of the lower sort, and in giving honor going one before another,
accounting the lowest place good enough for us, choosing the lowest place at
the Romans 12. Luke. 14.
feast. And so indeed an humbled sinner will thus abase himself. First of all
considering that even his best part, his soul, is made of nothing. This
excellent creature that thus reasons and discourses, not long since was
nothing. Now nothing is less then a Feather, then a stone, then a moate in the
air. But then when he looks to his sins, he sees himself worse then
nothing. That ambition then which reigns in men whereby they aspire to the
highest places, and judge themselves worthier then others, shows plainly that
they were never yet truly humbled for their sins.

3 In not daring Masterly and Iudge-like to censure: 3. In not censuring.
for the humbled sinner finds so much matter at home within himself, that he
has no leisure to look so much into others. And therefore though severe to
himself, yet more mild to others, in meekness of mind esteeming every man
better then Phil 2. 3.
himself. And those faults he sees in others he takes notice of happily in
himself, or else of others as bad, at least of the seeds and inclinations to
those sins. Therefore James after he had commanded us to humble our selves,
he adds, speak not evil Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse quod hic
est. Iam. 4. 10 11.
one of another: For how does he humble and cast down himself, that goes
about to cast down others, and trample them under his feet.

4 In abasing and submitting our selves to the lowest and meanest offices of
love to our brethren. 4. In submitting to lowest offices.
Thus the humbled sinner will make himself a servant unto all, and according
to the Apostles commandment, will serve others by love; and bearing other 1.
Cor 9. 19. Gal. 5. 13. Gal. 6 2.
men's burdens so fulfills the law of Christ.

CHAP. IX. Of the contraries to Humiliation, Despair and a seared Conscience.
HItherto of the grace of Humiliation it self: Now to add a word or two of
the contraries to it. Contrary to godly humiliation or contrition are these
two. 1. Desperation. 2. The blockish, the seared, and senseless Conscience
that is past feeling. Both these indeed must be avoided, but Ephesians. 4.
yet the latter of the two is more usual, and more dangerous, more usual;
because it is more pleasing to our nature, whereas Desperation is more
distastefull in regard of the bitterness. And therefore Satan wants that bait
to bring men to despair, which he has to bring men to senseless security.
Therefore here we may say, as they sang of Saul and David. Desperation slayes
thousands, Security Sam.
ten thousands, even as more die of intemperancy of diet, then are killed by
the Sword: so though Despair be more fearful, yet Security is more frequent.
More dangerous also, because Desparation may be turned sooner to good, for that
the despairing person is touched with the sight of his sins, and feels his
own misery. But the senseless conscience is nothing so, it has neither sight
of sin, nor sense of misery.

Both these extremes of Desperation and of Senslesnesse come from one cause,
and that is, the neglect of the pricks and wounds of conscience. It is a great
mercy of God to give us so fair warning from a monitour within our own
bosoms. The warnings others give us, we are ready to except against. We
cannot except against the warnings of our own hearts. But as when milder
correction preuailes not with our children, we proceed to seuerer discipline:
so when Conscience her gentler prickings are neglected, she falls to deeper
wounding and cutting; when rods will do no good, God puts Scorpions into her
hands to scourge us to death. Every little prick of an accusation fetches as it
were some blood from thy soul; Now if presently with a repenting heart thou
would crave the blood of Christ to be applied to thy soul, the bleeding
would be stayed. But because thou neglectest the bleeding, and think to stay
it by base medicines of thine own, therefore the wound bleedes still, and thou
shall dye of it. And thus we see how desperation comes from the neglect of the
pricks of Conscience.

But again and that more commonly the Conscience grows seared, and past
feeling, so that a man may now sin freely, and that without control of
Conscience, after that he has once begun to despise the admonitions and
accusations thereof. So we see the Father gives over correcting his unhappy
child, when he grows worse for all his correcting of him. Thus many men's
consciences deal with them speaking in a manner unto them as God speaks to
the Jews, Why should we smite you any more, since ye fall away more and more?
you set light by our warning, we will even give over. Isay 1. 5.
Conscience is Gods officer, and it is set by God to do the best office that
can be to us. But when God sees his officer not regarded, he will discharge
him of his office. When a wound is not taken in time, the flesh festers, and
grows dead and rotten: so also it fares with the wounds of Conscience. A
wounding Conscience neglected will grow a dead Conscience. O then howsoever
thou may set light by the checkes and rebukes of men, and may shake off
them. yet never reject or con-contemne the checks of Conscience. In any case
take heed of that, for either it will continually ring such a loud peale in
thine ears as shall make them to tingle, and thine heart to tremble: or else
that which is worse, it shall for ever after hold its peace. Do we then feel
the privy nippes, and secret snibs, and pulls of our consciences? Let us give
ear to so wholesome a rebuker. Let us seek presently to the Lord for mercy and
forgiveness. Let us humble our souls before him in confession. Let us put
Conscience out of office no otherwise then thus, that as Conscience has
accused us to our selves, so now we will go and accuse our selves to our God.
For if Consciences rods, and checks cannot drive thee to Repentance, whose
should? Many there are that in regard of their places are free from the rods,
and the cheeks of men, as Kings, and great ones: Who dare check them? None
may smite them, yet God in mercy toward them will 2. Sam. 24. 10.
have their Conscience to smite them as David's heart smote him, though a King.
Conscience takes no notice of Kingship. Therefore all, even great States, and
they of all others must most listen to, and heed the voice of Conscience, lest
otherwise it fare with us as with those whom great and violent noises
continually herd, at length make deaf, as in those that dwell by the fall of
the river Nilus. Or as it does with unlucky boys, who being used to the
rod, at length harden themselves, and regard it not.

CHAP. X. Of the names whereby the second part of Repentance, viz. change of
heart is set out in Scripture.
HItherto of the former part of Repentance, 2. The second part of Repentance,
Conversion, where
Mourning, Humiliation or Contrition: The second follows, Turning.
Reformation, or Conversion, where consider we 1. The Names. 2. The Nature. 3.
The Practice of it.

1. For the names, they are more especially two. 1. The names of it.
1. An Hebrew name signifying Turning or Conversion. 2. A Greek name
signifying After-wit, or wisdom.

The first name is a metaphor drawn from travelers, who having gone out of
their way, must come back again and return into the right way if ever they
mean to arrive unto the intended period of their journey. We all are or should
be travelers to God, to Heauen-ward: but we are turned aside into the quite
contrary way: we are like the Prodigal departing from his fathers house, like
the lost sheep straying from the fold: therefore we must turn back again,
and set our faces to wards God, upon whom we have turned our backs. It is
impossible his feet should ever stand in Heaven, whose eyes are not turned
toward it. Men do vainly persuade themselves of finding God and his Kingdom
with faces turned upon sin, and backs upon God. Excellently does Isay join
together turning and seeking God. A man Is. 9. 13.
may long enough seek an Eastern Country in the West, ere he find it. And
as long may he seek God in the ways of sin and Satan, ere he shall meet
with him. This phrase then shows the absolute necessity of Repentance: for as
he whose back being turned upon me is gone far from me can never be with me,
unless he turn his face toward me, and so make toward me with his feet: no
more can we sinners that are gone away from the Lord ever enjoy him, or be
with him, unless by Repentance we turn toward him: only thus turning may
we seek him, and thus seeking can we find him.

The second name is Metanoia, After-wit, or After-wisdome, opposed to Pronoia,
Fore-wit, fore-casting and providing before hand.

This name teaches that every impenitent sinner is a witless fool, and that
true wisdom consists in turning from our sins to the Lord. Of the Bapitst
drawing men to Repentance, it is said, He shall turn them to the wisdom of
the just. The minister Luc. 1.
says Paul, must wait if God at any time will give thee refractary Repentance,
(...), that is, that 2. Tim. 2. 25.
they may awake out of their drunken sleep, and become sober. Implying that as
long as we lie in our sins, we are as drunken sots void of all understanding.
Hence that phrase of the repenting Prodigal, He came to himself, implying
that before Luc. 15. 17. Prou. 9.
he was mad, and besides himself. If thou will be wise, thou will be wise for
thy self, that is thine own souls good, says Solomon.

Let now the wordling and impenitent wretch go, and think Repentance folly and
himself wise, that will not be troubled with so heavy and melancholy a thing.
They shall sing another song one day, even that Wisd. 5. We counted them
fools, but etc. Is not hea fool that being out of his way, will not return
back when the right way is showed him? Hark what Jeremy says of such? They
have Ierem. 5. 4.
refused to return: therefore I said they are poor; how poor? poor in the
brain, poor in wit; for he adds, They are foolish: for this cause that rich
man is called a fool for all his worldly wit, and Luc. 12.
those virgins foolish virgins for all their blazing lamps. It were madness to
think of coming up to the top of the house without the stairs or ladder; so
to come to Heaven without this ladder of Repentance. Extreme solly for a man
to aim at some excellent end, and in mean time never think of the means that
should compass it, nay to do that which is directly contrary thereto. For a
man to profess his desire after Heaven, and yet to shun Repentance the only
way that carries thither. Worthily therefore is Repentance called After-wisdome
or After-wit. In other things Fore-wit is preferred before After-wit. But here
the afterwit of Repentance shall bring us to a far better estate then ever
we should have attained if Adam had had the fore-wit to have espied the deceit
of Satan, and so to have prevented the danger. This is the wisdom that is
commended to us in the parable Luc. 16.
of the unjust steward. And it is the wisdom Moses prays for: Teach us so to
number our days, counting every day for the last, that we may apply our
hearts to wisdom, even to the wisdom of providing for our souls by
Repentance.

And so much of the names given to this second part of Repentance.

CHAP. XI. Of turning from sin.
THe second point to be considered in this 2. The nature of it. where
Change or Turning, is the nature thereof, and that is set down in the
definition to be a turning from sin to God.

Here though the nature of it be set forth by a metaphor drawn from change
of place, yet indeed Repentance is no change of place, but of qualities,
manners and dispositions from Evil to Good. The soul and body in regard of
their essence, powers, faculties, and proper and natural actions remain the
same after Repentance that before. Only the corrupt and vicious qualities in
them are taken away. and so they are rectified. Sorrow, fear, joy, etc. are
not abolished, but only polished, and refined of that dross of error in
regard of their object. Fear of punishment is turned into fear of sin, and
worldly sorrow into godly, Carnal mirth into spiritual joy in the holy Ghost.

Again this change is twofold. 1. Passive, whereby God changes and turns us.
In the which we are mere patients, and God only works. 2. Active, whereby
we being turned and changed by God, do labor further to turn and change our
selves. Both these in time are together, but yet distinct in nature. The former
is that which is called Regeneration, and is as it were the infusing of a soul
into a dead body. The latter is Repentance, and is the motion or stirring of
the soul infused. Of it John, when he says, He that has this hope purges 1.
Ioh. 3. 3.
himself. And this latter active Conversion in Repentance, is the effect of
the former passive conversion. After I was converted I repented: so Isay 30.
Ierem. 31. 18.
21. 22. And in this regard is Repentance made the gift of God, because his
turning of us, is the cause of our turning our selves.

For the understanding of the nature of this turning two things must be
considered. 1. The Parts. 2. The Properties thereof.

The Parts are two. 1. Auersion from sin. 1. The parts which are
2. Conversion to God.

For the former; It was thus expressed in the definition, 1. Auersion from
sin.
Repentance is a grace, etc. whereby the sinner etc. turns from his sin:
where let us mark that Repentance is made a turning from sin indefinitely
without restriction: whence arise those two Consectaries. 1. That there is no
sin so great but may be; And 2. That there is no sin so small, but must be
opposed and encountered with Repentance. Reason says, Great sins cannot be:
and small sins need not be repented of. In great sins Reason derogates from
Gods mercy; as though they could not be pardoned for all our Repentance: My
sin is greater then can be forgiven. In lesser, Genesis 4.
from his justice and truth; as though they might be pardoned without any
Repentance at all. Against both these errors oppose we both these assertions,
and thus do we maintain them.

1. I say; There is no sin so heinous or hideous, but there is place for
Repentance, the sin against the holy Ghost always reserved: of which it is
said, that it is impossible that ever the offenders therein should be renewed
by Repentance. Not that Hebr. 6.
the Arm of Gods power is shortened, or the bowels of his mercy so straightned,
as though any sin could overcome either: but as of a Physician though
otherwise able, and willing to heal a Patient, it may be said yet, he cannot
heal him, if he be obstinately wilful, and will neither endure the
Physician, but spits in his face, nor his Physic, but spils it on the ground;
even so the case is here. Therefore cannot this sin be pardoned, this
spiritual disease be cured, because this is the nature of it, to rage and rave
desperately both against the physic, and against the Physician; to trample
Heb. 10. 29.
the blood of Christ under feet, and to despite the spirit of God the
sprinckler of this blood, and not to endure him, when he persuades to prepare
the heart to Repentance, for the receipt of that Sovereign medicines.

But as for all other sin; Christ says, I came to call sinners (without
exception) to Repentance, though Publicans and Harlots: Princes of Sodom and
Gomorra, that is, such as matched the filthy Sodomites Is. 10. 16.
in wickedness, are yet bidden to wash themselves in this river. The
conspirators against Christ are called to kiss the son, namely with the
Psalm. 2.
kisses of that repenting woman, Luc. 7. who would have thought that ever the
crucifiers of Christ, who shed his blood by murder, should have drunk his
blood by faith; and imbruing their hands in the matter, Acts 2.
should have bathed their souls in the merit thereof. And yet even these are
bidden Repent.

This is to comfort such whom the multitude and heinousness of their sins
discourages, as though there were no access to mercy by Repentance. Unto these
God says, Come, let us reason together: Is. 1. 18.
Stand not reasoning with your own distrustful hearts, but hark what I say
to you. If ye will wash and cleanse your selves by Repentance; Though your
sins were as red as crimson, etc. yet then shall they be as white as snow. O
but my sins are exceeding great, and above the ordinary seize: why so much
the more need have thou to repent: the more dangerous the disease is, the more
is physic used. And if thy sin be so great as thou complainest, what
meanest thou to make it greater by not repenting. The greatness of thy sin
troubles thee. Repentance will make it less: it is only impenitency that is
the condemning sin. O but the greatness of my sin hinders me from
repenting: say not so: Remember that Christ is thy physician, and Repentance is
his physic, Mat. 9. The whole need not a Physician, but the sick; I came
not to call the Righteous, but sinners to Repentance. Will thou now make him so
weak and unskillful a Physician, that he should be good only at a cold, or at
the rheum, or some such petty infirmity, and not able to deal with a burning
pestilentiall fever? Indeed bodily diseases sometimes so weaken that there is
no ability to receive, much less the power in the physic received to work.
Many diseases are there that pose the best Physicians, Ludibria Medicorum.
and are their shame and reproach: not so here: Never art thou so low brought,
but Christ is able to make thee take his receipt of Repentance: and when it is
once taken, never doubt of the working: for there is no sin, no spiritual
disease that exceedes the skill of our spiritual Physician, Jesus Christ. And
therefore so many examples we have of horrible sinners renewed by Repentance, as
Rahab an Harlot, Abraham an Idolater, Manasses a Tyrant, Paul a Persecutour,
those Magicians called at the birth, that debauched thief called at the death
of Christ.

This doctrine condemns the rigor of the Nouatians denying Repentance to
them that fell away through fear in time of persecution.

It answers also that Question concerning Relapse or Recidiuation, into some
grievous sin after Repentance for it, namely, whether such relapsed persons
may be recovered again by new Repentance? This doctrine shows plainly they
may. Because no sin is excluded from Repentance, save that one unpardonable.
And heereto add these reasons.

1 Relapse into some one particular grievous offense, after Repentance seems
not to be more heinous, then a general and long continued revolt of one
eminent in the profession of the truth, from religion, to idolatry, from
holiness, to filthiness of life. But even such a revolt may be helped by
repentance, as in Salomons case. Therefore a relapse also.

2 Repentance is Christ's Physic for sick sinners, Matthew. 9. Now if temporal
Physic do help relapses into the same diseases, why may not repentance
relieve relapses into the same sins.

3 Christ commands us to forgive our brother unto 70. times 7. times in one
day, if he repent. Now that which God bids us do, in some measure Matthew. 18.
22.
we do it: and that good which we do, and have, we have it from God, and do
it by his help. All our goodness and mercy is but a little particle out of
his fullness, a drop out of his Sea. Therefore if there be such mercy in us to
forgive those that after their repentance for some injuries done us, offend
again in the same kind, much more then in God the Father, and fountain of
mercies.

4 Neither want we altogether example of Scripture. Abraham's example, Genesis 12.
19. hazarding his wives chastity by a slippery policy: and again, Genesis.
20. 2. dashing his foot at the same stone is alleged by some. To the which
we may also add that of John, worshipping the Angel the second time, after
the Angels rebuke for his former error. But in these examples there is no
mention made of repentance after the first slip. Though in all likelihood the
rebuke of an Angel should prevail with John, and of a heathen man with
Abraham, specially when he saw Gods rebuke in the the danger he was in.
Besides that these seem rather to be examples of infirmities, then of more
grievous offenses, whereof the question is made. As for Peter's dissimulation in
his Iudaizing, Gal. 2. it was nothing of that nature that his dissimulation was
in denying Christ. And therefore it cannot be counted such a Relapse as now we
speak of. The example of Jonas seems fitter for this purpose: his sin was
grievous to run away from God, and forsake his embassage to Nineveh: and for
it being grievously punished in the whales belly, he there heartily repented,
as appears, Jonas. 2. yet for all this when God spared Nineveh, he was angry
with him, and justified his former sin, and wished he had never come
thither; which in effect, and before Jonas 4. 1. 2.
God was all one as to have committed that sin again the second time. Here
is comfort then even for relapsed persons, that are entangled again in the
same offenses whereout formerly they were delivered by repentance. And yet this
comfort belongs only to poor troubled consciences, not to presumptuous
sinners. It is not to encourage any that stands to fall, or that is fallen to
lie still, but only him that is fallen, and feels himself fallen, and begins
to despair of recovery, to strive to get up on foot, by putting him in hope
of a possibility of rising up again by help of that stone which is Luke 2.
set as for the fall, so and that much more for the rising again of many.

But as for lesser slippes, whose experience does not tell him that even after
repentance he is again, and again hampered in the same snares of anger,
techinesse, lust, negligence, secret pride, hypocrisy, vainglory, etc.
Though yet the fruit of serious repentance before will appear in our falling
again, that we shall presently catch our selves tardie. Therefore we must not
be over much perplexed in such cases, to think our former repentance unsound.
For repentance does not wholly take away sin, but only weakens it, lessens,
and impayres it. And as he truly runned who afterward sits down: so he
may truly repent of some sin who afterward is foiled by it again.

2 Consectary is, that there is no sin so small but it needs repentance. The
world thinks that repentance is only for more grievous sins, as murder
adultery, oppression, blasphemy: as for lesser matters they hope they may be
dispensed withal. Here our civil men are to be nipped, who put away
repentance from themselves because free from gross scandal. Surely, though
they had no unbelief or profaneness of heart, which indeed are as heinous
sins as any, yet have they cause enough to repent, if it were but for the
very least idle thoughts, or words they ever thought or spoke. The children of
GOD whose heart God has softened by the touch of his spirit, will be troubled
even for the least sins; account ting no sin little which is committed
against so great a God. John Husse that good Martyr in his Fox Martyrol. in
Epist. Hess.
imprisonment repented for his playing at Chesse, because of the loss of time,
and provocation unto anger. So Bradford and Ridley for their negligences, and
secret infirmities even in good actions, as is to be seen in their letters.
When David's hand did touch but the lap of Saul's garment, that touch of his hand
cost him blows and strokes of heart. Every thing is laid to heart by Gods
children, such things the world never sticks at, sins of omission as well as
of commission. Ephesus is called to Revel. 2. 4. 5.
Repentance for leaving her first love. Even not to increase in grace according
to the good means, and occasions we enjoy, is a matter that craves repentance,
favoring our selves though in never so small sins cannot stand with
repentance, which turns the back upon all sins whatsoever, be they great,
or be they small.

CHAP. XII. Of the second part of Conversion, Turning to the Lord.
THe second part of Turning, is turning to the 2. Conversion to God.
Lord. In sin our backs are turned to him, In repentance our faces are turned
toward him. For it is not enough to cease from sin, but withal we must
turn to the Lord, and set our hearts toward him and his kingdom. O Israel if
you return, return unto me says the Lord. And let him that stole Ier. 4. 1.
steal no more, but let him labor and give to him that Ephesians. 4. 28.
needs. For every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down
and cast into the fire. Many lead Mat. 3. 10.
a civil and an honest life, not spotted with gross sins, yet for all this
they have profane hearts turned to the world-ward, not sauouring or affecting
the things of God. But here is the very pith of repentance, The turning of the
heart upward to Heaven, and fixing the eye upon God, and so making toward him
with the foot: that so it may be said of every true repentant, that his
behavior is as of one that is going up to the heavenly Jerusalem, Luke 9.
as it was said of Christ going to the earthly Jerusalem. Oh this one thing
shows how little repentance there is in this world, when the shame of our
affections carries us downward to the earth. A plain argument the heart is
turned to God: For in this regard a Christians conversation is in heaven,
because by repentance his eye is now turned to heaven, and his feet are
carrying him thither apace. Phil. 3. 2.


This then ministers exceeding great comfort to the poor repenting sinner
discouraged with his manifold slippes and infirmities, and is brought to doubt
of the truth of his repentance by the sense of his many and daily frailties.
Such an one may remember that repentance consists in a turning of the heart and
affections to God, not in walking in a way without a stumbling foot.
Repentance takes not away stumbling, it takes not away slipping, and sliding of
the foot. It keeps the face from turning from God, and the foot from walking
from God. It fares with a repentant as with a man going up an hill, who though
he may have many falls and slippes, yet still is said to be going up the hill,
because his face is toward the top of the hill. So it is with the penitent
sinner, he is turning to God, though he have many falls, because his face is
set, and the maine current of his affections is bent upon God. This therefore
be thy comfort, thou wentest not out to meet and to welcome sin, but it came
upon thee at unawares, and like a coward coming behind thee struck up thine
heels, thy feet indeed slid a little downward, but thy face was still upward.

But the maine point that here is to be insisted upon, is this, that
repentance always brings with it a wonderful, and a palpable change and
alteration of the heart and life. When our affections, like wild mad horses
are violently galloping to hell, the spirit of God by repentance, as by a
bridle, suddenly gives a ierke and turns them, and sets them a going as fast
the other way. So that those our companions in the broad way stand maruelling
at us, that we break off company, and do not still continue running out with
them into the same excess of riot. 1. Pet. 4 4.


So great is the change that not only our selves, but others also may discern
it as to marvel at it. It is compared to the change of darkness into Ephesians. 5.
8.
light, which who sees it not? yea unto the change of a stone into flesh, I
will take away the stony heart, and give you a heart of flesh. Why does Satan
bid Ezekiel. 26. 26.
Christ turn stones into bread to prove himself God? He had long before
done a greater matter then that, even turned stones into flesh which is softer
then bread. Great and wonderful is that change of glory in the life to come,
when a piece of clay shall shine as the Sun, when corruption shall put on
incorruption, when these base earthly bodies shall be spiritual bodies, and
these weak ignorant souls shall become like the Angels themselves. But this
change which is wrought by Repentance in the conversion of a sinner far
excels it: For the distance betwixt Grace and Glory is not so great as betwixt
Sin and grace: for grace is the beginning of glory. And therefore Paul
couches Sanctification under Glorification, being but the perfection of
Sanctification: And Peter calls the Grace Romans 8.
of joy, glorious joy and unspeakable. But sin is flat contrary 1. Pet. 1. 8.
to grace, and a change from one degree to another, is easier then from one
kind to another. No marvel then if the Angels do so triumph at the
Repentance of a sinner, when they see a greater Luc. 15. 10.
change then that at the first creation, when out of that deformed and confused
Chaos, so good and so bewtifull a creature as heaven and earth was drawn. Oh
the bright hue the leprous soul is in, when once washed in this Jorden. Though
before blacker then the stock, yet now shines as once Ierusalems Lam. 4. 7.
Nazarites. The beggars nasty rags are stripped off, the old man is put off,
and the royal robes they cloth us, the new man is put on. Great is the change
of old age into youth. Now in Repentance of old men we become young men, we
cast our old skin with the snake, and oh how smug and fresh are we then?
We even renew our strength Psalm. 103.
with the Eagle. All old things pass away, and all things become new. 2. Cor.
5.


Here then is an excellent trial of our Repentance. Let us not deceive our
selves. Repentance will transform a man out of himself, so that all the world
may see it, and say, How much is this man changed from that he was? Can thou
say of thy self as Paul of Onesimus? Once unprofitable, now profitable. Or as
Paul of the Corinthians, Once I was a thief, Philem. 11.
an adulterer, an extortioner, a covetous person, etc. But 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10 11.
now I am washed, now I am cleansed. Once I was a dog, under the table, but
now a son sitting at the table: once I was a bramble in the wilderness, but
now a pleasant and a fruitful fig tree in Gods Orchard. If thus thou can
say of thy self, it is a blessed evidence of true Repentance. But how sore
does this say to full many of us. For

First, how many profane wretches are there that lie wallowing in their mire,
and live in the daily and greedy practice of gross sins, that may say, I was
a swearer, and so I am still, I was a prophaner of the Sabbath, a proud
scoffer, and a mocker of all goodness, I was covetous, a drunkard, an unclean
person, and as I was, so I am still. Thou wretch that have thy leprosy still
sticking in thy forehead, will thou ever brag, that thou have washed thy
self in this Jorden? Thou that have an Ethiopian hide tanned in the sun of
thine own scorching concupiscence, and the Devils fiery temptations, thou that
have the Leopards spots, and the Leuiathans scales, will thou ever take the
boldness to thee of saying, Thou Repentest? where is thy change? where is thy
transformation? Repentance would make a change in thee. It made of Paul a
furious persecutour, a zealous Preacher, It makes a Lion to become a Lamb: It
makes the Is. 11. 7.
Lion eat grass quietly with the Lamb, as he did at the first creation: It
makes him forget and leave off his roaring and his ramping. It made the woman
of Samaria, and the crucifiers of Christ to become Ioh. 4. Acts 2.
humble and serious petitioners to Christ and his Apostles. It turned the
Iaylor from scourging, to annoint the wounds of the Apostles. It made Zaccheus
of a proling and pilling Publican, and a Acts 16.
grinder of the faces of the poor, to be a compassionate, and a merciful
refresher of their bowels. Lo, the Wolf dwelling with the Lamb, and the
Leopard with the Kid. David who before his Repentance Is. 11.
lusted after Bathsheba without fear, afterward was afraid, for that he had
inordinately lusted after a little water, and spilt it on the ground.
Presumptuous Peter whose voice was before his Repentance: 2. Sam. 23.
Though all men, yet not I, oh how humble and how meek was he afterward:
Simon love thou me more then these? to wit, then these thy fellows? Ioh. 21.
That was our Saviors Question; See now what was his answer. Not, more then
these. No, he had now turned his crowing into crying, his confident triumphs
into humble tears, Lord I love thee, though weakly, though not so strongly as
these who never denied, and forswore thee as I have done, yet Lord I love thee.
Cowardly Peter before his Repentance plucking in his snailes horn at the touch
of a silly girl, afterward how courageous was he, how did he not fear to
affront the highest Priest himself. Now then, thou that talkest of Repentance,
show me the like change in thy self. Can thou with good conscience say, I
was thus and thus, but now the case is altered, I hate that folly which before
I loved, I embrace that grace of God which before, swine that I was, I trampled
under my feet. Thou must be able to say so before thou can be able to say
thou have repented. Repentance and Continuance in thine old wicked courses
cannot stand together. Repentance will make thee of an earthling, a saintling,
of fierce, meek, of covetous, bountiful, of fleshly, spiritual, of a wolf,
a sheep, yea of a Devil, an Angel. So that thou may say, I was an unclean
beast; but do I follow drinking still? So Paul; Do I yet seek to please men?
as who should say, it is time: Indeed Gal. 1. 10. explaned.
once I did seek to please men, but I am now otherwise then I was. So to the
Corinthians, Yea though we have known Christ after the flesh heretofore,
despising him for want of outward glory, yet now henceforth know him so no
more. But alas, alas, no 2. Cor. 5. 16. expounded.
change to be seen in many, except it be from evil to worse.

2. How many civil men have we, that remain in their pure naturalls, and
bless themselves in their outward honesty and glory in this, that they were
always the same, which is just to glory in their shame. For what is it else
but a plain profession that they never had any repentance: for that would have
made a strange alreration. It would have reuersed, and have undone all that we
have done. A thing indeed which civil men can hardly be brought unto, to
demolish and cast down the goodly buildings (as they think, though indeed
rotten and ruinous) of their civil virtues: they can hardly endure to have all
their life bypast censured and condemned for naught. But yet they must if ever
they will see the kingdom of God. Except a John 3. (...).
man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. The word again is
significant; which, as Beza there notes, imports, that we must go over all
again that is past, and reject it as unprofitable, and begin a new. Thus did
Paul who was a better ciuilian then thou can be for thine heart: when he
repented he threw away all his glozing civil virtues as offals to dogs. And
though before he Phil 3. (...).
thought himself in good case, yet when the Law was revealed unto him, he saw
what he was then, Romans 7.
and then was troubled for inward lusts, and motions of his heart. And these
our times want not such examples, when civil men having been ceazed upon by
the spirit, they have seen their own dangerous state, and have been urged to
repentance, and so have felt a wonderful change in their hearts and lives: of
neglecters of the word and prayer, they have become conscionable practisers of
all religious duties, and zealous lovers of that which before only
fashionably, and for Laws sake they have performed.

Let then civil men whose nature is changed by the spirit of Repentance, know
that they are in a damnable state, and that it will not be well with them,
till they grow to a loathing, and a detestation of this their evil life, void
of all heat, and heart of holy devotion.

CHAP. XIII. Of the properties of Conversion.
But because many will yet deceive themselves 2. The properties of it which are
3.
thinking they have repentance when they have none, and some again will be so
terrified with this doctrine of the change which repentance works; that they
will think they have no repentance when indeed they have, we will therefore
further proceed to speak of three properties of this change or turning of the
heart in Repentance. By the two former whereof we shall terrify the first
kind of selfe-deceiuers, and by the third shall comfort the second kind of
doubters.

1. Properly. This change then must be an orderly change, beginning in the
soul, even in the 1. It is orderly
very marrow and spirit thereof, and so proceeding to the outward man, and the
actions thereof. This orderly change the Apostle teaches when first he bids us
be renewed in the spirits of our minds, and then Ephesians. 4. 23. 24
let him that stole steal no more. O Jerusalem wash thine Jeremy 4.
heart. But alas how many are there that set the cart before the horse, and
begin to change their lives before their hearts. Some indeed advise us so to
do, but as I think not advisedly. It is the only way to hypocrisy to do
that outwardly which is not first begun in wardly. And besides it is idle,
and to no purpose to purge the channel when the fountain is corrupt, and to
apply remedies to the head, when the headache is caused from the impurity of the
stomach. Miserable experience shows how such disordered beginnings of
Repentance often come to a miserable end. Content not then thy self with
leaving sin outwardly, but see you loath it inwardly, content not thy self
to loppe off the boughs, but lay the axe to the root of the Tree.

2. Properly. It must be a thorough change. The 2. It is thoroughly.
Lord sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit and soul and body may
be blameless. Many in their repentance give but the half turn, Acts 1.
those 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
that turn from one sin to another, as from covetousness to prodigality,
from Atheism, or Iudaisme, to Popery. This is as if the mouse escaping the
trappe, should fall into the paws of the cat. It is just like the turning of
the wind from one point of the North unto the other, from North-east to
North-west, but yet still it is in the North, and as far from the South as
before. So these men turn, but yet in their sin still, and as far from God
as before. Secondly, those that turn their understandings from error to
truth, but not their wills from evil to good, as those that of Papists turn
loose and unreformed Protestants. Thirdly, those that turn from many sins
and with Herod do many things, but yet they remain unturned from some one
special sin. Some indeed there are whose change makes them like
Aethiopians, white only in teeth, every where else cole-black. I mean our
verbal professors that have only a change from the teeth outward, a change
of their words, can speak well, and that is all. But others there are that
go further, and do much, and yet not enough, because though they seem to
turn from sin, and to look toward God, yet have a leering eye, and a
squint respect unto their sins, with Lots wife casting a longing look after
their old Sodom. And they turn, as if a man whose face is toward the West,
should turn to the North, or South: for so turning he may look both ways,
both to the West whereon his face was set, and to the East whereon his back
was turned. So many turn from their sins to God, not directly, but
side-waies, so that with one eye they may look to God, and with the other to
some sin. But as he whose face is turned directly to the East cannot see the
West, so he who indeed looks directly to God, cannot look to his sins, but
he must needs have them behind his back. Repentance if it be true, is
general: It strippes us stark naked of all the garments of old Adam, and
leaves not so much as the shirt behind. In this rotten building it leaves not a
stone upon a stone. As the flood drowned Noah's own friends and servants, so
must the flood of repenting tears drown even our sweetest and most profitable
sins. Most true is that saying of Thomas Aquinas, That all sins are coupled
together, though not in regard of conversion to temporal good, for some look
to the good of gain, some of glory, some of pleasure, etc. Yet in regard of
auersion from eternal good, that is God. So that he that looks but toward
one sin, is as much auerted and turned back from God, as if he looked to
all. In which respect S. James says, he that offends in one, is guilty of all.
Repentance is a thorough change of the whole man, of the whole life: it refines
every part, not so much but vanity and lightness in apparel. The Lord shall
wash (says Isaiah) the filthiness of the daughters of Zion, that is, that proud
bravery, and affected means of apparel mentioned in the third Isay 4. 4.
opened.
chapter, by the spirit of judgment, that is of Repentance, whereby they shall
judge themselves for that sin, and condemn that for nastinesse which before
they accounted neatenesse, and that for filthiness, which before they
accounted finenesse.

3. Property. It is yet an imperfect change. Perfect it is in regard of parts,
as a child is a perfect 3. It is imperfect.
man, but imperfect in degrees. It is like the change of the air from dark to
light in the dawning of the day, which proceeds by degrees, or as the change
and turning of water from could to hot, which is first lukewarm. This I note
for the comfort of such poor souls, that when they hear repentance is such a
change of the mind, and feel so little change in themselves, but their old
sins to be so strong and lively, are driven to doubts. But for their comfort
they must know that this is a change, that with grief they feel, and
complain even of those secret infirmities which were wont never to trouble
them. The rising of the heart against sin, the antipathy, and secret
grudging, and murmuring of the spirit against it, even then when it is foiled
by it, is an argument of a blessed change begun, which shall be perfected in
time.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the practice of Conversion in four duties.
THe third point follows. The practice of this 3 The practice of conversion in
7. duties.
Turning, Reformation, or Conversion. And it is notably set down by the
Apostle Paul, 2. Corin. 7. 11. where seven particular duties are set down
wherein the practice of this second part of repentance consists: For behold
(says the Apostle) 2. Cor. 7. 11. fully handled.
this thing that ye have been godly sorry, what great care it has wrought in
you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation, yea what fear,
yea how great desire, yea what a zeal, yea what punishment. etc He had said
before Godly sorrow works repentance, that is, this second part of repentance,
the change of the mind, for godly sorrow as we have seen is the first part.
Now here he proves that godly sorrow works repentance, and his reason
stands thus. That which works care and clearing, and indignation, etc. that
works repentance: but godly sorrow works these things, therefore it works
repentance. So that it is plain that the Apostle here refers those things
to the practice of this second part. To come then unto the particular duties.

1. Duty is Care. Now this care is twofold: first 1. Care.
the maine care whereby a sinner takes thought for the remission of his sins,
and life eternal. Such was the care of those after they were pricked in their
hearts at Peter's sermon when they cry out, Acts 2 37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? The voice of men in care and anxiety, as
of those that are in great care for this world: what shall we eat? or what
shall Matthew. 6. 31.
we drink? or what shall we put on?

And this is that which is figured in the Parable of the unjust steward, who is
brought in consulting and taking care, what shall I do? dig I cannot, and
Luke 16. 3.
to beg I am ashamed. So that the first beginning of our turning to the Lord
is a serious, and a thoughtfull consultation what course to take for the pardon
of our sins, and the salvation of our souls.

Now in this careful consultation there are two things to be considered. 1.
the ground. 2. the end of it.

For the ground of it. It is the sight and certain knowledge of the error of
our former course of life, and the just censure and condemnation of it. As when
a man turns him to the right way, first he sees plainly, and concludes that
he is gone wrong and thereupon bethinks himself what to do, that he may
recover the right way again.

2. The end or effect of it, it ends always in true repentants in a settled
determination, and resolute purpose to enter into that good way which the word
of God discouers unto them for good. Some indeed deliberate and consult, but
they remain houering, and do not resolve: like faint chap-men, that cheapen
and hancker about wares, but will not come off. They are loath to sell all they
have, to purchase the pearl, to buy heaven with the loss of their sins. For
when Satan sees a man begin to mistrust his own courses, and to entertain
thoughts of departing out of Egypt, he uses all the craft he can to detain
him, and pursues after him departing, as Pharaoh after the Isralites. So in the
Gospel, the dumb and deaf Devil, when Christ came to dispossess him, raged
and took on. So that every Christian in the practice of Repentance before he
can pass from his consultation to a resolution and determination, he shall
find and feel a shrewd bickering and conflict both with Satan and the flesh,
that will labor him to continue in his sins still, as Austin in his
confessions shows it was with him in his conversion. But notwithstanding all
the temptations of Satan and the flesh, the Christian gets the victory, and
grows to a resolution. This purpose and resolution of the heart, is the very
heart of Repentance. I have determined to keep Psalm. 119. 57.
thy word, says David. And this is that which Barnabas exhorted the
Antiochians, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. And
thus is Acts 11. 23.
the Prodigal son brought in resolving with himself, I will go to my
father and say, etc. and when he Luc. 15. 18.
did but thus resolve, his father came forth to meet him: for this serious
purpose to turn, is turning: I thought I will confess, and thou forgauest me.
So when Psalm. 32. 5.
Zaccheus had but resolved to make restitution, when as yet he had not done it,
Christ said, Salvation was Luc. 19. 8. 9.
come into his house. If we have not this constant purpose of heart to forsake
all our sins, and to endeavor our selves to the obedience of Gods
commandments, we have not yet set one foot over the threshold of Repentance.
The Prophet Jeremy calling upon Israel to return, they are brought in
answering the Lord, Behold we come Ier. 3. 22.
unto thee: when this purpose and will of coming is conceived, there is
returning. So repenting Ephraim is brought in thus resolving, what have I to
Hos. 14. 19.
do any more with idols? And Job, Once have I spoken, but I will answer no
more. It is not enough for us with Agrippa to be half persuaded, but we must
Acts 26. 28.
go through stitch, and so pitch it in a settled purpose, that we may say with
David, I have chosen the Psalm. 119.
way of thy commandments. The Prophet Isaiah bids the Jews to wash them, and
to make them clean, to Is. 1. 16.
cease to do evil, and to learn to do well, etc. Now it might be said,
Alas these are hard matters, how shall we be able to do all this? The Prophet
therefore qualifies the matter, saying, If ye consent and verse 19.
obey, that is, If ye consent to obedience in the sound and serious purposes
and thoughts of your hearts, ye shall eat the good things of the Land. Though
you cannot so thoroughly wash you, yet consent to it, and agree to it, and it
shall be accepted.

The second Care follows upon this purpose, the former Care ended: when a man
has purposed and set down with himself to do ought, then he takes Care how
to bring this purpose to pass. The Repentant considers with himself that
though now he be turned into the right way, yet if he have not his eyes in his
head, he may easily lose it again. He is not ignorant how many impediments
will encounter him in the way, how many stumbling blocks will be laid by
Satan, besides that the old Sepent will be behind him nibbling at his
heels, and assaying him to pluck him back. Now then these thoughts run in
his head, I have resolved to enter into this course, alas how shall I be able
to go thorough it? like the wise Luc. 14.
builder he casts his accounts before hand, considers the weightinesse of
Christianity, and bethinkes himself how he shall be able to perform that
which he has undertaken. He objects to himself resolving to serve God, as
once Joshua to the people, saying, We will serve the Lord, Nay but ye cannot
serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a jealous God, Josh 24 28. 19.
etc. So our Repentant in his first turning informs himself of the great
difficulties, that are in walking on in that way, whereinto his feet are
turning. He considers that he is raised out of the grave of sin, but yet like
Lazarus bound with napkins, so Ioh. 11.
is he still hampered with the bonds of many infirmities, which will quickly
make him weary and faint. And therefore now all his care is, how he may hold
out, and compass that which he has propounded to himself. Now this second
Care he shows in the practice of these duties.

1. Because he knows that in this building there are many enemies, as once in
the building of the walls of Jerusalem, he therefore shows his Care in Nehem. 4
furnishing himself with spiritual weapons working with one hand, and holding
the sword of the spirit in the other.

2. Being thus armed and provided, he has a vigilant and a watchful eye
against all occasions and means of sin, and has a Care to avoid them. He
is watchful and careful against the very first motions and whisperings of the
old Serpent, saying unto himself secretly, as before Gods spirit did, This is
the way, turn into it again,

3. He is careful to do all good duties both in his general, and in his
special calling, as to pray, read, meditate, instruct, admonish. Hear o
Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. 3.
and observe to do it, says Moses to the Israelites. So here is his care in
that he observes to do all good duties.

4. He is careful to do them in that holy manner which God requires. He is
not ignorant of Satan's wiliness, how he labors to interest and insinuate
himself into our best actions. Here then is his Care that he go with an even
foot, and an upright heart not out of a desire to be seen of men, and to have
praise from them. Take heed how you give your alms. He observes not only that
he do, but how he does good duties.

5. He is careful to apprehend all occasions of Good whatsoever are offered:
he marks when God sends such men unto him, of whom he may receive further
comfort and knowledge: he also marks when God puts such into his hands, to
whom he may perform any good office, and withal he marks the season and
opportunity. When any accident of Gods special works, either of mercy or
judgment falls out in the world, he makes good use of it: as the Lord noted
how Abraham upon occasion of his judgment on Sodom, Genesis 18. 18.
would thereby provoke himself and his to a more careful keeping of his Laws.

By this now may we try our selves whether we repent or no. Repentance we see
is a very careful thing, and fills our heads with many serious thoughts in
things spiritual. But alas with Martha we busy our heads with many things,
but in the mean time that one thing which is needful is the least part of our
care, we lie secure in our sins, and if any thought Luke 10. 41.
be taken, it is how to fulfill the lusts of the flesh. We are like those
women in Isay; Arise ye women that sit Romans 13. 14.
at ease: we eat, drink, play and sleep, but as for our souls, let God take
care if he will, we list not to trouble our selves with such a burden. Who is
there almost, who in the morning at his first arising entertaines these
thoughts, Oh how may I pass and bring about this day well? How may I avoid
Satan's snares, and restrain my own corruption? And as we look not back to
say, what have I done? so neither look we forward to say what shall we do.
Now we walk rashly, hand ouerhead. The repentant sinner is turned toward God,
and sees his great and awful majesty, and therefore is exceeding careful and
respective of his carriage, that he may not offend, walking now in the eye of
so great and withal so good a God. Children when their Governors backs are
turned upon them, play reakes, but if once they see them, then are they
careful of their behavior.

2. Duty is clearing. Such is our own weakness, 2. Clearing.
and Satan's malice, that be we never so careful and watchful over our ways,
yet we shall oftentimes be overtaken with heaviness, and drowsinesse, and
then is the envious man's time to sow his tares and darnell, for sin to steal
upon us Lo then what a repenting sinner will do in such a case. If contrary to
his purpose and careful endeavor, he over shoot himself, and fall into some
offense, will he lie in his sin, and suffer his sin to lie on his
conscience unquestioned? No, He cannot endure such guests, he knows full well
by dear bought experience what they are, he will never be at quiet till they
have cleared his conscience of the guilt and defilement of the sin. He gets
him presently into some corner with Peter, and there not able to endure
conscience to accuse him, he falls of accusing himself to God, earnestly
craving his mercy, never giving over rapping at his gate till he have gotten
Gods acquittance sealed for the pardon (...).
of his sin. This is the Apology or Defense here spoken of, the getting of
Gods pardon signed, and sealed with the blood of his son, that so when Satan
and Conscience shall come to dragge us by the throats to hell, we may pluck
this pardon out of our bosoms, and so chase them away. When Satan accuses,
yea and begins to judge add condemn us; here is our Apology, here is our
Defense and our answer ready: God has graciously forgiven me. The books and
bonds are cancelled; Satan go not beyond thine office, as Bradford sweetly
speaks, God is the judge, thou have not to meddle with his office. Lo the
Judge has cleared me. Accuse now as long as thou will. So long as a man has
the judges acquitting sentence, he needs not fear the clamours of any
malicious accusers.

And here we may observe a notable difference between the repentant sinner,
and the impenitent. The wicked wretch so he can shift off by any means the
accusation, he never cares nor labors for the Judges absolution, who in his
time will take notice of his sin, though never any accusation should be
proffered. All his care is for the present to put off the accuser, the sergeant,
the officer. Well, thou riddest thy self by some devise to day, but he comes
to thee again to morrow. Where is thy defense, thy protection against him?
Alas, thou have provided none. Now the true repentant he considers that it is
to no purpose to put away the accuser, when as yet the judge remains
vnpacified, who will again, and again set this accuser on our backs till we
have pacified him. And therefore his chief dealing is with the judge himself,
to get his favor and grace, and so he getting the Judges absolution, regards
not a whit the officers accusation. In a word, the wicked when Conscience
accuses, have no other care then to stop the mouth of Conscience, and to choke
it for the present that it may not accuse. The godly further, as they would not
have it accuse, so neither further would they have it a silent and a senseless
Conscience, but they would turn accusing conscience, into an excusing and
clearing Conscience. The wickeds care is only to stop and damme up this
violent flood, but the godly for that they see it is to little purpose thus to
do (because within a little while it will ouerflow, and rage more violently
then ever it did before) they have therefore a further care to turn the
stream and current the other way, to make Conscience sing another note, and in
stead of terrors, to speak peace.

3. Duty. Indignation, namely against our sins, 3. Indignation
and so against our selves for our sins. For though we have gotten Gods
defense against our sins, yet may we not remain friends with them, nay so much
the more bitter, and deadly ought our enmity to be against them, because of
Gods love in giving us the defense of his merciful pardon in Christ against
them. As if I had gotten the Judges absolution, and so a discharge from mine
enemies that sought my life, will I not then so much the more set my self in
hatred against those wicked enemies? Some when they have sinned will seem to
labor for the former clearing, they will confess their sins, and crave Gods
mercy, but yet that league and friendship which they still entertain with
their sins shows they have not so cleared themselves as they should, for if
they would clear their consciences from accusing, they must also clear their
hearts from loving their sins. Every wicked man has his clearing, his
apology and defense against the damage of his sins ready at hand, namely, the
death of Christ. But what follows on this? Do they hate and detest their
sin? Do they grind their teeth at it in anger? No; but rather make their
protection and defense against sin to be as it were a license of sinning
still. But the fruit of true repentance is indignation and bitter anger against
our sins. Hereupon Isay brings in the repenting Church, throwing away
idolatrous ornaments, as in a chafe, as one that throws away a menstruous
cloth, and says, fie, get thee Is. 30. 22.
hence. So Hosea brings in Ephraim in a like angry manner, saying, What have I
to do any more with idols? So Hos. 14. 9.
Peter not only wept, but wept bitterly, the bitter gall Matthew 26. 75.
of this godly indignation being mingled with his salt tears. Thus the
Church, when she had shamefully neglected Christ's call, her heart fretted within
her, Cant. 5. 4. Visceribus frementibus.
as Iunius reads it: we can fret and chafe at little defects in others, and
are tetchie for trifles. True repentance turns all tetchinesse with others,
into this holy tetchinesse and fretfulnesse with our selves for our sins. The
Idolater frets himself and curses Is. 8. 21.
his Gods, but the Repentants fretting reaches not to God, him he blesses when
he frets at himself, nor yet to man, to whom the humility of his heart makes
him patient, but to himself only, and to his own sins. Thus David fretted
in a manner at himself, when seeing how much he was deceived, and offended at
the wickeds prosperity, he at length befooles himself, and be-beasts himself
too, So foolish was I, and so ignorant, even as a beast before Psalm. 73. 22.
thee: In the like mood was he with himself when he had numbered the people,
I have sinned exceedingly, 2. Sam. 24 10.
I have done very foolishly. This is that Anger which Solomon preferres before
all carnal merriment Eccles. 7. 5.
and laughter, Anger is better then laughter. Then is God well pleased with us,
when in an holy anger we are displeased with our selves, then is he ready
toturne from his fierce indignation against our selves, when he sees us forward
in holy indignation against our sins.

4. Duty. Fear which must follow indignation. A strange conjunction of Anger
and Fear, for 4. Fear.
when men are angry they fear least, and grow more fierce then fearful. Men
commonly fear nothing in their anger: but here it is otherwise, indignation
breeds fear: that indignation against sin past, which is not attended and
followed with fear of sin to come, is not good, and therefore is fear added
to indignation. And this is another excellent part of the practice of
Repentance: for the burnt child must needs dread the fire: and the Repentant
sinner having once been bitten and stung by his sins, cannot but fear to
come near them again. He that after a dangerous straying is returned into the
way, will be afraid of losing it again: for before we saw one maine duty of
Repentance was Care, now Fear always waits upon Care: and besides that, the
Repentant being now turned to God, and seeing how great a good he is, cannot
but exceedingly love him, and out of his love fear the loss of him, for love
in this sense is exceeding fearful: even as the wife reconciled to Res est
solliciti plena timoris amor.
her loving husband offended, fears again to offend and lose his favor.
Again, in Repentance, and in turning to God, the heart was softened and made
pliable to the hand of God, and therefore now being made a tender heart of an
hard and stony, it will the more easily fear and tremble at a danger: whence
comes that opposition betwixt fear and hardness of heart, as Blessed is that
man Prou. 28. 14.
that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into evil,
and that of the Prophet, why have Is. 63. 87.
thou hardened our hearts from thy fear.

Now this fear is of excellent use in the practice of Repentance, for it is as
a bridle to order, guide and keep us in the way whereinto Repentance Prou. 28.
14.
turns our feet. Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that in
desperate boldness hardens his heart, shall surely fall into evil. Therefore
by the force of the opposition he implies, that he that fears shall be kept
from evil, and that herein his blessedness consists, which he more plainly
auouches elsewhere, The fear of the Lord is a wellspring of life to Prou 14.
avoid the snares of death: for more particularly it thus keeps thus.

First it makes us to quake at the very first risings of evil and sinful
motions in our hearts, and so to dash sin in the shell, Tremble (says David)
and sin not. Psalm. 4 4.


Secondly, when strong and violent tentations assault us, it strengthens us,
and withholds our assent, for the repenting sinner being now turned to God, he
always sees God, and knows that God sees him, and therefore the awefull
reverence he carries to his presence restraines him. This vpheld Joseph, How
can I, says he) do this, and sin against Genesis 39. 9.
God? This strengthened him against the powerful and adulterous follicitations
of his Mistress, The times was fit, his master was absent, and the place fit,
private and remote, yet though time and place gave him leave, Gods fear would
not: so powerful was it against her powerful persuasions to folly. So Isaac
though natural affection would have carried him to have reuersed Iaakobs
blessing, specially when he was importuned by the howlings of Esau, yet he did
not: and what was the bridle that held him back? He feared an exceeding great
fear, Genesis 27. 33.
which is mentioned afterward, The fear of my father Isaac, says Iaakob,
swearing by God, whose fear Genesis 31. 42. opened.
possessing Isaac his father, kept him from passing away the blessing to Esau.

Thirdly, it keeps from such sins, where the fear of man restraines not,
even from secret and unknown sins to the world. Thou shall not, says Leuit.
19. 14.
the Lord, curse the deaf: why, what should hinder? he cannot hear us if we
do, Thou shall not lay a stumbling block before the blind: why, what should
let us? he cannot see us if we do. Mark the words following, Thou shall
fear the Lord, who both hears thy curses, and sees thy stumbling blocks.

Fourthly, In the whole course of our life it makes us work out our salvation
with fearing and trembling, even rejoicing in fear, and feasting in fear,
knowing Phil. 2. Psalm. 2. Jude 12.
that there is then the greatest danger, when to our eyes there is the least
appearance of it.

In these and such like respects is this fear so necessary in the practice of
repentance: for Repentance is a continual returning toward God, and drawing
nearer still to him. To the which how soever that hellish and slavish fear be
a let, for it drives a man back from God, and turns away the face from sin,
yet not this loving and filial fear, for it drives from sin, and keeps us
from forsaking God, I will put my fear, says the Lord, Ier. 32. 40.
in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Out of this fear arises
that notable duty which some Repentants in the more serious exercise of their
Repentance, in the Scriptures, have practiced. Namely, that entering into
Covenant with God, and binding our selves by solemn oath unto him. This was
David's practice, I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments. Psalm. 119. 106.
The same duty we find practiced in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. Now this
practice arises out Ezr 10. Neh. 10.
of this fear and jealousy, which we have of our deceitful hearts. As when
we fear the faith and honest dealing of men, we will not trust to their bare
words, but we will have it under their hands and seals.

The contrary to this fear is bold venturousnesse, when we rush desperately
into all manner of sin, and in boldness of face and hardness of heart, work
out our own damnation.

Now by this may we try the truth of our Repentance. What, do we fear to
sin? when we see sin following us do we run from it, as the chicken
seeing the Kite come, flies under the wings of the hen. Art thou now afraid of
an oath? Have thou been a covetous usurer? a swinish drunkard? Eccles. 9. 2.
an unclean adulterer? a godless Sabaoth-breaker? And art thou now afraid of
these sins? tremblest thou at the thoughts of them? then have thou good
evidence of the truth of thy Repentance. But this gives the most the lie that
brag of their Repentance, because as it is said of those deceivers, that they
feast without all fear feeding themselves. So it Jude 12.
may be said of them that they follow their sins with all greediness,
without fear, or wit. So far from fear, that they do desire the occasions
of sin, and even harden their hearts against this fear. These may well fear
that they never knew what Repentance meant.

CHAP. XV. Of three other duties wherein conversion is practiced.
5. DVty is Desire. That which we fear, we 5. Desire.
desire to be freed from, and to enjoy the contrary. So he that fears death
desires life, and he that truly fears sin, desires to be freed from sin,
and to enjoy the presence of God every day more and more. This desire then of
Gods grace and his presence to deliver us from the cumber and the burden, and
body of death is another affection of a repentant heart: for when by Repentance
we are turned to God, and see the sweet beauty of his face, we are
exceedingly ravished withal, and therefore in strong and earnest desires we
make toward him, feign would we be at the end of our journey, that we might
be with him, and graspe him with our arms, and satiate our selves with his
sweetness. Hence it is that the children of God desire death and dissolution
with Paul because Phil. 1. 23.
till then they cannot be with Christ. These desires are so much the stronger,
because of our infirmity in approaching toward God, which is such, that we go
but as it were creeping. This greeues us, and makes us desire that we were rid
of these infirmities which so clogge us, and hang as lead at our heels. This
makes us cry with the Church, Draw me, and we will run after thee: and with
David, Oh Cant. 1. 3.
that my ways were directed. By Repentance indeed Psalm 119. 5.
we are escaped out of Satan's snare, but yet so as the prisoner out of prison
with the bolt on his leg, and so he can go but slowly, yet in his desire he
flies, and wishes every step twenty. We are still fettered with many
infirmities that press us so downward, that we cannot run up Gods hill, and
therefore this increases the vehemence of our desires. This is a great comfort
to every true Repentant heart. Thou that have these desires, it is an argument
of the truth of thy repentance, whereby having turned thy face toward God,
thou have gotten sight of his face, and therefore do so long after him, and
desire to draw nearer and nearer unto him. A repenting heart is never without
these earnest desires, Blessed (says our Savior) are they Matthew. 5. 3. 6.
which are poor in spirit, and then he adds, Blessed are they which hunger
and thirst after righteousness, where-euer there is a poor, there is a
thirsting spirit, and these hungring and thirsting desires are evidences of a
repenting hearts.

6. Duty is Zeal, which is a compounded affection 6. Zeal.
of Love and Anger. There may be deceit, and often is in our desires. Every
one pretends they desire Gods commandments, but there is no zeal in their
desires: they are lazy and sluggish desires: therefore is Zeal added next to
Desire, to show what kind of desires these must be, to wit, they should be
fervent and zealous desires: The Desire of the sloathfull slayes him, for his
hands refuse to work. Prou. 21. 25.
But true desire has zeal joined with it, which causes us eagerly to pursue
the thing desired, and to overcome all impediments hindering our desires. We see
in nature how the irascible faculties backs the concupiscible. And as fire
has lightness whereby it aspires to the highest place, so it has also heat
to consume that which should hinder his ascent. In the like manner has the
true desire of a repenting sinner, the grace of zeal to second it: when one
had uttered that affectionate speech, Blessed are Luc. 14. 14.
they that eat bread in the Kingdom of God, see how Christ presently
entertaines it with the Parable of the ghuests, who being invited to the
supper, had every one their excuses from their farms, oxen and wives: whereby
Christ seems to give a check to the counterfeit desires of many, and seems to
insinuate thus much, oh you indeed make as if you had a desire to come, but
you do but counterfeit, you mean it not, for when God calls you to this
supper, ye are ready to shuffle off his inuitation with one worldly excuse or
another, and so are your desires, zeale-lesse desires. They are so cold, so
heartlesse and so heatlesse, that they cannot leap over the least block that
lies in their ways. Thus we see then how fitly zeal follows desire.

And indeed a true penitentiary cannot but be zealous. Zeal must needs be
joined with repentance for these reasons.

1. Repentance is a turning unto God, and a returning into our way, out of
which we had wandered by our sins. Now the more way and time a man has lost,
the more earnest and zealous he is in the redemption of both. A man that has
rid out of his way, when once he perceiues it, will spur the harder, and
gallop the faster till he has recovered so far as he might have been if he
had kept his way in a good reasonable pace. So when the Repentant considers how
much knowledge and experience he might have gained, if the good time which he
has misspent in his sins, had been spent upon better things, when he considers
how much of his life is past in sin, and knows not how little he has to come
wherein he may walk in obedience he lays the more zealousty about him, that
what he wants in time, he may redeem with his zeal. And this is that which
Peter vrges, That henceforward we should live (as much time as remains in the
body) not after 1. Pet. 4. 2. 3.
the lusts of men, for it is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time
past after the lusts of the Gentiles. The longer we have been straggling, the
more quick should be our speed in our return.

And the same thing does Paul urge the Romans withal, As ye have given your
members servants to Romans 6. 19. Qui per poenitentiam resurgunt magna charitato
resplendent, and saepe maiori qua^ illi qui nunqua^ cecidernut Chry.
uncleanness and iniquity to commit iniquity, so now give your members
servants unto righteousness in holiness. The Repentant will be no less
zealous in the ways of grace, then he was in the ways of sin, and the more
zealous will he be in the service of righteousness, because he spent so
much of his time and strength in the service of iniquity.

2. Before repentance we are blind, and cannot see God, nor the sweet beauty
of his face, for indeed our faces are turned from him, but in repentance we
turn our faces to God, and then seeing him, his bounty, our crown and
recompense of reward, we arc so ravished and enamoured upon him, as that with
Paul in an holy zeal, we forget that which is behind, endeavoring our selves
to that Phil. 3. 13. 14.
which is before, and following hard toward the mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

3. The Repentant considers the inconceivable love of God toward him in the
pardon of his sins, that howsoever he was running headlong into hell to cast
away himself, and his soul, yet the Lord stayed him, and was merciful unto
him in the remission of all his offenses. The meditation of which sweet
goodness, and love of God constraines 2. Cor. 5.
him to be zealous for the glory of so gracious a God. This love of God in
Christ to him constrains him, and inflames and fires his heart with an earnest
zeal to glorify the Lord. That whereas before by his sins he had wounded
Gods glory, now the love of God who has had mercy upon him in plucking him
out of the jaws of Satan, makes him now zealous of his glory, and carefully to
labor to heal these wounds which before his sins had made. This we may see in
that repenting woman, who because much was forgiven her, therefore Luke. 7.
she loved much, that is zelously. She had not been so zealous before in
following her filthy and unclean loves, as now she was zealous in following her
holy, and spiritual love.

Now this zeal in repentance shows it self in these properties.

1. Property, It ouerlookes all difficulties, and ouercomes all impediments.
Much water cannot Cant. 8.
quench love, nay it kindles rather, and the more water the more love. Zeal
dampes at no bogges, quagmires, hills, or mountains, it is an affection that
will wing a man, and mount him over all. It is not a Lion in the way, no nor
yet Legions of Devils in the way can cool it is courage. Michols scoffs was to
David's zeal but as water upon lyme, made 2. Sam. 6.
it the more hotter, I will be yet more vile. And other men's hatred of the
truth did but increase his Psalm. 119. 126. 127.
Love, They have destroyed thy Law, therefore do I love it. A worthy example
of repentants zeal in this kind was that of that repenting woman, who though
Christ were at dinner in a Pharisees house, Luke 7.
and much company likely there, yet in the holy madness of her zeal she comes
rushing in, seeking him whom her soul loved, not abashed with the company, but
before them all falls to kissing and washing the feet of Christ.

2. Property, This zeal of Repentance thinks nothing too good for God, or
too dear for him, and spares for no cost and charges in the cause of his
glory. Thus David repenting for his numbering of the people, would not have the
place for the altar, and the burnt offerings of Arannah for naught, but would
give him money for them. So the Israelites repenting for their idolatry, showed
their 2. Sam. 24.
zeal in their costly offerings to the Tabernacle even Exodus 36.
till they were feign to be forbidden to offer. So it was with that good woman
that poured the box of costly ointment upon the head of Christ.

3. Property. It makes us draw others to God. This our Savior required of
Peter as a fruit of his repentance, that when he was converted he should
strengthen his brethren. In our sins we are commonly Luke 22. 32.
isntrumental for Satan to draw others into our sins with us. True
Repentance will make us zealous to be as isntrumental to bring others to God.
I would, says Paul, that not only thou, but Acts 26. 29.
all here, were not only almost, but altogether as I am, except my bonds.

7. Duty is Revenge. Here is the demonstration 7. Revenge.
of our zeal for God, and his word when we revenge their quarrels upon their
capital enemy, the flesh, the corruption of our nature. There is much deceit
in zeal. The zeal of many is only verbal, It may be heard, but not seen,
but true zeal must be seen as well as heard, Come says Iehu, and see what
zeal I have for the Lord. Now as his zeal 2. King. 10. 16
was seen in the revenge which he took upon Baals Priests in the slaughter of
them, so must our zeal appear in our revenge upon the flesh, which we must
wound and daily mortify. This revenge will show what affection we bear to our
sins. Before repentance they are so dear to us, that we cannot endure so
much as the reproof of them, but when our repentance comes, then comes
revenge, and we can brook not only reproof of them from others, but
vengeance also upon them from our selves. And when once we can come to be
revenged upon them it is a sign we account them as enemies. For no man
desires revenge but upon his enemy. Solomon knew the right mother of the child
by her tender heart, and earning bowels, which could not endure to see the
babe divided by the sword, surely when we cannot abide the sword of revenge to
wound and slay our sins, we have cause to suspect 1. Kings. 3. 27.
our repentance, for who would be loath to have his enemy wounded?

Now this revenging our selves upon the flesh is

General, Especial.
1. Generally, this revenge consists in that which the Apostle calls the
beating down of the body. And offering up our bodies as sacrifices to God,
both which places I understand of the body of sin, that is, the 1. Cor. 9.
27. Romans 12. 1.
flesh, which must look for no better at our hands then a clubbe, or a
sacrificing knife. It must be handled as Sarah handled Hagar, roughly. Our
flesh is of a slavish disposition; If a slave be well used, he will grow
saucy, and malapert. And he, says Solomon, that brings up his servant
delicately, he will be as his son, nay he will ouertop him, as Jeroboam did
Rehoboam, at whom it is thought Solomon aimed Prou. 29. 21.
at in that Proverb. This slave then must have a straight hand held over it,
and must be used like a slave to a whip, to a cudgel. We are not debtors to
the flesh, we owe it no kindness, no favor, Romans 8.
we owe it nothing but revenge, nothing but blows, and the blue eye that S.
Paul gave it. But alas! how far are we from this? how do we feed and flesh
1. Cor 9. 27. (...).
the flesh against the spirit? what ease, and content do we give it? How do
we stroke and hug, and cocker it? How do we take thought for it? How do
we gratify it in all things, as David did Adoniah, Romans 13. 14.
whom he would not displease from his childhood to 1. King. 1. 6.
say, why have thou done so?

2. This Revenge is more special, and it consists in these particulars.

1. There cannot be a greater revenge then to spoil our adversary of his
chiefest delight, and in stead of that to vex him with that which is most
contrary thereunto. Now the flesh in every one has some special darling sin
wherein she most delights, which is as her right eye in regard of pleasure, or
as her right hand in regard of profit. Now Matthew. 5.
this right eye must be plucked out, and we must be revenged upon the flesh
as the Philistimes upon Sampson in putting out his eyes. And this right Judges
16. 21
hand must be cut off, and the flesh must be used as was Adonibezek. Such
sins as are dearest, must Judges. 1.
be quite abandoned, and the contrary graces must be carefully practiced. A
revenge it is on our enemy to hurt his body any where, but to spoil him of his
eye or hand; this is a special revenge. The repenting sinner in mortifying the
whole body of sin, must do as Cranmer did in the burning of his body, he
burnt it all, but first he began with his right hand. So the repentant must
labor to consume the whole mass of the body of sin, and bring old Adams
bones into ashes, but yet let him begin with the most special members
thereof. Thus did Zaccheus when he was converted. His gainefull sin of wrong
and oppression, that went first to the pot, his right hand went first to the
fire. Luke 19 8.
Half my goods I give to the poor, and if I have wronged any man by forged
cauillation, I restore him seven fold. Paul's maine sin was persecution, and
wasting of the Church, and what delight did the flesh take therein? but lo how
he practiced his own rule, As ye have given your members servants to
uncleanness, and to iniquity to commit iniquity, so now give your members
servants unto righteousness in holiness. As fast as with both hands he
plucked Romans 6. 19
down, so fast with both hands he built up again. The great pain and toil
he put himself unto in planting Churches, was a revenge upon the flesh for
the pains before taken in persecuting. Salomons special sin was Epicurisme,
for he even sold himself to carnal and filthy pleasures. Therefore repenting
he does not only cut the flesh short of those pleasures, but in a further
revenge writes a book against them, the book of his repentance, and
retractations, Ecclesiastes.

2. This revenge consists in converting those very things, which have been the
matter, or object of sin, and abused by the flesh to sin, to the service of
God, and matter of our repentance for example. David in his adultery defiled
his bed. In his repentance he washes his bed with his tears: he turns Psalm 6.
his bed which he had made a brothell-house, into an oratory, and an house of
prayer. That place wherein he bathed himself, as it were in the milk of his
fleshly pleasure, in the same he now baths him-the salt brine of bitter
repenting tears.

So the Ephesians made a sacrifice to the Lord of their books of sorcery, and
David of that water of Acts 19.
blood, for which his worthies had by his means adventured their lives. So the
Israelites as they had sinned in offering their eare-rings of gold to Exodus 35.
the calfe, so repenting they offer likewise gold and earrings to the
Tabernacle. So likewise the Israelitish women offered their looking glasses
which they Exodus 38. 8.
had abused to the proud prancking up of themselves, to the use and service of
the Tabernacle. So Tyrus that famous mart-city sinning in the abuse of their
goods, both in getting and spending of them, their Repentance is thus set
forth. Her occupying Is. 23. 18.
and her wages are holy to the Lord, it shall not be laid up nor kept in store,
but her merchandise shall be for them that dwell before the Lord, etc. Here is
a lesson for Usurers, Pillars, Pollers, Receivers of bribes, all such as have
defiled their hands with unlawful gains, either getting it by an unlawful
calling, or by the abuse of a lawful. Let them learn of Tyrus: Let them not
lay up nor keep in store the matter of James 5.
their sin to testify and witness against them. Are yet the treasures of
wickedness in your houses? oh pluck Mic. 6. 10.
from the fleshie those fat collops. Better they should serve their gold and
silver so got, as David did the water of Bethlem, even spill it, and throw it a
way, then reserve it for their own private enrichment here, and their
eternal beggary and endless misery hereafter. That which before they offered
as a sacrifice to Mammon, let them now offer it to Gods altar, that is the
poor who are now come into the room of the Altar of the old Testamen: where
Repentance is, there is revenge. Have thou repented for thy covetousness, for
thine usury, bribery, etc? show thy revenge upon them by taking from them the
matter they feed upon, and with Tyrus give it to the Lord, and with Zaccheus
give it to the poor. The example of Bradford that worthy Repentant, whose
life, death, speeches and actions even breathed Repentance, a man that might
seem wholly to be made of Repentance, his example, I say, in this kind is very
memorable: who hearing a Sermon of Mr. Latymers, wherein restitution was M.
Samson in his preface to Bradfords Sermon of Repentance.
urged, he was so stricken to the heart for one dash of a pen which he had made
without the knowledge of his Master, (as full often, says Mr. Samson, I have
heard him confess with plenty of tears) being Clark to the Treasurer of the
Kings Camp beyond the seas, and was to the deceiving of the King, that he could
never be quiet till by the advice of the same Mr. Latymer a restitution was
made. The which thing to bring to pass he did willingly forgo all the
private and certain patrimony he had on earth. Those that thus offending with
Bradford mean not to repent and revenge themselves on their covetousness in
this manner, are not like to come where now Bradford is.

3. Another specialty in this Revenge is, when with the very self same members
and instruments of our bodies, which the flesh most of all has abused to
sin, we in special sort glorify God. Zachary that sinned with his mouth in
giving God Luc. 1.
the lie, repenting, as soon as ever he could speak, glorified God with his
mouth. So that woman, which had abused her eyes, her hair, her lips to Luke
7.
wantonness and uncleanness, repenting she reuenges her self upon the flesh.
She takes from the unclean Devil all those instruments, and to spite him
the more gives them to his utter enemy Jesus Christ. Her lips to kiss his
feet, her eyes to wash them, her hair to wipe them. So many delights as she
found of the flesh, so many burnt offerings she sacrificed to the Lord.

4. Further we take revenge on the flesh, when we restrain our selves from the
use of things otherwise lawful, because we have offended therein. As if
offending in gluttony, and drunkenness we should punish our selves with
abstinence from wine, and fasting. If in abuse of mirth, and recreations, we
then forbear them. If in apparel, we then also cut off this our Peacockes
tail. Thus we take knives from children when they cannot use them without
hurting themselves. Timothy but living amongst the luxurious Ephesians to
check their excess, did 1. Tim. 5. 23.
thus tame and subdue the flesh in absteyning from wine. How much more if he
had so offended himself, would he have done it to have punished the flesh?

Ob. But in this doing, do we not seem to approve of the popish exercises of
penance.

Ans. No. For 1. Many of these exercises they use, are simply unlawful in
themselves, being breaches of the sixth Commandment, as their scourgings of
themselves, and using that roughnes and austerity, which takes away health, and
shortens life. The deeds of the flesh must be mortified by the Romans 8. 13.
spirit, in a spiritual manner, and not in this forced, violent, and fleshly
fashion.

2. Our revenge is upon our sins, directed against the flesh, that is, against
the corruption of our nature, theirs is against their skins, directed against
their persons, and their outward man. And so indeed it is nothing else but an
idle violence offered to the outward man, such as that of the Pharisees, in
fasting till they lost their color and complexion, but that fasting fatted
their inward corruptions, their pride, and their vaineglory. For though they
pinched their carcasses, yet not their corruptions. Their lean bodies had
swollen souls. This revenge being especially against our sins, and sin
having greatest interest in our souls then in our bodies, the soul especially
should taste of this revenge. She should be broke of her will, she should be
crossed in her affections in her pride and vaineglory. As David said to the
Lord smiting the people with the pestilence, Alas these sheep, what have they
2. Sam 24.
done? Let thine hand be against me, it is I that have sinned. So may the
Jesuits souls say to them so cruelly martyring their bodies: Alas, what have
these bodies done without us? it is we specially that have sinned, and yet we
never feel your discipline, your hands should be specially against us. As Joel
said to them of his time, Rend your hearts and not your garments, so may we
say to these Papists, whip Joel. 2. 13.
your souls, and not your sides. This is the far harder matter, to humble
the pride of our spirits, then to take down the flesh of our bodies.

3. They make their carnal, their bodily, and bedlem-like revenge to be
satisfaction to Gods anger against sin, which is blasphemous, and derogatory
to the blood of Christ.

5. The last point of this revenge is, when we vpbraid the flesh, and cast it
in the teeth with those afflictions which God sends. Though we may not draw
afflictions upon our selves to mortify the flesh, yet being imposed upon us by
God, we may make our advantage of them for this use, to insult and triumph over
the flesh when God punishes it. It argues a vindictiue mind in us, and a
reuengefull spirit, when we rejoice to see another revenging himself upon our
adversary. So this is also a kind of revenge upon the flesh, when God having
entered the crucifying nails into the sides of old Adam, we pegge and drive
them in further, and hammer them up to the heads, by imputing them to our
flesh, and charging her with her dullness, and untowardness, and rating at her
as the cause of them. Ah thou vile flesh, I may thank thee for all this smart,
I could not turn thee, but I trow God will now tame thee, I trow he will
bring thee under, thou rebel. Thus if we will help God to whip harder, by
taking Gods part, justifying him in his dealings, and twittings at our
corruptions, we shall manifest our spite and revenge against this our enemy.
This was notably practiced by that worthy Martyr Cranmer, who when by his
cruel adversaries he was brought to the stake to have his body burnt, and so
his right hand, yet took that advantage against his right hand, or rather
against his flesh, that had abused his right hand to subscribe to the Popish
articles, to be revenged first upon it. And so in a godly revenge burnt his
right hand first. And thus we see the practice of this second part of
Repentance, and the whole definition of Repentance unfolded.

CHAP. XVI. Of Initiall Repentance.
NOw after the definition thus explaned it rests The kinds of repentance.
to see what division there is of Repentance. Into kinds it has none, yet it
has certain degrees:

Repentance therefore is either the first repentance, or the after Repentance:
the after repentance is twofold. First the continuation of the first in the
daily course of our lives. Secondly, the renouation of the first in special
manner upon some special occasions. So then in all there be these three degrees
of Repentance. Initiall, Continued, Renewed.

1 Initiall repeetance is that at our first calling, 1. Initiall. Hebr. 6.
called repentance from dead works: because all the works, even the best
works before, were dead works, coming from men wholly dead in their sins.
This is the repentance of which Paul speaks when he wishes Timothy to instruct
the contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentance. 2.
Tim. 2. 25.


Here consider two things.

1. The measure of this repentance. 2. The time of it.
1. The measure of it, how far it does extend. Ans. It is in the very first
beginnings but small, but when once it comes to the birth, it breeds in us
greater sorrow then is in continued or renewed repentance. Initiall repentance
then is the greatest in our sense, and apprehension. Indeed sometimes
After-repentance is more bitter by reason of the greater favors and mercies we
have received from God, but yet ordinarily the first repentance has a greater
measure of sorrow.

1. First at our first repentance our hearts are harder then ever after being
never before mollified with any former Repentance, and therefore the harder our
hearts are, the harder wedges needs there to cleave them.

2 Secondly, at our first repentance we have to deal with all the sins of
our whole life: now the more sins the more grief.

3 Thirdly, in our first repentance more sorrow and grief, because we never
yet had any sense of Gods love before; whereas the former assurance of Gods
love in after-repentance, does some thing allay and sweeten the bitterness of
our sorrow: these bitter pills are sugared in after-repentance.

2 The time of it, which must be considered two ways.

1 Generally. This life is the time of Repentance while we are in the way, for
when our journey is ended in death, no returning then. While it is day John 9.
we may work, no working in the night, that is, after death. Then is the
paying of wages. The day of judgment is called the Lords day, because he then
must reward every man according to his works. This life only is our day,
because then we must work. Manna was to be gathered only in the six days,
none upon the Sabbath. The time Exodus 16. Vide Drus. Ad^^. page 1^0 (...). Qui
lab (...) post^^die.
after our life is a Sabbath from working the works of God. Now then in the
six days of our life is the Manna of Faith and Repentance to be gathered.
Some went out to seek Manna upon the Sabbath but found none. If once our
Sabbath be come, none shall find nor eat Manna, that has not gathered it
before. As therefore we are bidden to remember this weekly Sabbath, that our
worldly businesses be not deferred till then, but may be dispatched in the six
days before hand, so must we also remember that eternal Sabath after this
life, and dispatch the spiritual businesses of repentance, and not put them off
till the working days be past. The life to come is no time of repentance. It
is the Nam in inferno inquit, quis co^fitebitur tibi? (...) Chrysostom. ad Ephesians.
hom vlt. Ier. 31. 9. Cum fl^tu and depr cationibus Iun. Revel. 6. 2. Sam. 7. 2.
time of Judgment, not of Repentance. It is not a time of weeping and
deprecations, but a time of weeping and imprecations, of weeping and gnashing
of teeth. It is a time rather of howling unto the mountains, then of lamenting
after the Lord. But some will be ready to say, if this life be the time of
repentance, then we will repent any time whilst we live, and it may serve the
turn well enough, we will repent in old age, in our sickness. etc. There
is time enough before we dye. Therefore for answer we must know that the time
of repentance is to be considered in the second place.

2. More specially. This life is indeed the time of Repentance, yea any time
of it, in regard of hope and possibility, both which are taken from us after
death. So Paul sets down no certain time, but proving if God at any time will
give them repentance. But yet in regard of our duty to practice repentance the
time present is the time. Even this very 2. Tim. 2. 25.
now wherein I speak, if hitherto thou have not repented Hence it is that the
Apostle so much beats 2. Cor. 6. 2. (...).
upon this now: Behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation.
He beats upon the very (...), the time present, the very instant of the time
present. So he beats as much upon to day, to day if ye will hear his voice.
To day is Gods voice, To Heb. 3 and 4.
morrow the Devils. If our neighbor must not be put off till to morrow; say
not to thy neighbor, go Prou. 3 28.
and come again to morrow; Then how much less must God? If ye will seek,
says Isay, namely after God by repentance, seek out of hand without further
delay, and enquire, return and come. And again, Isay. 21. 12. Isay 55. 6.
seek the Lord while he may be found: when is that? while he is near in the
means of the word, and motions of the spirit to thy heart: Now he is ready to
be found, while he calls upon thee to seek him. But the Devil still keeps his
old wont, and when Christ comes to cast him out by Repentance he cries out,
why art thou come to torment me before my time? Too many are like those Jews
that said, Matthew. 8.
The time was not yet come to build the house of the Lord. But against these
delays and prorogations of repentance we may consider these arguments. Hagg. 1.


1. Consider the uncertainty of thy life, which is such as thou can have no
assurance of it, no not for a minute. True it is at the twelfth hour, even in
thine old age thou may repent, but how know thou that thou shall see the
twelfth hour? God has promised pardon to him that repents, but has not
promised the morrow to him that defers. The whole time of Repentance is but a
day, oh that Paenitentiae indulgentiam, sed dilationi d^^m crastinum non
promisit, Amb. Luc. 19.
in this thy day, but yet it is not in this as in other days: for after them
follows such a night as has a day returning again. After this day coms an
eternal night. And again, in other days the time is determined for the end,
but it is not so in this day, we cannot say of this day that there are twelve
hours in it. How many are there whose sun has Itaque sic agendus omnis dies
tanquam agmen agat, and expleat, ac consummet vitam Qui dicit vixi, quotidie
surgit ad lucrum. Seneca.
set at noonday? who in the prime and flower of their days have been taken
away? yea, whose sun has set in the very rising? Therefore be ye prepared
also, for ye know not at what hour the Son of man will come. Thou say
thou will repent at thy death, well I take that thou grantest. Even this day
for ought thou know is the day of thy death. Out of thine own mouth then
will I judge thee thou evil servant. An tibi quoque concedet? Concedet
fortasse, inquis. Quid a^, fortasse, and interdum, and saepe? In mentem tibi
veniat, se de anima taa consilium inire. Contrarium etiam pone, etc. Chrysostom.
ad 2 Cor. 13. hom. 22.
Thou art to account every day the day of thy death, why then do thou not
repent to day, since thou art to look for death to day? I but, says our
youngster, I have known many live till their old age, and have repented then:
Well, what then, says Chrysostom, Art thou sure that God will grant the same
to thee? Thou say, Peradventure he will: what say thou peradventure, and
sometimes, and oftentimes. Bethink thy self, that the business thou have in
hand concerns thy soul. Therefore suppose the contrary, and think with thy
self, what if God should not grant it me. Who would be so mad to put his
soul to the adventure, upon a Peradventure? Peradventure thou may live till
thou be old, and why not as well, Peradventure thou may die both in thy
youth, and so sudden a death, as thou shall not have time to speak, much
less to repent. In other matters, in the things of the world we can number our
days in this manner, as to sum them up, and so apply our hearts to worldly
wisdom. We can make our wills in our health, let slip no opportunity of
furthering our estate, because we think I may die too morrow. Oh that we
could so number our days, as to apply them to the spiritual and heavenly
wisdom of Repentance. Enimuero quu^ ad bellum proficisceris non dicis minime
necesse est testamentum condere, fortasse revertar. nec cum de ineundo
matrimonio, consultas, dicis, vxorum egente^ accipiam, multi enim praeter
opinionem ad opes ita pervenerunt. At vero non de anima. Id. ibid. Luke 12.
When thou go to war, says the same Father in the same place, thou do
not say, I need not make any will, peradventure I shall return again, neither
when thou go about thy marriage business, do thou say, I will marry a
poor wife, for I have known many beyond their expectation to have grown rich
that have done so, and yet when the matter concerns thy soul, thou put it
upon these uncertainties, and peraduentures. Take heed. Even whilst thou art
thus reasoning what thou will do hereafter, even in the very thoghts of future
Repentance may death smite thee, as that fool in his worldly thoughts. And
that so much the rather because thy presumption is greater then his. He
promised the time to come to himself, as if he had been Lord of time, but
thou do not only so, but promisest thy self also the grace of Repentance,
as though thou had Repentance also at thy command. Whereas both the Grace and
the Space of Repentance are in the hands of God. The Grace is in his hand,
proouing if at any time God 2 Timothy 2. 25.
will give them repentance, and so is the space, I gave her space to repent,
and she repented not, Renel. 2. 1.


2. Consider with the uncertainty of thy life, the uncertainty of Gods grace.
Say thou had with Hezekiah a lease of thy life, and that thou were sure to
live as long as Methushelah, yet what assurance have thou to repent in thy
latter end, who have refused grace before when it was offered? Gods spirit Genesis
6.
will not always strive with wicked resisters of his grace. The chicken that
will not come when the hen clucks, may be well caught by the Kite. The sick
men that came not into the water when the Ioh. 5.
Angel moved, were not healed. It is not with the tides of Gods grace, as in
the tides of water, which come certainly at set time, so that he that misses
the morning tide, may have the evening tide. No, it is tide too day, and now it
is tide. Now take it if thou be wise, thou know not whether in all thy life
time the like grace will be offered thee again. Behold, says our Savior, I
stand at the door Revel 3. 20.
and knock, if any man will open, viz. when I knock, then I will come in,
else not. Thou may well fear that, because thou wast deaf at Gods call,
God will be both dumb never to call thee hereafter again, and also deaf
not to hear thee calling on Prou. 1. 28.
him.

3. Though Gods Grace in outward means may still be offered, yethow know thou
whether he will give thee the inward grace with the outward means of grace.
Nay, delays are dangerous. The longer thou put off, the further off art
thou and the more incapable of Repentance. For still thou heapest up sin upon
sin, and every new sin is a new stroke with an hammer that drives the nail
in further. So that Repentance will be more difficult afterward then now,
sin will have gotten such an interest, and confirmed a strength by
continuance of time. And this is that which the Apostle speaks of, Lest your
hearts be hardened thorough Hebr. 3. 13.
the deceitfulness of sin. We think to shake off our sins afterward, but
the longer they tarry, the faster they cleave. A twigge may be easily bowed,
but let it grow to a confirmed tree, and then there is no dealing with it. And
thus have we seen with these delayers of Repentance, that have said at first,
It is too soon, we will repent hereafter, when their hereafter has been
come, then have they said, It is too late, the season is past, our hearts are
so hardened that now we cannot repent. We must not say to our neighbor that
comes for his own good, go and come again too morrow, how much less to
God, who comes and craves not for his, but our good: who if we do our
endeavor in asking of him, will give that which he asks of us. If thou deny
him too day, he will deny to ask of thee too morrow.

4. Death is no fit time to begin to learn Repentance. It is absurd for a
soldier to seek his armor when the battle is begun. The Apprentice will
not be to learn his trade, when his time is going out. Repentance should
rather be an introduction to Death, then Death to Repentance. Besides at the
time of death, the body is so possessed with payns, and the soul so taken up
with fear of death, that a man is altogether unfit for so great and weighty
a work as Repentance is: yea, we see that men upon their deathbeds are not
fit to meddle with ordinary matters of the world, and shall we think that
when we are unfit for the basest things of the earth, that we can be fit for
the great and weighty businesses of Heaven?

5. Repentance at death is seldom sound. For it may seem rather to arise from
fear of judgment, and an horror of hell, then from any grief for sin. And
many seeming to repent affectionately in dangerous sickness, when they have
recovered, have been rather worse then before. It is true, that true
Repentance is never too late, but late Repentance is seldom true: for here
our sins rather Poenitentia nunquam sera siserir, sed sera. raro serta Vae
illis qui tunc habuerunt terminum luxuriae cum vitae.
leaves us, then we them, as Ambrose says, And as he adds, Woe be unto them
whose sin and life end together.

Let us therefore no longer foreslow our Repentance till death, sickness and
old age, let God have the best of our days. If we reserve the dregs of our
days for him, he will reserve the dregs of the cup of his fierce wrath for
us. Let us account it a greater shame to be to begin Gods learning in our old
age, then to be to begin any humane learning. And yet even there it is a
shameful thing. What a shameful and ridiculous thing were it to see a man with
a gray beard go to the Grammer-schoole, or to sit among children learning his
Turpis et ridicula res elementarius senex. Senec.
A. B. C. Repentance is the A. B. C. of religion, be as much ashamed to learn
that in thine old age, as thou would be to be amongst children and
schoole-boyes.

CHAP. XVII. Of continued and renewed Repentance.
THe second degree, I call Continued repentance, 2. Continued Repentance.
which is a going forward in the first repentance thoroughout the whole course
of our lives; for Repentance is not only a turning, that is but the first
degree, but it is also a returning. A man must never give over till he be
returned to that estate, wherein once he was, which is not done till our dying
day. If ye will seek, seek, return and Is. 21. 12.
come. After turning our faces to God at our first repentance, there must be a
daily coming forward to him by this continued Repentance. The Popish penance
is confined within the circle of a few days, weeks, months or years,
according to the priests discretion. But the true Repentance of a Christian, is
a continual act, and a daily exercise: for the change of the heart is not
wrought in us perfectly at the first, but there must be proceeding on by
degrees. The old man must be crucified by repentance. Now crucifying is a
lingering death. After we are converted, still we carry the body of sin about
us, and many infirmities cleave unto us, and break from us continually. As
therefore in a a leaking ship there must be continual pumping, and in a
beggars coat continual patching, so in our lives continual repenting and
repairing of our daily breaches. There is matter enough to hold our repentance
work all our life long. Many practice repentance by starts, now, and then,
when the mood and fit comes on them, but it must be a continual practice. For

1. We have daily infirmities. 2. We had sin before our birth, even in our
conception, even original sin which will hang upon us till our death. 3.
After death our sins will remain in regard of the evil sent corrupting
others. 4. Many were our sins before our calling, never to be forgotten, but
often with bitterness to be remembered as Paul did his persecution. 5. By
neglecting the daily practice of Repentance, we shall make the practice of it
far more difficult afterward. The house that is daily swept has but little
dust, and is easily swept, but if it be seldom swept then it asks much
scraping, rubbing, paring and washing, the dirt will be grown so hard to the
floor. So in casting of accounts, he that casts them up every day shall the
easier cast them up at the weeks end, and he that casts them up every week,
shall the easier cast them up at the years end, but he that lets them run
on from day to day, and from week to week, he shall find them so perplexe
and intricate, as that they shall trouble his best brains to bring all ends
together.

The practice of this continued repenatnce is,

1 Hearty confession, and bewailing of our sins to the Lord.

2 Careful watchfulnes over our hearts to keep out all sin.

3. Strict examination of our selves at the days end, and so censuring our
selves, for that we find amiss, with earnest calling on GOD for greater Grace.

3 The third degree is renewed repentance. Repentance 3. Renewed repentance.
Where.
is oftentimes discontinued, interrupted, or at least, increases not so as it
should, therefore ever and anon it is in special sort to be renewed. Now here
are two things to be considered: The practice and the times of this Repentance.

1 The practice of this repentance, what it is, 1. The practice.
wherein it consists? Ans. 1. In performing the duties of Repentance, handled
before in general, in a greater measure, and a more powerful manner. Acts 2.
Corin. 7. 11. speaking of this renewed repentance, which some call
extraordinary repentance: Behold says the Apostle, what care, what clearing,
etc. They had care before, but now a greater measure, and a more watchful
care. 2. In a more strickt examination of our selves. Examination of our selves
is to be practiced daily, but now a stricter, and seuerer, and that specially
for our estate to godward. And therefore this narrow search must discover some
secret infirmities before not found out. As in reading over our own works, or
writings the second or third time, we espy that which we did not before. So
in the second reuiew of our lives by renewed repentance we find out more sins
then before. 3. In a greater measure of contrition, and humiliation, as in
those Israelites drawing buckets of water, in a greater plenty of tears,
deeper sighs and sobbes.

2. The times and occasions of this renewed repentance: 2. The times.
They are five,

1. When we are to perform special services to God, because then we may
fear least our former negligences may come up in account against us, therefore
we must in special sort renew our repentance, and so seek unto God. Thus
before the Sacrament of the Lords Supper Paul commands a 1. Cor. 11. 31. Genesis
35. 1. 2. etc.
renewing of our repentance, and a fresh judging and condemning our selves. Thus
Iakob renewed his repentance before he went up to Bethell, and purged his family
of the idols. This God also first calls for, before our approaching into his
presence, in the duties of his worship, wash you, make you clean, and then
Isay. 1. 16. 18.
Come and let us reason together. So often then as an holy service is to be
performed to God, we must renew our Repentance.

2. When we seek for any special blessing at the hands of God. Because then
our sins may interpose themselves, and so intercept the blessing desired,
then are we especially to renew our repentance. As when our adversaries renew
the battle against us, we are to renew our preparation against them, so must
we do here. Thus Isaac when he Genesis 24. Genesis 32. 9.
sought the blessing of a good wife, went out into the fields into some secret
corner or other, to pray Acts. 1.
in special manner unto the Lord. So did Iakob when he sought the mercy of
deliverance from his brother Esau. So the election of ministers in the
Primitive Church was done with prayer.

3 In special afflictions, when God corrects our dullness, and by them as by
whetstones seems to sharpen our repentance, and to put an edge upon our
prayers. So did David in the rebellion of his son 2. Sam. 15. 26. 30. 2. Chron.
20.
Absalom, and Iehoshaphat when the Moabites and Ammonites came up against him.
And this is that which the Prophet calls for, Search your selves, Zeph. 2. 1.
search your selves, before the decree come forth, etc. wishing them in that
special affliction to enter into a special examination, and search of all
their ways.

4 In, and after our special falls and sins, whether gross and more
palpable, or more secret, such as are dullness, coldness, security. Thus David
after his two sins of adultery and murder, in a most special sort renewed
his repentance in his private confession to Nathan and his public confession
2. Sam. 12. 13. Psalm. 51.
to the whole Church. Peter after his denial went out and wept bitterly. So
when the Church of Ephesus was fallen into coldness and security, the Lord
calls upon her to remember from whence Revel. 2. 5.
she was fallen, to repent and do her first works.

5. At the time of death. Then because the children of God take their farewell
of repentance, they take also their fill of it: they think with themselves,
this is the last act of my repentance, it shall be therefore the best. And in
death Satan's temptations, and consciences accusations will be strongest, and
therefore our preparation against them must be more then ordinary. On the sixth
day the Israelites gathered double Manna, because none was to be gathered by
the day following, the day of rest. So because the time after death, is a time
of rest, and Sabbath from repentance, therefore then should there be a double
portion of Repentance. Every motion is the swiftest toward the center.

It is good indeed to see men joyful and comfortable in their death, but yet
withal, if we see them not humbled and penitent, we may justly suspect their
joy. Even the holy Martyrs who exceeded in spiritual joy, and had the greatest
cause of joy that might be, were yet great in their repentance at their death.
Hezekiah receiving the sentence of death, turned to the wall and prayed, and
wept sore. 2. King. 20.


Here mark the preposterous course of the world, that make death the time of
beginning repentance, whereas it is indeed only the time of renewing repentance
begun, and practiced before in our lifetime. Object. But the thief on the
cross began to repent, but at his death. Ans. It was a miracle with the glory
whereof our Savior would honor the ignominy of the cross. We may almost as
well expect a second crucifying of Christ, as such a second thief. Christ then
triumphing on the cross did as Princes do in the triumph of entering into
their kingdoms, they pardon gross offenses before committed, such as they
pardon not afterward.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the motives to Repentance, from the evil it remooues.
Having thus absolved the doctrine of Repentance, it will not be amiss to
close up this Treatise, with some perswasiues and motives whereby men may be
induced to the practice of it. Indeed the bare necessity of it might move, but
such is our dullness, that even in those things are most necessary, and most
nearly concern us, we are most supine and secure, and need the goades of the
strongest argument to prick us forward. The motives Two motives to repentance.
then that may persuade us are of two sorts. 1. From the benefits of
Repentance. 2. From the evils of impenitency. Out of these two heads shall
spring the motives following.

1. For the benefits which come unto us by Repentance. 1. The benefits of
Repentance. Which are Exodus 15.
Repentance indeed is bitter, and many therefore distaste it, as the Israelites
did the bitter waters of Marah, But if we shall consider the benefits that
shall accrue unto us thereby, we shall find them as the tree which the Lord
showed unto Moses, to sweeten and alay the bitterness thereof. Oh say some, this
repentance is an heavy and a troublesome matter: what good shall we get by our
mourning and mortification, but deprive our selves of our pleasures. Repentance
is a very hell, or at lest a Purgatory: well, be it that it be an hell, yet it
is such an hell, as must bring thee out of hell in the Kingdom of Christ.
Repent (says John) for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Our way to heaven,
is to go by this hell. And because men ask like those in the Prophet, What
profit shall we have, and what Mal. 3.
good, if we do repent, we will lay down more particularly the benefits
thereof. They therefore consist principally in two things.

1. In remoouing of evil. 2. In bringing of Good. 1. In remoouing evil.
The evils which are removed by repentance, are either of sin, or of
punishment. Repentance remooues 1. Of sin in regard
the evil of sin two ways.

1. In regard of the sting. 1. Of the sting.
2. In regard of the stain.
1. In regard of the sting. The sting of sin is the guilt of sin in the
conscience, binding a man over to the wrath of God, and filling the conscience
full of terror from the expectation of Gods vengeance. Now the repenting
sinner is freed from this guilt, and from the sense of it in his conscience,
and has the free and full remission of all his sins in the blood of Christ.
At what time Zach. 13. 1.
soever a sinner shall repent him of his sin, I will blot out all his
wickedness out of my remembrance. The same thing teaches Zachary, In that day
(namely, when (as it is in the former chapter) they shall mourn for their
sins, as for the loss of their first borne) shall a fountain be opened for
sin and uncleanness. They whose heads are fountains of tears to bathe
Christ's feet in, with Mary Magdalen shall have Christ's heart pierced to be a
fountain of blood to bathe their souls in, and to wash away all their
guiltiness. These two fountains must go together, and when we wash our
selves in the one, we shall be bathed in the other. Our mercy to our sins
breeds Gods severity, as Ahabs foolish pity to Benhadad was cruelty 1. King.
20.
to himself; but on the contrary our severity procures Gods mercy. Our mercy
to our sins, preuents Gods mercy to our selves, but if we take revenge upon
our selves in our repentance, then will not God take revenge upon us. The
promises of remission to repentance are very frequent in Scripture. So the
Prophet Isay promises pardon to the Penitent, Is. 1. 16. 17. 18.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your works from you, that is
to say, Repent: And then follows, Though your sins were as crimson, they
shall be made white as snow, etc. that is to say, you shall be pardoned and
forgiven. Have mercy on me (says Psalm. 51. 1. 3.
David) o Lord, now what is his argument to move God to mercy? For I know mine
iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. If we acknowledge our sins, that
is, if men repent, he is faithful and just to forgive us our 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
sins. Not that Repentance merits remission, nor that it apprehends it, for
so only fath brings remission, but as it is a necessary attendant of faith in
apprehending remission. For when we hold out the hand of faith to receive Gods
mercy, we do it as beggars, crying and lamenting our miseries. And Faith
looks upon Christ with a weeping and a repenting eye. And therefore though it
be faith that does apprehend mercy and pardon, yet because this faith is a
repenting faith, yea, even then most of all repenting, when it most of all
apprehends mercy, therefore it is that that the promise of pardon is made to
repentance. Hence Repentance and Remission of sin are joined together by our
Savior, Luke 24. 47.
No Repentance, no Remission. Except ye Luke 13. 3.
repent, ye shall all likewise perish: so if Repentance, then Remission. Be it
true Repentance, though it be never so small, there is Remission, and so life
eternal. Hence Repentance is called Repentance Acts 11. 18.
unto life. The Repenting sinner then is in a most happy case, for he has his
sins pardoned, and so title to Heaven. So that if a man dies in Repentance,
he dies in the state of salvation, and so goes to heaven. For look what way
we are turned when we dye, thither go we, as the tree falls that way whereto
it inclined and bowed, when it stood on the ground, Now Repentance, as we have
seen, is the turning of the heart to God: so that if a man die with his face
turned to Godward, to God he goes. But if he die in his irrepentance, with
his face turned from God, to God he can never come. Let this then persuade
every one, as ever he looks to be saved, to break off his sins by
Repentance. The Papists lie when they teach us, that there are two ways to
Heaven; The way of innocence, and the way of penitency. No, there is but this
one way of penitency, by which even the most holy must go, for all have sinned;
and only the repenting sinners shall be saved. And again, here is both
exceeding great comfort to the repenting, and terror to the impenitent sinner.
Are thy sins many and grievous? If they were as red as Scarlet, yet if thou
repent they shall be made white as snow. It is only impenitency that damnes
thee, not murder, not adultery, not incest. If thou can repent of these
these sins thou art safe: when the stream of thy sins, and the stream of
Gods wrath fot thy sins. come against thy soul, let the stream of that water
which issued out of Christ's heart, together with that stream which issues out
of thy repenting eyes meet it, and they shall turn away the current of it away
from thee. The Physician is not so much offended with the loathsomeness of the
disease, as with the contempt of his physic, which he knows being taken would
heal the disease. Nor God so much with thy most odious sins, as with this,
that thy impenitent heart refuses his physic. This is Ioh. 3. 19.
the condemnation, that light being come into the world, men loved darkness
rather then light. Not darkness simply that condemns, but obslinate
continuance in darkness, with love of it, and delight in it, after that light
is sent to help us out of darkness. On the contrary then, if thou repent not,
though thy sins were never so small, they have weight enough to press thee
down to hell. Impenitencie makes small sins great and heavy. But Repentance
makes great sins no sins, in regard of divine imputation. The greatest
sins are pardonable to the penitent, as the smallest unpardonable to the
impenitent.

And further, although our sins were pardoned and forgiven, yet can we have
no assurance that they are so, and the promises of remission belong to us; It
is presumption to snatch at the promise, before we have the condition. And
though thou had pardon, yet can thou have no peace till thou have come to
God by Repentance. For God holds the same rule with us in forgiving us, which
he prescribes to us in the forgiveness of our brethren. For though our brother
come not to us, and humble himself unto us, yet are we bound to forgive him,
but yet we are not bound to go to him, to tell him that we forgive him, but
he is to come and say, It repents me. Even so deals God with us, he may
happily have forgiven us, yet unless we turn and come again unto him, and
say, It repents us, he will not tell us, neither shall his spirit Luc. 17. 4.
assure and witness it to our hearts, that he has pardoned us. Now if there
be assurance as well as pardon, thou shall be perplexed and turmoiled as much
in the want of assurance as of pardon. God often deals with his children, as
Joseph did with his brethren, he would not at first make himself known unto
them, but spoke roughly unto them, and threatened them the prison, and afterward
he tells them, I am Joseph your brother. So till we are prepared by
Repentance, neither Genesis 45.
will God make himself, nor our pardon known unto us, but will rather speak
roughly, and threten the prison of hell; but if once we come with broken, 1.
Pet. 3. 19.
and with bleeding hearts unto him, then can he no more refrain himself, then
Joseph could, but will say to our consciences, I am your father, Be of good
comfort, your sins are pardoned. And when we have by repentance filled Gods
bottle with tears, then will he fill our hearts with this sovereign balm,
and will annoint our hearts with the oil of gladness and the unspeakable joy
of the holy Ghost. Then shall the former fears, stings and horrors of the
accusing conscience be banished, all shall be peace and joy. Repentance charms
the winds and the blustering storms of the accusing conscience, and makes the
haven of thine heart to be calm and clear. So that we may say of Repentance,
as they of our Savior, What kind of grace is this, that the Psalm. 32.
winds and sea obey it? even the sea of a hellish and a raging conscience. For
the experience of all Gods children that have had any experience of Repentance
in themselves, can witness thus much, that they have no sooner set themselves
to prayer, confession, and renewing of their covenants with God, but though at
first they brought an hell in their conscience, yet they have presently felt
hell turned into heaven; and in steed of the prick of conscience, the
vnconceiueble peace of God, cheering and comforting them. It is David's own
experiment, I said I would confess, and thou forgauest me, that is, thou
tookest hell out of my conscience, and shedst the sense of thy forgiveness into
mine heart. Hence it is that in diverse of the Psalms, specially the
penitential ones, the Prophet beginning in Psalm. 6. and 13.
much heaviness and anguish of spirit, ends in much joy and assurance. This is
the first evil which Repentance remooues.

2. Repentance remooues the evil of sin in regard 2. Of the stain.
of the stain, the blurre, and ignominy. For even this also it takes away. It
so heals the wound, that not so much as the skarre remains. When Onesimus had
once repented, the stain and ignominy of his theft was taken away, Once
unprofitable, but now profitable; to be received, not as a thief, Philem. 11.
but as a brother. But as long as a man remains impenitent, so long the stain
sticks in the soul in such sort, as if he were still in the act of sinning,
even as dirt does in the face till it be washed out. All (says our Savior)
before me are thieves and Ioh. 10. 8.
robbers. Why said he not, They were thieves in as much as they were dead and
gone. The reason may be because they died impenitently, in that their sins
and impenitency seems to continue the sin though the act be past. Hence it
is that a man may say of Cain still, that he is a murderer, but not of David
that he is an adulterer, the stain being washed out by repentance, and he
being made clear and clean as the picked glass. Because you say, says
Christ to the Pharisees, you see, Ioh. 9.
that is, remain obstinate in your blindness, therefore your sin remains,
that is the blot and stain of it. Sin casts dirt in our faces, and
besmeares, and befoules us, but after Repentance may a man say as
Nebuchadnezzer did of himself after his Dan. 4. 33.
restoring, At the same time was my glory and my beauty restored unto me, so at
the time of our Repentance the shame and the deformity which sin brought upon
us is takenaway, and our glory, and our beauty is restored unto us, which we
had before we sinned. The same thing God promises to the Gentiles in their
conversion, Then will I change in the people Zeph. 3. 9. 11.
their lips, that it may be pure (so Iunius reads it) with the which all may
call upon the name of the Lord, that is, I will call them to repentance, and
then follows a promise of taking away the stain, In that day shall thou not
be ashamed for all thy works, etc. Thus does repentance take away the shame and
the stain of sin. But impenitency sets a very brand-marke of shame upon the
forehead of the sinner, and makes him as foul after, as in his sin. A man
turning from the sun, remains so till he turn him toward it again, so in
sin turning away from God, he remains so, till by a fresh act of Repentance he
turn himself to God again. The wicked sinner may not think that his sin
passed away with the act which presently vanished. No, but as the works of
the Repentant follow them to Apoc. 14.
the grave, so also of the wicked; That as the one being dead may be still
called just and holy, so the other still wicked and impure. A lesson for
impenitent persons, your skarres, your wounds, your deformities, your
filthiness in which you lie down shall all rise up again with you, and with
these shall you appear in Gods sight at the day of judgment.

Now Repentance takes away the stain and ignominy Which is taken away in regard
of sin, both in regard of God, and in regard of man.

1. In regard of God: and that appears by these 1. Of God.
two things.

1. In that he receives repenting sinners into former favor and grace again,
without vpbraiding Iam. 1.
them with their sins: Yea, here the proverb is true, The falling out of
lovers, is the renewing of love. And as bones out of joint, ioynted again, are
stronger then before, so when God and we, are ioynted together again by
Repentance, his affections are stronger to us then before. The repenting
prodigal received greater tokens of favor, Luke 15.
then his elder brother that never brake out into that riot, neither do we
find his father, girding, and reproaching him with his riotous courses, nay he
rather answers the elder brother disgracing him with them. So Christ first
appeared to Mary Magdalen, Mark: 16.
out of whom he had cast seven devils, for all her former seven devils, he
honors her with his first appearance. The like honor did he to Peter, Go your
ways says the Angel, and tell his Disciples, and Peter, that he will go
before you into Galile. Why Dicit specialiter, and Petro, quia se indignu^
indicanit discipulatu, cum ter ^egauit magistrum. Sed peccata praeterita non
nocent quando non placent. Hieronymus in hunc locum.
is Peter more especially named then any of the rest of the Disciples? Not to
give Peter any primacie above the rest, but that they might know that how
soever Peter had grievously offended in his threefold denial, yet because he
had wept bitterly, and had thoroughly repented, he had blotted away that
stain, and received him to his former savor again. Though Peter sinned above
the rest, yet repenting, he is named above the rest. The husbandman loves that
ground, which having abounded in weeds, does yet afterward by good culture
abound with good fruits, better then that ground which as it was never abundant
in weeds, so neither extraordinarily in good fruit. And the Captain makes
more of that Soldier, which having fled, yet after returning does valiant
exploits upon the enemies, then of him that ever kept his station, but did no
special extraordinary service.

2. In that he restores unto them their former gifts and graces lost, and that
with increase and advantage. David all the while he lay in his sin had his
heart altogether out of tune to compose any Psalms, but after his Repentance
was he in a more excellent manner, a sweet singer of Israel. Zecharie by sin
lost his speech, but by repentance, he regained not only his speech, but
prophetical speech. Repenting Sampson was stronger then before; Luk: 1.
and did a more valiant act then ever. So Solomon and Noah recovered the spirit
of prophecy after their repentance. And Peter the spirit of confidence above
that he had before, that he who formerly was feign to speak to Christ by John,
afterward durst speak, and ask himself concerning Ioh: 21.
John. This is the admirable virtue of Repentance, that with the Eagle it
causes us to renew our youth, Psalm: 103.
and with the Snake to be fresher, and liuelyer, after the casting of our old
skin. When sin has impaired, and infeebled, and made us old, and withered
creatures, Repentance reviues us, and puts young spirits into us. So hearty,
and so cordial is this physic of Repentance. Other physic may take away our
bodily infirmities, but yet so, that it brings some weakness to nature; but
repentance adds strength to our spiritual and renewed nature. In this regard
that repentance recouers the loss of grace, it may be said also that it
recouers the loss of time; in that recovering grace, it makes us by double
diligence redeem the time; and so we may allegorically apply to repentance,
that of Joel, I will give you the years, which the Caterpiller has devoured.
Joel 2.


2. Repentance takes away the ignominy, and 2. of man. (...)
stain of sin, in regard of men, and the Church, who are to admit every
repenting sinner into their society, and familiarity as before, yea into
those former offices, and dignities, and credit, which before they had amongst
us. Hence it is that Solomon Cartm. in eccl. f. 46.
in the book of his Repentance, prefers the title of Ecclesiastes, that is, a
soul reconciled to the Church, or, a soul speaking and making confession, in
the Church, before the title of the son of David King in Jerusalem, as that
which would procure more grace to his work, and more credit to his person. He
seeks more credit in his repentance, then his crown. His repentance had more
power to restore him to the fellowship of the Church, then his scepter. Thus
was repenting Jonah restored to his prophetical office, Peter to his
Apostleship, Nebucadnezzar to his kingdom. As if a Traitor should not only
have his life, and his lands, but with them his honors and his offices in the
Commonwealth restored him by his Prince. True it is that if the children of
God fall into any scandalous sin, let them repent never so much they are like
for ever after to hear of it through both their ears, and always to have it
laid in their dish. But this doctrine, as it must correct the malice of the
world, reproching the repenting sinner, whom God honors, and raking up the
carcases of their sins, which God has buried, so must it comfort the
Repentant, when they shall remember, My sin is as if it had never been, and
therefore may they say to the Devil, and the world reproching them, Tell me
not what I have been, but what I am, and will be. And thus does Repentance
remove the evil of sin.

2. It also remones the evil of punishment. And 2 of punishment. By
that it does three ways. 1. by keeping back afflictions. 2. by taking them
away. 3. by sanctifying, and sweetning of them.

1. Repentance does keep back, and prevent 1. preventing.
Gods judgments, and many of his plagues hanging over our heads, and ready to
seize upon us. When sin, that is, the punishment, lies before the door. Gen:
4.
ready to enter in, and make havoc, yet if Cain do well, and repent him of
his former hypocrisy, and turn in truth unto the Lord, shall he not be
accepted? When Rabsakeh lay before the doors of Jerusalem, and before that the
Ammonites, how did the repentance of Iehoshaphat, and Hezekiah drive them back?
2. Chron: 20. 2. Chron: 32.
And it is a certain rule set down by God himself, when I have spoken against
a nation to destroy them, and Ier: 18. 7. 8.
to root them out, if they repent of their sins, I will repent of the evil
that I thought to bring upon them. Thus the Nineuites repentance wrought
repentance in God. God saw their works, that they turned from their evil
ways, and God repented of the evil that he Ion: 3. 10.
had said he would do unto them, and he did it not. Thus by their repentance
was the threatened sentence reuersed. A strange thing, as Chrysostom has
noted, that the condemned Malefactors repentance should repeal the Judges
sentence, and a thing altogether unusual in the Courts of men; yet in Gods
court repentance does not only frustrate Gods own casting sentence, but
turns it into an acquitting sentence, does not only turn back the evils to
be expected, but brings the contrary blessings which could never be expected.
That murtherous and adulterous marriage betwixt David and Bathsheba, how many
heavy curses did it threaten? yet they seriously repenting, all curses turned
into blessings. Christ came of this marriage, and Solomon the eldest son
thereof, was the most eminent man for gifts that ever was, and in his
posterity did the kingdom continue for many generations. Lo how Repentance
was more powerful to draw down blessings, then murder and adultery both
together with their united forces to bring down curses. For this is a certain
rule in all unlawful entrances into any Calling, that After-Repentance is
counteruayleable to a lawful entrance, and both keeps back the punishments
due to unlawful entrance, and sometimes brings greater blessings of God then a
lawful entrance. Would thou then keep back those plagues thy sins have
deserved, the way is to repent. Repent of thy sin, and God will repent of his
plagues. Gods anger is often in Scripture compared to fire, now look what
power the elementary water has against fire to quench it when it is beginning
to flame, and burst out, the same virtue is in the water of the tears of
Repentance, to keep the fire of Gods wrath from breaking out upon us in his
punishments. This is the water that can only prevent the burning of this fire.

2 Because sometimes, notwithstanding our Repentance, 2. Removing.
God sees it fit to lay some chastisements upon us for the furtherance, and
increase of our repentance, to show his hatred of sin, and for the example of
others, as in David punished with the loss of his child after his Repentance
for his adultery, and in Jonah, thrown into the sea after his repentance for
his disobedience, therefore though the power of repentance appear not in
keeping back the affliction that it touch us not, yet appears the power of it
in the taking away of the affliction in due time. If my people, says the Lord,
2. Chro 7. 14.
upon whom my name is called, do humble themselves, and pray, and seek my
presence, and turn from their 2. Chron. 33.
wicked ways, then will I hear in heaven, and be merciful to their sin,
and will heal their land. After Manassehs repentance had broken the fetters of
Satan, and his sins, it also broke the yrons he was held in, in prison. And
repentance was the same to him, that the Angel was to Peter, which opened Act.
12.
the prison, and loosed his fetters. Lo the Angelical virtue of repentance.
So Ionahs repentance was as a powerful vomit to the Whale, and made him cast
him up safe upon the land. Jonah his repentance, was as powerful as the three
childrens faith. It overcame the fire of the whales belly, as well as their
faith the fire of Nebucadnezzars furnace. yea, it did not overcome the fire
only, but the water also in the Seas, that they could not drown him. So Job
repenting, recovered all his losses, and received double riches, and
possessions.

3. If afflictions still abide with us, and we cannot 3. Sweetning and
sanctifying.
as yet be delivered, yet Repentance is a sweet comforter, and so brings a
mitigation of our afflictions If it cannot pluck out the poison, yet it shall
turn it to wholesome food, so that affliction shall be as no affliction, and
according to the Apostles counsel, we shall weep as if we wept not. If a man
feel 1. Cor. 7.
the grace of Repentance in his afflictions, so that he can go to God, and
confess, and bewail his sins, calling upon him for mercy, and renewing his
covenant with him, his affliction shall not so much grieve him, as this his
repentance shall cheer, and rejoice him. For to say the truth, in all our
afflictions it is more our sin, then the affliction, that pinches us. Sin
is a thorn in the flesh which makes but the touch of the finger painful,
whereas if that thorn were not, the stroke of the whole hand might be endured
without any pain. Now repentance takes away that thorn, that is sin, and so
makes our afflictions, both easy, and comfortable. None so meek, quiet,
patient, silent, and cheerful in affliction, as the Repentant sinner. The
more repentance, the more ease in afflictions. Only the impaenitent are
impatient. He that has two burdens on his back at once, must needs feel more
trouble, then he that has only one. Now the impenitent sinner has two
burdens, his affliction, and his sin, which adds weight to his affliction,
and lays as it were the hand to press it down upon us. But the penitent
sinner has but one burden, his affliction; as for sin, the other burden, his
repentance has eased him of it. Therefore David prays, Look on my affliction
and travel, and forgive me my sin. Then is Psalm. 25. 18.
our affliction eased, when our sin is forgiven, which cannot be without
repentance; for it is sin only that exasperates affliction, and is as salt
and vinegar to a sore; it is sin that makes it smart. Thus did David's
repentance ease, and sweeten the 2. Sam. 12.
affliction of his childs death: when by prayer, fasting, and such like
exercises of Repentance, he had removed the cause of affliction, his sin:
his affliction was not bitter, and burdensome, but his Repentance enabled him
cheerfully to rise up, and refresh himself. And this is the reason why the
children of God, as has been showed, have always in their afflictions afresh
renewed their Repentance, that they might, if not wholly free themselves from
their affliction, yet from the stinge and torment of it, and might gain, if
not deliverance from, yet patience, and comfort in it. for this is the
admirable power of Repentance, that it turns even crosses into comforts,
losses into gains and advantages; as contrarily, impaenitent lying in sin,
turns comforts into crosses, and helps into hindrances. Jonah while he went
on impaenitently in his disobedience, the ship could not save him, nor all the
skill of the Mariners: but when he once repented, then neither the waters
could drown him, nor the heat of the fishes maw consume him. When he was in
his sin, then the winds, the seas, and all were against him; when in
repentance, all for, and with him: the Sea, and the Whales belly kept him safer
then any ship, the Nineuites became obedient, and humbled themselves at his
preaching. So then afflictions may come, and may abide with us, but shall not
consume us, no nor yet much disease us, if we have once eased our backs of the
burdens of our sins by Repentance. This turns all curses into a blessing,
God has raised up his son Jesus, says Peter, and him he has sent to bless
you in turning every one of you from your iniquities. So that turning from
sin is a blessing that turns all crosses and curses into blessings. And thus
we see how Repentance remooues evil both of sin, and punishment.

CHAP. XIX. Motives to Repentance, from the good it brings.
NOw see a little the Good it brings, and procures. 2. In procuring good.
And the Good is twofold: Spiritual, and Temporal.

The spiritual good which Repentance procures, 1. Spiritual.
is twofold.

1. First, it brings to the repenting sinner, the Holy Ghost. Repent, says
Peter, and be baptized, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Act.
2. 38.


Now it brings the Holy Ghost both in respect of 1. The Holy Ghost.
his Comforts, and in respect of his Graces.

1. For the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, then are 1. In the comforts.
they most bountifully dispensed to us, when we are most uncomfortable, and
mourn for sin, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Repentance Matthew. 5. 4.
is the preparing the way of the Lord in the desert, by it are the rough and
filthy ways of our Isai. 40. 3. opened.
hearts amended, and made fair, and then the Lord himself sets in his feet,
and walks in them: by it our hearts being made of a desert, a paradise, Christ
comes presently and makes it the place of his delight, and solace. By
repentance we gain sweet fellowship with Chtist, and a more lively, and
comfortable presence of the Holy Ghost. For by preparing away in the wilderness,
is meant the change of our hearts by Repentance: and by the way of the Lord, is
meant the blessed, and comfortable presence of Christ's spirit within us: when
those crooked ways of ours are made straight by our repentance, and these
rough places plained, Then shall Isai: 40. 5. Luc: 3. 5. 6.
the glory of the Lord be revealed, and all flesh shall see the salvation of
God. So true in this regard also is that speech, Repent, for the kingdom of
God is at Matthew: 3. 2.
hand, that is, Christ is a King at hand, ready, royally to dispense his bounty
in pouring the unspeakable comforts of his spirit upon you.

2. It procures the Holy Ghost in respect of his 2. In the graces of it.
Graces, procuring both the means of Grace, and Grace it self. God will never
be wanting to the repentant sinner in the good means of grace: O ye
disobedient children turn again says the Lord, etc. Ier: 3. 14. 15.
And I will give unto you Pastors according to mine heart which shall feed you
with knowledge and understanding. Thus Cornelius his serious exercises of
prayer and repentance, brough unto him first an Angel, then an Apostle, and
then the Holy Ghost himself. And as it procures the means, so also Act: 10.
3. 25 44
Grace it self. And among other the gifts and graces of the spirit, procured
by Repentance, we may instance in Knowledge a main one, and which is the
ground of all the rest. Now we shall see how Repentance gains it. Sins are
as scales to our eyes, whence they are called works of darkness, and the
Devil, the prince of darkness, but the violent stream of repenting tears,
carry and brush away these scales. Natural tears indeed dull our bodily eyes,
but these tears clear the souls eyes, Proouing says the Apostle, if God at
any time will 2. Tim: 2. 25.
give them Repentance, that they may know the truth. The reason of our
ignorance of Gods word, is the hardness of our hearts, which being removed by
repentance, we come then to the knowledge of it. Excellent is that of Paul
concerning the Jews, that 2. Cor: 3. 16.
when their heart shall be turned to the Lord, the veil should be taken away.
That veil of ignorance which thorough the hardness of their hearts is drawn
over their eyes, by repentance shall be removed, and taken away. The Lord
says David, will teach sinners Psalm: 25. 8.
in the way: why Ioh: 9. he will not hear sinners, and will he then teach
them? He expounds himself in the next verse, what sinners he means, even such
as he will hear also, even humble, and repenting sinners, Them that be meek
will he guide in judgment, verse. 9.
and teach the humble his way. Humiliation is the way to get understanding,
From the day says the Angel to Daniel, that thou did set thine heart to
understand, and to humble thy self before thy God, Dan: 10. 12.
thy words were heard. Hereupon it is that the ignorance of the Gentiles, and
the infidelity of the Disciples, Ephesians: 4. 18. Mark: 6. 52. 8. 17.
is imputed to the hardness of their hearts. Is it any marvel then that men
are so grossly ignorant, that they never feel the enlightening and quickening
presence of the Spirit, so that they may even say in this regard, though not we
have not heard, yet we have not felt whether there be an holy Ghost, or no? Is
this any marvel when men go on so wilfully and impenitently in their sins?
Repentance is the best commentary to the Minister on his text, and to the
private man on his Ministers Sermon. If any man, says our Savior, will do my
will (and this is the will of God, even our sanctification, Ioh. 7. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3.
and this is our sanctification, by Repentance to correct our errors, and to
endeavor our selves in obedience) then he shall know whether the doctrine I
speak be of my self, or of my father. It was a good saying of Bradfords, That
we must first be in the Grammar-schoole of Repentance, before we go to the
university of Predestination. And Cardinal Poole answered not amiss to him
that demanded what course should be taken in reading of the Epistle to the
Romans, First, says he, begin at the twelfth chapter, and read to the end,
and practice the precepts of Repentance and mortification, and then set upon
the former part of the Epistle, where justification and predestination are
handled.

Secondly, Repentance brings grace and acceptance to all our good works.
Insomuch as 2. Acceptance to our services.
without Repentance they are no good works in Gods sight. This will the better
appear if we consider how that Repentance must have a double work, in every
good work. It has both a work preparatory and conclusory, it must begin,
and conclude all our services to God.

1. It has a preparatory work, whereby we are fitted and prepared to do
that good, which is to be done. For when we are to do any good thing, our
sins past rise up against us to hinder us, and they stop the passage of Gods
grace, whereby we should be enabled to do it. It is necessary therefore that
with repenting hearts for sins past, we go about the doing of good works,
and so draw down from heaven the grace of God, to enable us to do that good we
go about. Hereupon Peter bids those conuerts Repent, and be baptized, first,
to Acts 2. 38.
wash themselves in the tears of Repentance, before they were washed in the
waters of baptism. So Paul requires of the Corinthians the renewing of 1. Cor.
11. 31.
their repentance in the judging of themselves before the receiving of the
Sacrament of the Supper.

2. Work of Repentance in doing good works is conclusory, in the closing up
of a good work, for our best righteousness is as a menstruous cloth. Is. 64.
6.
This menstruity must be washed away with the tears of Repentance. We bring
forth the fruits of our obedience, as the Bears do their whelps, altogether
unshapen. We had need by repentance lick them over, and bring them into
better form. And as sour apples have sugar to commend them to our taste; so
had our obedience need of the weeping water (salt in our feeling, but sweet
to God) to commend it to his palate. Thus did Nehemiah close up his many worthy
services with this act of repentance, acknowledging himself an unprofitable
servant, and craving pardon for his defects: As after his reformation of the
abuses on the Sabbath, he prays, Remember me, o my God, concerning this, and
pardon me according to thy Neh. 13. 22.
great mercy. And after the relation other abuses reformed, he closes his
book with this, Remember me, o my God, in goodness. These be the spiritual
Neh. 13. 31.
good things which the grace of Repentance procures unto us.

2. Repentance brings also temporal Good, and outward blessings. If ye
consent, and obey, that is, if 2. Temporal Good. Is. 1. 19.
ye consent to yield obedience to the former commandment of washing you, and
making you clean by Repentance, then shall you eat the good things of the
land, you shall not only have the blessings of heaven, but the blessings of
the earth also. So the Lord promises the captiued Jews peace, Ier. 29. 11. 12.
13. 14.
and freedom from their captivity upon their Repentance and seeking unto God.
So Joel upon his exhortation to the people to turn unto the Lord with Joel 2.
12. 17. 19.
all their heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, etc.
brings in the promise of temporal blessings, The Lord will answer, and say
unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil, and you
shall be satisfied therewith. Thus fasting procures feasting, and when we feast
the Lord with the wine of the tears of our repentance, then will he fill us
with the wine and fruits of the earth, when we have withered faces with the
tears of Repentance, then will he give us oil to make our Psalm. 104.
faces to shine, and will power down a blessing without Mal. 3. 10.
measure, when in any good measure we humble our selves for our sins. This
is that argument where withal Eliphaz vrges Job to turn unto the Job 22. 23.
24. 25.
Lord, If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up: Thou shall lay
up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the flints of the river. Or else, if
Repentance do not procure these things always, yet it brings as great a good,
as Eliphaz there tells Job, Yea, the Almighty Sic Iun. Auru^ ^ectissimum.
shall be most choice gold and silver, and strength unto thee. If God do not
give thee gold, he shall give thee himself which is better then gold. He
will make a blessed supply another way. Such is that gracious promise made by
the Prophet Hosea to the Israelites upon their Repentance, O Israel return
Hos. 14. 3. 5. 6.
unto the Lord thy God, And what shall follow thereupon? I will heal their
rebellion, I will love them freely; there be spiritual blessings which shall
follow upon their repentance, but there is not all, he also promises temporal
blessings, I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the lilly, and
fasten his roots as the trees of Lebanon. When we give unto God the dew of
repentant tears, then will he himself be a dew unto us. There is one dew for
another, a dew from heaven, for a dew from the earth. And no marvel that true
Repentance procures temporal good, when as but a temporary Repentance has not
wanted these temporal blessings. Ahab a very Nonesuch for working of
wickedness, for there was none like Ahab, who sold himself to commit evil, yet
even he but rending his clothes, though he rent not 1. King 21. 27. 28. 29.
his heart, and putting on sackcloth and fasting, is not neglected of God:
See thou, says the Lord to Eliah, how Ahab is humbled before me? Because he
submits himself before me, I will not bring that evil in his days. How much
more will God regard the rending of the heart, who thus far respects the
rending of the clothes? If God do thus to the dry, what will he do to the
green tree?

CHAP. XX. Motives from the evils of impenitency.
THe second sort of motives is from the evils of 2. Motive from the evils of
Impenitency. Which are 2. Chro. 36. 13 14. 15. 16.
impenitency. Impenitency it self is of it self a grievous and a fearful
evil. An impiety above heathenish abominations. Zedekiah hardened his neck, and
made his heart obstinate that he might not return to the Lord God of Israel,
And as he so the people and the Priests trespassed wonderfully according to all
the abominations of the Heathen. Nay, they did not only trespass according to
the abominations, but above their abominations, for though the Lord sent his
messengers rising, and sending to call them to Repentance, yet they mocked his
messengers, and despised his words, till there was no remedy. Hereupon it is
that our Savior vpbraides the cities wherein he had done Matthew. 11. 20.
most of his great works, even for their very impenitency, because they
repented not. This is the maine sin for which he girds them. And for the same
sin he spares not to vpbraid the eleven after his resurrection, he reproved
them of their unbelief and Marc. 16. 14.
hardness of heart. Indeed God gives as grace, so the means, and
reproacheth and vpbraideth no man, Iam. 1. 5.
that is, he vpbraideth no man with lesser infirmities, but where impenitency
is under the means there he vpbraideth, and threatens it both. This is a
greater sin then all other sins; other sins are rebellious against God,
but yet this is a perpetual rebellion against him. This is that whereby that
Ierem: 8: 5.
Apocalypticall Iezabels sin is aggrauated, not so Reu. 2. 20. 21.
much in this did she sin, that she called her self a Prophetess, that she
deceived Gods servants, and made them commit fornication, and eat meat
sacrificed to idols. But this was her heavy and heinous trasgression, I gave
her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. Her great sin
was, that she repented not for sin. This indeed is the damning sin. It is
not simply sin that now damnes, but continuance in, and impenitency for
sin. It is not the falling into the water, but the lying under the water that
drownes. It is not falling into sin, but lying in it by impenitency, that
drownes a man's soul in perdition. There is but one sin that shall never be
forgiven, the blasphemy against the holy Ghost, and even this sin is not
simply irremissible and unpardonable, but only because that sin has always
annexed unto it final impenitency: even that sinner, but that he is an
impenitent sinner might be pardoned.

But let us a little more particularly see what the evil of this sin is.
Solomon tells us in one word what it is: He that hardens his heart, to wit,
by impenitency, shall fall into evil. Now this evil that Prou. 28. 14.
shall follow impenitency is two fold: Temporal evils, and Spiritual evils.

1. Impenitency brings Temporal evils. They are these. 1. Temporal, they are
1. Judgments of note.


1. Fearful, exemplary, and remediless punishments, God whips not this sin
with ordinary rods, but he lashes it with scorpions, plagues it with
remarkable vengeance and judgments of more eminent note. The patience of God
is that which keeps back Gods judgments. Now impenitency sins against Gods
patience, and abuses it. Man's impenitency causes Gods impatience. And whereas
Repentance stands in the gappe, and keeps out judgment, Impenitency breaks
down not a gappe, but the whole fence, and not only lets in, but as with
cart-ropes, hales in Gods judgments. The wise man sees a plague, and hides
himself Prou. 22. 3.
but the foolish go on still, and are punished. The wise man hides himself by
Repentance, by it turning back from his sin, and so turning back the
judgment; but the fool, the impenitent sinner, he goes on still till he meet
with the judgment. Repentance is a meeting with God, Because I will do this
Am. 4. 12.
unto thee, prepare to meet thy God o Israel: Then we meet God when we seek to
him by Repentance, and sendforth our tears and prayers, as our Ambassadors to
plead for a peace, and sue for mercy to God, in turning his fierce wrath from
us. But Impenitency makes a man sit still, and lets the judgment come, and so
because it will not come to meet with God, it meets with his wrath and
judgments. So it is noted of the old world, They were eating and drinking, and
marrying, and giving in marriage, and knew Mat. 24. 38. 39.
nothing till the flood came and took them all away. They were washed away with
the waters of Gods judgment, who would not wash themselves in the tears and
waters of Repentance. Therefore it is that when the Lord comes to threaten this
sin, he heaps so many threatenings one upon another against this sin of
impenitency, as if so be he could not satisfy himself in threatening it, as if
so be the naming of it had enraged his jealousy: If any man Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.
21. etc.
shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk
according to the stubbornness of mine own heart, etc. The Lord will not be
merciful unto him, but then the wrath of the Lord, and his jealousy shall
smoke against that man, and every curse that is written in this book shall
light upon him, and the Lord shall put out his name from under heaven, and so
goes on still in that heavy manner threatening impenitent persons to the end of
the chapter. And whereas the Lord in threatening other sins uses to come in with
some qualifications upon hope of Repentance, yet when he threatens this sin,
he is absolute in his threatenings, to show that he will be resolute in his
judgments. The Lord called to weeping Is. 22. 12. 13. 14
and mourning, to baldness and girding with sackcloth, that is, to the
exercises of Repentance and Humiliation, And behold joy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, eating and drinking,
that is, hardening their hearts by impenitency and going on in their sins
without Repentance. Well, but how did the Lord take this, Surely, says he,
this iniquity, this iniquity of their horrible impenitency, shall not be
purged from you, till ye die. Here is no qualification of the threatenings, but
God absolutely threatens that he will never pardon this sin of theirs, that
with so high an hand, went on in their sins.

Secure sinning and hardness of heart, is an undoubted forerunner of severe
destruction. And when God will give over men to his judgments, he first gives
them over to this judgment of an impenitent heart. So upon the judgment of
hardness of heart threatened by Isaiah, In making their Is. 6. 10. 11.
hearts fat, and their ears heavy, etc. follows the fearful threatening, of
washing the cities till they be without inhabitant, and the houses till they
be without man, and the utter desolation of the Land. Thus is hardness of
heart and impenitency, always the harbinger to some fearful plague. As on
the contrary, when God intends mercy to a nation, he first gives them the grace
of Repentance. In that day (says the Lord by Zachary) will I seek to destroy
all nations that come against Jerusalem, And I will power Zich. 12 9. 10.
upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of
grace and compassion, and they look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall lament, etc. as if had said. Though I mean to destroy other nations yet
will I not destroy Jerusalem, but will give them the grace of Repentance, that
they may prevent and avoid destruction. But on the other side, when our hearts
are hardened in sinning, Diluvium fuit circa finem Aprilis cum orbis quasi
reuiuiscit, cum aues cantillant, and ex ultant pecudes, etc. Luther in Genes. 7.
Gods heart is hardened in punishing. Yea, even then when men are most securely
hardened, is Gods hand nearest unto them to fall heavy upon them. The old world
was destroyed in the end of April, which is the most pleasant time of all the
year: And the sun shone upon Sodom that morning it was destroyed: who would
have looked for such a flood now the winrer was past, and the year now in her
prime and pride? who after such a fair sunne-shining morning would have looked
for such a dismal day? Such dismal events does men's impenitency portend, and
then most of all, when they are in their greatest security. Arise (says the
Lord to Nebuchadnezzer) and get you Ier. 29. 31. 32.
up to the wealthy nation that dwells without care, which have neither gates nor
bars, but dwell alone, And their camels shall be a booty, etc. Men are never
so fit a booty for Gods judgments, as when they are without care.

As general hardness fore-runnes general judgments, so in particular men,
their hardness goes before destruction. See Ieroboams example. He was
reproved by the Prophet for his idolatry, the Altar cleft, his hand dried up,
and healed again. Any of these might have cleft his heart, and had wrought him
to Repentance, But yet after this Jeroboam converted not, but turned again to
his idolatrous 1. King. 13. 33 34.
courses, and continued in his impenitency: and what was the issue of all this?
And this thing turned unto sin unto the house of Jeroboam, as who should say,
all that he had done before had not turned to sin, had it not been for this
sin of his impenitency, But this turned to sin to his house, even to root it
out, and destroy it from the face of the earth. Balaam hardening his heart
against Gods command, the Asses rebuke, and the Angels sword, returns home by
weeping cross, and he that would not return for the Angels sword, was
afterward slain by the sword of the Israelites. So was Pharaohs Number. 31. 8.
Exodus 14.
heart hardened to his destruicton in the sea. So of the cities of Canaan it is
said, That it came of the Josh. 11. 20
Lord to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle,
to the iutent they should destroy them utterly, and show them no mercy, but
that they should bring them to naught. This is made the cause of Gods
judgments upon Saul. Saul died for his transgression against the Lord. Now
what was his transgression, first he brake the commandment 1. Chron. 10. 13.
14.
of God, then he sought and asked counsel of a familiar spirit, and last of
all, which was his sinning sin, after all this, he sought not to the Lord,
by Repentance, therefore the Lord slew him.

2. If any impenitent sinner do escape some 2. Reservation to worse judgments.
temporal judgments, as often he may, and does, yet his impenitency turns all
his deliverances but into further curses and judgments, and his deliverance is
a worse judgment then the judgments from which he is delivered; for it argues
either Gods utter forsaking of them, as desperate patients are given over by
the Physician, Why should ye be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and
more. Or else it Isay 1. 5.
argues a reservation of them for some more fearful plague. If by these
former judgments before specified, ye will not be reformed by me, but walk
stubbornely against me, then I will walk stubbornely against you, and smite
you yet seven times for your sins. So that an impenitent man's preservation out
of one judgment, is but a further reservation of him to seven judgments.
What mercy or favor is this? nay the mercy is seven times a greater
judgment. Cham was saved from the flood in the Arc, but it Gen 9.
was for a greater judgment, for his fathers, and for Gods curse: as good to
be drowned as to be cursed, as good to die under the waters, as to live under
a curse. Pharaoh escaped many of the former Exodus 14.
plagues under which the rest of the Egyptians smarted, he was but kept for
the sea, to be made a prey to the waters. Lots wife escaped from Sodom, but
Genesis 19. Genesis 14.
was turned into a pillar of salt. The Sodomites were rescued out of the hand
of Chedor-laomer, but were Genesis 19.
after consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven. It had been happy for
them if they had bin still captiued slaves under Chedor-laomer. So true is that
of Amos, that it is with wicked impenitent Amos 5. 19.
sinners, as if a man did fly from a Lion, and met with a Bear, or went into
the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him. As also that
of Isaiah repeated Isay 24. 18. Ierem. 48 44.
by Jeremy, He that flies from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit,
and he that comes up out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare. Even as good
be in the pit still. This is but out of the frying pan into the fire, or as
Ezekiel speaks, out of one fire into Ezekiel. 15. 7.
another fire, and the last fire happily like Nebuchadnezzars furnace, seven
times hotter then ordinary.

3. Thirdly, God will even take pleasure in inflicting Gods delight in
judgment.
judgment, God indeed delights in mercy, but man's impenitency will make him
delight in judgment. Hereupon he threatens Loadicea, Revel. 3. to vomit her
forth of his mouth, if she still went on impenitently in her luke-warmnesse.
God signifies by that phrase, that he would take pleasure and delight in their
destruction, as it gives great ease to the ouer-pressed stomach to be
disburdened and eased by vomiting. Such is that threatening Prou. 1. 24. 25. 26.
Because I baue called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out mine hand,
and none would regard, but ye have despised my counsel, and would none of my
correction, I will also laugh at Risus Dei longa graui^r est ira Dei. Quid Deus
loquitur cum risu, in legas cum luctu. Augustine.
your destruction, and mock when your fear cammeth. God is never more angry
then when he laughes. Gods laughter is an heavier judgment then his anger,
for when once he comes to delight in his anger, it is a sign his anger is
implacable. We have most cause to weep, when God laughes.

2. Spiritual evils procured by impenitency 2. Spiritual which are
are these.

1. Spiritual blindness, and blockish senslesnesse, 1. Spiritual blindness.
further hardness, and obduration, My people would not hear my voice, and
Israel would none of me. See what was the punishment that followed upon it, So
I gave them up to the hardness of their hearts, Psalm. 81. 11. 12
and they walked in their own counsels. As if he had said, Since they will
harden their hearts, their hearts shall be hardened: since they will harden
them against my mercy, I will harden them in my justice. Thus was Balaam
besotted thorough the hardness of his heart, that he could not see so much as
the Ass did he rode upon. And the Sodomites were smitten as well with a
spiritual, as a temporal judgment of blindness. So Pharaoh hardening his heart
against each plague was also given up to further hardness. Thus the Apostle
seems to make this the cause of the Gentiles hardness of heart, because Ephesians.
4. 18. 19.
they being past feeling gave up themselves to wantonness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness, So God punished their former hardness with
further obduration. So elsewhere he makes this the cause why they were given up
to a reprobate sense; and a cauterized conscience because, they went on
impenitently Romans 1.
in their sins with greediness. This is an heavy and a fearful judgment
to be given up to the hardness of our own heart. David had his choice of
three plagues, whether he would take, 2. Sam. 24.
but all those three jointly, are three times easier then this one, famine,
sword and pestilence, are mercies to this judgment. Better to be delivered up
to the sword, famine and pestilence then to an hard heart, nay, better be
delivered up to Satan himself, then to hardness of heart: we find a man
delivered 1. Cor. 5. 5. 1. Cor 2.
up to Satan, and yet he repented and was saved, we find none delivered or
saved that has been delivered up to the hardness of heart. Delivering up to
Satan is for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit 1 Cor. 5. 5.
may be saved: but delivering up to the hardness of heart is for the
destruction both of flesh and spirit, both of soul and body. It is a desperate
evil to be delivered up to ones own heart. Adulterers by Gods Law should be
stoned to death: though now man's Law be more favorable, yet God secretly
executes his Law upon impenitent adulterers, for he stones them with the
heauiest and hardest stone that is, even with a stony heart, to which he
delivers all such impure beasts.

2. Desperation. They that think Repentance 2. Desperation.
is a bitter cup, to the which they will not lay their lips, shall drink a cup
of Satan's own tempering, and shall suck up the very lees of it. If thou
refuse heavenly repentance, though shall with Judas be forced to a desperate
hellish repentance. Though sin may lie a sleep a while before the door, as
with Caine, like a drowsy sluggish cur, yet at the length it will awaken and
bark so hideously, and grinne so fearfully in thy face, that though thou be
not driven with Saul to murder thy self, or with Judas and Achitophel to hang
thy self, yet shall thy conscience be no less dismayed with desperate fears
then theirs were.

3. Eternal condemnation: The impenitent 3. Eternal damnation. Is. 4. 4.
person shall fall into that bottomless pit of fire and brimstone. Repentance
is called the spirit of burning. It is a burning fire that consumes our sins;
if this fire burn not our sins, Hell fire will burn our souls. If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them 2. Cor. 4. 3.
that perish, says the Apostle. Hereupon our Savior threatens those Jews,
that they should die in their Ioh. 8. 24.
sins. If they should die in them, they should rise in them, and if they
should rise in them, then should their sins rise up against them, and fall
heavy upon them to press them down into the lowermost hell. This is the sin
which of all others, increases a man's damnation. Therefore impenitent sinners
are said to heap up wrath against the day of wrath; Romans 2. 5.
even the whole heap of all their sins, and the whole heap of Gods wrath
shall be laid upon them. So our Savior pronounces an heavy sentence upon those
impenitent cities where he had preached, That it should be easier for Sodom
and Gommorrha Matthew 11 21. 22. 23. 24.
in the day of judgment then for them. Surely, they that have the least pain
in hell, shall have but little cause to brag of their ease. Even the least
sins shall have smart enough, what then shall the crying sins of the
Sodomites have? Sodomy was a monstrous sin, such a sin that, as Chrysostom
says, Cogitato quam grave illud sit peccatum, et quod ipsam Gehennam etiam
ante tempus apparere coegerit. Chrysostom. ad Romans 1. hom. 4.
it made hell to appear before the time, such a sin as made an hell on earth.
Such a sin then as had an hell on earth, must needs have an hell with a
witness, in hell. Needs must their damnation be fearful and easelesse that
began so early. And yet the accursed Sodomites shall have an easier hell then
such impenitent persons as reject Gods mercy in the Gospel. Sodom and
Gomorrhaes hell, shall be an heaven to Bethsaida and Chorazins hell. An
impenitent person shall think himself to have been an happy man, if he had
been one of those accursed Sodomites that once perished with fire and
brimstone from heaven, and now lie yelling and howling in the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone in hell. Oh how heavy shall his condition be, how
inconceivable his woe and torment, that shall envy, and grind, and gnash his
teeth at a cursed and damned Sodomite for his happiness. Oh consider this all
ye that forget God, lest he tear you in Psalm. 50. 22.
pieces, and there be none that can deliver you. Repent, and the Kingdom of
God is at hand to receive thee: Repent not, and the Kingdom of hell is at hand
to double-damne and devour thee.

Gratias tibi Domine Jesus.
MICHAEL and the DRAGON, OR CHRIST tempted AND Satan foiled. Penned by the
late faithful Minister of God, DANIELL DYKE Bachelour in Divinity. Published
since his death by his Brother I. D. Minister of Gods word.

HEB. 2. 18. For in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Ralph Mab, and are
to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Greyhound. 1616.

THE HISTORY of Christ's temptation, recorded by three of the four EVANGELISTS.
Matthew. 4. 1. THen was Jesus led aside of the spirit into the wilderness, to
be tempted of the devil.

2. And when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was afterward
hungry.

3. Then came to him the Tempter, and said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

4. But he answering said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

5. Then the devil took him up into the holy City, and set him on a pinnacle
of the Temple.

6. And said unto him, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down, for it
is written that he will give his Angels charge over thee, and with their hands
they shall lift thee up, lest at any time, thou should dash thy foot against
a stone.

7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord
thy God.

8. Again the devil took him up into an exceeding high mountain, and showed
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.

9. And said unto him, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down, and
worship me.

10. Then said Jesus unto him, Avoid Satan, for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

11. Then the devil left him, and behold the Angels came, and ministered unto
him.

Mark. 1. 12. AND immediately the spirit drives him into the wilderness.

13. And he was there in the wilderness forty days, and was tempted of
Satan, he was also with the wild beasts, and the Angels ministered unto him.

Luke 4. 1. AND Jesus full of the Holy Ghost, returned from Jordan, and was led
by the Spirit into the wilderness.

2. And was there forty days tempted of the devil, and in those days he did
eat nothing: but when they were ended he afterward was hungry.

3. Then the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God command this
stone that it may be made bread

4. But Jesus answered him, saying, It is written that man shall not live bread
only, but by every word of GOD.

5. Then the devil took him up into an high mountain, and showed him all the
kingdoms of the world in the twinkling of an eye.

6. And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and the
glory of these Kingdoms, for it is delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will
I give it.

7. If thou therefore wilt worship me they shall be all thine.

8. But Jesus answered him, and said, Hence from me Satan, for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him alone thou shall serve.

9. Then he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the Temple,
and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down from hence.

10. For it is written, That he will give his Angels charge over thee to keep
thee.

11. And with their hands they shall lift thee up, lest at at any time thou
should dash thy foot against a stone.

12. And Jesus answered, and said unto him, It is said, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God.

13. And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for
a season.


REpentance and Temptations are The Preface.
two main points in the practice of Religion, and the two purgatories that a
Christian in his way to heaven must pass thorough. The first is of water, the
other of fire; we can no sooner come out of the one, but we must look to enter
into the other. No sooner have we bathed, and washed our souls in the waters
of Repentance, but we must presently expect the fiery darts of Satan's
temptations to be driving at us. What we get, and gain from Satan by
Repentance, he seeks to regayne, and to recover by his Temptations. We must
not think to pass quietly out of Egypt without Pharaohs pursuit, nor to
travel thorough the wilderness of this world without the opposition of the
Amalekites. Satan will be in arms against us, if he perceive but the
thoughts, and purpose of departure, much more if the practice. Surely this
envious man sleeps not. No sooner can our fallow ground be plowed up, and the
precious seed of grace be sown therein, but presently like the greedy fowls
of the air he labors to catch it away, or else like the envious man to sow
this ground with mingled seed, and to mar the wheat with his tares. No
sooner can we repent of one sin, but he is tempting to another.

Fitly therefore may this Treatise of Christ's temptations The fit coherence of
this treatise with the former.
follow the treatise of Repentance. It is pity to sever those things in
treatise, which are not severed in practice. The former doctrine has taught
how to come out of sin, this will teach us how we may avoid coming into
sin. The best way to avoid Satan's temptations, and his malice is to know
them, for his greatest strength lies commonly in our weakness, and our weakness
in our ignorance of his enterprises. Lest Satan, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2.
11. should circumvent us, for we are not ignorant of his enterprises. Ignorant
ones then are subject to circumvention, and they who know not Satan, may
easily be circumvented by him. If our own experiences be not yet ripe enough
to trace him, and to discover his cunning fetches, we may here see him to
disclose himself, and his greatest strength, and craft he has, in this duel
and single combat with our Savior who was tempied in all things as our
selves, sin excepted. If our skill and strength be yet too weak to tread
him under our feet, here shall we see our Lord foiling the fiend, and treading
upon this Goliath, and treading out a way to us, whereby we also might trample
him under our feet.

To come then to this history of Christ's combat The division of this History.
with, and conquest over Satan, Three things are generally to be considered
therein.

1. The preparation to the combat. 2. The combat it self. 3. The issue.
The preparation is twofold. 1. For the ouercomming The first part, the
preparation.
of Satan's tentations. 2. For the admitting and suffering of them. In the
former he prepares himself, in the latter he prepares Satan his adversary.

The preparation for victory is set down by the The first preparation.
Evangelist Luke chapt. 4. 1. And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost. etc.

Ob. Jesus Christ was full of the Holy Ghost at the first conception by virtue
of the hypostatical union, how it is then now said that he was full of the
Holy Ghost?

Answ. That fullness at his first conception was in regard of the habit, not of
the act and exercise. The Godhead did not always communicate it self in
operation to the manhood. Before it did as it were hide it self, and lurk,
but now it rowzes up, and shows it The Lord fits, and having fitted,
exercises his servants with trials.
self.

Doct. 1. The Lord first sits, and having fitted, he then exercises his
servants with trials. According to the strength of grace is the trial of a
Christian. Little grace has few or no trials, great grace has many, and
great. As here in Christ: anointed with the Psalm 45.
oil of gladness above his fellows, and so also salted in the brine of
sorrow above them all. As was his back so was his burden, As were his parts so
were his passions, As he might say, was there ever sorrow like mine? so he
might say, was there ever strength like mine?

Use. Great comfort in all our afflictions. Christ's desert is not so terrible,
as his fullness of the Holy Ghost is comfortable. When God brings affliction
upon us, it is a sign that not only he prepared it for us, but also us for
it, and harnessed us, and fitted our hands to fight. And now he will make
trial of us, that he may triumph over Satan in us, as in Job. Job 1. and 2.
As a schoolmaster, when he has polished and perfitted a good scholar,
brings him forth, prouokes adversaries to set upon him, and takes a pride to
see the fruit of his own labors. Here is double comfort A double comfort in
crosses.
then in our crosses. 1. On our part. That we have received of Gods grace
which is more comfortable, then the cross discomfortable, and that therefore
we shall not be tempted above our strength. 1. Cor. 10. 10.
2. On Gods part. That he will be glorified in us against Satan. The credit
of our combating redounds to God, who if he had not well taught us in his
fencing school would never have brought us into We should come from the Word
and Sacraments, full of the holy Ghost. Acts 9. 17. 18. Genesis 29. 1. See Trem.
the field, lest we should shame him.

full of the Holy Ghost. So did Paul after his baptism; and Iaakob after
Bethels vision lifted up his feet like a traveler that goes freshly after a
good bait. Many are like Judas after the sippe, they depart not full of the
Holy Ghost, but full of Satan, and as the Israelites they sit down to eat and
drink, and rise up to play; As if Exodus 32. 6.
in the strength of good cheer I should rail at the master of the feast. Good
motions in hearing are not enough. We must return from Jorden, the same we
were in Jorden. The Church is Gods fencing-schoole, thence bring we skill, It
is Gods armoury, thence bring we furniture against Satan. Only the Holy Ghost
can overcome the filthy Ghost, and he is to be got only by the ministry. A
great honor it is to it that the Holy Ghost first began to manifest his
power in Christ in the use of it.

The second preparation is for the suffering of the temptations. For if Christ
who had lately been so The second preparation.
honored from God, and from heaven had still continued in answearable glory,
the devil had been skarred away. Therefore Christ by the bayts of the place,
and of his condition in the place draws him on, and prouokes him to fight
giving him all the ods and advantage that might be, laying away those terrible
weapons, the sight whereof would have terrified Satan, and leaves himself
naked, and destitute of all helps. The greater odds Satan had, the greater
was the shame of his foil, the greater the glory of Christ's victory, while he
beats him in the desert, the place where he reigns and triumphs Luc. 8. 29 as
it were a cock upon his own dunghill, and that in the weakness, which
hunger brought upon him.

Ismael and Amalek, the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent. God
to gain the greater glory to himself gives all the advantages that may be to
God for his greater glory gives aduantaage to the enemies.
the enemies of his Church. How unequal was the combat and contention betwixt
Luther one poor Monk, and the Pope, and so many legions of his creatures.
They had the sword of most magistrates to sway at their pleasures, great power,
and great authority, yet Luther took the prey out of their teeth, as poor
David overthrew the great Goliath. So the Jesuits at this day have better
means of learning, greater maintenance, more countenance among theirs, then
our poor Ministers with us. So has it been, and still is in the Church.

So much generally. More particularly.

The first advantage given Satan was in the The first advantage.
place whither Christ went, which is said to be the desert or wilderness. He
was led by the spirit into the wilderness. What desert this is not set down.
Only by Mark it appears such an one, wherein men Marc. 1. 13.
were not, but wild beasts.

Here the Papists speak in commendation of Eremeticall From Christ's example
the Papists falsely ground an Eremeticall life.
life, as authorized by Christ's example. But absurdly. For Christ was no
Eremite, but spent himself in the public service of the Church. He was in
the desert forty days, not his whole life. And this was done both upon
special ground, the extraordinary motion of the spirit, and upon special
end, that he might be tempted. Neither of which will they say of their own
Eremites. Nay the quite contrary as touching the end, for they profess they
go into deserts to avoid temptations.

Quest. Does Christ's example here allow us willingly to rush, and adventure our
selves upon dangerous Whether Christ's example allows us to rush upon
temptations.
occasions of tentations to sin, or to go into such places where Satan has
power?

Ans. Neither. In some places Satan has power over bodies, to do hurt. As
absurd for any to venture into them, as to go into a Lions den, or into such
places where mad dogs are. In other places Satan has power over our souls,
in regard of the dangerous prouocations to sin they yield, as the house of
the harlot, and the company of wicked and godles persons. If we may not put
our bodies We may not put our bodies into Satan's hands, much less our souls.
into Satan's hands, much less our souls. Christ had strength to encounter
with him, and to overcome him, and was moved here unto by the Holy Ghost; we
that are weak and unable to look him so much as in the face, may not of our
own heads thrust our selves into danger, but must carefully avoid all
occasions of evil Prou: 4. 15. and 5. 8. Come not near the door of the house
of the harlott. Prou. 4. 15. and 5. 8.
Brute beasts are often afraid of those places where some evil has befallen
them, and cannot be drawn near either to them, or the like to them. We may
be set to school even to the horse, and the mule, Be not like to horse, and
mule said David. In this respect I may truly say the contrary, Be like Psalm:
32.
to horse and mule, who are wyser in their generation then men reasonable
creatures. As these shame us, so must more the heathen. So Cotys K. of Plutarch.
Thracia being by nature choleric, when certain curious glasses were brought
unto him, presently brake them, left (said he, being demanded his reason) I
should deal cruelly with those that should break them.



Ans. Occasions of evil are of two sorts. 1. Given to Satan, and to our own
corruption, as things We must give no occasions of evil to Satan, or our own
corruptions.
either simply evil, or else in themselves indifferent, which yet we (such is
our weakness) cannot use without sin. These we are to avoid carefully. 2.
Not given by us to them, but only taken by them, and these are not to be
refrayned, as prayer, alms, etc. which none must omit because of the occasion
of pride and vainglory, but rather to expect the presence of that Gods spirit
to overcome Satan, who has commanded us to perform such duties. And indeed
in regard of Christ such an occasion was this of his going into the desert; for
he did it by the motion of the Spirit which was counteruayleable to a
commandment. He was led by the Spirit of God into the desert, but when thou
castest thy self upon the pykes, and runnest into dangerous company, and
go to the theater, to the tavern, to the stews, thou art led by the impure
spirit.

In Christ's going into the desert, three things are noted.

1. The time. Then. Matthew. 4. 1. 2. The cause and manner of his going. was
Jesus led by the spirit. 3. The end. to be tempted. Matthew. 4. 1.
First for the Time. Then. Namely after his Baptism, 1. The time when Christ
went into the desert.
his initiation into the mediatourship, and that great honor then done him.
Learn then:

After high favors showed to Gods children come usually great temptations.
Matthew 3. 17.
in the spring come after many cold pinching frosts. what a sudden change was
this? Is this he of whom erewhile the Lord said, This is my son, and does he
now send, and set his slave upon him to vex, and bayte him? So Paul after his
paradise had his pricks in the flesh, and 2 Cor. 12. 7.
buffetings on the face, after his revelations from God, his temptations from
Satan. So fared it with the blessed Virgin, after the honor of the Angels
salutation, the Holy Ghosts ouershadowing, Luke 1.
Christ's conception, Elizabeth's singing, the Baptists springing, her own
prophetical tryumphing by the powerful presence of the H: Ghost in that
excellent song, after all these honorable comforts she is pinched with the
heavy cross of being suspected by Joseph for a dishonest woman, and so of
being in danger to be put away, to loose Matthew: 1. 19.
the comfort of her husbands protection, and to be exposed for ought she knew
to misery, and infamy.

as cheerfully receive the other. As here Christ for all his former honor
subjected himself to this humiliation. As before for all his honor in heaven
from all eternities he abhorred not the Virgins womb. Ioh. 1. 1, 2. and 14. so
now from all his late honor in Jordan, he abhorred not the Devils Ioh: 1. 1.
2. 14
desert. Christ went as willingly to the desert to be humbled, as to Jordan to
be exalted.

learn secondly,

The dearest of Gods servants must expect the greatest tentations
the most eminent for parts and graces, fitted, and called out for the highest,
and most honorable services, such men must look for greatest tentations and
most of all to be molested with satan. Tyrants offer no violence to the
vanquished, but to the resisting, and rebelling Cities. The Pyrat sets not upon
empty ships, but upon the richly laden. A rogue, or a beggar may pass freely,
and never need fear that the thief will meddle with him: it is a rich booty
he looks for, and the well-monyed traveler. So Satan troubles not such as are
under his power already: such as are empty of grace he desires not to winnow,
for what have they in them to be sifted out? The dog barks not at the
domestikes, but at strangers. when the door is wide open, and there is free
ingresse, and egresse there is no knocking, but if once shut up, then still one
or other, is rapping and bouncing. The wicked have the doors of their hearts
set wide open to Satan, therefore he rapps not there by tentation, but at the
godlyes, that shut and bar up this door against him.

Iaakob continued under Labans tyranny, and would be made his drudge, and his
packehorse, all was well, but when once he began to fly he makes after him:
And so does the Devil, when any one parts from him to Christ, then he is as a
Bear robbed of her whelps.

This is my wellbeloued son, out of Gods mouth, but presently Christ went to
be tempted.

All good Christians then must be tempted. But They that have greatest graces,
or highest places are Satan's chief eye-sores.
if any of them be of better graces then other, or called forth to higher
place, and service then other, they are specially eye-sores to Satan, they are
a fair mark for the arrows of his tentations. All the while Christ lay still
in his fathers shop, and meddled only with the Carpenters chipps, the Devil
troubled him not, but now that he is declared the son of God, and solemnly
invested into the office of the mediatourship, and goes about to disthrone him,
and to cast him out of his kingdom, now he bends all his forces against him.
See we not how small and weak, and withal cowardly creatures will with all
their force and fury, set upon the strongest and mightiest, if they have a
suspicion they come to rob them of their young ones, as an hen upon a mastiue.
The odds betwixt Christ and Satan is far greater, and yet now Christ comes
forth toward him in this his high office of the Mediatourship to take from him
his seed, and Satan though but a poor creature, yet he dares fly in the
face of the Lord God himself, his Creator. Every Christian in his place, but
specially those of excellent parts and great places, are enemies to Satan, and
seek the impayring, and ruining of his kingdom, For such do most seek the
ruin of Satan's kingdom.
and having gotten themselves out of his clutches, they seek to draw others,
therefore he cannot but hate them, but specially Christ above all, their head
and captain, who came to break his very head, who was to do him greatest
hurt, and whom if he could have hurt, he had hurt all the elect besides, and
thorough his sides mortally pierced all their souls.

Look then as a man by his parts or place, is fitted to do Satan more harm,
as learned men, wise men in the Church, or Commonwealth, so much the more does
Satan oppose them, and the rather because in them he overthrows many others.
Augustine when God called him was far more assaulted by Satan than Alixius,
because of Augustine.
his greater learning. Moses when he began to execute Moses.
his calling, what troubles had he? So Paul Paul.
above his fellows, because of greatest gifts, maligned of Satan. And Zach 3.
Satan was standing Zach. 3. Iehoshua. This serves first for caution.
at the right hand of Iehoshua the high Priest. Such persons then have here
their Item to take heed to themselves. Satan has desired to winnow you. The
choicest wits, the quickest spirits, the greatest parts, the deepest learning,
the highest callings he labors to prey upon. If he see a young gentleman of
great parts, place and parentage likely to be advanced, and called forth to
great services, he will specially labor to corrupt him with the love of
vanities and vain pleasures, and with the contagion of evil company and evil
counselors. This also is comfort 2. For Consolation.
to those of such parts and places (when thus troubled by Satan or his
instruments) whether Magistrates or Ministers. It is a sign Satan is afraid
of them. And on the contrary that Satan never fears any great hurt from them
in their places of the Magistracy or Ministry, whom he lets quietly alone. In
the whole history of the Acts we shall see how the Apostles almost never came
to any place, but Satan began to rage and tempest against them.

The second point. The cause and manner of this 2 The cause and manner of
Christ's going into the desert.
his going, He was led by the Spirit. By the Spirit understand the Holy Spirit,
not the impure one First, because mention was made of this Spirit immediately
before in the former chapter by Matthew. Secondly, because of that which
follows, to be tempted of the Devil, whereas if the unclean spirit the
Devil himself had been meant thereby, then rather the words should have
run thus, He was led of the spirit to be tempted by him. Thirdly, Luke is
plain, He returned from Jordan full of the Holy Spirit, and was led (...) by
that spirit into the wilderness.

Led] Some refer it only to the inward motion of the mind, others also to
the motion of his body miraculously carried, and rapt (as Philip Act 8.) Acts 8.
by the spirit into the wilderness. And to this do they refer that
afterward Luc. 4. 14. concerning the rumor that went of Christ. To this I
rather incline, both because Marks words favors it, the spirit thrust him
forth, and because that if it had bin (...). Mark. 1. 12.
otherwise, he would have had after these miracles at Jordan so many followers
that the work of tentation intended would have been hindered. And yet this
extraordinary motion of his body hinders not the voluntarines of his mind,
which as it is the grace of all other of his sufferings, so of his temptations,
that he was not led as a Bear to the stake, but went to it with courage and
cheerfulness.

The Use. This leading of Christ by the spirit was extraordinary, yet we must
thus far imitate it, That the very motions of our body, and our goings to, and
from places must be from the direction The very motions of our bodies must be
from direction of Gods word and spirit.
of the Word, and so of the Spirit of God. As was Noah's going in, and coming
out of the Arc, Iaakobs going to, and coming from Laban. But many are led by
the Devil as dogs in a string, and carried from the Church to the alehouse,
the stews and the stage. The Spirit of God carries us to no such places.

the secret will and counsel of God. He leads us All our temptations are
disposed by Gods secret will and counsel. Satan is chained. 1 Chronicles 21. 1. 2.
Sam. 24. 1.
and goes before. Who then would not follow such a guide, and be cheerful in
all our trials? Satan is a mastiue, but yet in Gods chain, and cannot come
out at us to bait us unless God loose him, and set him on us. Therefore 1.
Chron. 21. 1. Satan is said to move David to number the people, and 2. Sam.
24. 1. God is said to move David to it; even as both the dog may be said to
bait the beast, and the owner of the beast, that brings him to be baited, and
suffers the dog to be set upon him. Here then is sweet comfort in these
baytings. A Comfort to the tempted Christian.
God is by, and looks on, he will have pity on us, if he see this curre too
violent, he will pluck him off. As the owner of the beast is so merciful to
his beast, as not to let us be killed by the mastiues. If thou feel thy self
ready to fail and sink in tentation, lift up thine heart to that Spirit that
led thee to be tempted, and yet will not suffer thee to be led into temptation.
He that set him on, he only can take him off.

The third point. The end of his going. To be tempted 3. The end of Christ's
going into the desert
of che Devil. Here six questions may be asked.

Quest. What is it to tempt, or to be tempted?

Answ. The word which is the first root is (...) What it is to tempt or to be
tempted.
to pierce thorough. And so this word (...) coming of it, is to take trial,
because by piercing thorough a thing, it is tried what it is within, whether
sound or no. Thereafter then, as the means are to try or discover, so is the
word of tempting used. For first, there is a trial by a naked offering of
objects or occasions, thus we say of delicate meats, they are temptations. So
prosperity, riches, etc. are temptations. And crosses also Iam. 1. 2. And thus
is God said to tempt in Scripture, because in his How God tempts. James 1. 2.
providence he offers objects, and such occasions as will try us, and when he
sends us either wealth, honors, or the contrary, when he sends us his Word,
the precepts and exhortations thereof. As by speeches cast out we also do try,
and as we say, feel one another. So Genesis 22. God tempted Abraham in Gen 22.
How Satan tempts.
that commandment of offering up Isaac. Secondly, Trial is by earnest
persuasion and solicitation to sin, for by this means we are tried what we
are, as Joseph's chastity was tried by his mistresses persuasions. And this is
the Devils tempting. Sometime the fisherman only sets his bait without any
urging of the fish to come unto it. Sometimes having laid his net, he takes
poles, and thrusts, and drives them along into the net. The former way God
tempts, but only this latter Satan. The meaning here then is, that Christ
was led into the wilderness to be tempted, that is, to be persuaded to evil
by Satan.

Quest. How could Christ who was so holy be tempted? Answ. He could not be
tempted inwardly How Christ-being so holy could be tempted.
of himself being holy, but outwardly by another he might. So were Adam and
Eve. And thus to be tempted, that is, to be persuaded to sin by another,
whether Man or Angel, is no sin, but a cross, so there be not the least
yielding to the motion, no not in the least ticklings of the affection. Satan's
temptations against us do for the most part taint us, by reason of the
simpathy betwixt our corruption and them. But in Christ there was an antipathy
against sin, as in the stomach against some meats, the which the more we
are urged to eat of them, the more we loath them. Whereas in other meats that
we especially love the very sight of them is persuasion enough to eat of them.
Christ's heart to Satan's tentations was as a stone or brass wall to an arrow,
repulsing them back presently. Our hearts are as a butt where they may easily
fasten themselves. Ours as a barrel of gunpowder to the fire, Christ's as
water, and therefore he said, The Prince of this world is come, and has naught
in me, Ioh. 14. 3.

Ioh 14. 20.
in the tempted, for then Christ should have sinned. All temptations are not
sins in the tempted.
This may comfort those that being vexed with fearful suggestions of Satan,
as to think amiss of God himself etc. do thereby think amiss of
themselves, as if they were therefore most vile wretches. But they must remember
that this is no more their sin, if they presently beat it back, then if a
man like themselves should wish them to the like. Satan must answer for this
himself. Quest. But How we may discern the temptations of Satan from those
that proceed from our own corruption.
how shall I know that it is Satan, and not mine own corruption. Answ.
Temptations against the light of nature, even corrupted nature, where there is
no bait to entice corruption, as for a man to kill his loving and beloved
parents where there is no hope of gain by it, no matter of displeasure to
provoke, these are merely from Satan. And so are the blasphcmous thoughts
against the Trinity. Specially if such temptations come furiously, and like the
flashings of lightning suddenly, we not imagining how, nor upon what occasion
we should conceive such thoughts, and withal haunt us, and will not be driven
away, but the more we strive and beat them away, the more, like flies, they
come upon us, and withal be contrived subtly and artificially, this is like
the marching of Satan, as he said, This is like the marching of Iehu, for he
marches furiously, 2. Kin. 2. Kings 9.
9. I think never do temptations arise from the flesh, but the Devil
interposes himself, and speaks his good word for them being once set on foot
by the flesh. Therefore such temptarious called the messengers of Satan. 2.
Cor. 12. and Ephesians. 4. 26. 27. 2. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 26. 27.
we are said in anger to give place to the Devil. And though commonly the
flesh regratifie the Devil, and applaud, and set forward his temptations, yet
it does so fall out sometimes, that the Devil tempts alone, and that so
grossly, that the very flesh is ashamed of it.

Quest. How, or in what manner was Christ tempted, whether by inward suggestion
as we, or by Whether Christ was tempted by inward suggestion, or by an audible
voice.
an audible voice, the Devil appearing in a visible shape?

Ans. It is most likely to latter way. First, because it is said Then came the
tempter unto him. Secondly, because of that desire of his that he would fall
down and worship him. Yet I hold it not impossible that Christ might be tempted
by suggestion. For he was tempted before he was hungry, even during the space
of the forty days, Luc. 4. 2. 3. And it seems Luc. 4. 2. 3.
that those temptations were rather by inward suggestion, for that it is said
Then, namely after he was hungry, came the tempter to wit, in a bodily shape,
implying that before he came not so. So he was tempted afterward also, but
yet nothing is read of any visible apparition.

Quest. Why was Christ tempted?

Answ. That we might see the horrible rage Why Christ was tempted.
and senseless madness of the Devil, against God and our salvation. For
though, that before in Jordan, and all his former miracles at his birth etc.
might have cleared his Godhead to him, yet malice blindes him that he cannot,
or will not see, and makes him to bark against the sun, and to fight against
the heavens. And so still is it with his wicked instruments.







For if this were done to the green tree, what then shall be done to the dry?
If Satan durst set upon Christ who was as green wood, and had abundance of
moisture to quench the heat of his fire, what then will he do to us that are
dry, and quickly set on fire.

lighting on Christ, so also Satan's temptations, and the foil he gave Satan
was for us.

Lot, to see and hear the wickedness of the Sodomites, who yet persuaded him
not to do the like, how much more to our Lords soul to hear this cursed
hell-hound uttering such filthy speeches, persuading him to such ungodliness.
See we then in Christ suffering this for us, his love, our desert, namely to be
thus vexed and molested with Satan, and if we have ease and deliverance in
tentation, thank we Christ's trouble for our ease.



For in that he suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. And Heb. 4. 15. 16. We have not an high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things tempted in
like sort, yet without sin, Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may receive mercy, and find Grace to help in the time of
need.

Quest. By whom was he tempted? By whom Christ was tempted.


Answ. Luke says by the devil, Matthew says, by the tempter. Quest. There
are many evil spirits, who is this here called the devil? Ans. It should
seem to be the prince of them, the head of that Apostasy, as Matt: 25. the
Devil, and his Angels.

Quest. Why is he called the Devil? Answ. The word signifies a slanderer, or
accuser. And he Why the tempter is called the devil.
accuses, 1. To God. 2. To man.

To God he accuses man; hence called the accuser of the brethren, Revel. 12.
And thus he accused Job, Job. 1. and 2.

To man. He accuses first God himself, as to our first parents, as envying
their felicity, and ouerhardly dealing with them in their restraint of that
fruit, and so still he does in the matter of Reprobation, and the commandments
of the Law. Secondly, he accuses, or slanders the graces of God, he brings an
ill name upon them to discredit them with us. Thus he slanders zeal to be
rashness, justice to be cruelty, wisdom to be craft, mercy to be fond softnes,
humility to be baseness.

Use. It being the devils office to be an accuser, or slanderer, let us take
heed of doing such ill offices. Let the devil have his own office, let us not
go about to take it out of his hands.

Tertullus plead against sinners: Judge, O righteous Judge, that which is
equal. Judge him mine that would be none of thine. After his abrenouncing of
me, and all that is mine in baptism, what had he to do with anger,
wantonness, uncleanness, covetousness, and pride, and the rest of my things.
He would needs be mine, He lusted after these things of mine. Adiudge him
therefore to me as mine, etc. so Augustine. And Cyprian brings him in thus: I
never suffered either blows on the face, or thorns on mine head, or scourges
on my sides, or cross on my back, I never shed my blood for them, nor yet did
I ever promise them an heavenly kingdom, and yet have they wholly devoted
themselves, and all to me. Oh let us stop the mouth of this so greedy a curre,
that snatches so eagerly at every thing. And howsoever, as I said, in regard of
accusing others we may not put him out of office, yet in accusing of our
selves we should. Let us accuse our selves before he come to accuse us, that so
he may come too late.

Luke gives him, The devil. The name that Matthew gives him is, the Tempter,
Then came the tempter unto him. See what is the devils profession, and his
trade; He is The devils profession and trade is to be a tempter.
not only an accuser, but also a tempter. And therefore he does this last that
he may do the first, he therefore plays the tempter, that he may play the
devil. He tempts us to no other end, but that he might accuse us. Hereupon the
Scripture elsewhere gives him this name, 1. Cor. 7. 5. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. we see
by it whence are our temptations to lust, to anger, to covetousness; they are
but casts of the devils office, they are from him whose profession and
occupation is to tempt. The more vnwelcom should they be unto us, and rejected
with the greater distaste and dislike. Can any good thing come out of Nazaret?
said Nathanael Ioh: 1. 46. but more truly may we say, Can any good thing come
from hell? what ever he pretend can the devil intend any good to thee? It
were argument sufficient against the temptation if it would be remembered, that
he that tempts is the devil, and as sure as before the sin we find him a
tempter, so sure after the sin we shall find him a devil. Again this
shows whose journey men they are, and of what company they are free, that
solicit men to sin. They are free of Satan's trade, they are his factours,
and iourneymen, and therefore our Savior calls Peter being isntrumental to
Satan, Satan himself, Matt. 16. 23. Come behind me Satan. They that will
have his trade shall have his name too.

D. This phrase signifies his assiduitie in his (...).
trade. for it is in the participle of the present tense, implying a continual
action, as one that is never The devil is very diligent in his tempting.
out of his work. The devil is not idle, nor lazy at his business; but as
Latimer speaks of him, he is the only diligent Bishop in his Diocese. for

1. There is no person whom he tempts not. Indeed 1 He tempts all persons.
the devils are many, there was a whole legion in one man, and yet though so
many, yet in such a multitude of men as are in the world one would think some
might escape his assaults. yet such is his diligence, and so bestirres he
himself that not a day passes over our heads, wherein any of us escape his
frequent assaults.

2. There is no place in which he tempts not. The world is a vaste, and a wide
thing, and yet no 2. In all places
corner therein, wherein a man may be privileged from his molestations. So
that in this respect we may almost say of Satan, as David speaks of the Lord,
Psalm. 139. that whithersoeuer we go there will he be, heaven only excepted, we
can be no where, where we may be freed from him. Christ was here tempted in the
wilderness, Adam in paradise: Both at home, and abroad, in private, and in the
public assemblies, at sea, at land, where ever we be he will be with us, and
tempting of us.

3. There is no time in which he tempts not. 3. At all times
Even while we are hearing the word shall we hear his serpentine whisperings.
Prayer is a means to chase him away, and yet even whilst we are speaking to
God, will he be so bold as to be speaking to us, and even then whilst we are
soliciting God by our prayers, will not he forbear to solicit us by his
temptations. Hence that counsel Matthew. 26. 41. Matthew: 26. 41.
Watch and pray. Even while we are praying had we need to be watching, for
even then Satan watches his times to tempt us. Surely while we sleep, and are
at rest, yet a man would hope he might be at rest from his tentations, but he
sleeps not when we sleep, nay this envious man sowes his tares whilst the
good man is asleep. Even in our sleep will he tempt us in our dreams. whose
experience is not able to justify as much? Fitly then is he called a tempter,
so diligent is he to tempt all persons, in all places, and at all times. His
diligence should teach us that lesson Pro: 4. 23. Keep thine heart with all
diligence. It is the use that Peter makes of it, 1. Pet: 5. 8. Prou: 4. 23. 1.
Pet: 5. 8.
Be sober and watch, for the devil your adversary, as a roaring lion walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. And thus much of the first advantage, or
provocation given to the devil to tempt, viz. the place whither our Savior
went, and where he continued 40. days.

The second advantage follows. His condition The second advantage.
in the place, which was twofold,

1. He was wholly without food, and therefore fasted. 2. He was without
fellowship of men, having only the wild beasts for his companions.
For the first. It is set forth to us, 1. by the kind of fast. It was a
thorough fast indeed. He eat nothing says Luke, and therefore Matthew makes
mention of fasting in the nights also, when he had fasted forty days and
forty nights. 2. It is set forth by the time, how long it lasted, forty
days. 3. By the consequent ensuing at the end, He was hungry.

For the first. His fasting. It may seem not so 1. The kind of fast.
fitly to be made a provocation to temptation, for it was an argument of his
divinity to fast wholly, and that so long a time, and this might have skarred
the devil rather from, then have drawn him to Christ. Ans. 1. It was no
provocation to the three ensuing temptations, simply in it self, but in the
consequent that followed thereon, his hunger. 2. There were other temptations
before the forty days were ended, and as it is likely, in the first beginnings
of Christ's being in the desert. Now his want of food in the desert might draw
him on at the first in the former temptations, though afterward seeing the
fast grow so miraculous, it seems he went away, because it is said, Then came
the tempter, namely, when Christ was hungry; so that he tarried not all the
while of his fast with him, but departed confounded with the miracle of the
fast, and yet also seeing Christ to be hungry set upon him again.

For the second point, the time of his fast, namely, 2. The time of his fast.
forty days. The Papists hence gather the fitness of their Lenton fast, as
being an imitation of Christ's. Answ. brought it out of the desert, where he had
fasted so long a time in solitary retiredness, and not out of the Schools,
and Colleges, and that the rather because Moses and Elias, two notable
restorers of Religion under the Law had done the like. As his fasting could not
but be of God, so neither his doctrine, which he thus fasting received.
Xenocrates a Philosopher was so hot on his studies, that he forgot to eat, and
his wife was feign to put his meat into his mouth, and worldlings are so eager
sometimes of their occasions, that they feel no hunger. Every Christians
conversation should be in heaven, and there is no need of meat, and here we
should be, as if no great need, eating as not eating. We say the belly has no
ears, for others, but we should have no ears for it. The belly is common with
us to the bruites, and while we much affect it, we are more brutish then
reasonable. Reason is clouded with those fogges and mists, that ascend up out
of the kitchen of the stomach to the brain. Moses and Elias did, the consent
between their doctrine, and his. Adam begun our woe with eating, so he
contrarily our weal and salvation, with abstinence. might be to try the
Jews, that had been at Jordan, and had seen this sun of righteousness
rise there so gloriously, and shine so brightly, and might expect much comfort
from him, and lo now in the first rising he is no sooner seen but he is taken
away from them, and over clowded with these temptations in the desert. Thus is
it also in the spiritual presence of Christ in the hearts of his children. As
soon as he has appeared to them at their first conversion he departs, and is
not felt of a long time again, but at the length he will return out of the
desert wherein he had hid himself.

But now as for the Papists reason, that he did it Christ's fast is no pattern
of an anniuersaty fast.
to give us a pattern of an anniuersary fast, it is absurd. For,

Godhead as the creation of the world etc. or of his person as God-Man, and
Mediator, as his sufferings, or of his humanity as the works of moral
obedience. Now only the latter are imitable of us. Matthew. 11. Learn of me,
Matthew. 11. 28.
not to fast forty days, but to be humble and meek. Now his fasting thus long
was a miracle, and therefore the work of his Godhead that enabled the manhood
to hold out.

their fast. Whereas therefore they say that fish is a fitter meat to tame the
body, it is egregiously false. The Graecians called the finest feeding men,
fish-eaters. (...). Plutarch. symp.
And the greatest feasts have been of fish. God when he appointed the
Nazarites abstinence from wine, yet appointed no abstinence from flesh, and yet
under the severity of the Law these were to practice the stricktest outward
mortification. Ans. His disciples being fishermen those were easiest to be had,
but have they forgot that he eat flesh, the Paschall Lamb, and that in the
time of their Lent? Answ. But why then eat they bread, and drink they wine
coming from the earth? These are but idle toies. Their own eating of fish,
and abstinence from flesh is a sufficient argument against them, for by their
kind of abstinence from flesh not forbidden, they grew so proud that they
could not abstain from flesh indeed forbidden them, as a learned man
excellently speaks. Luke 3.
to be thirty year old) and at Easter the time of his sufferings, there being
an odd half year besides the three years of his ministry, it will follow
that this fasting was about Michael-tide.

They reply, that it is not needful that they should imitate Christ in every
point and circumstance of this fast, or in the exactness of it, if so far as
they can, it is well. Answ. Yea, but Christ appointed it not for imitation, as
I showed in the former reasons, Christ appointed no such fast for imitation.
and further show thus.

Bellarmine says the reason was because Christ fought butthis once only openly
with the Devil, but we that are every year to fight, had need every year to
fast. Answ. But does the Devil come at set times of the year, or only at that
time, or was not Christ himself tempted afterward? Not openly says
Bellarmine. That's more then he knows, for the text says, the Devil left him
for a season. So he then returned again. How, the Scripture has not told us,
why then will Bellarmine determine?



Thou and thy Disciples fast not. Matthew. 9
in Christ's time, but as Christ says, the time shall come, when they should
fast. viz. after the ascension of Christ, and then the Apostles fasted, and
ever since the whole Church. Answ. The Apostles fasted as we read sometimes in
the Acts upon some special just occasions offered, but that they fasted their
Lenton fast there is no proof. Superstition quickly grew after the times of
the Apostles, but at first it was observed only as a religious commemoration
of Christ's fast, and that not generally by all, but only particularly and
voluntarily by some. And Irenaeus in his time writing to Victor Bishop of Rome
shows with what variety and diversity it was observed.

Matthew. 4. 1.
4. 1. He went to the desert indeed purposely and deliberately, but his
fasting there was occasional partly because he had no need to eat, and
partly because the desert affoorded him nothing to eat.

Bellarmine objects that the tithe of our life is due to God, and that is given
in this yearly Lenton fast. Answ. 1. The tithe being but as he himself casts
but 36. days, why fast they forty, and urge Chrits example. 2. Base niggards
are they, that give but the tithe to whom all is due. And thirdly it were hard
if we gave our life no better to God, then in a Lenton fast. 3. The consequent
ensuing upon his fast.


The third point follows. His hunger, following after forty days fast. He
could still have preserved himself from hunger, as well as in the forty days,
He was hungry.
but he would not for these causes. Ambrose says his hunger was an holy craft.
Adam, who in Paradise a place of all abundance without the necessity of hunger
was provoked to eat by Satan unlawfully, whereas this second Adam in the
desert, and hungry too, could so not be overcome by him.

He was with the wild beasts. Marc. Marc. 1. 13.
1. 13. This Christ did to give the Devil further advantage, and to show that
of himself without the help of any man he overcame him As at his passion and
agony, though his disciples, some with him, yet alas asleep when he prayed,
only Judas he waked to do him hurt.

Eve when she was alone from Adam. Society is helpful against temptation.
Two, says Solomon, are better then one, woe to him that is alone. Eccles. 4.
10. This must teach us to use our company well, that it may indeed be the
communion of Saints. But alas we so abuse our company, that it is the best
snare the Devil has to catch us in. And sooner are we often foiled in
company, then in solitariness. So much evil example in company is given.

It is only our rebellion against God, that makes the creatures rebel
against us.
once to Adam in his innocency, we may see what was the privilege of our
innocence, and what now the punishment of our sin. Man is truly called a
little world, and in him we may see an image of that in the greater world. Now
in man, as created of God, the affections, called the unreasonable part, as
being common to us with bruites, were subjected to reason, And so showed how
by like proportion in the great world, the unreasonable creatures should be
subject to the reasonable. But when once order was broken in the little world,
then was it broken also in the other, and when reason lost his authority over
affection, then man also lost his sovereignty over the creatures, and his
slaves became rebels. Excellently Chrysostom. As a father sometime gives over
a lewd and desperate son to be scourged by his slave, so God us men into the
hands of the wild beasts. Howbeit as men have had Gods image more repaired, so
has God, though not without miracle, made these beasts show their subjection,
as all of them to Noah in the Arc, the lions to Daniel, and the viper to Paul.
Whenever we see any rebellion of these creatures against us, remember we our
rebellion against God. The Devil and his instruments are worse then beasts to
the Lord and his Church.


Better to be a beast, then to be compared to a beast. Satan is compared to a
Lion, but yet worse then a Lion. The Lions here reverenced Gods image in
Christ, and yet here Satan offers him violence. So man by Job compared to an
asses colt. Job. the Pharisees yet were worse, for the young colt whereon yet
never man had sitten, yielded himself to be ridden by Christ. And so should it
have been with us if we had stood in innocence. No need then of breaking
colts, and framing them to the saddle. Thus the devil, and his instruments
show themselves worse then beasts to the Lord, and his Church.

We deserve no other companions but the tigers of hell.
and to be yoked with those lions, and tygres of hell, and chayned with them in
chains of darkness for ever.

Thus much for the preparation to the temptations.

The temptations follow. And they are of two 2. The temptations.
sorts.

First, those that befell Christ in the forty days fast, Luc. 4. 2. Secondly,
those afterward.


Satan sticks not to interrupt the best meditations and actions.
and contemplation, and talking secretly with his Father, this saucy Satan
yet durst come, and interpose himself, and offer to interrupt, and to disturb
these sweet soliloquies of our Savior. No marvel then if he deal thus with
us in our prayers, meditations, and hearing of the word. No such disturbance
feel we at a play. At gaming can some sit up all night without any heaviness,
but at a Sermon how quickly does the devil rock men a sleep? This shows
that the one is of God, and for our good; the other is against God, and to our
hurt. It cannot but be good which the devil is an enemy to. It cannot but be
evil, which he is a friend unto. This serves also to comfort us, in the grief
we have because of our distraction of mind in prayer, and hearing, the devil
labored to distract Christ, and came with his temptations, when Christ was in
his meditations.



The first in these words, If thou be the son of The first temptation.
God, command these stones to be made bread.

Son of God.] He means as God meant before in that voice, This is my
wellbeloued son. Beza thinks only some special holy man to be meant, but
the devil did not think that every holy man could turn stones into bread,
and that by his own word and commandment, for he says not, pray to God, but
command that these stones be made bread. Stones.] Luke says stone, as Miles
for the whole company of soldiers, and Gen: 31. the stone Genesis 31.
which here I have set up, speaking of an heap of stones. and Exodus 8. The
fly came up. meaning Exodus: 8.
the swarms of flies. If thou be the son of God.] He speaks not this
scorningly as they Mat. 27. 40. Math. 27. 40.
but flatteringly, and with insinuation. We are not to imagine that Satan
spoke only these words, but as Gen: 3. in his temptation of Eve, so here diverse
amplifications, and this but the abridgement of his speech. It is therefore as
if he had more largely spoken thus: There was a voice lately heard from heaven
confirming thee to be Gods son: This miraculous fast of thine has confirmed
the same. Neither see I any cause to doubt, save that thou art now pinched with
hunger, and have not relief, I would desire thee therefore both for thine
own, and thy fathers honor, and for his glories sake, whereof I know thou art
zealous, and for this weak bodies sake, whereunto thou ought to be
merciful, and not by neglecting it, be guilty of selfe-murther, and for my
sake also, who would gladly be resolved, that I may give thee the honor due
unto the, if it may appear unto me that thou art the son of God. In all
these regards (all matters of great importance) I desire thee to turn these
stones into bread, for otherwise thou can not live in this necessity. If
thou do not this, I shall plainly think thou can not, and so that thou art
not the son of God. Neither would I wish to nourish any such conceit of thy
self, but rather suspect that voice in the air, as some deceitful illusion.
for how is it likely that the son of God would suffer his humane body thus to
be famished, he being heir of all things, and able to do every thing.
Therefore I say, If thou be the son of God command these stones to be made
bread.

In the temptation consider two things:
1. The Devils assault. 2. His repulse in Christ's answer.
In the assault consider 4. things. 1. The assault.


1. The sins whereto he tempts our Savior. 2. The arguments whereby he
tempts. 3. The manner of conueyance. 4. The time.
The sins whereto Satan tempts Christ.
seemed first to urge Christ to the working of the miracle; and then secondly,
in case he did not, to distrust his Fathers voice. But indeed this latter was
the main thing he looked at in this temptation. Therefore I say Satan tempted
him Thou art my Son. Thou art my Son, so of that general word spoken to
all Gods children concerning his providence, and protection over them. And
these two were inward, and secret sins whereto he tempted, to doubt of the
truth of Gods word, and the care of Gods providence. And indeed these two
necessarily go together, for we can never trust in Gods providence for this
life, unless we believe that word of his spirit telling us we are his
children. for when we believe him to be our father, and our selves his
children, then will we hang upon his providence, and assure our selves of his
care. wrought a preposterous miracle, releeuing himself by unlawful means.

For the first then.

It is the devils chief endeavor to call into question the truth of Gods word.
said Thou art my son, and now he comes with his If thou be the son of God.
In the word of God there be specially three things. 1. Commandments, and these
he accuses as unjust and unreasonable, 1. commandments.
as that first commandment to our first parents. 2. Threatenings, and these he
makes to be but scarcrowes, 2. threatenings
and mere bugges; as to our first parents that threatening, ye shall dye, no
says the devil, but ye shall live better then ever ye did: So Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy: 29.
19.
29. 19. ye shall have peace though ye walk after the stubbornnes of your own
heart, never fear the curses threatened. 3. Promises, and them he 3. promises.
makes to be but vain words, as to David in temptation Ps. 77. Has the Lord
forgotten to be merciful, and Psalm: 77.
to Cain Genesis 4. My sin is greater then can be forgiven, Gen: 4.
and so to all dispayring persons. Now in all these the devil assaults our
faith, not as he thinks without reason. For faith in the commandments breeds
obedience, in the threatenings fear, in the promises comfort. So that by this
means he would bring it to pass, that as God should have no fear, reverence,
and obedience at our hands, so we should have no comfort at his hands. But yet
more He strikes more specially at our faith in the promises.
specially does he strike at our faith in the promises, not so much at the
general faith in believing the truth of them in general, as at our special
justifying faith applying those promises unto our selves. Not so much to doubt
at the general voice of God in the word, Every believer shall be saved, but at
the particular voice of God by his spirit applying the general to us, and
saying, Thou beleeuest, Thou art my son. For indeed this faith is the ground
of all saving Reu. 1.
obedience, The love of Christ, apprehended by 2. Cor. 5.
faith, constraines us. 2. Cor. 5. And I believed, therefore Psalm. 116.
I spoke. Psalm. 116. We cannot perform any sincere, acceptable, filial
obedience till by faith we are assured of Gods love. This persuasion sets us
on work in our obedience.

The holy Ghost Romans 15. 13.
fill you with all joy in believing. Romans 15. 13. And believing, ye rejoiced
with joy glorious and unspeakable. 1. Pet. 1. 8.
1. Pet. 1. 8. Therefore the devil envying our comfort and our happiness, would
rob us of our faith, that he might rob us of our joy.

whom resist steadfast in the faith. 1. Pet. 5. 9. Therefore as the 1. Pet. 5. 9.
Philistines got away the Israelites weapons, so does Satan in getting away
faith from us, disarme us, and make us naked. For this is our victory whereby
we overcome, even our faith. 1. Ioh. 5. And in this faith 1. John 5.
apprehending Gods strength lies our strengrh, as Sampsons in his locks, and
therefore the Devil knowing this, labors to do to us, which Delilah did to
Sampson, even to cut off our locks. And indeed when he does this, he does that
to us, which Sampson did do the Philistines, he pluckes down the pillars of
the house, and overthrows us.

Use. 1. Above all things then fortify we our faith and assurance, that God
is our father, and we his sons. Where the Devil oppugnes most, thither must
we bring our greatest strength. Now as we have seen, he labors specially to
shake our faith. Satan has desired to winnow you, Luke 22. 31. 32. Luke 22
31. 32
what would he winnow in them? The next words show, but I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. Though Satan then come, and accuse God to us, as not
loving us, yet let us be no more moved, then a good wife would be to hear a
false knave thus accusing her loving husband. If we must not receive a false
accusation against an ancient, under two or three witnesses. 1. Tim. 5. shall
we then rereceiue 1. Tim. 5.
an accusation against the Ancient of days, the Lord himself upon Satan's
word, a known and detected deceiuer? Such as are known to do ill offices on
both sides, to come to me with a tale against thee, and then presently to go
to thee, and say as much of me, such I say being once known, who will regard
them? Now we know Satan to be such an one. He accuses God to us, and then he
goes, and accuses us to God, as he accused both Job Job 1. and 2.
to God, Job 1. and 2. and afterward God to Job, as not respecting him. As we
would be loath God should believe Satan against us, so let us take heed that
we believe not Satan against God.

which is cursed; so also that which is yet worse, betwixt the father and the
sons, yea betwixt the father and his own natural son, yea betwixt the two
natures in Christ personally united the manhood and Godhead; He would make
the manhood think that the Godhead did not sustain it. Now if he thus tempted
Christ's humanity that had that special union with the second person in the
Trinity, what then may we look for, whose union is not so near? We see how he
guls the wicked of the world, and persuades them being his slaves that they are
Gods sons, being very beggars, that they are kings. And so why may he not
contrarily persuade Gods sons, that they are his slaves?



second, In that he tempts him to doubt of Gods care and providence. We see
how the Devil The second temptation.
will also trouble us in this point of Gods providence for this present life,
as David was troubled The Devil would draw us to a distrust of Gods
providence. Psalm. 73. Ierem. 12. Romans 8. 32.
Psalm. 73. and Jeremy. Ier. 12. let us strengthen our faith in Gods mercy for
our salvation, and we have made sure work for this. Romans 8. 32 God having
given us his son how shall he not with him give us all things else?

The third sin he tempts him to, was to work a The third temptation.
miracle of turning stones into bread, and so to have eaten.

Quest. This seems no such matter. Why might not Christ have done it lawfully?

Answ. After we have thoroughly weighed it, we shall find a great sin. Herod
with any miracle, nor yet those cruel mockers at his crucifying, he owed them
no such service. Nay when his mother unseasonably made a motion he checked her,
that though he wrought the miracle afterward, yet it might appear he did it
as of himself, as knowing best his own time, and not to be instructed or
directed by any. of faith, and then being wrought thus in hugger mugger without
the sight of just witnesses how would it have confirmed faith. Luke 8. 1. 2.
Ioh. 4.
cruel adversaries on the cross, crying out to them, I thirst, and imploring
their mercy, least otherwise he might have seemed in miracles to have had Simon
Magus his mind and to have sought in such holy things, his own gain, and
private benefit, which had been abominable. Here by the way we may Phil. 1.
the action it self is unlawful.



be a scholar, here construe this Greek sentence, it would not beseem the
stayednesse of the learned man, who had already given far more sufficient
testimonies of his learning then that, presently to do the thing required.



Thus we see how many sins the devil couched, and infolded in this one.

We must no measure actions by the outward appearance.
when one is hungry? but we see what a matter it would have been here in
Christ. A little pin, specially being poisoned may prick mortally, as well
as a great sword. Adams eating the fruit seems a small matter to flesh and
blood, which wonders that so small a pin should wound all mankind to the
death. But Adams sin was not simply the eating of the apple, but the eating
of the apple forbidden by God. There was the deadly poison of that little
pin. And there also the Devil so handled the matter that all the
commandments were broken in that one action. As the first table in his
infidelity doubting both of Gods truth and goodness, contempt of, and
rebellion against God, preferring of Satan before God, and in the profanation
of that fruit he ate, which was a sacrament. And for the second table, he broke
the fifth commandment in his unthankfulness to God his father, that gave him
his being, and had bestowed so many blessings upon him. The sixth in the murder
of himself, and all his posterity body and soul. The seventh in his
intemperancy. The eight in touching another goods against the will of the
Lord. The ninth in receiving the Devils false witness against God. The tenth
in being discontent with his estate, and lusting after an higher. Take we heed
now of the deceit of sin. It shows little sometimes, but oh the bundle of
mischief that is lapped up in that little.

The second point follows. The arguments whereby the Devil tempts. First to
unbelief and 2. The Arguments which the Devil uses to Christ.
distrust thus.

1 If God regarded thee ought, much more if indeed in this manhood this second
person in Trinity dwelt personally, surely thou should have bread to preserve
thee in this need, though it were made miraculously of stones. But thou have
no relief, no stones turned into bread. Therefore God regards thee not. etc.
The proposition is built on this ground. God prouides for all his, specially
for such a creature as the humanity of Christ, that is united to the Godhead.
The husband would provide for the wife, the father for the son in less need
then this. But the union betwixt the Godhead and humanity of the Messiah is
far greater. And this ground is true. But then another ground necessarily
implied by Satan is false, that no other provision could be had, but by bread

D. Hereby we see how Satan uses to descant upon our afflictions, and thereby
casts doubts into our It is usual with Satan to cast into our minds doubts of
Gods love. Psalm 73. Judge 6.
minds of Gods love. So did he with David Ps. 73. So Gedeon Judge. 6. If the
Lord be with us how then is all this upon us. As in prosperity the devils
endeavor is to make us lay our hearts too near to it, whence that of the
Psalmist, If riches increase set not your hearts thereon, Psalm. 62. 10. So in
adversity, to Psalm 62. 10.
make us to lay it to near our hearts.

sleep in Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
even then are we in Christ, when we are in our graves. If any man should be
used like a dog, or a Bear, yet as long as he sees humane shape, and
discernes the use of humane reason in himself, he would still for all this
usage think himself to be a man. So though the children of God be used here
in this world, as if they were wicked, yet as long as they feel the work of
grace, and the power of Gods spirit, they must still hold themselves to be Gods
children.

David complains of some Psalm. 3. 2. Many say to my soul, There is no help
for him in God. This is Satan's course, and in so doing we shall show our
selves his instruments.

Argument was to persuade him to the working of the miracle, because he was the
son of God, and therefore he was able to work it.

Psalm. 3 2. The Devil tempts us to do what we can do, though never so
unlawful.
we should do. It is no matter whether lawful, or unlawful, that skills not,
he would never have us to stick at ought. Thus deals he here with Christ.
Thou art the son of God, and thou can do all things, and will thou not use
this power of thine to help thy self by turning stones into bread? And yet
this was an unlawful means of helping himself. So Iezebell reasons with Ahab
about Naboths vineyard, Thou the King of Israel, and suffer such a base fellow
to cross thee? So still speaks Satan to great men, Thou of such a place, and
power, suffer such an one to stand in thy way. So in sickness he presents
ungodly means, as charms, and witches, and tells us, if when we may be
helped, and will not, we are worthy to be sick still. So to scholars, you are
men of parts, and learning, and live you thus? Get you to Rome and to Rhemes,
and there ye shall have respect answerable to your desires, and deserts.

The third point follows. The manner of conueyance, 3. The manner of
conveyance.
full of craft and cunning. for



Thou art my son, but he was deceived here.



the first, that he may win so much the more afterward.



Lo an orthodoxe devil sound in judgment.

Lo a sober, and a temperate devil.

Lo a pitiful, and a compassionate devil.

Lo a religious, and a devout devil. And yet in all these shows he is false,
and in these buttred, and oyled words, has war in his heart. He that
flattereth, Prou. 29. 5. spreads a net before his brothers feet. So does the
devil in these flattering speeches he gives Christ, and his truth. So Marc: 1.
24. O Jesus of Nazaret I know thee the son of the living God. Jesus and son
of the living God, there is butter, and oil, but Jesus of Nazaret, there is a
sword. for thereby he labored to confirm the people in that error that
therefore Jesus was not the true Messiah, because he was of Nazareth. This
cunning conueyance of Satan must teach us wisdom, and watchfulness, in trying
and examining matters, and not to be carried away with every fair show, and
pretense.

The fourth point follows. The time when he 4. The time.
was tempted. Then, namely when our Lord was hungry. Where we learn.

The Devil and his instruments are wise to wait their times. Job. 24. 15.
and great personages we wait our fittest opportunities. The adulterer waits
for the twilight, says Job. Job. 24. 15. So Herodias when Herod was in the
good vain took her opportunity for John's head. So Putiphars wife for Joseph
when her husband was absent, and when Joseph was alone. Genesis 39. 11. So Genesis
39. 11.
the whore Prou. 7. entises the youngster, My husband Prou 7.
is from home, and gone into a far country. That was then the bashfulnesse
of that sin in those days. Now the case is altered. We on the contrary should
be wise for good, and learn of the unrighteous steward to make the best of
our opportunities. So Paul 1. Cor. 16. 8. 9. took the advantage of that 1.
Cor. 16. 8. 9.
opportunity of Gods opening the door unto him, to stay the longer at Ephesus.
So Abigail took her time to reprove Nabal when he was come to himself. 1.
Sam. 25. 37. oh how good is a word spoken 1. Sam. 25. 37.
in season. When the iron is hot then strike, when God by afflictions has
humbled, and softened either others or our own hearts then to work upon tnem,
as Job 33. 23. Job. 33. 32.


It is Satan's fit time to set upon us, when we are disabled to resist him.
that is a fit time with him to set upon us. As the enemies will make battery
upon the walls where weakest, and every one goes over the hedge where lowest, So
Satan where, and when he finds us feeblest, there, and then will he be
dealing with us. When David was idle and out of his calling, then shot he the
dart of lust at him. When the same David was in distress pursued by Saul, then
he shot the dart of distrust at him, and made him say, One 1. Sam. 27. 1.
day shall I be caught by the hand of Saul. 1. Sam. 27. 1. As the fowler sets
his snares for the birds in the winter time, when there is want of food, and as
the sons of Iaakob set upon the Shecemites in their grief upon circumcision,
when unable to resist them, the like advantage will the devil take against us.
This therefore must teach us at such times specially to look to our selves. If
the good man of the house knew when Matthew. 24. 43.
the thief would come, how would he watch and prepare for him, says our
Savior. Now we know that at such times as these are, the devil will not
fail to come. If in such a weakness as hunger, how much more then in our
deadly sicknesses, and in the very pangues of death. It is but a cowards
trick, but the devil cares not for his honor, so he may hurt us. Again, if
natural and sinne-lesse infirmities yield Satan an hint for temptation, what
then do the unnatural and sinful? If natural hunger after meat, what then
that inordinate appetite, and itching desire after gain, glory and preferment?
They that will be rich shall fall into many temptations. 1. Tim. 6. 9, They
even inuit Satan to come unto 1. Tim. 6. 9.
them.

The Devil fits his temptations to our dispositions
As here one temptation for hunger and want. If Christ had been in fullness
and abundance, he would have had another. He has temptations on the left hand,
and temptations also on the right. When in want, then comes the temptation to
distrust, to use shifts and unlawful means. If in discontent, then to be
impatient, and if we be of great spirit, then to lay hands on our selves, as
in Achitophel. If we be rich, and in great and high places, then he tempts
to pride, disdain, and oppression, epicurisme and voluptuousness. Prou. 30.
Prou. 3. 8. 9.
8. 9. Thereafter also as our constitution of body, are his temptations. The
sanguine man is tempted to vain lightness and scurrility, the choleric to
wrath and fury, the melancholy to dead and unprofitable lumpishnesse, to
strange and idle conceits, the phlegmatic to sloth and drowsinesse. Every
calling also has his several temptations. As the Judge to be corrupted with
bribes, the Preacher either with man-pleasing, Ezekiel. 13. or to selfe-pleasing,
as Augustine complains in Psalm. 51. the tradesman with deceit, and the
seruing-man with idleness and gaming. Every age has his temptations, youth to
be overcome with the love of pleasure, and old age with covetousness. Yea,
every gift has its temptation, as the gift of learning, valor, eloquence,
beauty, yea the saving graces of Christianity, and the calling of a Christian.
He will not tempt a Christian ordinarily to the grosser and more odious sins
of the world, but to the close and more secret, of privy pride, hypocrisy,
coldness, negligence and security.







So much of Satan's temptation.

Now let us see Christ's answer.

But Jesus answered, and said, It is written, Man lives not by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds Christ's answer to Satan's temptation.
out of the mouth of the Lord. The devils argument was. If thou were the son
of God, thou would turn stones into bread to relieve thine hunger, and so
preserve thine humanity, which otherwise will perish. But thou do not turn
stones into bread. Therefore etc. Our Lords answer now is both to the
consequence, and the false ground of it. To the consequence he answers by
retorting it most excellently, whatsoever proceeds out of the mouth of God can
preserve man's life, Therefore it follows not that if I be God, I must needs
nourish my body by bread, oh absurd and senseless Satan. Nay if I could not
nourish my body but by bread, then were I not God, and therefore need I not
turn these stones into bread, because I am God, and can make what I will to
nourish me, even stones without being turned into bread.

To the ground of the consequence, which was, that without bread his life could
not be preserved, he answers that it was directly false, and proves it by the
words of Scripture. Deuteronomy. 8. Man lives not by bread. etc. Deuteronomy. 8. 3.


And thus we see the scope of this answer. Wherein

Consider 1. Whence it is taken. 2. The answer it self.

the first. It is taken out of Deuteronomy. 8. Where Moses tells the Israelites that
God therefore did feed them with Manna from heaven, to teach them that man
lives not by bread only. Our Lord could have confounded the Devil otherwise,
but to show the power of the Scripture, and to grace it, and to The word of God
is the sword of the Spirit, wherewith we must wound Satan. Ephesians. 6.
give us an example of fighting against Satan, he chooses this way of
confuting him by the written word. This is that sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.
wherewith we must wound Satan. We are bidden to resist him by faith, but this
faith is grounded on Gods word.

The Use. 1. Against the Papists, that take away the weapons from Gods people,
and so betray them into the hands of their enemies, and in steed of the sharp
two edged swords of the spirit, give us a leaden, and a wooden sword of their
own, as their holy water, their crossings, their grains, and their durty
relics. It is not the sign of the cross, but the word of the cross that
overthrows Satan. For he is that strong man that will not yield but to a
stronger. Now the sign of the cross, and holy water, and such bables are
humane inventions, and therefore too weak to chase him away. But the word of
God has a divine power in it, and so is able to overcome him. And indeed if
there were no other argument to prove the Scripture to be Gods word, this were
sufficient, that it has power to quail, and to quash Satan's temptations.

Apollos in the Scriptures. Acts 18. 24.
Acts 18. 24. But Ministers with Christ should labor to be good Textuaries,
and not Ministers only, but all Christians in their places. For Christ here
alleges Scripture not as a Minister, but as one tempted to defend himself.
Now all Christians are subject to temptations. In the plague time none will go
abroad without some preservative. None will go forth into the fields, but
take at least a staff with them for fear of the worst. Those that travel
will not ride without their swords, Those that know they have enemies will
never go forth unweaponed, and Kings always have their guards. Now all of us
having Satan's temptations, and our enemies ready for us at every turn, we had
need daily to resort to the armoury of the Scriptures, and there to furnish
our selves. For when this word shall be hid in our hearts, and enter into our
souls, then shall we prevail both against the violent man, and the flattring
woman, that is against all kind of temptations, whether on the right, or on
the left hand. I have hid thy word, says David Psalm. 119. in mine heart, Psalm.
119.
that I might not sin. Thus Joseph prevailed against that temptation to
folly, by remembering the seventh commandment. The reason why we are so Genes.
39.
often foiled is, for that we read not the Scriptures at all, or else carelessly
without affection, or attention, and impression in the heart. Let us now then
like good ants hoard up against the winter of trial, of this spiritual
grain. In that time one sauoury sentence of Scripture shall do us more
service, then all the pretty and witty sayings and sentences of Fathers,
Philosophers and Poets. If Christ as man, notwithstanding his union with the
Godhead, had use and comfort of the Scripture, how much more then the most
holiest men. Cast not off the study of the Scriptures only to the Ministers.
Though the law be not thy profession, yet thou will have so much skill in it,
as to hold thine inheritance, and to keep thy land from the cauiller. So
here, though divinity be not thy profession, yet get so much skill as to
keep thine heavenly inheritance against Satan's cauils. As any is more subject
to Satan's temptations, so has he greater need of the Scriptures. Therefore
Princes and great ones specially have special great need of them. Deuteronomy. 17.
18: 19. Josh. Deu. 17. 18. 19. Josh. 1. 8.
1. 8. And betimes let us inure our little ones to them, Who knows but that
the alleging of these texts here might be the fruit of that institution in
the Scriptures in his childhood under his parents.

The answer it self follows. In which here are two things. 1. First, a
concession or grant, implied 2. The answer it self.
in the word Only. Man lives not by bread only. It implies thus much. I grant
that ordinarily man lives by bread. Where by bread synechdochically is meant
all other the creatures made for food. As Job 1. They went to eat bread, that
is, to feast and banquet.

restriction of the grant. Yet not only by bread, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord. Every word.] This word Word is not in
the Hebrew, but only thus, by all that proceeds, but the sense is well
expressed: for Word both in Hebrew and Greek signifies as much as thing. So
that it is all one as if we should read it thus, but by every thing that
proceeds out of the mouth of God, that is, which God appoints and gives power
unto, to be nourishment. The sum of the answer then is. Bread indeed is the
ordinary means of sustaining life, but yet bread has not this power in it
self, but because it is proceeded out of Gods mouth, God has appointed it for
that purpose. Now God can as easily appoint any other thing as bread, if he
will.

The words then contain the doctrine concerning Gods providence for this
temporal life. In the which doctrine consider two things.

1. First the kinds of this providence. They are two. 1. Ordinary. By bread. 2.
Extraordinary. By whatsoever else besides bread shall be appointed of God.
Secondly, the object of both the kinds. Man lives not. Man in general.
For the first, namely the kinds. And

First, the ordinary providence of God in maintaining 1. The ordinary
providence of God in maintaining this present life.
this present life, our Savior grants it to be by the means of bread, yet so,
that therefore bread is the means of life, because the decree is gone forth
from God concerning bread, that it should be the means. We learn then.

As Gods providence ordinarily works by means, so these means have all their
strength from him.
from him. We see how for the preservation of every particular man he has
appointed food; for the continuance of the whole kind, generation; for the
restoration of health decayed, and the preventing of sickness, physic. And
in these creatures he has placed a virtue inherent in themselves for these
purposes; yet so that the operation and success is guided by his power and
gracious blessing. For that he that gave the virtue is able to inhibite and
restrain it if he will. Hence that speech. Hos. 2. 21. Hosea 2. 21.
I will hear the heavens, and the heavens the earth, and the earth Izreel. The
earth is the means to bring forth fruit to us, the heavens to make the earth
fruitful by their influences, but yet they must be petitioners to God before
they can exercise that virtue God has given them, for the helping of the
earth. God then at the first gave power and qualities to his creatures of
working this and that, and still in the exercise of this power he sustaines an
underprops them, for in him we live, move, and have our being, Acts 17. And
by his mighty word he bears up Acts 17. Heb. 1. 3. Genes. 1. Genes 9.
all things. Heb. 1. 3. And that word Genesis 1. and again Genesis 9. for our food
is at this day effectual for nourishment, as that other Increase and multiply
is for propagation of mankind. We may easily see that as the creatures could
not make themselus, so neither could they bestow these properties and qualities
they have upon themselves. Besides that, these properties are such, as make
them to be in the places of servants unto others, as the heavens to the earth,
the elements to plants, plants to beasts, beasts to men. Now every creature
naturally abhorring servitude, and seeking sovereignty would never have
bestowed on it self such properties, as whereby they were thus to be
enthralled to the service of other creatures. And thus other creatures whom
they serve, they did not thus dispose of them, therefore these properties and
qualities were given them by God.

virtue inherent in them by nature, as bread and herbs, etc. which God in
their creation blessed to these ends, and then endued them with such virtue. 1.
Tim. 4 3. 1. Tim. 4. 3.
which God created to eat. So that in nature the reason of this virtue of
theirs may be seen. Or else they should have Gods virtue and power assisting
them, and present with them, as in the Word and Sacraments, and the reason of
this must be seen in the the Scriptures, and Gods ordinances there revealed.
But neither of these can be spoken of charms, and therefore it is only the
Devils mouth out of which they are proceeded. And only those means are for our
use which proceeded. And only those means are for our use which proceed out
of Gods mouth.

staff of bread. Now if they need a staff to lean on, they are not fit to
be staves for us to lean on. And therefore that which Prou. 3. 5. Solomon
speaks Prou. 3. 5.
of one second cause, Trust in the Lord, and lean not to thy wisdom, is to
be applied to all second causes whatsoever. Lean not on them then, but on
that they lean on too, which is to support both them and thee, and that is
God. Without him they are not only lame, but dead, he it is that must quicken
them. Hence that opposition of the living God, to riches, That they trust not
in uncertain riches, but in the living God. 1. Tim 6. And therefore Luke 12.
the 1. Tim. 6.
fool deceived himself, promising himself long life because of his great
riches. Though a man have abundance, yet his life consists not in his riches.
Luke 12. Princes children should in all likeli-hoode be Luke 12.
stronger, lustier and heathfuller then poor men's that are glad to leap at a
crust, the other having the purest and most exquisite diet, and wanting no
tendance, and yet for the most part they are not in so good liking, nor of such
able bodies. Daniels pulse by Gods blessing kept him in as good liking, as the
kings diet did the rest of his fellows. Men and women of weak constitutions
have oftentimes children, when others more likely in natural reason, are
without. Hence that observation Psalm. 37. that a little to the righteous is
great riches, and goes further then the larger revenues of the wicked: so that
the poor godly man with his little can do good, and Psalm. 37.
lend to others, whereas the great rich wicked man, for all his living and
rents is feign to borrow, and which is worse, pays not again. If any say it
is for want of wisdom, and providence and care, David tells us the contrary.
Psalm. 127. 2. that for all their Psalm. 127. 2.
early vprising, and their late downe-lying, for all their carking and
plodding they could do no good without God built the house. A wise woman
builds the house, Prou. 10. And yet withal God must build Prou. 10.
the house too, says David, Not her wisdom without God. So the diligent hand
makes rich, says Solomon Pro. 10. 4. But the blessing of God makes rich says
the Prou. 10. 4.
same Solomon Pr. 10. 22. Not diligence without Gods Prou. 10. 22.
blessing. For otherwise for all the earning of great wages it is but put into
a broken bag. Hag. 1. 6. So bread nourishes, but withal God blessing
nourishes. Hagg. 1. 6.
The one as the matter, the othet as the form. The very heathen apprehended
this point very well, They made their Goddess Providence to be the midwife of
nature, showing that nature could do nothing without the power of Gods
providence. And hence though the wiser of them acknowledged but one God, yet to
every several creature gave they the name of God, as of Ceres to the corn, of
Bacchus to the wine, of Neptune to the waters, to show that the power of God
was in these creatures, and that it was not so much they, but God in them and
with them that wrought. What a shame then for Christians to repose and secure
our selves in these outward means? Oh when one has gotten a great living and
great friends, we say, oh he is made for ever. God that can break the staff
of bread, can break the staff of friends, riches, favor, and all such means
as we trust to. As he did the staff of physic to Asa. 2. Chron. 15. As he
restrained 2. Chron. 15. Dan. 3.
the fire. Dan. 3. from hurting and from burning, so can he also, from
helping, and from warming. If we want means then let us not only seek to
them, but to God. And if we have them though in never such strength and
abundance, yet let us as earnestly crave Gods blessing and help, as we would
do in our greatest want. For what have we when we have the means? Have we
God locked up in the means? No, we have but dead things, unable to help
without God. Therefore in the fourth petition Christ teaches the greatest
Princes that swim in wealth to pray for their daily bread as the poorest
beggar.

1. Tim. 4. 4.
wise to go about any business. Thus Genes. 9. Noah by the sacrifice after
his release from the Genes 9.
Arc sanctified his dwelling again on the earth. Hence of ancient did the
Jews dedicate their houses, Deuteronomy. 20 5. The want of this, and the swinish
rushing upon the cretures makes many houses to be Deuteronomy. 20. 5.
preyes to the fire, thieves, devils, and many men's meat to be the same to
them, that the quails were to the Israelites.

Matthew. 6. 33.
First to seek the Kingdom of God; This is to go to the fountain, to the
wellhead. Who would go to an inferior officer if he may have access to the
highest? to the servant if he may come to the master? If God be displeased
with our sins, then neither sowing, eating, drinking, or laboring, shall
have any success, as in the Jews that neglected Gods Kingdom, Hagg. 1.
Therefore godliness is Hagg. 1. 1. Tim. 6.
well called great gain. 1. Tim. 6. because it gains God himself, and so his
blessing upon all outward means, and he that gains riches without God, what
has he gained but a little gravel? Pro. 20. 17. Prou. 20. 17.
A sweet bargain.



And thus much for the ordinary providence of 2. The extraordinary providence
of God.
God.

Extraordinary follows, but by every word that proceeds etc. that is by any
thing else besides bread whatsoever God shall think good.

God is not tied to second causes. 1. Without means.
with them. This will appear in these particulars. 1. God sometimes works
without the means at all, as in the first creation of the chaos, and in
Christ's healing of many diseases. Here the word that proceeds out of Gods
mouth is his own immediate power. He speaks to that, and bids that alone
effect this or that, 2. Chron. 14. 11. It is all one with God to 2. Chro. 14. 11
save with many, or with no power, namely of any means, save this of his own
immediately. 2. God 2. By insufficient means.
sometimes works by ordinary, but those weak and insufficient means in the
order of nature. As when the bunch of figs healed Hezekiahs sore. 2. King. 20.
2. King. 20.
as when Iaakobs rods laid before the sheep of one color and made them
conceive, and bring forth parti-colored ones. Genes. 30. when the wind Genes.
30.
brought the Israelites quails in such abundance. Exodus 16. when Gedeons three
hundred soldiers Exodus 16.
got the victory Judge. 7. and Jonathan and his armorbearer Judge. 7.
alone chased away, and slew so many of the Philistims. 1. Sam. 14. 6. It is
not hard to the Lord to 1. Sam. 14. 6.
save with many or few. Of the same kind was it to strengthen Elias so long
with one meal, that he should be able to go forty days journey together in
the wilderness. 1. King. 19. 8. And to this head 1. King. 19. 8.
may we refer that of Merlyn, who during the massacre of Paris, some
fortnight together was nourished with one egg a day laid by an hen that came
constantly to that hay-mow, where he lay hid in that danger. Thus the oil in
the widows cruise and meal in her barreil. 1. King. 17. together with the
seven loaves, and two fishes in the Gospel 1. King. 17.
insufficient to do that they did, and yet God speaking the word to them, they
did it. So for the apparel of the Israelites which they had when they were
young, and children in Egypt to serve them till they were grown men, and
forty years together in the wilderness without being worn out. And so for
our Savior Christ to be conceived only of woman's seed without man's. In all
these God indeed did work by means, but by such as weak and insufficient in
the order of nature. 3. God otherwiles 3 By unusual means.
works altogether by unusual and unwonted means. Such as was Manna in the
desert. So without the sun he caused light to shine forth either out of the
whole chaos, or else out of the element of fire, at the first creation, so
without rain at the same time the earth was fruitful. Thus with the noise of
Rams horns the walls of Jericho fell down. 4. God sometimes works not
only by 4 By contrary means.
means diverse from, but quite contrary unto the ordinary. As the blind man's
eyes are restored with clay and spittle. Ioh. 9. and Jonas is saved by being
John 9.
in the whales belly. Thus God works without all means, without ordinary
means, by weak and insufficient means, and against the means.



Psalm. 37. 3. Et pascere fide sic Iun. Hab. 2. Luke 21. Genesis 22.
of meat and drink. Thus Hab. 2. The just, in troublesome times, shall live by
faith; And Luc. 21. Possess your souls by patience. Never despair, but say
as Abraham to Izhak. Genesis 22. God will provide, and then will the Lord provide
in the mount. And when with Iehoshaphat we know not what to do, yet have we
our eyes unto God. 2. Chron. 20. 6. Art 2. Chron. 20. 6.
thou brought to low estate, and have scarce bread to put into thy mouth?
Remember that if God speak the word to weak means they shall work as well
as the strong. An hard dry crust of bread, and a very little shall be
nourishment competent and comfortable. Never use any shifts if in any of thy
wants thou have not lawful means at hand. He that believes will not make
have. Isay 28. 16. Necessity is a Esaias 28. 16.
shrewd dart and a sharp one, yet see how Christ repulsed it here by faith,
in his fathers powerful and all only all-sufficient providence. So must thou,
and be of his mind, I Will starve rather then thorough distrust use unlawful
means, and so offend God. The three children comforted themselves thus. Dan.
3. that though they saw no ordinary Dan. 3.
means for their deliverance, yet God was able extraordinarily to deliver
them, if not, yet would they not deliver themselves by disobedience and
idolatry. Christ in his greatest necessity would not turn stones into bread to
save his life, and will thou in far less necessity not to save life, but to
increase wealth, and so honor and greatness, turn not stones but blood, even
the blood of the poor Saints of God into bread by oppression and extortion?
How many are there that turn, not stones into bread, but lies, flatteries,
base shifts into silver and gold, yea, jewels and precious stones? Others turn
stones, yea, precious stones, and their whole substance inro bread, into meats,
drinks and apparel, and wastefully lavish Gods good creatures on idle backs
and bellies, using this as a means to procure something their affections want.
But whether we would free our selves from our fears, or obtain our desires,
our Saviors example here shows us, that on no hand we may use the least
indirect course whatsoever. Christ with one word speaking to these stones might
have killed his hunger. Mordecay with a bow of his knee might have prevented
his danger. And many of the Martyrs by one dash of a pen in subscribing to the
wicked articles of their adversaries. But they trusted in God, and knew no
means could deliver them without him, and therefore durst not use unlawful
means cursed by him, for how could Gods blessing be expected upon them? Though
Cranmer subscribed yet that would not save his life. And if such unlawful
means of ours work, it is a far greater judgment then if they did not.
Whatsoever is got with evil means is got with Gods anger, and shipwreck of
conscience. An hard bargain. A shameful disparagement to God and to his
favor to prefer a piece of bread, or of red earth before it, and what a
foolery is this to save thy little finger with the loss of thine eyes? In
getting a little good, to lose a far greater? in saving life and getting
wealth, to lose God and a good conscience? As Solomon shows in false and
deceitful tradesmen. Prou. 20. 25. There Prou. 20. 15.
is gold and precious stones, which happily sometimes by a false oath may be
got in selling, but the lips of truth are a precious jewel. Truth and a good
conscience are far more precious then gold or precious stones. It is a
pitiful exchange when with the loss of these the best jewels, we gain the
other, which are worse, and but dung in comparison. Why do we thus distrust
God, as if he alone were not able to help us? and why do we thus dishonor
him, as to lend him, and to join with his providence such base helps as
these. He needs not his own lawful, much less thy unlawful means.
Unlawful it was under the law to couple an ox and an ass together, how much
more to couple Gods holy and just providence, and thine unholy and unrighteous
means? Those holy matrones of old, which would not we are gawish and garish
ornaments to win their husbands affections, are said to trust in God. 1. Pet.
3. 5. And therefore would they not we are braided hair, and such meretricious
1. Pet. 3. 5.
allurements, but only used meekness, peaceablenesse, and a quiet spirit,
which were means appointed by God. Wheresoever there is trust in God, there
will all base means be rejected. Oh then that we could learn in all needs
to cast our selves upon God, to live by faith, and not by fleshly practices.
Do thou want all means? God is insteede of them, and more then them all.
Are the means against thee? God works sometimes by contrary means. David's
father and mother forsook him, yet God took him up Psalm. 27. Joseph's brethren
were against him and his preferment, yet God thereby advanced him. Iaakobs
master Laban was against him, and dealt basely with him, and sought his
impouerishment, yet God thereby enriched him. Therefore with Job trust we in God
killing us, for he works by contraries, life out of death, and light out of
darkness.

And so much for both the kinds of God providence, The object of Gods
providence.
The object follows, Man in general, not holy and good men only, but man in
general lives not by bread only, and so here is an amplification of the
argument. If any, even the wickedest man that is, may have his life preserved
by God without the ordinary means, much more Christ an holy man, yea, more
then a man, his manhood being united personally unto the second person in the
Trinity.

So wonderful is Gods goodness, that it extends to all his creatures. Psalm.
36. Matthew. 5.
wicked his enemies, because they are his creatures. as Psalm. 36. Thou Lord
sauest both man and beast. and Matthew. 5. He causes it to rain, and shine both
upon the just and the unjust. Nay, he will extraordinarily provide for them in
their need, as Manna for the murmuring rebellious Israelites, for Core, Dathan
and Abiram, as well as for Moses and Aaron. He extraordinarily prouides for the
young ravens crying for hunger, when forsaken of their dammes. Psalm. 147. 9.
And so for the birds. Matthew. 6. wanting such Psalm. 147. 9. Matthew. 6.
means as men have to provide for themselves, so that seldom seen to fall
down dead for want of food. Now men though wicked are above beasts, and come
nearer to God, and therefore God is said to be the Savior of all men, though
specially of them that believe. 1. Tim. 4. 10. An excellent example of 1. Tim.
4. 10.
Gods extraordinary providence over the wicked in their great calamities see in
Hagar and her brat Ishmael. Genesis 21. 15. 16. 17. Learn hence Genesis 21. 15. 16
17.




Are ye not much better then they. If God so provide for strangers, for the
Devils brats, what will he do then for his own children? If so for Ishmaels,
what then for Isaacs, and if thus for our bodies, worms meat and rotteennesse,
what then for our immortal souls?

Thus much for the first temptation.

The second follows. Matthew. 4. 5. Then the Devil The second temptation.
Matthew. 4. 5.
took him up into the holy city, etc.

In this temptation consider two things.

1. First, The Devils assault. 2. Secondly, Christ's rcpulse. 1. The Devils
assault.

In the former, two things also Time. Parts.

For the Time two questions may be demanded. 1. The time of it.
to the former, since Luke sets that in the mount in the second place.

Answ. Luke ties not himself to the just order, but only to the truth of the
history, and sets them down in that order they came to his mind, not in that
order they befell our Savior.

Reasons. Matthew speaking of the temptation in the mount says, Again the
Devil took him, etc. verse. 8. which shows that he had taken him once
before.

Quest. Whether this temptation, being the next in order, did follow the former
immediately or in some distance of time?

Answ. It seems there was no great stay. Luke says in the end of these three
temptations the Devil left him for a time. When he had ended all his
temptations he left him for a time, implying, that before he did not leave
him, nor gave him any respite.

renewing his temptations. His mouth was stopped, Satan's shamelesnes in renewing
his temptations.
and he was set non plus in the former temptation, yet how soon does he
begin to open his mouth again. He was repulsed yet he comes to fight
again. He has many strings to his bow, and many arrows in his quiver. When
one way takes not, he tries forthwith another; yea, he will make proof of
all ere he leaves. He is called Beelzebub. The master fly. Flies though they
be never so much beaten away, yet they will come again and again to the same
place. In persuading to good, alas how quickly are we weary. If at first we
find no success, we quickly give over. Not so with Satan and his instruments.
Putiphars wife again and again sollicites and sets upon Joseph for all his
many denials.

Matthew. 12.
worse then himself.

victory, so in the victory to have an eye to the fight again. We must be
still troubled, and that daily: whereupon in the Lords prayer we are taught
daily to pray, Lead us not into temptation. Which also further refutes that
dotage of Tobies fish, so driving away the devil that he shall never return
again. Job had given him a notable foil, and yet he returned again with
greater violence. Our whole life is a continual warfare, one trial is the
beginning of another: changes and armies of sorrows are against me, says Job.
The same may we observe in the Patriarchs history, how one wave followed
another, one trial lincked and chained to another Always then keep we on our
harness, and look we for no ease here.

So much for the time of this assault.

The parts are two. First, Satan's fitting his temptation. 2. The parts of the
assault.
Secondly, his uttering it being fitted.

The fitting of his temptation consists in two 1. The fitting of his temptation.
things. carrying Christ's body to the holy city, that is to Jerusalem. Luc. 4.
Secondly, placing it there on the top of the pinnacle.

For the first, two questions may be asked.

Quest. Whether Christ were thus carried, and so set in vision only, the
Devil deceiving his senses, or whether really and indeed?

Ans. I think the Devil carried his body really and indeed. Reasons. Ob.
desert to be tempted. The desert then was the place of his temptations, not the
Temple. Answ. It is sufficient to make good that speech, that he was there
tempted in the 40. days, and that the first temptation of the three, wherein
was a preparation to the other following was there perfected. 2. If his
carriage were only in vision, then either Christ inwardly in his mind knew
that it was Satan's iugling, and no such matter as it seemed to his sense; or
else as his outward senses, so his mind also was deceived, and he thought it
was so indeed, as it seemed to his senses. If the first, then it was no
temptation, for Christ knew he was in no danger, he knew that he stood upon
firm ground in the wilderness, and so he should but have abused the Scripture
he alleged for himself. The latter seems to offer a far greater disgrace to
the mind of Christ in the apprehension of error for truth, then the Devils
carrying of him does to his body.

Quest. Whether was Christ carried by the devil thorough the air, or went on
his feet.

Ans. The word that here Matthew uses does not necessarily imply that he was
carried, as neither Lukes word that he went on foot. But yet nothing hinders
but that Christ might in body be thus carried by Satan, as he was afterward
apprehended, bound and crucified by that cursed crew. And as he gave them, and
death it self power over his body, so might he the devil. Christ came in the
state of humiliation, and stood in our steed. He could have confounded the
devil, and have smitten him as he did those officers. Ioh. 18. but as there,
so here he willingly Ioh. 18.
yielded himself. And since he yielded his body to be set on the pinnacle by
the devil, why not Satan and his instruments may have power over the bodies
of Gods children Luke 13.
also to be carried. Satan, and so his instruments may have power over the
bodies of Gods children. As he had over Job in his ulcers, over his children in
their death, over Mary Magdalen that was possessed, and over that daughter of
Abraham, Luc. 13. for to this the best are subject, yet so that Satan is
restrained and curbed by God, so that he cannot do what he would. And this
grievous affliction is sweetened and sanctified to Gods children, so that the
more power he has over their bodies, the less he shall have over their
souls. Yea, his possession of the body is turned to be a means of his
dispossession out of the soul. In which regard it is said Numb. 23. 22. 23.
There is no sorcery against Iaakob, nor south-saying against Israel, because
God was an Unicorn to take Number. 23. 22. 23.
away the poison, and venom, and sting of it, as he does of all other
afflictions, yea, and of death it self to his Israel. Waters when the Unicorns
horn has been in them, are no longer poisonable, but healthful; A waspe when
his sting is out, cannot be hurtful in stinging, but may be profitable in his
buzzing to awaken us: So are all these outward afflictions, even witching and
possessing by Satan. So that that which Christ said of the Devils instruments,
they can kill the body, but not the soul, the same may we say of Satan
himself concerning his possession, He may possess the bodies, but the souls
of Gods children he cannot. Here he had some power over the blessed body of our
head Jesus Christ, but not the least power over his soul. In the wicked his
special power is over their souls. When he was sent to Ahab, he was sent to go
and be a lying spirit, and to deceive him. But when he was sent to Job, it 1.
Reg. 22.
it was but to afflict his body with ulcers. Again, this power which he has
over the bodies of Gods children that we now speak of, is such as that they
are merely patients; as in Christ in this place. Otherwise for Christ to have
gone, and idly without cause to have endangered himself on the pinnacle had
been to tempt God, But now it is the Devils sin, not his. So in those that
are possessed, all those forced and violent motions, though not only vain and
idle, but even horribly sinful, as when he speaks railingly on God, his
truth and his children, these are all the Devils own sins. And therefore he
desired not to possess Job, because his intent was to draw Job himself to
blaspheme. But now wicked men, though they are free usually from this
possessiue power of Satan, yet Satan has a far greater power in the
voluntary motions of their bodies, such a power as that they shall be agents
in that they do, and guilty of sin. He carries them not against their will,
as here our Savior to the top of a pinnacle, nor as him in the Gospel, into
the fire and water, he offers not that violence to their bodies, but he
carries them willingly, and drives them as free horses that need only the
shaking of the hand, to the tavern, to the stews, to the theater, to this or
that evil company. He makes them abuse their eyes to wantonness, their
mouths to filthiness, and he makes their feet swift to shed blood. So that
as Paul being guided by the good Spirit of God could say, I live not, but
Christ lives in me. Gal. Gal. 2. 20.
2. So they, we live not, but the Devil lives in us. This possession of soul
and body together, is the more fearful, and yet the more ordinary, and yet no
marvel made of it, because it is not discerned.

The place whither he is carried, Jerusalem, is called the holy City, because
of the Temple, and Gods worship there, though otherwise there were horrible
abuses in doctrine, discipline and manners.

Man's wickedness cannot overthrow Gods goodness.
with whom a little evil either in whole Churches, or in particular men
preuailes more, to make them speak evil of them, then much good can do to
make them speak well of them. It is the sin of the Brownists.

Golgotha, yet God will account of thee by his, and not by thine own. Though
thy wheat be mixed with much chafe, and thy wine with much water, yet God
gives the denomination from the better part.

Acts 2. 9. 10. 11
holiness is not inherent in the ground and the walls, but was only in regard
of the worship of God, which then was there in special manner, and now
failing, it is no longer the holy city.

setting of Christ upon the pinnacle of the temple. Some difference there is
amongst Interpreters what it should be. It matters not greatly. All agree in
this, that it was a very dangerous place.

for temptations. Satan had before the advantage of the place in the desert
given him by our Lord, and Satan many times takes the advantage of the place
for his temptations.
here he takes it himself. As here he took the opportunity of this place,
and the danger thereof for Christ to stand long upon it, to urge this
temptation of this Cast thy self down, so does he still against us, for the
better enforcing his temptations against us. Some places are as dangerous for
our souls, as the pinnacle of the temple was for the body. And when once he
has gotten us upon these pinnacles, then it is hard if we cast not our selves
down. As when Peter was in Caiaphas his hall, then was he set as it were on
the pinnacle of the Temple, and how fearful a fall caught he? So in Joseph,
learning in Pharaohs court to swear by the life of Pharaoh. Quest. May we not
then dwell in such places? Ans. As for the body, we may not be venturous to
go upon high, steep and dangerous places without a calling, but having a
calling we may, as Masons and Carpenters do, So for the soul, when God calls
us to such places, as he did Joseph, Obadiah, Nehemiah, then we may dwell
therein, but if no calling, take heed then, and let Peter's example teach us the
danger of Caiaphas his hall. We that can scarce stand in the firm ground,
never trust we our feet in slippery ground, unless God guide and lead us
into it.

Thus much of the fitting of the temptation. 2. The uttering of his temptation.


The uttering of it follows.

And he said unto him, If thou be the son of God, Cast thy self down, for
it is written, etc.

In which words two things to be considered.

First, the sin whereto he tempts. Secondly, the arguments whereby he tempts.
That whereto he tempts is to Cast himself down 1. The sin whereto he
tempts.
headlong from the top of the pinnacle. Where observe.

The Devil in temptation has no enforcing power but onley a persuading
slight.
rests in us to give assent. Therefore he says here, Cast thy self down.
For indeed else we should not sin. Many fondly excuse themselves and their
sins by the Devil, but the Devil could not make thee sin except thou were
willing. And he has no power to constrain thy will. The Devil is the father
of thy sin, but thine own concupiscence is the mother. And what could the
father do without this mother. Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away
by his own concupiscence, and is entised. Iam. 1. 14.
Iam. 1. 14.

The Devils power is limited.
throw him down. He is a finite creature, and cannot do all things. And in
those things he can do (such as was this, to throw down a man standing on
the pinnacle of the Temple, for even a child might have done this) he is
curbed and restrained by God. So the Lion. 1. King. 13. killed the Prophet, but
1. King. 13.
neither touched the ass whereon he rode, nor yet the dead carcass.

Three notable evidences of Satan's limited power may we find in that one
history of the man possessed in the region of the Gadarens, Luke 8. 27. First,
Luke 8. 27.
in that he begges leave to enter into the swine. He that afterward boasts of
that all the world was his, and all the kingdoms thereof, has not power so
much as over a vile swine. Legion, there was a whole Legion of Devils in him.
Now a Legion in the wars contains above six thousand footmen, Veget. lib. 2.
cap. 6.
and seven hundred horse men. Now though whole a legion of devils, such an
army and host of them in one poor man, yet were not able to destroy him, nor
to do with him as they did with the swine. Thus it is also in the rage of
Satan's instruments against the Church, the spiritual body of Christ. God
suffers his Church to be in their hands, as Christ's body in Satan's to be
placed as it were on the top of the pinnacle, to be in great danger, and as
with David but an hairs breadth between him and death, yet then Gods snaffle
is put into their mouths, and his hook into their nostrils, as into Esaus and
Labans in Iaakobs cause. Pilates brag therefore against Christ, Know thou
not that I have power to crucify thee? Ioh. 19. 10. And Labans to Iaakob. Genesis
31. 29. I am able Ioh. 19. 10. Genesis 31. 29.
to do you hurt, they were but vain crakes. Satan himself was feign to say
to God in Jobs cause, stretch out thine hand.

Does God take care for oxen? says Paul, so may we say, Does God take care
for swine? Are we not much better then they? Though the knife be in the
enemies hands ready to cut the throat of Isaac lying bound on the altar, yet
their hands shall sooner wither with Ieroboams, then do the deed; Even then
God will work our deliverance, even by themselves, as here the Devil does not
only not throw Christ down, but carries him safe away from this so tickle and
dangerous a place.

But in the action it self of casting down himself, It had been a great
sin in Christ to cast down himself.
it may be asked what sin was in it.

Answ. Judas, but he would have had our Savior to have done it out of
presumption and vainglory, as still he labors with some in the same kind,
as in duels, single combats, and going out into the field for every trifle.
Thus the Devil labors both to make us use and lose our lives when, and as he
would. As he would have us to live to him, so to die to him. When God calls
for our lives to be spent in his quarrel, then he makes us timorous and
fearful; when God would have us live, and do good, then the Devil labors
to make us idly and vainly prodigal of our lives. When Christ had no
calling to venture his life now he persuades him to venture it, but afterward
when God called him, he set on Peter to call him back and to say, Master
spare thy self. Matthew. 16. 22. So the Gallants Matthew. 16. 22.
of our time that seem so little to pass by their lives, that will venture
them to revenge the least disgraceful word or look, if God should call them
to suffer martyrdom for his glories sake, how base and dastardly cowards would
they show themselves. the arguments The Arguments, whereby he tempts.
whereby Satan persuades Christ to this casting down of himself.

1. Argument. If thou be the son of God. The The first argument.
sense is thus much. Since thou art so confident in the voice at Jordan, and
beleeuest verily that thou art the son of God, and therefore in the strength
of this thy faith wilt rest on thy fathers providence for food without turning
stones into bread, well then thou that art so great, and so mighty, both in thy
Godhead, and in the faith of thy manhood, never be afraid of this so
dangerous a place. Trust to the power of thy Godhead, Trust to the faith of
thy manhood, and boldly throw thy self down, that as thou art God, so it may
evidently appear in this so famous and populous a city, in the eyes of all the
beholders, who will receive thee as a man come down from heaven unto them.

In this argument there are three reasons couched together.



It is Satan's usual trick to make us presume upon the privileges we have
received from the Lord. 1. Cor. 7. 20.
and bear our selves out upon the privileges we have received from the Lord,
even sometimes upon our spiritual privileges, that we are the sons of God,
and are heirs of heaven. As in the servants in the primitive Church, that
therefore cast off the yoke, and would be servants no longer, 1. Cor. 7. 20.
And in others hereupon to carry themselves more highly, and to despise
others, on whom yet God has not showed such mercy. But in outward temporal
privileges it is more common. Great personages presume upon their place, their
power and their parentage, as if these were so many licenses to sin. Pharaoh
thus presumed upon his King-ship, who is the Lord? or who is Moses? I am an
absolute Prince, a man to whom all stoop, and to have a mean fellow thus to
talk to me, thus to threaten me? As here he reasoned with our Savior, If
thou be the son of God, so will he be still ready to reason, If thou be the
son, or daughter of a King, of a Prince, of a Nobleman, of a great rich man,
who then should restrain thee, who should be so bold to check or control
thee? Base flatterers that are always haunting great personages have learned
the Devils argument, and indeed are his instruments in pressing of it. As
Iezebel to Ahab, Art thou King of Israel? And the Persian Judges 1. King. 21. 7.
to King Cambyses, who being desirous to marry his sister, and asking them if
there were any law for it, answered that there was no such law, but that there
was another, that the Kings of Persia might do what they lift. A gross
deceit. For the more privileges, the more bonds of obedience to that Lord of
whom we have and hold them, by whom even Kings and Princes do reign. And
therefore such should rather reason as Nehemiah did, Neh. 6. Neh. 6. 11.
11. should such a man as I flee? should such a man as I am, so honored, so
advanced by God, should I so much forget him, and my self to sin against
him? The Devil reasons, Thou art the son of God, therefore cast down thy
self, that is, therefore sin. Nay the contrary argument holds strong, Thou art
the son of God, Therefore sin not against thy father. So God when he could
have made thee the basest drudge and scullion, has yet advanced thee to high
and honorable estate, Therefore remember thy debt to him, and show thy
thankfulness. No doubt but Satan thus reasoned with David when he tempted
him to adultery with Bathsheba. 2. Sam. 12.
What? thou art a King, and be crossed in thy pleasure? But when God sent
Nathan to rebuke him. 2. Sam. 12. he inuerted the Devils argument, and
reasoned quite contrary, I advanced thee from the sheepefold even to the throne
etc. and so amplifies his sin even by that whereby Satan extenuated it to
him, and made it seem no sin.

Reason. From his faith in Gods providence and promises. Thou beleeuest that
that word, Thou art my son, is the word of God, and so in thy want of food
thou comfortest thy self with it, and live by faith. Thou then that have
such a strong faith in that voice of God, and perswadest thy self that this
manhood of thine is united personally to the second person in Trinity, and
therefore can be vpheld in this danger of famine without bread, Thou I say
that have such a strong faith, never fear to cast down thy self headlong,
but assure thy self that Gods providence can preserve thee from this danger,
as well as from the other.

Here we learn.

The Devil labors to wound us with our own weapons.
with our own weapons, as here Christ, with his faith in the former
temptation. What strange cunning is this? The devil like a crafty pyrate will
hang out the same colors. Whereas Christ stood upon faith, and resting upon
Gods providence, why he will be as well for that as he, and so persuades him
to do that which might carry a show of a strong faith indeed. So he sees
some men zealous and fervent in the profession of religion. And seeing no
possibility to quench this fire, he will throw his gunpowder into it. He will
deceive them under the color of zeal, and bring them to preposterous
indiscretion, yea, to a blind and bold madness, as in the common people to
reform public abuses without the Magistrates authority, as in throwing down
images, and the like. Contrarily seeing others to be wiser and moderater, he
abuses their wisdom and moderation to make them remiss and careless, dead
and heartlesse. Thus he abuses our care of prayer, and seeking Gods Kingdom to
be negligent in our callings, and contrarily our consciences of our callings to
the neglect of Gods kingdom. So he abuses our commendable custom of giving
our selves to good meditations, and stirring up good affections in our selves
in our solitariness, to distract our minds in the public exercises of the
word and prayer. The devil sees that against Gods children, oftentimes he can
have no other advantage, then that which they had against Daniel Dan. 6. in the
Law of his God, in the graces of Gods Dan. 6.
Spirit, and therefore he dies his bad clothes in good colors, and paints
the foul faces of sin with the colors of graces and virtues to deceive us;
As here he presents presumption to Christ under the color, and in the habit
of faith; and so now covetousness, of frugality and good husbandry;
drunkenness and carowsings of healthes, of good fellowship; sottish sloth, of
quietness. Eccles. 4. 3. Eccles. 4. 3.
unlawful sports both in regard of the nature of the games, as dice; and in
regard of the time spent in them, as when men lie at their recreations from
morning to evening, this he will present to us under the name of honest mirth
and recreations. Oh then what need have we to fly to Jesus Christ who dwells
with prudence, Prou. 8. What need have we Prou. 8.
not to be carried away with every thing that has a show of goodness, or of
indifferency, but to bring these painted strumpets of the devil to the light,
yea, and to the heat of the word of God, and then their painting shall melt
away, and we shall see their beauty came only out of the devils box. Take
heed least we be hardened with this deceitfulness of sin. This hardens a
man in sin, when he apprehends it as a virtue, or a thing lawful.

The Devil when he cannot draw to one extreme, seeks to draw to another.
Ioh. 13. Numb. 14.
he could not get our Savior to distrust, he labors to rush him upon
presumption. So Peter Ioh. 13. from refusing to have his feet washed, to offer
feet, head, hands and all to the washing. And the Israelites. Number. 14. from
denying to go toward Canaan when God commanded, to be hot upon going when God
forbad them. So the Papists from the extremity of the Corinthians. 2. Cor. 10.
9. 10. ctc. to 2. Cor. 10. 9. 10.
magnify the writings of the Apostle in the contempt of his vocal ministry,
are fallen into the contrary extreme of magnifying that which the Apostles
delivered by word of mouth, unwritten tradition, to the disparagement of their
writings. So Luther from the indiscreete zeal of the people at Wittemberg in
throwing down images, to the retaining and maintaining of images, and Austin
from carnal singing to no singing at all, many of us from the false religion
in Popery, to no religion, from works without faith, to faith without works,
from zeal without knowledge, to knowledge without zeal, from the tyranny of
Popish discipline, to the neglect of Christ's holy discipline. This then must
teach us not to be too proud, or secure if we prevail against Satan in one
temptation to this or that extreme, for easily may we be foiled in another
extreme. As our hatred of prodigality may make us covetous, and our hatred of
covetousness may make us prodigal. So that in ouercomming Satan in one
temptation we are so much the nearer, being overcome by him in some other if we
look not well to it.

Reason. From that credit and glory he should have by the throwing down
himself, and yet being safe, namely, he should with all applause and
admiration be received of the Jews in Jerusalem, beholding this miraculous
descent.

The Devil uses to puff us up with the delight of praise and glory.
When we feel such thoughts, know that they are of the devil, who goes about
to exalt us that he might humble us, to set us upon high pinnacles, that he
may lay us flat on the earth, as he did our first parents Genesis 3. whereas on
the contrary God uses Genesis 3.
to humble us that he may exalt us. If Christ had hearkened unto Satan he had
cast himself down indeed, as he himself was once cast down out of the
heavens into the lowest hell. Pride goes before destruction. Prou. 16. 18.
Prou. 16. 18.


The danger of vainglory.
Christ to this so dangerous an attempt to hazard the breaking of his neck.
And thus for a little vainglory in the world how many are there that break
their necks, and crush their estates in proud and pompous prodigality, that
they may have a name, and we well spoken of.

2. Argument: that Satan vfes in this tempation The second argument.
follows. For it is written, He will give his Angels charge ever thee, and
with their hands they shall lift thee up, lest at any time thou should dash
thy foot against a stone. The argument is drawn from assurance of safety in
casting down himself, and this he would confirm by Scripture.

The Devil misapplieth Gods promises, mercies and providence.
Gods promises, mercies and providence. As sometimes he denies unto us the
application of these when we are interested in them, as when we walk
uprightly with God, so contrarily he applies them strongly and earnestly when
they belong not unto us, as here the promise of protection by Angels to Christ
though he should tempt God, And so he ordinarily applies the promise of mercy
to most desperate wretches; though they lie wallowing in their mire, and never
wash themselves in the waters of repentance. Cast thy self headlong into this
sin, says he, and Gods mercy shall keep thee from falling into hell. In good
things he seuers the means from the end, telling us we may have the end without
the means, heaven without repentance and obedience, a plentiful harvest
without sowing the seed. In evil things he seuers the end from the means, hell
and destruction from sin and disobedience, as Deuteronomy. 29. 19. quite contrary to
that Eccles. 11. 9. but Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Eccles. 11. 9.
know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment. Yea, he does
not only thus sever those things which God has joined together, sin and
punishment, but as here we see, ioynes together that which God has severed,
sin and reward, tempting of God, and preservation by Angels, implunging our
selves into the gulf of sin, and resting in Gods kingdom, sowing cockle and
reaping wheat, setting thorns and gathering figs, brewing with crabs and
drinking sweet and pleasant beer, wasting and spoiling the Lords vineyard,
and our pay, and our penny with the laborers at the end of the day. He makes
us believe we may find the heavenly kingdom, as Saul found the earthly,
without seeking; nay, in seeking a far different matter, his fathers asses,
and so that we may find Gods kingdom whilst we are hunting after the
sinful pleasures of this world. As he would persuade Christ of a sure
descent from the Temple, without going down by the stairs, nay, by using a
contrary means, a violent flinging of himself down: So he would persuade us
of a sure ascent into heaven without going up by the stayres of obedience,
without climbing up the hill, nay, though we run down the hill amain.
Witness the miserable experience of these times, wherein such as are idle all
the haruest-time of this day of grace, do yet promise themselves clothing in
winter as well as any. Impudent and insolent sinners, Adulterers, Swearers,
Epicures, Mammonists, such as say unto God, Depart from us; do yet make full
account to hear God say unto them, Come ye blessed If there should want room
in heaven, the Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs must come out and leave their
places, rather then they should stand out. The vile, vicious and profane swine
do thus deceive themselves most pitifully. If any are to be saved, they are
the men. Though they have lived like swine all their life long, yet a cry for
mercy at last gasp shall transform them into Saints, as the Sirens songs
transformed men into swine. In this deceyt many do live and die. Hereupon the
Scripture admonishes us of it. 1. Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the unrighteous
1. Cor. 6. 9.
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither fornicatours
nor adulterers etc shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And Prou. 20 4. The
sloathfull will not plow in winter, therefare he shall beg in summer, Prou.
20. 4.
which is true in the spiritual sense, as in the rich glutton, Luc. 16.
begging water in hell, and in the Luc. 16. Matthew. 25.
foolish virgins, Matthew. 25. begging of oil. The devil seuers conditions from
Gods promises, but let us couple them together, and not cry peace, peace, when
breaking the conditions of Gods peace, present destruction is at hand. Let us
know that all absolute application of the promises without respect to the
condition is of the devil deceiving us, and therefore examine we our selves of
the conditions of Gods promises, if we would have any comfort of them.

But let us come more specially to the devils proof, and examine the testimony
of Scripture cited by him out of Psalm. 91. Psalm. 91.


The promise of the Angels protection is made upon condition of our keeping our
selves within our bounds, for so it is said, They shall keep thee in thy
ways, that is, in those courses appointed thee by God, but the Devil
persuading Christ to go out of these ways, carftily clippes off that clause.

In this allegation let us consider,

1. What is right and good. 2. What is naught.
1. This is right.

First, That the attendance and the service of the Angels is acknowledged. Well
might Satan acknowledge it, for he knew it by experience, being The Angels are
attendants to Gods servants. Dan. 10. 21.
encountered so often by the good Angels in his wicked endeauours against them.
Dan. 10. 21. As there was a strife betwixt Michael and Satan about dead Moses,
Jude 9. so much more no doubt about Jude verse. 9.
living Moses, and every good Christian. The Angels ward off his blows, and
help us against him both in soul and body. This place is of the bodies
defense, as the dashing of the foot against the stones implies, by which one
danger understand by a synecdoche all other. And the whole purpose of the
Psalm shows as much; for the Psalmist had said before, he shall deliver thee
from the snare of the hunter, and fom the noisome pestilence, etc. and then
gives the reason, for he shall give his Angels charge etc. So that Angels help
to remove diseases and evils, as the Devil helps to bring them, Psalm. 78.
Psalm. 78. 49.
49. and as appears in Jobs history. Job. 1. and 2. But that their office is
also for the souls good is clear enough out of the Scripture, Heb. 1. 14.
Psalm. Heb. 1. 14. Psalm 34. 7. Matthew. 18. 10
34. 7. yea even the little ones have their Angels. Matthew. 18. 10. both little
in christianity, and little in years, babes and sucklings. Angels are their
rockers. Every child of God is a spiritual Prince and King, and this honor is
not merely titular, it is true and real, and therefore we must have the state
and privileges of a King. The privilege of a Council or Senate Psalm. 119.
24. to wit, Gods testimonies, Psalm. 119. 24.
and the privilege of a guard full of state and strength, the Angels
themselves.

Christians. David, Psalm. 34. 7. having said, The Angel Psalm. 34. 7. 8.
of the Lord pitcheth his tent round about them that fear him, he adds ver.
8. Taste, and see how gracious the Lord is, to wit, in allowing his children so
gracious attendance, Blessed is the man that trusts in him, namely in regard of
so happy protection. It is accounted a great matter of state in the world to
have at our heels a long train of followers, in silks, sattins, golden
chains, and such like bravery. How are such sights gazed on, and how do such
doat upon their own greatness? Alas but beggary to the glory of the least of
these attendants. Thou had need have a fair day, and a clear sunneshine,
or else half thy show will be lost, but Angels our attendants enlighten the
greatest darkness. Luc. 2. 9. What a favor was it for Mordecay a poor Luke
2. 9.
porter to have Haman the great pompous Peer of the Empire to be his
attendant, his lacquay, and his footman for an hour; how much more honor for
us poor worms to have those mighty Peers of heaven, little Royes, Demigods
to wait upon us continually? King Solomon in all his royalty, in the midst of
his two hundred targets, and three hundred shields of beaten gold was not like
one of the lillies of the field, much less like a Christian enui roned and
encompassed with a wall of Angels on every side. Despise not, says Christ,
Matthew. 18. one Matthew. 18.
of these little poor Christians. As simple as they seem to be, they have a
guard of Angels attending them, Their Angels are in heaven. How dare thou
despise them whom the Angels honor? why should thou disdain the poorest
Christian, and think him unworthy thy speech, thy countenance, thy company,
whom the great Angels think worthy of their service and atrendance? what pride
is this? Nay, this should make us humble our selves though never so great to
become servants in love to our brethren, and to be ready to wash, yea and kiss
the feet of the least of the Saints of God. For the Angels greater in power
and in glory they do thus abase themselves to us. But especially how dare
thou wrong them? How dare thou wild boar rush into Gods Paradise, such as
is every true Christian, where stands Gods Angels with their swords drawn?
will a dog fear thee from entering into, and making an assault upon an house,
and shall not a legion of Angels affright thee from offering violence to any of
Gods Saints?

Elisha against that bloody King, Iaakob against the fear of Esau, Hezekiah
against Senacherib, and England against that invincible navy of the Spaniards
in the year 88. what though the good Angels appear not ordinarily, no more do
the evil ones, and yet thou doubtest not of the hurt done by them, why then
doubtest thou of the help done by the other? Get thee those eyes whereby thou
may see as with Moses the invisible God, so the invisible Angels. Pray, as
Elisha for his servant, that thine eyes may be opened, and then shall thou see
more with thee then against 2. King. 6. 16 17.
thee. 2. King. 6. 16. 17.

our attendants, that we grieve them not with our misdemeanors, and make not
their waiting tedious unto them. So Paul 1. Cor. 11. 10. would have 1. Cor. 11.
10.
the women behave themselves orderly in the assemblies because of the Angels.



The promises and blessings that belong to us belong principally to Christ
Psalm. 8.
to Christ. As here the promise of the Angels protection is in special manner
applied to Christ, and so comes to us at second hand. That which is spoken
Psalm. 8. of man's dignity above all other creatures as having all things put in
subjection under him, is interpreted, Heb. 2. 6. and 1. Cor. 15. 27. Heb. 2. 6.
1. Cor. 15. 27. Heb. 1. 3.
of Christ. For Heb. 1. 3. he is made heir of all things, and therefore Romans
8. 17. we are so made heirs, that we are but heirs annexed with Christ. He
is the grand heir. He is the executour as it were of Gods will, and receives
all his legacies, and then from him they pass to us. Hence we are said to be
elected and called in him, and blessed with all spiritual blessings in him.
Ephesians. 1. 3. 4. First Christ Ephesians. 1. 3. 4.
is elected, then we in him; first Christ is justified and discharged of our
sins, then we in him. Gal. 3. 19. The promises are made to Abraham's seed.
Not Gal. 3. 16.
seeds, says Paul, but seed, noting one and that is Christ.

For humility in the midst of all our excellency, which though it be great by
virtue of that communion we have with our head and husband Jesus Christ,
entituling us to his blessed privileges, yet it is but derived from another.
In our selves we are naked, and mere nothings. All that we are, we are it,
and all that we have, we have it in Christ. Will thou be proud of the Angels
service? They do it to thee only as thou art a member of Christ's body. If a
King should marry a poor beggar, the greatest Nobles of the land must do her
service, but yet it is done with a relation to the King. And so the service the
Angels do us is done with a relation to Christ who has married us to
himself. 1. Cor. 3. 21. 22. 23. All things are yours, but how comes that? 1.
Cor. 3. 21.
you are Christ's. This is the difference betwixt legal and Evangelical
blessings, that the Legal are directed, and came to man immediately, but no
Evangelical blessing comes to us otherwise them mediately by Christ, first
receiving them, and then passing them over to us. This overthrows the popish
pride, that would be something of themselves without Christ, like that youncker
in the Gospel that would have his portion in his own hands. Luc. 15. Luke 15.


For instruction, to get us unto and into Christ. Else are we the nakedst, and
most beggarly wretches of any. No right to the least crumme of bread or drop
of water, no right to the service of the meanest, much less of the choysest of
Gods creatures. But Christ has gold and golden apparel, and he calls thee to
buy of him. Revel. 3. Thou may Revel. 3.
buy it at an easy rate, by marrying thy self to him by faith. Can the
husband be rich, great, glorious, and the wife poor, obscure, ignoble? Can
Abram be called Abraham receiving honor in his name, and shall not Sarai be
Sarah, and partake with him in the same honor. Oh the glory of all Christ's
members, and oh the misery of all that are out of him.

For comfort, and that two ways.

The indefinite promises are to be appropriated by particular application.
application; As here Satan applies this promise to Christ in special, and
the tenor of the words of the promise show as much. He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, speaking particularly to every faithful Christian. So Galat.
4. 7. Thou art no Gal. 4. 7.
more a servant, but a son. God would not speak thus particularly, if he
would not have us apply particularly.

Thus we see what is right.

See we now what is naught in this Allegation.

This is naught, That the Scripture is alleged in a perverse apish imitation,
because Christ had alleged Scripture before. Thus has the Devil The Devil,
Gods Ape.
always been Gods Ape, as in sacrifices, washings, tithes, priests, altars,
oracles of the heathen, all which he did apishly imitate, and counterfeit the
like to those in the Church of God, thinking by this means to disgrace the
ordinances of God. Pharaoh hardened his heart when he saw his sorcerers to do
the same things seemingly, which Moses did truly. And so when other nations
should have rites and ceremonies of divine service as well as the Jews, and
other sects should allege Scripture, as well as the orthodoxe Christians, this
might harden many, either in wrong religion, or else in a neutrality. This
imitation the Devil also practices in his instruments. All those courses the
servants of God at the first restoring of religion used for the furtherance of
the Gospel have the Papists since taken up for the stablishing of their
Kingdom. As first preaching specially in great cities and palaces of Princes,
though otherwise they judge of preaching as of a matter of complement. 2.
Books of piety and devotion. 3. Seasoning and affecting youth be times by
careful instruction. 4. Offers of disputations. 5. Translations of Scripture
with comments, common places and histories of the Church. 6. Discovery of their
scandalous lives. 7. Martyrologies. In all these have they affronted us.

This also is naught. That the Scripture the most holy word of God by writhing,
wresting, and The Scripture made a patron of sin.
falsification is made a patron of sin. Here the Devil by Scripture
corrupted, encouraged Christ to tempt God. So Epicures, belly-gods, drunkards,
fornicators, covetous worldlings, will allege Scripture for themselves, which
I spare to recite remembering what Pliny (beginning to relate some tricks of
drunkards, but calling himself presently back) says, Quae referendo pudet
decere, least his taxing should be a teaching. Julian the Apostata spoiling the
Christian soldiers, alleged that Matthew. 5. Blessed are the poor, for theirs
is the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 5.
saying that he spoiled them to make them blessed: So with the like Spirit he
alleged another sentence out of the same chapter, when thou art smitten on
the one cheek, turn the other also, to disgrace Christ for that being
wrongfully smitten he spoke in his own defense. The Popes and Papists hane
excelled in this kind. The next sentence in the 91. Psalm to this sentence
here alleged by the devil, did that guilty Innocent the third allege when
he trod upon the Emperors neck, Thou shall walk upon the Aspe and the
Basiliske. And the like is that; God made two lights, the greater and the
less, to show that the Pope was above the Emperor. And that in the Gospel,
Behold here are two swords with Christ's answer, It is enough, to prove the
Popes right to both the swords.

Index expurgatorius does in other authors. More remarkable examples hereof
are these. Romans 11. 6. If it be of grace, then not of works: for then grace
Romans 11. 6.
is no more grace, And if of works then not of grace, or else were work no
more work. The latter member of the opposition (a notable inforcer of the
Apostles argument against merit) is quite left out. So Heb. Hebr. 1. 3.
1. 3. where it is said that Christ by himself has purged our sins, that
clause by himself, forcible against our own satirfactions, is left out. So
Genes. 3, for he shall break the serpents head, they read she, Genesis 3. 15.
which they would have to be meant of the Virgin Mary. See how they imitate
the arch-corrupter of Scripture.

In thy ways, which Some part of the Scripture omitted.
is very material, and quite against that to which he tempted our Savior. For
as Bernard has noted, the Angels shall bear us up, in our ways, not in
casting our selves down headlong. What kind af way is this to cast a man's
self down from the pinnacle? The In vijs nostris, non in praecipitijs. Qualis
haec via descendere de pinnaculo? via Luciferi caedentis de coelo. Bern.
way of Lucifer falling from heaven. That which the Devil has left out let us
put in, that which he concealed let us specially remember, for if there were
not some special treasure enclosed in it, he would never have concealed it.

Gods providence can only then be expected when we walk in the ways appointed.
can only then be expected, when we are in the ways he has appointed us,
that is, within the compass of our general or special callings. Otherwise it
is with us as with the dear when they leap over the pale of the park and
straggle into the fields. Prou. 27. 8. As a bird that wandreth from her neast,
so Prou. 27. 8.
is a man that wanders from his own place, While the bird keeps her neast she
is safe from the kite, from the snare, the ginne and the fowler, whereas out of
her neast she is in danger of all these. So it is with a man in, or out of his
calling. It cost Shimei his life when he passed his bounds set him by the King,
and so it is dangerous to be out of the bounds and ways set us by God.
Examples we have in Balaam met by the Angel with a naked drawn sword, Numb.
22. Numb. 22.
he was out of the way of the Lord, God had forbid him to go. So Moses was met
by the Archangell Christ himself, when circumcision was neglected. Exodus 4.
And Iaakob met with many crosses when Exodus 4. 1. King. 13.
his vow was neglected. So the Prophet. 1. Kin. 13. that went out of his way,
and beyond his bounds set him by God, was slain by a Lion.

David our ways in our hearts, what they are, and whether we keep our
station. For we are all in warrefare, Christ is our captain, as long as we
keep company with him, the Angels keep company with us, but if we forsake
him, they are not so fond of our company, as for it to leave Christ's. What
need have we then to look to our selves in all our actions, even in eating,
drinking, riding, sporting. For even in these actions God has set us our
ways. If we be out of them, we be out of Gods protection. How can we look
to be protected in the way of drunkenness, gluttony, and profaneness in eating
without prayer, or in the way of idleness, and voluptuousness in our
recreations, when we use them immoderately, either in regard of the time, or
our affection. We see what dangers we are subject unto in our eating, drinking
and riding. Look we then, that as in all these we stand in neeede of Gods
protection, so we put it not from us by going out of his ways.

Iaakob to meet Esau coming against him. Genesis 32. 1. 2. for he knew he was
in his ways verse. 9. O Genesis 32. 1. 2. 9.
Lord which said unto me, Return. The ways of God are like Iaakobs ladder.
Genesis 28. where the Angels Genesis 28.
of God were ascending and descending. And that ladder signified the way of
going into, and returning from Mesopotamia, and Gods gracious protection of him
in his journey by his Angels. Therefore after his dream it is said Genesis 29. 1.
Then Iaakob Genesis 29. 1.
lift up his feet, that is, he went freshly, courageously and comfortably,
because he was assured of the Angels protection in that long and solitary
journey. This made Luther so courageous, when he said, that though all the
tyles of the houses in Worms were so many devils, yet he would go thither. He
knew he should have more with him, and greater, then any against him, even
this guard of Angels. A man that is in these ways need not fear, having such
a guard of legions of Angels. The fearful sluggard will cry, A Lion in the
way. Prou. 26. 13. yea but this Prou. 26. 13.
text cries an Angel, yea, many Angels in the way, to stop the Lions mouth.
The Lion is in those by-ways in which that Prophet walked. 1. Kin. 13. 1.
Kings. 13.




Gods holy doctrine abused.
is abused. So is the doctrine of predestination by them that reason from it to
a careless looseness of life, If I be ordained to life I shall be saved, how
ever I live, If to death, I cannot though I live never so well. So was, and is
still the doctrine of justification by faith abused to the shameful neglect of
good works. What then? Are the doctrines naught because the wicked pervert them
thus to their destruction? No, no more then good herbs are poisonfull because
spiders will suck poison from them. The poison is in the wicked that do
assimilate according to their own nature, and turn the good juice of
wholesome doctrine into pestilent poison. The Bees of God can suck honey out of
these doctrines, yea, out of Satan's poisoned weeds, as Virgil drew gold out
of Ennius his dunghill, but the Devil and his draw dung out of Gods gold, and
turn his golden mines into dung-hils. But in themselves the words of God are
pure and incorrupt, and contrary to all corruption of life. 1. Tim. 1. 10.
Therefore absurdly do the Papists condemn our doctrine 1. Tim. 1. 10.
of justification, as opening a gap to licentiousness. They may as well
condemn the doctrine of our protection by Angels as opening a gap to
presumptuous tempting of God. Thus much for the Devils assault.

Christ's repulse follows. Jesus answered, and said, 2. Christ's repulse.
It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

Here consider two things. 1. Christ's alleging of Scripture.


First, Christ's alleging of Scripture. Secondly, the Scripture he does
allege.
That he alleages Scripture again in answering Satan it teaches us.

The necessary use of the Scriptures in conflicts with Satan.
do make the child of God complete to every good work, so more especially to
this good work of conflicting with Satan. As our Savior said to the Sadduces
ye err, not knowing the Scriptures. Mark. 12. 24. so may we as truly say, ye
are foiled by Satan, Mark. 12. 14.
and err in manners, as well as in judgment, not knowing the Scriptures. It
is our ignorance in the Scriptures that makes us such preyes to Satan.
Ignorant persons cannot possibly stand before Satan. All then must labor for
knowledge in the Scriptures, even those of young years, for their age is an
advantage against them to Satan in his temptations, and therefore they have
special need of the Scriptures.

The abuse of the Scriptures must not take away the use.
Scripture because the devil abused it. The honest traveler does so much the
more wear his weapon and his sword, because the thief uses the same weapon.
And so indeed this is a reason to make us so much the more carefully to read
the Scriptures. Fondly then does the Church of Rome take away the Scriptures
from the common people because some have perverted them.

3. That conference of Scripture is a notable Conference of Scripture with
Scripture is the way to find out the true sense of it.
Our Savior did not challenge the devil for his leaving out that clause in thy
ways, for the Devil might have urged the words, and have pleaded, it is said
in thy ways, Here is no exception made of any ways: In thy ways they shall
keep thee, Therefore in this way of going down headlong from the Temple. Now
our Savior by bringing another place of Scripture, that forbids tempting of
God, shows that that place in the Psalm cannot be meant of tempting ways.
And therefore that it cannot favor the devils purpose that now tempted him to
such an action, wherein he should tempt God. The Papists say, The Scripture is
a dumb judge, The Church must interpret it, Christ the head of the Church, and
the author of the Scripture, though by the power he had, he might have
interpreted this Scripture, yet he would not, that he might give us an
example how to clear the Scriptures when any doubts arise, namely diligently
to confer one place with another. Therefore must the whole Scripture be read,
and that with attention and with observation.

Deuteronomy it is in The Scripture must be read with the spirit of application.
the plural, ye shall not tempt, here it is in the singular, spoken to every
one in particular, and so to Christ, Thou shall not tempt. It is the fashion of
men to take that which is spoken generally to all, to be spoken to none, or
rather to others, then to themselves, and therefore in hearing and reading the
word, they put it off from themselves. But here we see Christ applied that to
himself which was spoken generally to the whole body of the Israelites. So
Psalm. 40. It is written of me, says David, in the volum of thy Psalm. 40.
book that I should do thy will. No where is it so written of David by name.
But the general commandments given to men of his place, he applied
particularly to himself. We must apply those things that are spoken in the
Scriptures to our selves, as Paul applies that to the Hebrews, Heb. 13. which
was spoken by name to Joshua, I will not fail thee. Josh. 1. Heb. 13.
So Peter applies that of Gods patience written by Josh. 1.
Paul to the Romans. Romans 2. unto the Jews, As Romans 2.
our beloved brother Paul wrote to you 1. Pet. 3. This particular application
is that which incorporats the 2. Pet. 3.
word into us, And as it must be in the commandments, so likewise in the
promises as we saw in the former verse, and in the threatenings also. The
Papists say, where is it said by name to any man, Thou Peter or John shall be
saved. I ask, where is said to any by name, Do thou this, or that, swear
not, sanctify the Sabbath; and yet commandments belong to us, why then by the
same reason also do not the promises, though not spoken to us by name.

The second point. The Scripture Christ does allege. 2. The particular
Scripture alleged by Christ. Mal. 3. 10.
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. It contains a prohibition of tempting
God. Object. Mal. 3. 10. God bids us prove him. For whereas to tempt God is to
prove or try some property or properties in him, to see whether he be so
powerful, patient, just, wise and merciful, as he has revealed himself in
his word, it is impossible we should live in the world, and converse in our
callings without having this trial. Answ. A thing is tried either when there
is no other end in the use, but to try it, or when used for some other
purposes. As an horse is tried both when I ride him for no other end but to
try him, and when I ride about necessary business. Now it is the former
trying and tempting of God that is condemned, which is a needless trying. And
it is twofold. Mixed and Simple. Mixed tempting 1. Mixed tempting.
is that which is compounded of infidelity and presumption. And this tempting
of God is in every sin that is committed against the clear light and check
of conscience. whether he know their sin or no. presumptuous sins, Psalm.
19. 13. This shows the Psalm. 19. 13.
heinousness of such sins as are committed against knowledge. Therefore such
sinners are called proud sinners. Mal. 3. 11. and tempters of God. So likewise
Numb. 14. 22. those that were disobedient Mal. 3. 11. Numb. 14. 22.
notwithstanding they had seen Gods glory and miracles in Egypt are said to
tempt God. So Ananias and Sapphiraes hypocrisy is called tempting of God in
this regard. Acts 5. 9. Acts 5. 9.


Simple Tempting, is twofold. 2. Simple tempting.


1. Of infidelity. 2. Of presumption.
1. Of Infidelity. When not content with that 1. Of Infidelity.
God has done already to settle our faith, we prescribe him means of our
own Examples. Exodus 17. Exodus 17. 7.
7. God must show his presence by giving them water at that time, or else not
amongst them. So Ps. 78. Psalm. 78 41.
41. These two joined together, They tempted, they limited the Holy one of
Israel, Thus did they Luc. 11. Luc. 11.
tempt Christ in demanding a sign, and so here the devil. We must take heed
of this. The Devil will be ready to put such thoughts as these into our
minds: If God be our God, and so as the word says, let him show it by doing
this or that. This is horrible tempting of God.

2. Of Presumption. When we in the vain expectation 2. Of Presumption.
of Gods help and grace either do that we ought not, or omit that we should
do. There are three maine particulars of this.

1. When without any just calling from God we rush our selves into danger
whether certain, or inevitable, 1. When without just calling we rush into any
danger.
or very probable. When God calls us, then we have reason to expect his help
according to his promise. Examples hereof are first in things temporal, as to
rush into houses infected, or possessed by Satan, to set open the doors in the
night, to ride thorough doubtful places, and in dangerous times without
weapons, which besides the tempting of God, is a tempting of man oftentimes. So
to run to the adversaries of the truth, and to put our selves into the Lions
mouth. Here certain heroical examples of some carried by an extraordinary
spirit are to be excepted. Secondly, in things spiritual, to go into
dangerous places and companies, where we are likely to be corrupted, to go see
the mass, with Peter to go into Caiaphas hall, to marry with idolaters and
profane persons, to entertain profane companions and servants, to read
Popish books not being first grounded in religion, and without praying unto
God that thou may not be led into temptation, reading also in filthy
playbookes, and raking in such filthy dung-hils, venturing the being poisoned
with the stench for the hope of finding some conceited jewel, in a word, when
we cast our selves upon temptations, and dangerous occasions of sin, that we
might well enough avoid, we tempt God. This was Salomons sin Eccles. 2. in
following his pleasures and delights, as if a man should put his finger into
the fire, hoping it should not burn. 2. When desiring any blessing of God we
yet refuse and neglect those 2. When we neglect any good means appointed for
obtaining any desired blessing.
good means by him appointed for the obtaining of it. Examples, 1. In things
temporal, as if being in sickness we should refuse physic, or in poverty
refuse to work for our living, or in any danger we yet sit still, and hold the
hand in the bosom, and stir not, looking that God should work. Like the
foolish carter, that when his cart stuck fast cried to his god, and moved his
lips, but not his hands to help himself. Thus if Hezekiah had refused the
bunch of figs, or Paul and his companions to tarry in the ship, they had
tempted God. True faith as it will not use shifts, but in want of means make
God in stead of them, so when means may be had, will most carefully them. As
it will not deny God in deifying the means, so neither will it tempt and mock
God in despising or neglecting the means, but it will thankfully accept and
embrace them, as the very hands of God whereby be uses to work. So that here to
refuse means is as if we should cut off a man's hands, and then pray him to
work. But in the things of this life few there be that neglect means, nay
here we are too ready and apprehensiue of the means, so that we will rather
use unlawful means, then none all, and all shall be hid under this that we
will not tempt God, as Ahaz. Is. 7. 12. Secondly, in things spiritual Isai. 7.
12.
we are more blameworthy. In temporal matters, where God oftentimes would have
us trust him with out all means, there we greedily hunt after means, but in
things spiritual where God calls upon us to use the means for our salvation,
and to seek for knowledge as for treasure, here we are full of faith, and will
trust God without use of any means. But this faith, which will not lay hold on
the hands and helps which God affords us for obtaining saluationis no faith,
but a presumptuous tempting of God. Men would escape the danger of hell, and
with Balaam slothfully wish, O that we might die the death of the righteous,
but their hands refuse to work the works of God. They lie gaping on the bed of
idleness, as though in the mean time God would snatch them up into heaven in a
chariot. Peter tells them that refused to walk in the beaten way to heaven,
and sought salvation Acts 15. 10. Domine Deus sac me in ijs consequendis operam
collocare pro quibus obtinendis soleo adte crare.
by the Law of Moses, that they tempted God, Act. 15. 10. And here in was Sr.
Thomas Moore his prayer commendable, Lord God make me to bestow pains in
getting those things, for obtaining whereof I use to pray unto thee.

When we undertake any thing vufitted and unprepared.
pray or preach without some preparation. Eccles. 18. Before prayer prepare thy
soul, and be not as one that tempts God. So when a man unlearned shall take
upon him the handling of weighty controversies against the adversaries: when
Carolostadius opposed Luthers consubstantiation but weakly and insufficiently,
Zuinglius said that he was sorry that Non satis humerorum haberet.
so good a cause wanted shoulders. Now for a man that has but weak shoulders
to take upon him the carriage of a burden requiring Sampsons back, were to
tempt God. Thus do many offend at this day in undertaking things above their
bodily strength, as to ride so far in such a space, only for a little lucre.
Though this also may be referred to the first head of casting our selves into
danger. Thus also might Peter tell them that took upon them the bearing of the
legal yoke, that they tempted God Acts 15. because it was a burden, which
neither Acts. 15.
they, nor their fathers were able to bear.

And thus much of the second temptation.

The third follows. Matthew. 4. 8. 9. and Luke 4. The third temptation.


In it also consider:

The assault. The repulse.
In the former also consider: 1. The assault.


The Preparation to the temptation. The vttring of it.
The preparation was that he took him again, and 1. The preparation to the
temptation.
carried him into an high mountain, which translation I hold not imaginary,
but as the other to the pinnacle, real, and in truth. Object. In the mountain
this sight of all the kingdoms could not be seen, for neither is any
mountain so high, neither if there were, could they be seen with all their
glory in the twinkling of an eye. For some are before, and some are behind,
some on this side, and some on that, and so cannot be seen all in the
twinkling of an eye. Therefore it must needs be that Satan represented
these things to his eye. Now representation needs not a mountain, for that
might be done in a valley. Answ. The sight that was to be represented being so
great and glorious, the devil also would set it forth even by the place where
he represented ir. Besides, he might take him into the mountain that there
might be a conuenience betwixt the sin he tempted unto, namely ambition, and
aspiring after high matters, and the place an high mountain, or else in an
imitation of God taking up Moses into the Mount.

The temptation it self is twofold.

Principal, to idolatry, to fall down and worship 2. The temptation it self.
Satan. Subordinate, or inducing to the former to affect the glory of the
world.
And this subordinate is twofold.

1. Real, in presenting the sight to his eye. 1. Real.
2. Verbal, alluring by fair promises when he saw the dumb show could not
prevail.
For the first, S. Luke says he did it in the twinkling of an eye, which some
think Satan did the more to set our Lords teeth on water after it by sudden
taking it away. But it may seem rather to argue satan's speediness in doing of
it. For afterward he says not All those things as speaking of things not gone
out of sight, but All these will I give thee, speaking as of things still in
sight.

Here we learn.

The Devils last temptation is commonly the sorest.
is commonly the sorest. Every motion is swiftest toward the center, and some
winds are most boisterous in the end. The Devil herein deals as in wars,
they place the rascal soldier in the forefront, and those of worth come
behind, and as Iaakob did, when Esau came, set Rahel and Joseph whom he most
respected in the last place. The two other temptations were slighter, but here
Christ feels the weight of his whole body, that before felt but his little
finger. Many a man could overcome hunger, and that idle glory that comes from
the stinking breath of foolish men (which were the instruments of Satan's
former temptations) which yet would fall down before this temptation of stable
honors, rule, and riches. Thus must it be with us in the whole course of our
life. Every day must we look for shrewder trials then others. And the last in
death shall be the extremest. As Nebuchadnezzars, so the oven of his fiery
temptations shall then be heated seven times hotter, then ever before. Then he
will towse us indeed. Before in comparison he did but play and dally. Only
one nation of the Egyptians was against the Israelites at their first coming
out of Egypt, but at the end of their journey, at their entrance into Canaan,
there were seven against them. The last combat is the sharpest. Therefore
prepare specially there for defense, where Satan specially prepares for
offense.

The Devil seeks to deceive the understanding by working first upon the
affection.
them to fit and prepare the understanding for deceit. For here first he
speaks to our Saviors eyes, and by this sight presented to the eye, would
tickle his affections, and then he comes and speaks to the ear: and in those
his speeches first he flatters with fair promises, before he tells him what
he desires of him. Thus at the first, he set first upon Eve, and the Apostle
noted in the false apostles, 2. Tim. 3. that they crept into silly women first,
that were carried more by affection then by judgment. So Simon Magus had his
Helena, and Apelles his Philumena, and other heretics their several women,
whom first of all they animated with the spirit of their error. This is that
Tertullian observed of them, that they do persuade, before they teach, whereas
the truth does not teach by persuading, but persuades by teaching. This must
teach us to look to our affections, for by these may des he woes the
mistress; These are our Eues whereby he deceiues us.

windows The Devil labors to abuse our eyes that by those windows death
may enter into our souls.
death may enter into our souls. According to the proverb, he comes to the
sea by the river, to the heart by the eye. Our eyes are his spokesmen to our
heart. What poison is there almost that he does not convey into our souls by
this passage for covetousness and desire of the world, witness this present
temptation, that of Achan in seeing the Babylonish garment, and that of Ahab in
seeing Naboths vineyard, and coveting after them. Whereupon covetousness is
called the lust of the eyes. 1. Ioh. 1. Ioh 2. Genesis 3.
2. for intemperance of appetite witness Eve, Genesis 3. she saw the fruit was
pleasant: For adultery, David, Putiphars wife, and innumerable more. Plato
deriues (...) of (...). Lusting and looking in Greek differ but in one vowell.
For drunkenness that of Solomon. Prou. 23. Look not on the wine, etc. for
envy, that Prou. 23.
Matthew. 20. Is thine eye evil because I am good? Hence that note that God has
made the eye the sense of Matthew. 20.
sorrow, because such a sense of sin.

Turn away mine eyes from vanity, and because it is Psalm. 119. 37.
so deceitful a sense to bind it to the Lord with Jobs covenant. Job. 31. 1.
we must mortify our eye, Job. 31. 1.
which is that plucking of it out, namely out of old Adam, and setting it into
the new man. But for this purpose we must with all diligence keep our hearts,
Prou. 4. for the eye poisons the heart being first Prou. 4. 23.
poisoned by it. The rivers run into the sea, but they came first from it.
This is the reason here why Christ's eyes were not caught, because he had a pure
heart. Let us labor in our measure for such hearts and eyes as Christ had.
Take heed of having Lots wives eye casting a longing look after Sodom, but
get that same oculum irretortum, and this same Stoicall eye of our Savior,
that we may see eye-pleasing and tempting objects, and not be moved and set a
gogge, as the Disciples Luc. 21. with the beauty of the Temple; and as he with
the beauty of Luc. 21.
a young boy, to whom it was answered, that the Praetor must have continent
eyes, as well as hands. Here surely there is good use of that Stoicall
apathie. Cicer. offic. l. 1.
But alas if Christ's case had been ours, our eyes would have saved Satan's
lips a labor. They would have bitten presently upon so sweet a bait.

The temptations on the right hand are more dangerous then those of the left
hand.
temptations of Satan. One on the left hand by adversity, the other on the
right hand by prosperity. Called Romans 8. 39. height and depth. But yet withal,
that this of prosperity and abundance is the most dangerous, and therefore
comes here in the last place. For this is that wherewith (if it were possible)
the very elect should be deceived. Many that keep on their clothes in the
wind, vnbutton themselves in the sun. The thorny ground is not overcome with
the scorching of the sun in persecution as the stony, but with the thorns of
wordlinesse in times of peace and ease. Judas, Demas, Alexander the coppersmith
and others, both of old and latter times that acquitted themselves in some sort
in the trial of the cross; were yet here fearfully foiled. David not foiled
with lust whilst he wandered in the wilderness, many Bathshebaes would not
have overcome him then.

Use. 1. To such as are in this estate of prosperity to look to themselves,
they stand on slippery ground. Prosperity to religion, is as the Iuie to the
oak, it quickly eats out the heart of it. The security and profaneness of
these times, the daughters of our peace and prosperity show as much.

Use. 2. To such as are in adversity to be patient, yea thankful. God in
pity keeps them from riches and abundance, least it should choke them. For
they are thorns, Matthew 13. He sees that thy weak brain would not bear such
strong drink, Matthew. 13.
nor thy weak stomach digest such hard meat.

Use. 3. To such as have stood out in the lesser temptations, that they yet
presume not. For many are like to cold snakes in adversity, which then do no
hurt, the cold stupefies them; but let the heat warm them, and then they will
discover themselves. Therefore we must labor to approve our selves also in
this temptation on the right hand. Good gold is purged in the fire, and shines
clearly in the water, whereas contrarily clay is scorched in the fire, and
dissolved in the waters. So a good man acquits himself both under the cross,
and in peace and preferments, when as the wicked oftentimes are foiled in both.
Approve we then our Magis metuendus Sa^hanas cum fallit, sq^am cum aeuit.
sincerity in both, and in the latter specially, as more dangerous.

Use. 4. For trial to them that have been overcome by the lesser temptations
on the left hand. If hunger and necessity master thee, what then will fullness?
If a piece of bread and an handful of barley corrupt thee, what then such
glorious offers as here the devil makes.

The Devils craft in showing the glory but not the grief.
concealing the grief. So in sin he shows the pleasure, and conceales the
punishment, he shows the gain, not the pain. As to the Israelites the
oynions and fleshpots of Egypt, not the brickes, not the bondage of Egypt.
We knowing this craft, must labor in these temptations to see that which the
Devil hides, and to apprehend the fearful after-claps. Let us labor to see
Iaels nail as well as her milk, Delilahs scissers as well as her bosom, the
snakes poison as well as her embrace, and the Bees sting as well as her honey.
That speech of Abner is true in sin. 2. Sam. 2. 26. Will it not be
bitterness 2. Sam. 2. 26.
in the end? and the want of apprehending, it is the cause of our foiles in
temptation. If David could have felt the grief of his broken bones Psalm. 51.
before Psalm. 51.
his adultery, he would never have committed it. The Devil blindes us so that
we see not till afterward, as Genesis 3. Then were their eyes opened, the devil
that shut them before, will open them then. Genesis 3.
That which Solomon notes in some buyers, to say, It is naught, It is naught,
and after they have bought to boast how good it is, is contrarily true in
Satan in the sale of his naughty wares to us, It is good, It is good, says
this seller, but aftetwards he lets us see how he has fetched us over, and
cries as fast, It is naught, It is naught. The devil at first comes as a
friend, and promises pleasures and profits, but afterward he shows himself as
an enemy in accusing, and showing nothing but grief, shame, Gods anger and
hell fire. Like that deceiving Prophet. 1. King. 13. that entreated the other
Prophet to come 1. King. 13.
in and dine with him, and never gave over till he had got him, telling him
he had a warrant from God, but afterward in the midst of dinner rose up and
threatened him destruction for consenting. Such sauce does the devil always
give us to his sweet meats, when ever we eat of them. The things the devil
tempts unto, are like unto such pictures as on the one side are some goodly
men, or beautiful women, but on the other side ugly owls. Let us therefore
look on both sides, and desire the Lord to open our eyes, that we may see the
fearful consequents of sin.

It is the Devil that makes us think the world to be glorious.
this strumpet. When then we feel our selves begin in our thoughts to
magnify riches, pomp and pleasures, let us know the Devil is at our elbow,
and therefore pray we that we be not led into temptation. Thus much for the
real temptation.

The verbal follows.

It contains Satan's promise to our Savior, to 2. The verbal temptation.
give him the whole world. And well may I call it verbal, for he does but
verba dare, go about to cozen Christ with mere words. Now as I said this is
but a subordinate temptation, vshering the other to idolatry, an argument to
draw on the other. And thus Satan reasons. If thou may get the whole world
by worshipping me, then it is thy best to do it. But thou may get the whole
world by it, therefore do it. The assumption he proves first from his
willingness showed in his free offer. Secondly, from his ability to perform
that he promises, because all is his, and that by the best right, Gods
donation, It is delivered to me, and to whom I will, I give it.

All this will I give thee. Mark.

A wicked kind of liberality is to be avoided.
ends, for his own glory, that he might obtain worship of Christ. Thus many
are bountiful to procure glory and respect to themselves, and to such as will
crouch unto them, but not otherwise. This is a diabolical bounty. the revenues
of Prou. 10. 16.
the wicked are to sin. Pro. 10. 16. but the righteous will honor the Lord
with their riches, maintain his Church and true worship. Prou. 3. 9. Honor
the Prou 3. 9.
Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of all thine increase.
enemies gifts are no gifts. His bounty is to catch our Saviors Soul, as Saul's
was to David in giving him Michall to be a snare unto him. But true bounty has
truth joined to it. Prou. 20. 28. Bounty and truth preserve the King. Prou. 20.
28.


The Devil uses to equivocate.
It was a great catch our Savior was like to have had, if he had yielded. If
he had been challenged for not performing, here would have been his defense,
even the Jesuitical trick of equivocation. Thou shall have all I showed, for all that I showed thee was but an image, and indeed nothing, so nothing shall
thou have. Of this trick, see more in the treatise of the hearts deceitfulness.
page 21. 22.

The Devil enticeth to his service by hope of gain and glory.
us unto his service by hope of gain and glory in this world, necessarily
tying and appropriating these things to his followers. If thou will worship me,
thou shall have all these things, otherwise if thou feed still upon the oracle
at Jorden, and beleeuest that voice that there spoke to thee, thou art sure
enough to continue poor and miserable still. So still he deals with us. What
fools are you to believe Gods word, and in the mean time to be pinched with
poverty, and held under in obscurity? Can you live upon words? Come hither to
me, I will surely make you rich, great and glorious in the world, if ye will be
ruled by me. Thus Balak enticed Balaam by gifts, and told him, the Lord kept
him from honor. Number. 24. 11. Such a Balak is Satan, promising mountains of
gold to seduce us from the Lord. Like Nebuchadnezzar, Numb. 24. 11.
with his alluring promises, as it were, the melodious harmony of musical
instruments, he bewitches us, and makes us bow to his golden Idol. Like the
strumpet inueigling the youth, by telling Prou. 7. 16.
him, she had decked her bed with ornaments, carpets, laces of Egypt, and
perfumed it with myrrh, aloes and cynnamon. Surely this golden and
glittetering bait of the devil of all other is most alluring, and preuailes
most. Bounty in a master is a great attractiue to his service. Can any of the
sons of Ishai, 1. Sam. 22. 7.
said Saul to his servants, fearing their defection to David, can they give you
vine-yards, houses, etc. 1. Sam. 22. 7. when the Devil then once has
possessed us with a conceit of his bounty, that there is assurance of rich
rewards in his service, and contrarily that in Gods, nothing to be gotten, but
beggary and misery, poverty and perseeution, then he makes to begin to
entertain thoughts of casting off Gods livery, and to say as they, Mal. 3. The
proud and wicked are advanced, Malac. 3.
It is in vain to serve the Lord. This temptation had almost puzzled David, it
brought him near falling down, his feet had almost slipped. Here was Psalm 73. 2.
that fearful shipwreck of Judas upon the rock of the 30. pieces of silver. He
saw that the event answered not his hopes in following of Christ, that same
temporal kingdom whereof he dreamed went not forward, and himself
disappointed of such honors and offices as under him he expected, and long
gaped for, therefore he now forsakes Christ, and hopes for greater matters by
the Prelates, and so turns traitor to his master, and chaplain to the
Prelates, or rather the devil in the Prelates. Here was Demas his overthrow.
The devil set out the world like a painted and trapped strumpet to his eye,
and caught him persently, So that he forsook Paul, and embraced the present
world. 2. Tim. 4. 10. In the purer and primitive Churches how came there at
length such 2. Tim. 4. 10.
horrible corruptions and Apostasies, but the Devil bleared and blinded their
eyes with ambition and covetousness, and persuaded them that in the simplicity
of the Gospel there was little, either gain or glory, unless they corrupted
it, and turned it into another gospel. Thus has the devil hatched the
pestilent monster of popery out of the cockatrice egg of the love of this
world. And at this day what is it that keeps men otherwise wise and learned, in
that rotten religion, but that same golden cup which the whore of Babylon holds
in her hands. Pomp, primacie, riches, fat Bishoprics, Cardinalships, and these
golden cords bind them fast to this See. The Centuriatours interpret this, All
these will I give thee, thus, I will make thee Pope. What makes many so violent
and so virulent against the truth, and the purer professors of religion, but
that they look to climb, and to rise up to preferme^t upon their shoulders. As
Erasmus noted in his time, when he said, that Pauper Lutherus multos fecit
diuites. Poor Luther made manyrich. That was it that made so many write and
rail against Luther, because it was a step to preferment. In the Commonwealth
also, and in all callings therein, this is the cause of the many corruptions
that abound, because the devil is taken at his word, and men do verily
believe that in the way of honesty and sincerity the way is stopped up, and
hedged against riches and rising, and contrarily is opened in the devils broad
way (where they may have elbow room enough, and do what they will) namely in
the way of falsehood, injustice, flattery, profaneness, swearing,
Sabboth-breaking, dissembling, and time-seruing.

Now the reason why this temptation so takes, is Many say, Psalm. 4. who will
show us any good? that is, Psalm. 4. 6.
any lands, livings, honors, dignities. Nay, so dote we on this world, that we
wait not for the devil to come and offer us the sight of our supposed good,
and so to tempt us, but we even tempt and provoke the devil, and as though he
were too slow in his office, we cry out for him, who will show us any good? who
will show us the way to get the world, and the desirable profits thereof? As
in Judas, who went first to the devil in his instruments, with his what will
ye give me? not having the patience to stay the Devils leisure, and to hear
him offer, This will I give thee. Being so sharp set on these things, the
devil bears us in hand that the most compendious way to get and hold them, is
to crack and craze conscience, zeal, religion; and tells us that so long as
we stand upon such nice and curious matters, we shall never rise or thrive in
the world. Nothing is more distastefull to flesh and blood then the cross, and
therefore no marvel if Christ have so few disciples who inuites them to the
cross, If any will be my disciple he must deny himself, and take up his
cross. Nothing again more tickling and delighting our corruption then the
glory of the world, and therefore no marvel if the devil have so many
servants, who inuites them to the kingdoms of the world, If any man will
worship me, all these kingdoms and the glory of them will I give him,



Mortification of our fleshly members.
should come to a dead man, and promise him never so many kingdoms, and show
him never so much honor and glory, he is nothing moved. Now mortification
make us dead men to the world, as blind men to this goodly sight of the world,
and as deaf adders to the charms of this charmer. Neither then will these
goodly things any more tickle us, then a jewel, or a precious stone will do a
beast. This mortification is that which weanes us from the world, and makes us
to be with David Psalm. 131, Psalm. 131.
to be to the world as weaned children to the breast, who do not only not
desire it, but though you show them never so goodly a breast, abounding with
never so luscious milk, and promise them never so much, and flatter them what
you can, yet you shall not get them to take it, and suck it. When the devil
entices mortified Christians to sin by these profers and promises of the
world, he is more like to speed, and win them, then a woman is like to
persuade her weaned child to do this or that, by plucking forth the breast.
Of all arguments it is the worst to a weaned child. Indeed to a sucking child
it is the only commanding argument, and so is the breast of the world to an
vnweaned and vnweined and unmortified Christian. The Devil has them on the
hip, he may easily bring them to any thing. Look how a crust commands an
hungry curre, so does a little worldly trash a carnal man. They that have
longing desires, and itching affections after this worlds delicates, and they
that will be rich fall into temptations and snares, 1. Tim. 6. 9. 1. Tim. 6 9.
There is no doubt but worldly, covetous, ambitious men would turn Papists,
yea, Turks and Infidels rarher then they would not drink the sweet milk of
worldly profits and pleasures. For covetousness it self is inward idolatry,
and what should keep him from committing outward sin, that commits inward. He
that bows his heart to gold in his chest, will rather then lose that gold, bow
his knee to a golden or wooden image. And this experience has showed in all
ages. So that not only by covetous desires of worldly pelf does the devil
bring men oftentimes to kill others. Pro. 1. 19. but even themselves. Prou. 1.
19.
and their own souls, by betraying them into his hands, by forsaking the
faith. 1. Tim. 6. 10. The 1. Tim. 6. 10.
only way then to keep our selves from being drawn away by the allurements, is
by mortification to pluck out that eye of ours, that is so much affected with
the beauty of that golden Idol, and to circumcise that ear of ours, that is
too much delighted with the devils sweet music, to put a knife to that throat
of ours, that too much longs after his dainties. Yea, so to be crucified with
Christ, that our nature may be quite altered and changed, so that now these
worldly things may no more move us, then hay would do a Lion. And indeed if
we were thoroughly mortified, nothing would move us then, but the kingdom of
God, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, increase of grace. And as for
the worlds treasures, we should despise them, as grown and grave men do
childrens gewgawes, and bables. And we should take in as foul scorn, to have
the devil thus offer us these wordly profits, as grave men would take it ill
to be persuaded to ought by the offers of childrens bables. It is a sign
therefore that we are still babes, and not men in Christ, when the worlds
toys and bables have such interest in us. Labor we then to be grave, sober
and mortified Christians; that since the devils most powerful motive to draw
us away from God, is this of worldly gain and glory, we having no affections
to these things, may be no fit booty for any such temptation, but being Gods
Nazarites may be able without longing to look on the wine sparkling in the
glass; and being Gods chaste virgins may be able not to desire the strumpets
beauty in our hearts. If the worlds beauty can command thine eyes, and her
music thine ears, surely, the devil can command thy knee to bow to him. For
if once we look on the Sun shining, and the Moon in her brightness, the
kissing of the hand, that is, adoration will follow. Job. 31. 27.
Job. 31. 27.

Holy meditations. 1. That desire of abundance is unlawful. 1. Tim. 6. 8.


1. That the very desires of abundance and greatness are in themselves
unlawful, though we desire them not upon such conditions, as here the devil
offers them. We are commanded 1. Tim. 6. 8. to be content with mere
necessaries for food and raiment. Where there is contentation there are no
further desires. Agur Prou. 30. 8. prays against riches, Prou. 30. 8.
as well as against poverty. That which we are to pray against, we may not
desire, and such desires cannot be of nature, for that is contented with
little, nor of grace, for that is contented with less, and therefore they must
needs be of corruption, for that is the insatiable Horseleach. Therefore for
the things of this life, we must be at an indifferency, and subject our selves
to God as David. 1. Sam. 15. 25. 1. Sam. 15. 25. 2 That the devil in these
promises deceives us. Not giving all the things promises.


2. That the Devil in these promises deceiues us, and that three ways. First
sometimes not giving all the things promised, but the contrary. Adam was
promised to be like God himself, but how well he obtained it, witness Gods
bitter scoff, Behold man is become as one of us, Genesis 3. So he promised by his
instruments life and honor to Cranmer, if he would give him the worship of the
hand, and receive his mark in the hand by subscription, but he failed him. So
the Romish runnagates that go thither for preferment, what little respect have
they oftentimes, so that they wish themselves at home again, and sometimes
return in the same discontent, in which they went. How little was Judas set
by, by the high Priests, when once he had served their turn? How did they
shake him off in that pitiful distress, with Look thou to that? How poor
are the witches that in confidence of these promises even sell themselves to
the devil? Secondly, sometimes the devil deceiues us in his promises, not
yielding Not yielding them so good as he promised.
them so good to us as he promised, cole-pits in stead of golden mines,
bleare-eied Leah in stead of beautiful Rahel, stones and serpents in stead of
fish and bread. The Devil promises us much peace and felicity in these
outward things, we find nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit. Therefore
they are called lies, Ps. 4. because as pleasant baits they cover Psalm. 4.
Matthew 13.
the hook. Hence that phrase Mat. 13. of the deceitfulness of riches.
Sweetness is promised in the bread of deceit, but we find it gravel crashing
in our teeth. Prou. 12. That same wickedness which is so Prou. 12.
sweet in the mouth, and under the tongue, will be gall of Aspes in the
midst of us, and God will make him that has so greedily devoured substance,
to vomit it up again, for God shall draw it out of his belly, he shall suck
the gall of Aspes, and the vipers tongue shall slay him. Job. 20. 12. 13. 14.
15. 16. The way of the wicked Job. 20. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. Prou. 12. 26.
shall deceive them, says Solomon Prou. 12. 26. And therefore he says
immediately before, that the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor,
that is, the wicked, for all the righteous his present crosses, and the wickeds
present felicity. For though they believe the lying promises of the devil, yet
it will prove otherwise. Their honey will prove gall, and their wine vinegar,
and therefore Solomon adds in the next verse, The deceitful person shall not
roast that which he took in hunting. He shall never joy it. In his fair
roses the devil hides shrewd pinnes, that shall prick them when they look to
be refreshed with their sweet smells. Balaks preferments were goodly roses to
Balaam, and so were Naamans gifts to Gehezi, and the Babylonish garment to
Achan, and the thirty pieces of silver to Judas. But there were poisoned pinnes
in all these roses. For what got Balaam for his going to Balak, but a sword in
his ribs. Number. 31. 8. whereupon Jude calls it the deceit of Balaams Numb. 31. 8.
Jude verse. 11.
wages. Jude 11. Did not Judas thirty pieces bring the halter about his neck?
and Achans Babylonish garment the stones about his ears? And Gehezies reward
the leprosy into his forehead. So that these men might have done with the
instruments of their punishments, Judas with his halter, Achan with his stones,
as Craesus did with those chains with which Cyrus bound him, he sent them to
Apollo, that is, to the Devil for presents, who had gulled him with false
promises of victory.

Thirdly, the devil deeceiues in his promises, in getting far better things
of us, then we have of Getting far better things of us, then we do of him.
him. For in these contracts with the Devil, we make Esaus penni-worth, sell
heaven for a mess of porridge; Glaucus exchange, gold for copper. We are as
foolish as children, that lose their parents and their own liberty, and suffer
themselves to be stolen away for an apple. Yea, as the bird that accepts of
the fowlers meat, but buys it full dearly, with the loss of her own life.
So here we shall have of the Devil a little worldly trash, but then we lose
that which is more precious, truth, faith and a good conscience. Proverbs 20.
15. Incomparable Prou. 20. 15.
Jewels to be bought with the loss of ten thousand worlds, but not to be
sold to the Devil, though he could give us as many worlds, as we have
hairs on our heads. Buy the truth but sell it not. Proverbs 23. Surely, if
only the health and strength of our bodies were to be lost for all the world,
it were no saving bargain. Who in his right wits would take upon him the
Monarchy of the whole world, upon condition that he must never have one
healthful hour, but always be tortured with the most exquisite torments of
the stone? He has a more kingly spirit, that chooses rather to be an healthy
beggar, then a sick and tortured King.

Now then if it would profit a man nothing, to win all the whole world, and to
lose but his bodily health, what then, as Christ says, to lose his own soul,
his precious soul? when then we are thus tempted, let us think of our losses
we shall sustain, and let us think with the good figge-tres. Judge. 9. tempted
with a Kingdom, should I lose my sweetness? should I lose my fatness Judge 9.
to reign? So should a Christian reason with Satan ballancing the worlds
riches, and the spirits together, should I leave the fatness of faith? should
I lose the sweetness of a good conscience to reign a while in a little
worldly glory? Why, I am a Lord and King already. A spiritual LORD: should I
be such a fool to lose my spiritual Lordship for a temporal one? My service
under Christ makes me a King. My Kingdom I should receive of thee o Satan
will make me a slave. Better is a royal service then a slavish soueraignety.
Again, every Christian has satan under his feet, by these gifts Satan seeks
to redeem himself, and thou by accepting them do not only free him, but
inthrall thy self, and bring thy self into his place. Here then thou
should have the mind of those Persians, Is. 13. 12. 17. which should not
regard Isay 13. 12. 17.
silver, nor be desirous of gold. And of the husband finding the adulterer
with his wife, Prou. 6. 35. not enduring the sight of any ransom, nor
consenting though gifts be never so much augmented. Satan's Prou. 6. 35.
bounty is treacherous as we saw before. And his gifts are hooked and limed,
to catch our poor souls in.



First they are inferior to us as men, much more as Christians. A thing worse
then thy self cannot make thee better. Gold and silver are inferior to
Resdeterior te non potest face re te meliorem. Aurum and Argentum inferiora te.
Bonum coporis animus, animi Deus.
thee. The good of the body is the soul, and the good of the soul is God. How
do we then disparage our selves in seeking after, and esteeming of these
things which are to our souls, as copper to gold, embasing it, not making it
better. What content then can a man's soul take in these things. If covetous
and ambitious men feel content in any of these things, it is no otherwise then
as itching sores do in clawing and scratching fingers. They are the worse for
it afterward. Nothing can fit the infinite appetite of the soul, but God who
alone is infinite. No more can man's mind be filled with corporal, then a
chest be filled with spiritual things. He alone that fills heaven and earth
can fill the soul, Psa. 119. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but
thy Psalm. 119. 96.
commandments are exceeding large. And 1. Pet. 1. 1. Pet. 1. 24. 25
24. 25. All flesh is grass, and the glory of flesh as the flower of the
field, but the word of God endures for ever. And Psalm. 17. 15. When I awake I
shall be satisfied Psalm. 17. 15.
with thine image. God fully satisfies, but these earthly Non esurientes
animas, sed esuriem pascunt animarum.
things do not feed our hungry fowls, but the hunger of our souls, says
Augustine.

Secondly, they are fickle and fugitive, therefore well showed here in a
moment, because they glide away as the running water, and in representation,
because they have no substance, but are mere shadows and vanishing shows. So
Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 1. Cor. 7. 31.
31. says that the fashion of this world passes away. Where the word
translated fashion, signifies but an (...).
accidental and external figure, without substance. Saint Luke calls al
Agrippaes pomp but a fancy, Acts (...). Acts 25. 23. Gal. 4. 19. (...). Heb.
13.
25. 23. And on the contrary, Paul speaking of the new man, framing and forming
him in us. Gal. 4. 19. uses such a word as signifies an essential and
substantial form. And Heb. 13. heaven is said to be a city having
foundation. No earthly thing has any foundation, but are reeling and
tottering, whence that phrase of the uncertainty of riches, 1. 1. Tim. 6. 18.
Timoth. 6. 18. Either they forsake us living, or we them dying.

come. We must go up with Moses into Mount Nebo, and see the heavenly Canaan,
and with John into Gods mountain, and see the heavenly Jerusalem, and put
down the devils mountain, with Gods mountain, and his sight, with that sight
with that sight which is there, when we shall see what better things we have
in heaven, we shall scorn the devils offers, and think our selves disparaged
being Gods sons and heirs of heaven, to be offered such trash. And therefore
the devil did not here as in the other temptations say, If thou be the son
of God, because that here it would have made against him, as being a
temptation not standing with the dignity of Gods sons. If we could but know
our own worth in being Gods sons, and the rich inheritance this sonneship
entitles us unto, we would scorn this world, as much as an honest man, having
a sweet and well-fauoured wife of his own, would do some filthy druggle and
blouzie Postquam in montium verticem ascenderimus parua nobis and vrbs, and
moenia etiam videntur, etc. Sic parua videbuntur otiam, and diuitia, and gloria
etc. cum coelestia respicias. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 15. 1. Tim. 6.
harlot. As on the top of high mountains, the greatest houses and men seem
but small, so from the top of Gods mountain, all these earthly things which
here we so admire, will seem but mean and small. It is because wicked men
are (...), as Peter speaks, blind and cannot see things that are a far off,
such as are heavenly, that they fall so in love with the earthly. This remedy
Paul prescribes. 1. Tim. 6. But thou o man of God fly these things. viz.
covetousness. But how? Lay hold on eternal life. When our desires and
thoughts are in pursuit after these earthly things, then should we direct them
by presenting this other, and better object of heavenly glory. This last
meditation serves also to answer that objection, that God rewards not his
servants, and fulfils not his promises of this life made to them. For though he
never should, as he often does remember them with temporal blessings, yet
they are all abundantly fulfilled in the enioyment of that heavenly glory. Job.
22. 24. and Psalm. 91. 16. Job. 22. 24. Psalm. 91. 16.
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. And therefore
as Hebr. 11. God need not Heb. 11.
be ashamed to be called our God, as falsifying his truth, because he has
prepared a city for us, which is an universal collection of all blessings.

All these meditations laid together and well digested, we shall be able to
answer Satan in this temptation, as the King of Sodom was answered by
Abraham. Genesis 14. 23. God forbid that we should take so much as a shoe
latchet of Satan, least it should Genesis 14. 23.
be said, Satan has made us rich.

from his ability. in regard that all these things are his by Gods donation and
delivery, so that he may dispense them where, and how he will. Where we have
to consider.

1. The Devils lie, with the color of it. 2. His slander. 3. His craking.
First, the Devils lie, that God had given him all the world, and the honors
thereof to dispose as he 1. The Devils lie.
would. This is a very lie. For Ps. 24. 1. The earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof. Psalm. 75. 6. 7. Psalm. 24. 1. Psalm 75. 6. 7.
To come to preferment is neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from
the North: But God is judge, he makes low, and he makes high, And there was
one now in presence, who had said long ago, By me Kings do reign, Prou. 8.
And afterward, All Prou. 8. 15.
power in heaven and earth is given to me. Matthew. 28. Matthew. 28.
And who now truly and justly might have said concerning the delivery of this
power, as Zidkiah unjustly said unto Micaiah, concerning the Spirit. 1. King.
22. When went the Spirit of the Lord from me 1. King. 22.
to thee? So, when was this power taken from me, and given to thee? Indeed
the Devil is Gods iaylour, and has the keys of hell delivered unto him, he
has fetters and irons, rackes and tortures delivered unto him, being an
hangman and executioner, but he has not that delivered unto him, which here
he speaks off. For if it were as he says, would he prefer at any time
his enemies to Kingdoms? would he arm them with swords against himself?
Surely, Satan will not be divided against himself Matthew. 12. would he
prefer David, Hezekiah and Josiah to the throne, to beat Matthew 12. Revel. 2.
down the throne of Satan, Reuelat. 2, would he prefer such figgetrees to
the Kingdom? No surely, None but Ahabs, Neroes and Domitians, and such vile
brambles, that would scratch and tear in pieces Gods Saints.

Either then the Devil is a gross liar, or a most simple fool. But the
Devil is no such simple fool as to put a knife into his adversaries hand to
cut his own throat with. And therefore he is a notorious lier.

If it were as the Devil would there should be not only no good Kings: but
no Kings at all; but Tyrants only. For the Devil is an enemy to kings because
their authority is an enemy to him. Jude 18. The cause why the Devil so ruled
then is noted Judge. 18.
to be this, In those days there was no King in Israel.

Take we heed now this being such a lie we believe it not. The practices of
many witness against them, that they acknowledge the Devils Lordship, for in
sickness they seek to charms and witches for health, in poverty for wealth,
in obscurity for honor by shifts and wicked means. If we believed that God
were Lord, good means would suffice us, we would seek all these outward
blessings in the ways of godliness, and never seek to get them by offending
God, or otherwise then by seeking him and his favor who is the bestower of
them.

Thus we see the Devils lie. The color of the devils lie.


Let us see the color of it.

For there is some truth in this which the Devil speaks, and that is this.

God sometimes lets the Devil alone in his violent disposing of earthly things.
disposing of these earthly things, and that for most just causes, as the
trial of his children, the punishment of the world, and the glory of his own
name, in triumphing over Satan thus let loose, and overthrowing him by
himself. Now the Devil turns toleration into donation, conniuence and
permission into approbation, and that which is done at some times, and in some
places he makes constant and general. This is the trick of devilish liers
thus to piece out things by addition. A little truth shall be enough to face
out, and color over many lies. If they have never so little hold, how wilthey
stretch? as Doeg in Abimelecks entertaining of David, and the world in the
lesser infirmities of Gods children. Beware we of this. As also beware we of
gathering Gods allowance from the event, as here the devil seems to do. For
so might the thief that gets his goods by stealing, and the cruel extortioner
say that God has delivered that which they have into their hands. Thus we see
how the Devil abuses this little truth to color a lie. Let us see what good
use we may make of it.

Princes are on foot, when servants are on horseback, Eccles. Eccles. 10. 7.
10. 7. The rod that should be on the fools back; is often in his hand to
afflict the backs of others. Asses are set out with golden bridles. Base and
unworthy persons are preferred in Church, Commonwealth, and families, when
honest and heroical spirits are curbed and depressed. And oftentimes such
wicked ones are in honor and place, that a man would think that it is true
which here the Devil says, and that honors were at his disposing indeed.
But is this any such marvel, whilst by Gods toleration the Devil sits at the
helm? will not he oppose any good man, and strive against his preferment? God
indeed is the God of order, and that he does, is done in the sweetest
conueniency; but the Devil is the God of confusion, and therefore he iumbles
and tumbles, and turns all things topsie turuie, and troubles the clear
fountains. Howbeit God is the God of order, even in the Devils greatest
confusions. And as once out of the confused chaos at the first creation he drew
forth this orderly and adorned world, so still out of Satan's tragedies and
hurly-burlies, he brings forth sweet order and comelines. For when Satan has
his will in the government of the world, then, and therein also is Gods will
fulfilled, for Gods will is the highest cause of all things. Psalm. 115. 3. But
our God is in heaven, he Psalm. 115. 4.
does whatsoever he will. So that not so much as the least action comes to
pass without his will. So that (which is a singular comfort) that which is as
the Devils action most disorderly, as it is Gods, is most orderly.

Criminibus debent hortos. etc.
thanking God for their places. But herein they offer a vile indignity to God,
for as not to thank him for that which is his, is to deny him to be author
of good, so to thank him for that which is the devils work, is to make him
the author of evil. Give unto God that which is Gods, and not that which is
the devils.







Thus much for the Devils lie, and the color thereof.

The second thing is his slander of God. For, if this 2. His slander.
be true, that God has delivered up the government of the world to Satan,
then the Lord must be guilty of all disorders committed by the Devil. If God
himself cannot be free from slanders, what marvel if good men cannot?

The third thing is his craking. All this is mine, and 3. His craking. Prou.
13. 7.
I give it where I will. There is. says Solomon, Prou. 13. 7. that makes
himself rich, and has nothing. This is true here in the devil, the poorest
beggar of all Gods creatures, and yet lo how he boasts of his riches. To
brag of that we have not is the Devils trick. And vainglorious vaunting
Thrasoes are the Devils disciples.

And thus much for the subordinate temptation.

The principal follows, which is to idolatry, that The principal temptation.
Christ would fall down and worship him.

The slavery of ambition.
to a base falling down and worshipping of himself. Ambition is base and
slavish. It will fall down to Dignitatibus fulgere vis? Danti supplicabis and
qui praeire caeteris honor cupis, posce^di humilitate vilesce. Boet.
rise, crouch and creep to mount. How base did Absaloms ambition make him to
cringe and crouch to the people, and to kiss those, whom otherwise he would
hane scorned to look upon. But the basest of all is, when it makes men bow to
Satan.

2. Mark the intolerable pride of the Devil in affecting divine honors. As
here at Christ's hands, 2. The devils intolerable pride. Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 1. Cor.
10. 20. Reu. 9. 20.
so in all the sacrifices of the Heathen: So Deuteronomy. 32. 17. They offered unto
Devils, not God. 1. Cor. 10. 20. These things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. Revel. 9. 20. So in the images of
Popery, and in all superstitions and false worship. The consideration of this
shows of what spirit they are, that would draw divine honor to themselves. It
shows that the Popish spirit is an hellish spirit.

3. It was the Devils fall to scorn homage and 3. The devil fell by scorning
to submit himself.
subjection to Man-God. In Mahomets Alcoran it is said that the Devil was cast
out of heaven, because he would not worship man. Whereupon Luthers conjecture
is pretty. The devil, says he, has bewrayed himself. It is likely he
foresaw the incarnation of Christ, and thence was his fall in scorning to
submit himself to an inferior nature. And this well suites with that here
related, that the devil is so far from doing homage to Christ incarnate,
that he requires it from him. Herein we have a picture of wicked wretched
men, who though they have smarted often for their sins, as the devil ever
since his fall has for his pride, yet for all that they go on, and grow worse
and worse.

creator, God blessed for ever. Great is the odds betwixt the devil viler
then the vilest toad, and Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, whom the Angels
adore, at whose name every knee bowess, Phil. 2. yea, whom once the Devil
himself worshipped in heaven, and yet this base Devil would have our blessed
Lord fall down to him. The righteous falling down before the wicked, is like
a troubled well, and a corrupt spring. Prou. 25. 26. How true had this been in
Christ, If the righteous Christ had fallen before the wicked Devil? for Christ
is the spring of all grace to the elect. It had been happy for the Devil if
he could have done that to Christ, which he wishes Christ to do to himself.
John Baptist thought himself unworthy to wipe Christ's shoes, and yet the
Devil, Pope-like, thinks himself worthy to have Christ kiss his shoes.
Whereby we see that The wicked by how much the baser, by so much the loftier.
more they seek to domineere, especially over the godly, as Haman over
Mordecay. Neither must it seem strange to the godly, if sometimes the base
refuses of the people, the most dunghilly, and rascal rake-hels, the scumme of
the earth, viler then the earth, rise up against them, and crow over them, and
would have their necks under their girdles, nay under their feet, since the
devil their master would so have done with Christ our master. The servant is
not above his master. It was Jobs case and complaint, Job. 30. 1. that they
whose fathers he had refused to set with the dogs of his flocks did mock
him, and grinne at him like a company of curres.

5. See to what horrible sins the Devil may 5. The best may be tempted to
horrible sins.
tempt even the best. What more fearful then to worship the Devil in person?
yet to this sin is Christ himself tempted. Be not thou discouraged then if
thou be tempted to gross and odious sins. It was our Lords own case.

Thus much for Satan's assault.

Christ's repulse follows, 2. Christ's repulse.


Containing First a detestation of Satan's temptation. Secondly, a confutation
of Satan's temptation.

First, the detestation in the first words, Avoid Satan, 1. The detestation.
Hence from me, Be gone, speaking to him as to a dog. This teaches.

Temptations are violently to be resisted. Ephesians. 6.
maidenly and gingerly dealing here is not good. They are called fiery darts,
Ephesians. 6. we must therefore deal as in quenching fire. Thus violent was Paul when
he beat down the flesh as with a club, 1. Cor. 1. Cor. 9.
9. and so here Christ deals thus violently with satan. He would not endure
him, nor stand debating with him, but commands him away. As wicked men deal,
making themselves intractable to all good persuasions stopping their ears
against them Act. 7. Acts 7.
So should we do against the devils enchantments. Herein was Eve wanting.

2. Christ before spoke more moderately, but 2. When wickedness grows
outrageous, we must of lambs become lions.
now that the Devil begins to thrust out his horns, and to show himself
plainly, Christ takes him up short, and with great eagerness and indignation,
bids him Auaunt. When wickedness is more mannerly, and does not so grossly
discover it self, there is place for meekness: But when once it grows
impudent and outrageous, away then with mildness, then of lambs turn we
lions, and show we the spirit of power, as Paul against Elymas, Act. 13. 10.
Nettles if they be handled gently sting the more. Therefore of some Paul says,
Rebuke them, (...), cuttingly, Tit. 1. 13.

3. Especially, should a Christians spirit be up, 3. A Christian should then
be most moved when Gods glory is defaced.
when Gods glory is defaced. In our own private injuries mildnes is good, but
in Gods cause, patience is blockishnesse, moderation is mopishnesse, toleration
is cowardice. Madness then, is better then meeknes. This made Christ give the
Auaunt now to Satan because Gods glory was now specially shot at, when the
devil would have had a divine worship. Numb. 12. 3.
Moses the meekest man on earth, what a spirit had he, and how was he blown
up, when the people had made the golden calfe. Gods blessing be on that
blessed heart, that has a stomach against Gods dishonor, and entertaines all
wicked oaths and blasphemies, with this Apage of our Savior: And woe to them
that cry Euge.

The second point follows. The confutation of the temptation. Where are two
things, 2. The Confutation.


1. Our Saviors weapons. 2. His manner of handling it.
His weapon is that place out of Deuteronomy. 6. 13. out of this one book, nay almost
out of this one chapter has Christ answered all Satan's temptations. Now then
if there be such sufficiency in one book, in one chapter of Scripture, what is
in the whole? How is it furnished abundantly with antidotes for every poison,
with medicines for every disease? Tobies fish and others herbs are but idle,
the devil fears them as much as he does the Papists holy water, a devise of
his own. Only the Scriptures scare him. Object. If he may be chased away with
harmonies, as in Saul's case, then why not with herbs, says Gulielmus
Parisiensis? Answ. The melancholy humor being the devils seat, music had
force to assuage the force of the humor, and so consequently of Satan; The
music disabled the instrument, not the Agent, dispelled the melancholy, not
the devil.

His manner of handling the weapon.

And that is in his Allegation. 1. His allegation.
Application.

His allegation. His manner of alleging is, that in alleging he interprets
it. First, by changing the word fear into worship. The reason is, because that
fear is the more general word, and so comprehends worship the particular: And
besides, fear is the cause of outward worship.

And here we learn.

The true fear of God vrges us to outward worship of of God. Psalm. 14. 1.
neglect of Gods outward worship argues little true fear of God. Here then
the gross neglecters of Gods worship in prayer, hearing, receiving the
sacraments are condemned for Atheists. Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in
heart there is no God, This Atheism of their hearts is manifested in their
lives in the neglect of Gods worship, ver. 4. They call not upon Verse. 4.
the Lord. This discouers them also which say, they may give outward reverence
to Idols, so the heart be reserved to God, but when God is truly feared in
the heart, he will be also worshipped with the knee. Show me thy fear by
thine outward worship.

The fear of God is the fountain both of matter and manner.
manner wherein it must be performed: which condemns most men's profane,
irreuerent and ceremonial service of God.

Alone, and him alone shall thou serve. For that this is the true sense may
appear by the negative in the former verse in that place Deuteronomy. 6. Ye shall
Deuteronomy. 6.
not worship other Gods, but the Lord your God shall ye serve. The case is
alike when we say that by faith only we are justified, for so much is implied
in that negative of Paul. Not by works, but by faith. Now the word only is to
be referred as well to the first part of the sentence, Thou shall worship the
Lord, as to the last, Thou shall serve him, or else Christ had but played with
the Devil.

2. His manner of Application of the text to answer 2. His application.
Satan's temptation is excellent. First, Satan tempted him to outward
idolatry, persuading him thereto by the benefit he should have thereby, even
the Lordship of the whole world, because it was at Satan's dispose. Now Christ
with this text answers both this argument whereby he tempted, and the
temptation it self. The argument of benefit, by alleging a flat place of
Scripture against that, whereto Satan promised a blessing. As if he had said.
How can any benefit come by that which Gods prohibition has cursed? This
teaches Nothing is to be gotten by offending God.
And indeed in such cases the question is, whether we will choose God, or our
penny; Christ, or Barrabas. Therefore excellently Joseph, when tempted by his
mistress to folly, by hope of gain; How can I do this, and sin against
God? Genesis 39. 9. opposing Genesis 39. 9.
the loss of Gods favor, to the gaining of his mistresses.

Again, whereas Satan, the better to draw on Christ, and to assure him of
this benefit, craked of that Lordship he had in the world, Christ notably
refutes this vain brag by the title of Lord, which this text gives to God,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, containing a secret reason why God is
only to be worshipped, because he only is the Lord of all things. And so
there lies couched this argument against Satan. None can be made Lord of the
world, but by the just Lord, and to him only is homage to be given in that
regard. But not thou Satan, but God is the Lord of the world. And therefore not
thou; but he to be worshipped in hope of receiving this Lordship.

The consideration that God is the Lord of all, may stay us against the wants
of outward things.
that God is the Lord of all, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.
And therefore do we beg our daily bread at the Lords hands, because his is
Kingdom. Thus Christ answers the argument.

The temptation it self to fall down and worship, is directly and plainly
answered by the words of the Text, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God. Where
the doctrine plain.

Only God is to be adored with outward religious worship.
knee, uttering words of prayer with hands stretched out, and eyes lift up.
Though some of these may be done to Princes, yet not with that purpose and
affection of heatt wherewith we do them to God. And it is this purpose of the
heart that makes these outward actions religious worship. The outward actions
may be performed in scorn, as they Matthew. 26. Matthew. 26.
bowed to Christ. The Papists say, that Angels and Saints may be worshipped
with religious worship, but yet not with the same that God is worshipped. Gods
worship they call (...), or worship. The Saints (...), or service.

Answ. 1. This distinction is a mere mockery, as if a woman giving her body
and affection to another man, should invent one name for the giving of her
affections to her husband, another for giving them to another.

Latreia signifies service to men, yea, cruel and base bondage, Deuteronomy. 28. 48.
Leuit. 23. 7. in the translation of the Septuagints. And Douleia signifies
service to God, Matthew. 6. 22. Romans 1. 7. and in many other places.

Douleia properly signifies an higher and strickter service then the other, for
(...), coming of (...), to bind, signifies a bondman, and seruus in latin,
quasi bello seruatus, signifies such a servant as was taken captive in the
wars. Latreia signifies the service of one hired for money. And therefore
that place Leuit. 23. 7. Ye shall do no servile work, the Leuit. 23. 7.
seauenty rendered (...), to prevent the fraud of the Jews, that would have
hired others to work. Therefore, as wittily our Humphrey speaks, worthily do
the Papists take Douleia to themselves, (quia and duriter, and gratis seruiunt)
because they have an hard and a rewardlesse service. As they were not hired of
the Saints to serve them, so they are like to receive no wages of them. Yet
though this be the proper signification of Latreia, we deny not but that very
fitly it is applied to divine service, because it ought to be voluntary, as is
the work of him that is hired, and not constrained as is bond-slaues. But to
leave this difference of words, let us see what real difference they put
betwixt the worship of God and Saints. Bellarmine defines divine worship, that
which is given to the person worshipped, as unto the first beginning and last
end. Now, says he, so to worship any creature is idolatry, and that is here
forbidden. Belike then our Savior falsely alleged this place, to prove that
he might not worship Satan. For Satan did not desire to be worshipped, as the
first beginning, and last end, but as one under God that had received that he
had, of him.

Thus we see how this text answers Satan's first temptation to outward
idolatry. It answers also in the latter clause, And him only shall thou serve;
the second temptation to inward idolatry, in the love of honor and riches. God
only must be our master, not God and riches, Matthew. 6. He must have all our
heart and affections. Psalm. 73. Whom have I, o Lord in heaven, or in earth but
thee? And thus much of the combat between Christ and Satan, the second maine
head of this story.

The third follows. The issue. It is twofold. The third part: the issue of
Christ's temptation.


1. The diuela departure. Then the Devil left him. Matthew. 4. 11. 2. The Angels
ministering.
For the first. Out of it we learn. The first issue.


God will give an issue to the trials of his children.
upon them. 1. Cor. 10. 13. There has no tentation taken you but such as
appertain to man, and God is faithful which will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you be able, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that ye may be able to bear it.

James is, Iam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil, and Resistance of Satan puts him to
flight.
he will fly from you. A coward inuites him. The more we give place to him,
the more he encroches. The way to be rid of him, is not to yield to him. The
reason is plain. Resisting is more then a man's work. When he sees a man go
about to resist him, he perceiues God is there, and therefore flies the
presence of God. Where no resistance is, there he perceiues the spirits
absence, and so conceiues hope of easy victory. Let us then show our spirits
in resisting and fighting with Satan. Here a word and blow is the best. If
the Devil speak but the least word in temptation, draw presently upon him, or
thou emboldnest him.

Quest. How should I resist him?

Answ. 1. With Gods word, as here our Savior The way to resist Satan.
did, seriously meditating on it, and by faith applying it to thy self. 2.
With our own words in prayer. Amalek cannot prevail so long as Moses his
hands are held up. Resistance indeed is by faith, whom resist steadfast in the
faith, 1. Pet. 5. 9. Now faith 1. Pet. 5. 9.
uses both the word and prayer. In resisting the injuries offered us by men, if
we revenge them our selves we complain not, or if we complain to
superiors, we revenge them not our selves. But here both must be done. We
must both resist him with blows and violence, in striking at him with the
sword of the Spirit, the word of God, as also with complaints put against him
to the Lord in our prayers.

S. Luke adds that he departed for a season. Luke 4. 13. which implies that
though Satan had received this terrible foil, and such a foil as might for
ever have put him out of all hope of victory, yet after a while again, such
was his malice, such his shameless and impudent importunity, that he would not
for all this, rest: but would yet again assault our Lord. It teaches us then.

Satan's malice is invincible.
his temptations, yet not his impudency. Who would have thought that ever
Satan put to so foul and shameful a foil, durst ever have peept out of his
den again, and have showen his face any more? And yet his malice makes him
both blind and restless. We find him again at our Savior Matthew. 16. 22. 23.
where he used Peter as his stalking Mat. 16. 22, 23.
horse. If after such an inglorious foil given by the son of God, who had
thus trampled him in the mire under his feet, and so victoriously triumphed
over him, his malice would yet serve him for new adventures, what then will it
do, where he finds his repulse more gentle, and his denials more easy?
Never must we hope for any truce with this adversary. Though he have the worst
by never so much, yet will not his malice endure to hear of a peace, no not of
a truce. As he never slumbers nor sleeps that keeps Israel, so neither he
that hates Israel. Psalm. 121. 4.
Never hope we to be freed from Satan's molestations, till we have gotten that
great gulf, Luke 16. Luke 16. 26.
26. between him and us. We may sometimes have somewhat more peaceable
intermissions, he may for a season forbear us, but yet neither will those
seasons be long, for he knowing his time to be short. Revel. 12. will be
sure that those seasons Reu 12.
shall not be ouerlong. And therefore our wisdom will be to redeem these
seasons, and if any rest be given us from his malice to be arming our selves
against a new combat. Be not too secure, thou may as well think he will
cease to be a Devil, as cease to tempt.

The second issue is the Angels ministering. And lo The second issue.
the Angels came and ministered unto him. They ministered either food to his
hungry body, or comfort to his troubled soul, wearied with Satan's wicked
temptation, or else they ministered triumphing at his victory. And this is set
forth by way of admiration; And behold the Angels etc. Him whom the Devil so
vilely used; The Angels do service unto.

Learn first,

The difference betwixt Christ's temptations and ours
came not to him to minister, till after the temptations were ended, but to us
they minister in the very act of temptation.

God raises up comforters unto his servants after the abuses of Satan's
instruments Luke 16.
stead of ministering Angels to us. So after Shimeis railing, and Absaloms
treachery the Lord raised up many faithful friends and comforters to David.
Though the rich man despised Lazarus. Luke 16. yet the Angels despised not to
carry his soul into heaven. Nay, God himself oftentimes, as I may say,
ministers unto his abused and oppressed Saints. Witness those many unspeakable
comforts ministered unto the hearts of the Martyrs in their prisons, at the
stake, and in the fire. How may this comfort us against the railings and
scoffings of Michall? What though she scoff, yet David shall be honored of
others, even of those in whose eyes she desires he might be despicable. 2.
Sam. 6. 22. 2. Sam. 6. 22.


Nothing is lost by waiting on Gods providence.
by waiting upon Gods providence. If Christ had hearkened to Satan, to have
made bread of stones, and so out of a distrust in Gods providence had
unlawfully relieved himself, he would have found it indeed bread of stones,
even like Salomons bread of deceit, full of gravel, it would have been stony
and grauelly stuff to his conscience. If Christ hearkened unto Satan, and had
by that miracle served himself, the Angels here had not served him. Who would
not wait upon Gods providence, to be thus waited upon by Gods Angels? Trust God
in all thy straights, make not bread of stones, and rather then thou shall
want, God will send not only Ravens to feed thee, as they did Eliah. 1. King.
17. 6. but an 1. King. 17. 6.
Angel to feed thee also, as he did to the same Eliah, 1. King. 19. 5. 6.
when we are not thorough distrust 1. King. 19. 5. 6.
ouer-hasty to serve our selves rather then fail the Angels shall serve us. So
well shall he be served, and so assuredly shall he be fed, that makes Gods
providence his portion.

FINIS.

