THE IVDGE WHEREIN IS SHOWED, how Christ our Lord is to Judge the World at the
last Day; to the extreme Terror of the Wicked, and to the excessive Comfort of
the Good. With a Preface, which it willbe necessary to read before the Book.

Translated into English.

Nolite errare, Deus non irridetur: Quae enim seminauerit homo, haec and metet.

Gal. 6. verse. 7. Be not deceived, God will not be mocked: for the things
which a man shall sow, the same he shall reap. Permissu Superiorum, 1621.

TO MY NOBLE, FAITHFVLL, WORTHY, and most dear Friend, Mr. G. T.
SIR,
Since I had the Joy to see you last, I have looked a little into the next
Life, as despayring that in this, I should be able to find any thing which
might be worthy to fill up that place, which is made empty by your ABSENCE. And
now by chance, or rather by Gods good Providence, I have met with a
Prospectiue-Glasse, which gives me a view of Heaven, and Hell, in a very
express and clear manner, though the Countries themselves be far off. I
should never have been able to fit the Instrument toward any eye; but
finding now, that all was ready made (and that, so excellently) to my hand, I
have adventured to frame a case for it, after the English fashion. The thing in
it self, you will not choose but like, for it is excellent; and I am but too
sure, that you will love the part that I have therein; because the same Love
has ceeled up the eyes of your judgment concerning me. But if (abstracting
from that) you chance to like it, I shall stand in little fear of the censure
of others, who must give me leave to believe, that there lives not amongst them
all (for ought I know) a man that can outstrippe you in Translating. Herein I
have seen precious things of your doing; both in Prose, and Verse, and in
several Languages. And I never misliked any Translation of yours, but that
one, when you translated your Presence, from the eyes of my body, by whose
Abse^ce, I am in part deprived of being able to translate some of your virtues
into my soul. The least that I can do against Absence and Distance, for so
great a wrong, is to send them a Defiance; and to bid them be sure, that if
they mean to make me love you one hairs breadth the less, they shall loose
their labor. Nay they kindle me rather, to make this expression of my self;
and to acknowledge (as I may say) this Statute of my heart, before the World.
For I am fixed in giving you all power over me, and I glory in being subject to
such a Friend.

Your, what you will G. M.

THE PREFACE.
A Learned and holy man of this age, besides the odor of his Sanctity, has
left suruiuing, diverse Monuments of his writing; and, amongst the rest, three
books Of the Imitation of Christ our Lord. In the first of these, he shows,
under several Titles, the several Offices which his divine Majesty is
performing to the souls of men; as he is our God; our Redeemer; our King; our
Savior; our Mediator; our Advocate; our Captain; our Sacrifice; our Spouse;
our Doctor; our Lawgiver; our Pastor; our Light; our Life; and, to conclude,
our Judge. The whole book is large, and not only should I have felt the pains
in translating it all, but I might have doubted of your Patience, whether or no
it would have reached, to the reading of it over, with due intention. The last
of the Tytles, delivered to us by our Author, I have here translated; and you
may see, that he is a Lion by his nails.

In this discourse of Judge, which is not founded upon private contemplations,
and much less, either upon loose coniections, or streyned conceits; but even
wholly in effect, upon the passages of holy Scriptures (though not cyted word
for word, but duly pondered, and truly paraphrased, as the best spiritual
writers are wont to do) he does admirably describe the sovereign Majesty, the
incomparable Mercy, and the inviolable Justice of our Judge. And (as incident
heerunto) he delivers us such a Map of the next world; and does so describe
the Paradise of heaven, and the Zona Torrida of hell, as may serve, either to
ravish us with joy, or strike us through with horror, and make us even wither,
for woe; according to the several state that we may be in. If we be members of
the true Church of Christ our Lord; and if, withal, we be in the state of
grace, we shall look with more hope upon the joys of heaven, then with fear,
upon the torments of hell; and so, we shall get courage in the good course
begun. But if, on the other side, we be cut off from the communion of the true
Church of Christ our Lord, by any one error in belief; or if yet, being
Catholics, we be remaining in state of mortal sin, this Treatise, I hope,
will help to guide us by the hand out of those Labyrinths; and place us in that
high way of Faith and Charity, without which we can have no title to heaven;
but the ^aws of hell, will be sure to suck, and swallow, and devour us.

Let no man therefore be deceived, or rather let no man deceive himself. God is
God, and he will be served. And it is all reason, that, by our believing, and
living as we ought, true Homage may be done to that infinite, invisible,
immortal, and most pure Majesty of his. And man is man; a thing of nothing,
for of nothing he was made. And as now he is, what is he, but a Pedlars-shop
full of trash; or rather a very sincke full of filth; and to what height of
honor ought he esteem himself to be advanced, if he had but even a single
leave, to serve and love such an omnipotent Creator? But now, since besides
this, he is to be rewarded with an immortal Crown of glory for so doing (the
sublime excellency whereof, no created power can comprehend) what marvel can
it be, that the torments be also infinite, to which he shall be adjudged and
chayned; if instead of doing reverence to God, by embracing an incorrupted
faith, and leading either an innocent, or penitent life, he enter into
rebellion and treason against him, by embracing any error in belief, or
falling into sensuality, or any one other mortal sin, if withal, he dye
therein, without repentance.

It is not want of Charity, in them who say, That all such as dye with any
mortal sin upon their souls shall eternally be tormented in the fire of
hell; but it is true Charity to declare this truth, that so, in time men may
know to what to trust. S. Paul abounded, and ouerflowed with Charity; and that
very Charity it was, which obliged him to proclaim this doctrine; Gal. 5. v. 20.
That, the works of the flesh be manifest, and he says they are these,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Impudicity, Luxury, Serving of Idols, Witchcrafts,
Emnities, Contentions, Emulations, Angers, Brawles, Dissentions, Sects, Enuies,
Murders, Ebrieties, Commessations, and such like. Of these (says he) I
foretell you, as I have foretold you, that they which do such things as these,
shall not obtain the kingdom of God.

Now if these Sins do exclude men from heaven, others also which are as
grievous, will be as sure to exclude them; and the more certainly will they
exclude them, the more grievous, and enormous they fall out to be. For if
simple fornication do make a soul liable to the pains of hell, what will not
Adultry do? If for a private emnity with a man's neighbor, he shall be adjudged
to those eternal and unquenchable flames, what shall be not be, for dividing
the Church of Christ our Lord, by unbelieving any doctrine, or disobeying the
government thereof?

I say the unbelieving of any doctrine, as before I said of the committing any
other mortal sin. For this is as true, in the law of our faith, as it is, in
the law of our life, That, Qui in vno peccat omniu^ factus est reus; he that
offends in one, is made guilty of all. Not that he who offends in all, shall
not be more deeply damned, then he that does it but in one; but because
whosoever shall have offended mortally against any one commandment of our Lord
God, which concerns good life, or any erroneous doctrine, in difference from
the Catholic belief, is most truly declared to be a breaker of the Law of
God, and a corruptour of his truth; and that as such a one, he shall perish,
except he repent. Woe be therefore to them (and of woe they will be one day
sure) who bring such false weights into the world; and who profane the law of
God, and not only the law, but the lawgiver himself; In that they allow him
not to be a perfect hater, and a severe punisher of all mortal sin, in what
soul soever it be found. Whereas yet he protests himself (throughout the
whole Current of holy Scripture) not only to hate, but to abhor it. The Sap.
14.10.
impious man, and his impiety are hated by Almighty God. The Prou. 3.32.
scoffer, the Prou. 12.22.
Liar, and the Prou. 16.5.
Arrogant person, is an abomination to God. The Prou. 15.9.
way of the wicked man, and every wicked thought of man, is abhorred of God.
Thou Ezech. 33.8.
wicked man, thou shall dye the death. Behold Ierem. 23.19.
the whirlewind of the indignation of God shall go forth (says the Lord of
Hosts) and it shall come upon the head of sinners, like a furious tempest.

Now, if any man perhaps shall tell me, that these places, and the like, are
only meant of Infidels, or such other wicked men, as shall have spent their
whole life in the offense of God; but that christians and such as lead not a
life so prophanly wicked as those others, are not meant hereby, howsoever they
may commit some mortal sin, and continue therein; let such a one behold, how
the holy Ghost takes care to answer his objection, by assuring us, Ezech.
18.26.
That, If a man, who had been never so just, should yet forsake that justice by
committing sin, he should dye therein. And then he can look for nothing, but
that Day, whereof another Prophet says: Mal. 4.1.
That it shall come burning, like a furnace, where all proud men, and all other
persons working wickedness, should be like stubble, and that this day, shall set
them on fire. Nay it is a fearful thing to see, in the Prophet Jeremy, how our
Lord does swear, That how full of privilege soever, and how dear soever a
man may have been to him, yet if he fall to sin, and dye therein, he will
reject him. For speaking of a sinner he expresses it, in these words of
Terror: Ierem. 22.24.
As I live (says our Lord) if Iechonias the son of Ioachim the king of Judah,
were a ring, which I did wear upon mine own right hand, I would pluck it off.

So deadly does Almighty God hate sin, and sinners; and so infallibly will he
judge them to be tormented for the same, in those eternal ardours of hell, if
they repent not cordially thereof before their death. And what a fit of phrensy
then, must that be, which can possess us so far, as to make us, for any
temporal and base delight, to forsake, and be forlorn by that God of eternal
Majesty, and of infinite beauty.

But in the self same manner, the Fathers and Doctors of the holy Church,
have testified this truth upon all occasions. They were not Infidells, but
faithful Christians to whom S. Chrysostom said Hom. 22. ad pop. Antioch.
tom. 5.
(when withal, he took himself into the number:) Consider that without
fail, we must all depart, to stand before that Judge, whom it will not be
possible for us to de eaue; and where, not only our actions shallbe judged, but
even our very words, and thoughts; and where we shall endure extreme punishment
for those things, which here have seemed but small. Be always remembering these
things; and see thou never forget that fire which is never to be extinguished.
Let us therefore (says S. Ambrose) Ambr. in psalm 38.
lament our sins that we may deserve pardon. If our sins be not forgiven in
this life we shall have no rest in the next. The Aug. de fide and oper. cap. 15.
tom. 4.
burning of such as shall be damned, will be eternal, as the fire is to be which
shall burn them: and Truth affirms, that not they only are to be sent unto it
who wanted Faith, but they also who wanted good works. This last is said by S.
Augustine, and he also affirms thus in another place: No one good deed is
left unrewarded, nor no one sin unpunished. At the last Day (says Greg. l.
9. Moral.
S. Gregory) that devouring flame shall burn such as are now polluted with
carnal pleasures; then shall the infinitely wide mouth of hell, swallow down
such persons, as here are puffed up with pride. And they, who through their
fault have here performed the will of their crafty Tempter, shall fall like
reprobates into those torments, together with that guide of theirs. And Greg.
l. 5. Moral.
according to the quality of their sin, the punishment thereof shallbe
ordained, and every damned soul shallbe tormented in the fire of hell, after
the rate of her demerit.

This is then the verdict of the Fathers and Saints of the holy Catholic
Church, and of the Apostle Saint Paul; yea and so the holy Ghost himself who
wrote by his pen, and which is every where clearly given, to prove this
certain truth, That any one mortal sin, whether it might be against good
life, or true belief, does shut up the gates of heaven against us, and set
open the bottomless Abyss of hell to swallow us, unless we repent thereof
sincerely, before our death.

The hour of which death, because it is so wholly hidden from us, it will
infinitely concern us, both instantly and exactly, to cast up all the acco^pts
of our Conscience; to be cordially sorry for all our sins; to confess them
distinctly; to purpose an amendment firmly; and to satisfy for them intierly.
For this is a business which must not be dispatched after a cursory and
superficial manner; but we are to consider with what care we would consult
about our estats, if they were in danger; or about our lives, if they lay on
bleeding. And here we must not fail to use so much more delige^ce then there,
as Eternity is of more importance, then a moment of Time. And in fine, we are
to do it so, as, at the hour of our death, (when we shall go to stand before
our Judge) we would be glad that we had done it. For without this true
repentance which signifies a flight from sin with grief; and supposes a
flight toward God with love, it is no Faith in Christ our Lord, which will
serve the turn to preserve us out of that lake of eternal torment. But
rather, the more knowledge we shall have had of him by Faith, the greater will
our torment be, if we do not pe^nance for the sins which we shall have
committed against that Majesty of his Which, the same Faith tells us to be
infinite; and that his hatred against sin is also infinite; and that as, with
strange mercy, he will assume to incomprehensible, immortal joy, the soul,
which at that day he shall find to be free from sin; so in whomsoever he he
shall perceive, that sin remains, the same soul will he then instantly adiudg
to that sea of fire and brimston, where it will sail in sorrow, and blaspheme,
and rage, for all eternity.

To the precious Death, and Passion of Christ our Lord, we owe and must
acknowledge (amongst innumerable others) this unspeakable benefit (for which
let all the Angels for ever bless and praise his holy name), That through the
infinite merit thereof, we may be received to grace, by means of true
contrition and pe^nance; how often, and how wickedly soever, we shall have
offended that high Majesty. But that Death and Passion, will never save the
soul of any one creature, unless both that mystery, and all the other
mysteries of Catholic faith, be well believed, and al sin be cordially
detested; which sin, is a monster, so fierce and cruel, as that it did cost
the very son of God his life. By that life, and by that death I beg, that
thou will give over to trample with thy durty feet, in the sacred Blood Royal
of our B. Savior, which he shed for thee upon the Cross. For so thou do,
preferring Barabbas before him, as often as thou co^mittest any mortal sin;
and so long thou have continued to do it, as thy soul has been spotted with
that crime.

Or if thou have so little of the noble in thee, as to be moved more by thine
own interest, then by the consideration of that immense benefit, which the
fou^tain of Majesty vouchsafed, with such excess of love, to this wicked
creature man; then, do I conjure thee, even by that very interest of thine
own, that instantly thou make have into thy self; and that, discharging thy
soul by pe^nance, of whatsoever may be offensive to the pure eyes of God, thou
implore his mercy now, which may save thee from that inflexible justice of his,
in the last dreadful day. At which time, even this very paper will appear to
thy extreme, and everlasting confusion, if thou forbear to serve thy self of
this admonition. Heaven and earth shall pass away, but the word of God shall
remain for ever. Matthew. 24. v. 30.
And that word has thus advised us, and thus assured us by the mouth of the
most B. Apostle S. Paul, speaking to the Galathia^s: Gal. 6.7.
Nolite errare, Deus non irridetur: Quae enim seminauerit homo, haec and metet.
Quoniam qui seminat in carne sua, de carne and metet corruptionem; qui autem
seminat in spiritu, de spiritu metet vitam aeternam. The plain and clear
sense whereof, is as follows: Take heed you frame not certain fantastical,
and false opinions to your selves, as if you could ouer-reach Almighty God, and
euacuate his truth, and make him believe that he gave you a free law whereby to
live, the^ indeed he gave. But be well assured that the very truth is this: Let
every man alive, consider seriously what he sowes, for just so, and no
otherwise, shall he reap. If you sow works of flesh (which are particulerly
cited before, in this Preface, out of a former Chapter of S. Paul to the same
Galathians) you shall reap nothing but corruption, but destruction, but
everlasting damnation. But if you sow works of the spirit, which are wholly
contrary to those others, and are there expressed to be Charity, Joy, Peace,
Patience, Benignity, Goodness, Longanimity, Meekenes, Faith, Modesty, Continency
and, Chastity, you shall in virtue of that spirit (wherewith you live, and
whereby you are to walk) pass on from this transitory to an eternal life; and
then at the most liberal hands of God you shall receive a most precious crown
of immortal glory.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS DISCOVRSE.
HOW the office of being our Judge does belong to Christ our Lord, as he is man:
and of the great benefit which God imparteth to us, in giving him to be our
Judge. Chap. I. Of the great desire which Christ our Lord has (for as much as
concerns him) not to condemn any one, in his judgment, but to save them al.
Chap. II. Of the benefit which Christ our Lord imparteth to us, in giving us to
understand, and feel the grieuousnes of sin by the means and manner of his
Judgment, to the end that we may in time do penance for it. Chap III. How we
are to have great sense, of the grieuousnes of sin, by reason of the
demonstrations which shall be made by all the creatures of God before the
Judgment. Chap. IIII. How Christ our Lord, discovers the hate which he
carries toward sin, by the so particular account which he taks thereof.
Chap. V. How Christ our Lord declares to us the detestation which he carries
against sin; whereof the wicked are convinced by that sentence which he
pronounces against them. Chap. VI. How Christ our Lord discovers the
grieuousnes of sin, and the hatred which he carries against it, by the last
sentence whereby he is to condemn the wicked, and by the punishment which he
inflicteth upon them. Chap. VII. How the grieuousnes of sin is yet more
discovered, by the causes of the Judgment, which are alleged by Christ our
Lord. Chap. VIII. How a Christian is to draw a detestation of sin, out of the
consideration of this Judgment of God, and great vigilance in the leading of a
good life. Chap. IX. Of other Considerations, from which we may draw the
detestation of sin, and the care of leading a good life. Chap. X. How a
Christian is to draw out of the consideration of the divine Judgment, a great
fear of offending God, that so he may fly far from it. Chap. XI. How it is
very necessary and full of profit, that a Christian do exercise himself in this
holy fear; and accompany it with the exercise of divine love. Chap. XII. Of
how great value, and merit, this holy Fear is. Chap. XIII. Of the favors
which Christ our Lord will do to the good at the day of Judgment; and of the
Joy which they shall conceive, by seeing the signs which precede that
Judgment; and by beholding the glory of the Cross, which shall go before
Christ our Lord. Chap. XIV. Of the favor which Christ our Lord will do his
servants, at the day of Judgment, by separating them from the wicked. Chap. XV.
Of the favor which Christ our Lord imparteth to his servants at the day of
Judgment, by giving them his benediction, and communicating his kingdom to
them. Chap. XVI. Of the felicity which Christ our Lord will communicate to his
servants, in the kingdom of heaven. Chap. XVII Of other benefits which Christ
our Lord co^municateth to his servants in his heavenly kingdom; and of the
fruit of gratitude, which we must gather from the Consideration of this reward.
Chap. XVIII. How all the things of this life which are good, and which give
delight, do induce us to a desire of the kingdom of heaven. Chap. XIX. How
from this knowledge, concerning, the kingdom of Heaven, which Christ our Lord
will give his servants, we are to gather a resolute purpose to fly from sin,
and to fulfill the Commandments of God, and to despise the commodityes of this
life. Chap. XX. How we are much to animate our selves, toward the exercise of
good works; considering the great estimation which Christ our Lord does make of
them at the day of Judgment; and the reward which he also imparteth to them.
Chap. XXI.
THE IVDGE
CHAP. I. How the office of being our Judge, does belong to Christ our Lord, as
he is man; and of the great benefit which God imparteth to us, in giving him to
us, to be our Judge.
ALTHOUGH the indignation, and wrath of Christ our Lord against the wicked, and
the punishment which he inflicteth upon their sins, do belong to the office
which he has of being a Judge; yet so also does it belong to him, under the
same Title, to do favor to such as are Good, to defend them, to imparte
benefits to them; and both to express mercy toward them in the Judgment
which he exercises upon their faults, and to give the^ reward for their good
deeds, and for this reason it is that I will declare the benefits and favors
which we obtain by Christ our Lord, in respect that he is our Judge. It Why it
was wholly fit for the second Person of the most holy Trinity to be our Judge at
the last day.
belongs to Christ our Lord, that he be our Judge, in regard that he is a
man, and because he took the nature of man upon him; as being a most
convenient thing, that the Judge be seen by all such as are to be judged by
him; and that the guilty may well understand, and hear the sentence that shall be
given against them; and that for as much as men are composed of a body and a
soul, they may perceive it with their soul, and hear it with the senses of
their body. Now if Christ our Lord, as he is only God, were to be the Judge, he
could not then be seen by the wicked; and the sentence which immediately he
should pronounce would not interiourly be perceived by them; and therefore it
was fit that he should be our Judge as man, and should pass his Judgment upon
men, that so he might be seen, and heard by all.

This Mystery was discovered to us, by Christ our Lord, and Savior himself,
whilst he was saying: Joan. 5.
The Father judges no man, but he has given all judgment to the Son, and
he gave him au hority to exercise Judgment, as the son of man. That is to
say, Although the eternal Father have the supreme authority, and power of
Judging, and that to him it does principally belong to approve, and reward that
which is good, as also to reprove and punish that which is evil (and the same
also has the Son; and the holy Ghost the same, as being one and the same God
with the Father) yet the office of Judging exteriourly, and after a visible
manner to be seen, in the Tribunal, and with the authority and Majesty of a
Judge; to give exteriourly a sentence which may sensibly be perceived by such
as are Judged, this does only belong to the person of the Son of God. Who by
means of the most sacred humanity which he has immediately united to himself,
and by the power which from all eternity he has as God; and by that which in
Time was communicated to him as man; he is to make this visible and exterior
Judgment, this being an execution of the interior invisible Judgment, which is
made of all the most Blessed Trinity. And although this exterior Judgment, be
also ascribed to the Father, and to all the Blessed Trinity, as to the prime
cause of all things, yet he who is the immediate executour of this Judgment,
is Jesus Christ the Son of the living God; because the sacred Humanity is
only united immediately to the person of the Son, and that Humanity does make
this Judgment, as the instrument of Divinity.

Now An unspeakable benefit of God who gave us Christ our Lord for our Judge.
an immense benefit, and an imcomprehensible mercy it was, for God the Father
to give us Christ Jesus for the Iu ge of our cause, as he is man, as he is our
brother, and our Savior If a delinquent were in prison for greiuous Crimes,
deserving death, and that he had a brother who most tenderly loved him, and
esteemed him, and did so much desire his liberty, and his good, that to deliver
him out of prison, and from death, he had spent his fortune, and had exposed
himself to many troubles, and even to the hazard of death; and if the king
should assign that brother of the party for the Judge of his cause, with
Sovereign power, to Judge him without appeal; what kind of favor, what
clemency would it be, which heerin should be used toward that man? How full of
joy and comfort would he be, upon the naming of such a Judge? How confident and
secure would he make himself, that the sentence would be full of pity, and as
favorable to him, as possible his cause might bear? Well therefore, since all
men, according to the From which Christ our Lord and his B. Mother are excepted.
ordinary law are faulty and guilty, and it being necessary, according to the
divine Justice and wisdom, that Judgment be given upon them; and the cause of
all them, who have committed mortal sin, being so important, that either they
must be condemned to immense and everlasting torments, or be declared not
guilty, but worthy to enjoy the kingdom of heaven; what greater favor, what
clemency could be desired, or even thought of, then that God the Father should
be pleased to give us, for our Judge, Christ Jesus, who is our brother, and of
the self same nature with us; and who loves us with an unspeakable love; and
who does so much esteem, and desire both our liberty, and our glory, that for
the procuring thereof, he has offered himself to most bitter pains, and
scorns, and even to the death of the Cross? O how great a comfort, O how
incomparable a joy is this, for those sons of Adam, who feel the greatness of
this benefit? O how confident, and secure ought they to be, that Judgment shall
go upon them with great mercy; and that the rigor of Justice, shall be
te^pered with much pity; and that the sentence shall pass in favor of them,
for as much as shall be possible, without impeachment of the holy law, and most
sweet ordination of Almighty God.

CHAP. II. Of the great desire, which Christ our Lord has (for as much as
concerns him) not to condemn any one, in his Judgment, but to save them all.
THIS most merciful Judge, has given us some most evident testimonies, of the
most ardent desire which he has, not to condemn us in his divine Judgment;
but to deliver us as free and safe, and that the sentence may wholly pass in
favor of us. One of these testimonies, and that a very admirable one, is this;
That before he would come, the second time, to make an universal Judgment of
sinners, and to condemn and punish such as he should find to be faulty, Mark
this excellent doctrine, for it is full of truth and comfort.
he came, in that first coming of his, to pass a Judgment upon sins
themselves; to destroy, and to consume, and to deprive them of being, and life;
and in like manner also to pass a Judgment, against all the enemies of our
souls namely the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and to overcome, and
dispossess them of all power, and Title, which they might make to men; and to
defeat those forces which they mainteyned to the preuidice of men's souls; and
to give men strength, and means, whereby they might defend themselves, and
obtain perfect victory against them all. That so, when he should come to pass
a Judgment upon men, he might find them free from sin; and if not all of
them, yet so many, at least, as would take profit by the grace he gave them;
and consequently that he might have nothing to punish in them. Yea and
moreover, that he might find them conquerours over their enemies, that so he
might give them that reward of glory, for their victory, which he had promised
to such as should overcome.

This is that high Mystery which Christ our Lord discovered to us in the
Gospel, sometime saying, Joan. 3.
That he came not to Judge the world, but to save the world. At other times he
says, that he came to make judgment upon the world, as he teaches us by the
Evangelist saying, Joan. 12.
I came into the world to Judge it. And yet in another place: Joan. 8.
Now is Judgment to pass upon the world. Our Lord means to say heerby, as
himself declares, That at his first coming when he came, in a mortal and
passible body, he came not to pass a Judgment upon men, to chastise and
condemn the wicked, by doing Justice, and pronouncing a sentence of
condemnation against them. For if he had come to this end, and that he would
have passed this Judgment at his first coming; he would, in effect, have bin
obliged to comdemne all the world; for, in effect he found them all in sin; and
even those few Just persons who were free, were so, in virtue of his being come
to save them. And if that first coming of his, had been to Judge men, even
those few had also been in state of sin, and had been condemned. He therefore
explicates himself by saying I came not to judge the world, but to save it,
That is, I came not as a Judge, but as a Savior, I came not to condemn
sinners by doing Justice on them, and by passing a sentence of condemnation
against them; But Christ our Lord delivers no man from the pains of hell, by
his sacred Passion, but such as first are delivered by it from sin.
I came to save them, by suffering and dying for them, and by communicating my
Justice and merits to them; that so I might free them from sin, and Justify
them; and give them the spiritual health of grace, and of eternal glory. And
to this very office of saving men, is ordained that Judgment, which he says
he came to make in that first coming, and which he was to pass against
sins, and against the devil also in favor of men. So does he declare
himself, saying: Through my Passion and Death, Judgment is now to pass, and
sentence is to be given, in favor of the men of this world, against the
devil. For till now, he held men subject, and captiued under his power and
tyranny; but now, by the payment which I am making for the^, they are to
remain safe and free. Now, the devil, who is the Prince of this world, who
held men subject under sin, is to be deposed from that dominion which he held
in the world; for innumerable souls, which were captiued in error and sin,
are to be converted and saved; and remedy shall be imparted to them all, whereby
they may be delivered from him, and may obtain eternal glory.

So also, in that first coming of Christ our Lord to save mankind, he made a
kind of distinguishing and dividing Judgment, between the good, and the bad;
the elect, and the reprobate. For when he was preaching, and working miracles,
and procuring the salvation of the world; some did profit by his coming,
receiving his faith, and obeying his Gospel, and participating of his merits.
And others again, because they would not believe in him, nor serve themselves
of his remedies, did still remain in their sins; yea, and through their
ingratitude, and the hardness of their hearts, they grew therein. And thus by the
occasion of the coming of Christ our Lord, the distinction grew more apparent,
between the faithful and the unfaithful; between Just persons, and sinners;
between the elect, and such as were reproved by God.

For they who received the faith of Christ, and did follow him, by the
imitation of his life, and by the taking up of his Cross, according to their
That is according to the state, wherein they were at that time.
present justice, were just persons; and as long as they did persevere, they
had signs in them, of being predestined; and they who received not the
faith, according to their then present state, were wicked and reprobate This
did our Lord declare, when he said: I came into this world, that they who see
not, might se^; and they who see might be blind. Which was as much to say, Upon
my coming, did this judgment follow, and this distinction was made amongst
men; that many who in their souls were blind, through ignorance and error,
and vice, and who did not see the truth, nor did walk in the right way to
heaven, by believing in me, with a lively faith, they I say, might see the
truth, and follow it. And that many others, who saw, and had knowledge of the
Scriptures, and did know the law, and the Prophets; and who both in their own,
and in the peoples opinion, and estimation, were held wise, and had a
spiritual light wherewith to look into divine things; they, I say, for their
pride and ingratitude, should remain blind; and, going astray from the right
way, should not find their error and perdition.

Another divine and most singular testimony, which Christ our Lord has given
us, of the desire which he has, in this judgment of his, not to find any
sins which he might punish, nor any sinners whom he should be so obliged to
condemn, is, That Let all Angels adore him for this inestimable benefit to
men.
at his first coming he made a law, which was to last till the end of the
world, whereby he gave faculty to all sinners, that during the whole time whilst
their life should last, they might pass a Judgment upon themselves;
acknowledging their sins, and accusing themselves thereof with grief, and
confessing them to a Priest, who should hold the place of Christ our Lord; and
satisfying for them, according to the judgment of the same Ghostly father; and
that they performing this, he would not, in his Judgment, either condemn or
punish them, but would declare them to be not Guilty, and would impart the
kingdom of heaven to the^. And that, if having once passed this Judgment upon
themselves, they should yet return again to sin, and become abnoxious thereby
to eternal condemnation; yet still as long as their life should last, they
might return to pass the same Judgment upon themselus, as often as they
would; and that if they should do it according to Confessing them all clearly
with great sorrow and firm purpose of amendme^t
Truth, he would not condemn them, but would admit them into his company, and
make them happy. O Judgment which is so dearly sweet! O Judge, who is so full
of mercy! and how unanswerable is it proved by this most pitteous Judge, that
his intention and desire, is not to punish but to pardon; not to condemn, but
to absolve and save; since before he comes to pass his Judgment, he uses so
many means, and applies so many remedies, to the end that he may find no
sins to punish, nor no sinners to condemn.

If an earthly Judge, had his prison full of delinquents and thieves, and
murderers, and should make a kind of agreement and bargain with them, that
Consider seriously heerof and admire the infinite goodness of God in that,
wherein the blind world thinks it has hard measure, namely in the Institution
of the Sacrament of Confession.
every one of them might choose what friend or kinsman of his own he would,
and in secret should declare his offense to him, delivering to him the whole
truth, and undergoing but that penalty which he should impose upon him for the
same; And that, upon some day of the same year, himself would come to the
prison to Judge them; and that he would pronounce them to be free, who had
declared their offenses to friend or kinsman of theirs; and who had performed
the penalty which he had imposed; and that he would only condemn those others,
who would not have recourse to that remedy; what would you say of this Judge,
and of this agreement? You would say, that there nether is, nor ever was, nor
ever will be in the world any Judge, who shows, or is to show any such mercy;
nor who ever made, or will ever make any such Capitulation, with persons who
had deserved to dye; nor are there any laws on earth, which can permit any such
thing. And if there were any Judge, who would submit himself to the like
condition, there would no delinquent be found, who would not joyfully perform
this agreement, and so be declared for not guilty.

Well then, Christ Jesus, the Eternal Judge, and who is of infinite power and
Majesty, does show this mercy to all such sinners as are worthy of eternal
death. And he has made this bargain, and agreement with them all; and that is
yielded to by the laws of heaven, which the laws of earth will not endure. Let
us therefore serve our selves of this mercy, let us perform the articles of
this agreement; and let us, in time, pass a Judgment upon our selves; let us
confess our sins with true sorrow; and let us amend our lives, to the end
that when at the hour of our death, in the particular Judgment; and at the end
of the world in the Universal judgment we shall come before this great Judge, he
may find no sins to punish or condemn in us. For it is said by S. John the
Apostle, concerning this Lord: 1. Joan. 1.
If we confess our sins, repenting our selves truly of them before God and his
substitute, God is just, and faithful, in fulfilling the promises, and
rewarding the meritts of Chri^ our Savior; and so he will pardon us our
sins, through his merits, and will cleanse us from all wickedness, as he has
promised.

O most unhappy men who deferring to do penance, and to make amendment of
their lives, despise this mercy of God, as S. Paul says by making ill use
thereof; Romans 2.
And Woe be to the^ who will needs be wicked even because God is so infinitely
good.
by this means they treasure up the wrath and punishment of God for
themselves, against the day of his wrath, which is, that, of his Judgment.
These laws of mercy were not made, nor are they proclaimed unto men, to the
end that thereupon, they should take such a wicked strange presumption to
sin; but that, if they have sinned, they should not be dismayed; but that in
hope of this divine mercy, they should instantly correct themselves, and
reform their lives and obtain pardon. So does the glorious Apostle S John
advertise us; for having said: That if we confess our selves well, God will
pardon us, he insta^tly adds this, 1. Joan. 2.
These things have I written, to you my children, to the end, that you may not
sin but that you may fly from sin at full speed but yet if any man do
sin, we have an Advocate before the Father. That is to say, let him not be
dismayed, nor out of hope; but let him instantly be converted to God, confessing
his sins, and doing penance for the same; because we have an Advocate and
Mediator before the eternal Father, which is Jesus Christ the Just, and the
very fountain of Justice, who made satisfaction for all our sins.

CHAP. III. Of the benefit which Christ our Lord imparteth to us, in giving us
to understand, and feel the grieuousnes of sin, by the means and manner of
his Judgment, to the end, that we may in time do penance for it.
ANOTHER most singular benefit, which Christ our Lord imparteth to us, under
the quality of his being our Judge; is to make us know and feel, the
grieuousnes of of sin, that so we may be drawn to abhor it greatly, and to
conceive a true fear of falling into any offense of God. This knowledge, and
this holy Fear do we fetch from the consideration of that divine Judgment,
since notwithstanding that Christ our Savior, is of his own Nature most
pitteous, and most benign; and being the very fountain of pity and mercy;
and being most profoundly meek, and sweet, and the very fountain of sweetness;
and being so great a lover of men, that he dies for them; and so much desiring,
and esteeming the salvation of their souls, that he gives his life for the
same; we The terror wherewith Christ our Lord will appear, at the later day.
yet see, that in his Judgment he will come extremely full of cause, to make us
horribly fear; and most terrible will he be in the highest degree, and full of
wrath and fury, and for zeal of justice against sinners. He will come sitting
down, upon those horses of the heaven which are the clouds; Matt. 25.
he will come in a warlike manner, accompanied by all the squadrons and armies
of heaven; Sap. 5.
he will draw with him the whole world of creatures, being all ranged and
placed in form of battle against sinners. Sopho. c. 1.
Yea, and even the very Saints, and Blessed souls themselves, who are so full
of pity, and have been the Advocates of sinners, will come armed, and shall
be made both Judges, and the Ministers of divine Justice against them. He shall
have, for the Messenger which speaks of his coming, Psalm. 96.
a most furious fire, which shall burn and purge all corporeal creatures; and
a most hideous frightfull sound of mysterious trumpets, which shall spend
themselves over the whole world; and shall make all creatures tremble; and shall
pass and pierce even to the lowest bottom of hell, and shall make those
souls spring out of those infernal habitations of theirs, full of horrible
confusion, to resume their bodies and appear in Judgment. In this manner does
the Scripture describe the coming of Christ our Lord to Judgment.

Let us now consider, who it is that causes this mutation of Christ our Lord.
Who changes him in so strange a fashion? Who makes him, of most pitiful, so
extremly fierce? Who, of most profoundly meek, so full of wrath? Of must
delightfully sweet, so full of fury and terror? Of peaceable, so given to
war? Of a refuge and shelter for sinners, to be grown such a severe punisher
of the faulty? Sins See here, if sin be not a dangerous companion to live
withal.
they are which cause this great mutation, and which do so far estrange him
from that most benign, and sweet condition of his. The hatred and profound
detestation which he has of sin; the lively feeling he has, to see himself
so foulely offended; the greiuous weight which our faults do carry in his
divine presence, whereby his will is transgrest, and his law despised, do make
him grow so frightfull, and so very fierce, toward the doing of justice, and
taking vengance upon sinners. So says the Apostle of Christ, Judas Thadaeus,
Iud. 1.
speaking of this Judgment: Mark well, for our Lord does come accompanied with
the innumerable troops of holy Angels to pass a Judgment upon all wicked
men; to convince them of all the evil works which they have committed, and of
all the evil words which they have spoken, contrary to the law of God; and to
pronounce a sentence of comdemnation against them.

Since then the hatred which God does carry against sin, is so very great;
since the punishment which he will execute upon sinners in that Judgment of his
is so immense; O it is full of reason, that from the faith and infallible
notice which we have of this truth, all we, who are believers, should fetch a
knowledge of the grieuousnes of sin; and a perfect detestation of the same,
and a profound grief and sorrow for such sin as we have already committed;
and much fear in respect of them which we may commit hereafter. That so we may
fly them, and be freed from the fury of that divine Judgment, and from that
sentence of eternal damnation, which is to be thundered out against sinners.
For The true use which we are to make of considering the terror of the day of
Judgment.
this is the true reason, why this Judgment is discovered, and notified to us,
as S. Paul affirmed whilst he was preaching to the Athenians to this effect:
God does now anounce the truth of his Gospel, to men: to the end that all men
and in all places may do penance of their sins; since he has, with firm
deliberation, ordained a day, at which time he will judge the whole world with
great vprightnes of justice; giving to every one, that reward and punishment
which his works deserve. And this Judgment he will pass upon the world, by
the means of Christ our Lord; who as man, has authority from the eternal
Father, to give visible Judgment upon all men. Act. 17.


CHAP. IIII. How we are to have great feeling, of the grieuousnes of sin, by
reason of the demonstrations which shall be made by all the creatures of God
before the Judgment.
TO the end that from the declaration of the office which Christ our Lord has
of being the Judge; and of the Judgment which is to pass upon the whole
world, we may draw the great fruit of knowing and feeling the greiuousnes of
sin, and of abhorring it, and doing penance for it; and, that we may also
draw from thence, a fear of sin, and of the punishment thereof, we will go
dedeclaring those points, and mysteries of this divine Judgment; which may best
discover to us the immensnes of the hate, which God does carry toward sin;
and of the punishment which he inflicteth upon sinners. The first point which
does discover to us the hate which God does carry toward sin, is, that in
this his terrible Judgment, he will not only punish the sinners who did offend
him by their sins, Matt. 24.
but How insensible creatures, shall after a sort be punished, for having been
made the instrument of man's sin.
he will, after a sort, punish all the Creatures of the whole world, whereby
sinners were assisted and served. The Sun shall grow dark; not as now it
does somtymes, by natural causes; or in respect that any cloud may ouershadow
it; or because the Moon may cast it self between it, and the earth, (as it
happens in the case of an Eclipse) but it is to be obscured, by a supernatural
and miraculous cause; and so it is to be understood, that for a while it shall
loose the whole light it had. The Moon shall also loose her light. The Stars
shall fall from heaven Joel. 2.
either because when they are without light, it shall seem to be, as if they
were fallen, or else for that, in very deed, they shall dislodge themselves from
that high firmament, where they are fixed, and for some time shall fall from
thence, and deteine themselves in the air, till they return again into their
place.

The powers of the heaven shall be moved, that is, those celestial bodies, with
their natural virtue shall tremble, and so shift their places, as in an
earthquake the earth is wont to do; or if it be understood of Angels, the
meaning is, how in that day, they shall make some kind of spiritual
demo^stration, and motion of great admiration. The Sea shall be troubled, and
shall be moved in a most wonderful manner, and with the waves thereof, shall make
such a hideous noise, as will astonish the whole world; and oppress and
afflict with excessive fear and horror, the hearts of mortal men, and will
make them even whither again with woe. The Earth, shall tremble, 2. Pet. 3.
and shall be open in many parts, and shall disclose even the pits of hell. The
Air, with the same Earth, and Sea, shall burn by that most ardent ouerflowing
of fire, which shall consume all the living bodies, of fishes, beasts, and men.
God in his law, commanded the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. c. 13. v. 20.
that when they should be to fight against the Idolatours, and Pagans (who
dwelt in the Land of Promise, and whom he was pleased to punish for their
sins) not only that they should kill the men, but even the very beasts, which
did them service; and so in particular he A sign of this truth in the old
Testament
exacted this of Saul, when he went to fight against the Amalecites; and
because he did not punctually comply with this commandment, but suffered some
of the Cattle to live, God was offended, and Saul was punished. 1. Reg. 3.


Let us now see why God did not content himself, with causing the men who had
sinned to be put to death, but the beasts also, which had no fault. It was to
make men understand and feel, that sin is so great a mischeife, and is so
worthy to be abhorred and punished, and that God does indeed, so much abhor it,
that it is a most convenient thing, not only to punish sinners with eternal
torments and death, but to destroy also, and consume, and as it were to
chastise, the creatures whereof they did serve and help themselves toward their
sins. Therefore is it, that resolving in the Universal Judgment to chastise
the wickedness of all men, in a most complete manner, he will not content
himself to deliver over sinners themselves to those eternal ardours of fire
and those other immense pains of hell; but to the creaturs also whereof they
made some use in sinning, he gives as it were a kind of pain, and punishment,
in detestation of the sins themselves; as also, to the end that they may be
purged, and cleared from that indecency, and deformity which grew to them, by
the service, which they did to sinners. For thus it is, that the Sun, the
Moon, and Stars, which did illuminate sinners whilst they were committing
their sins, shall be deprived by him for a while, of all the light, and beauty
which they have, and he shall convert it into thick darkness. And as for the
Sea, and the Earth, and Air, which gave food to sinners, and did maintain
them, whilst they were offending God, he will make them as it were fear, and
tremble, and will deprive them, for a time, of the natural quality and
disposition they have; and will consume, and kill all those living creatures,
and plants, which were the food of sinners; and will destroy al those
buildings, which were the habitation of wicked men. And thus, through the
mutation, and demonstration, and desolation which in the Judgment, God will
show in all the creatures which served sinners, he does teach and testify the
infinite hatred which he has against sin. And he does induce, and persuade us,
that now, through the knowledge of this truth, we may be drawn to abhor and
detest them; and that with a penitential and holy life, we may cleanse our
souls, as well as possibly we can, from al fault and offense of his divine
Majesty. 2. Pet. 3.
S. Peter This truth is insinuated by S. Peter.
does admonish us of the good effect which we are to draw from the change which
is to be made upon the creatures, by saying to this effect: Since there is a
day of the universal Judgment to come wherein all the creatures, for having
served sinners are to be purged with fire and burnt; infer my brethren from
hence, how diligent, and constant it is fit for you to be, in the leading of a
good life; and how holily and purely you are to converse in this world, and how
vigilant, and careful, it will become you to be, in performing the works of
piety toward God; and of mercy toward your Neighbor; expecting with a lively
faith, that day of our Lord; and approaching and drawing near to him with
speed not with paces of the body, but with the desires and affections of the
soul, desiring and loving this day, and preparing to see your selves at that
time, accompanied with purity of life, and with the exercise of virtue.

CHAP. V. How Christ our Lord, discovers the hate, which he carries toward
sin, by the so particular account which he takes of them all.
ANOTHER mystery of this divine Judgment, discovering the mighty
demonstration, and detestatio^ which God does express against the faults
whereby he is offended; is the so particular account which he will take of us,
and which we all must give, of all the facultyes or powers, and all the senses,
both of our body and soul; and of all the creaturs which we have used; and If
you believe this point of faith to be true I shall not need to wish you to
look well about you.
of all the works which we have performed, all the words which we have
spoken, and all the thoughts which we have conceived, how little soever they
fall out to have been; without leaving out, so much as any one idle word, or
any one idle thought. We shall give account of how we employed our
Understanding; if we did set it on work, upon the inquiry and search of God,
and his truth, and in contemplating on him, and his holy Co^mandments, and the
works of his hands, and the divine words of his mouth. As for the memory, we
shall be questioned, if we have used it, in calling our Lord God to mind,
together with his presence, his goodness, his power, and all his benefits, and
mercies. We shall be arraigned upon the point of our Will, if perhaps it have
been busyed, in the love, and estimation, and desire of God, and the
accomplishment of his Law, and of his will; and in the search of all those
things, which concern the glory of our Lord God.

We shall We shall not only give account of our sins, and the faculties of
our mind, but also of the senses of our body and of the use of all Gods
creatures.
give account, of how we put the senses of our body on work; if we employed
our eyes upon behoulding this fabrike of the world, and these Heavens, and
Elements, and the other works of God, that so, behoulding in these creaturs,
the trace, and sent which they carry in them, of all his divine perfections, we
may raise our selves up by them: So to consider with our souls, the power, and
the wisdom, and the goodness, and the beauty of God, and by this means, to
love and praise him with our whole hearts. So also, if we employed our ears, to
hear the words of the true God; and those instructions, and doctrines, and
admonitions, and examples, which were profitable to the soul; and in hearing
the sweet music of man's voice; and of the instruments which he can use, and
of the birds also of the air, so to stir our selves up, toward devotion, and
to contemplate the much sweetness of that Celestial music; and so to love and
esteem the blessings of heaven. And concerning the Smell, if we employed it
only, upon those things which are necessary for man's life; and through the
sent of creaturs if we aspired toward the sweet savor of virtues, and of
good example; and of the glory of the next life. So also for the Tongue, if it
was moving in the praise of our Lord God, and in offering him devout prayers,
and in learning and teaching those things, which are necessary both for our
selves and our Neighbors; and in discovering, and confessing our sins for
the obtaining of pardon, and redress thereof, and in taking but that food,
which was necessary for the sustenance of our life; and in drawing out of the
gust and savor of corporal meat, a consideration and feeling of the
unspeakable sweetness, and savor of those spiritual foods of grace, and
glory. So also, if we have employed the sense of Feeling with our hands, and
all the rest of our body, upon the only taking of those things, which were
necessary for the same body; and profitable for our soul, and for our
Neighbors, and for the use of our life, and for the exercise of the works of
Charity and Mercy.

This good use of all the powers of our souls and senses of our body does our
Lord God demand of us, when he says, Deuteronomy. 4.
Keep thy self, and keep thy soul, with great care; and of this are we to
make a very exact account, in his divine Judgment. We shall also give account
in the same Judgment of all our sins of speech; such as are vain Oaths,
Reproaches, murmurations, cursings, scoffing of our neighbors, and words of
anger and impatience, of lying, of sowing discord: Of these and others which
are either lascivious, or curious, or vain, of every idle word, says Christ
our Redeemer, Matt. 12.
shall men give account in the day of Judgment; and that word goes for idle
which is neither necessary, nor profitable. Account must also be given of all
sins of deed; such as are disobedience to parents, and other Superiors,
revenge, ill in treaty of our neighbors, dishonesty, injustice, usurping and
detayning the goods of others against right, unlawful bargains, pride in
government, excess in the furniture of houses, of clothes, of expenses
otherwise, and in the intertaineme^t of servants; excess also in diet, in
play, and in other superfluous and vain things: Of all these, and of all other
evil deeds, account must be given, as Ecclesiastes says; Eccles. 12.
All things which are done by man, both good and bad, shallbe presented in that
divine Judgment, to be there examined; and for every work which shall be found
erroneous and ill, he shall be punished. We shall give account of al our
thoughts, such as are rash Judgment; consents which are given to revenge, or
else uncleanness or voluntary delights, in any thing which is ill; or to inward
hatred; or in fine, to thoughts which are unprofitable For as the Wise man
says, Sap. 1
God will examine, and judge the thoughts of the wicked.

Besides this, we shall give A point of great moment and little thought on.
account of our sins of Omission, which are the most in number, and ly most
hidden from our sight. For having forborne to pray, to read good books, to
fast, to perform other penances, and mortifications, and to confess, and
communicate. For having omitted to do the works of Justice, and mercy, in
certain cases, and at certain times, when either some particular precept, or
the great necessity of doing those works, did oblige us to them. For having
failed to comply with many duties of our calling, and offices, to which we were
bound by the obligations either of God or man. We shall give account, how we
have profitted by those spiritual and supernatural graces, which God has
given us; such as are his Sacraments; the guifte of Faith; the Doctrine of the
Gospel; good Sermons, holy exampls, virtuous conuersations, the admonitions,
and reprehensions of our Superiors, and Ghostly Fathers; and the interior
inspirations which God has given us. We shall give account, how we have used
our natural and temporal benefits, as namely our Health; if we have employed
it upon the service of that Lord who gave it; Our Time, if we have spent it
profitably; our Reputation, if we used it to the glory of God, and the good of
our Neighbor. Our Estate and temporal goods, if we have employed them, only
to the succor of the true necessities of our selves, our family, and our
neighbors, and of those things which are profitable to the life of a Christian
man, and to the honest Condition of every one.

The account which is to be given for these sins of Omission, and the
punishment which is allotted to them, Christ our Lord declared in that Parable
of the Talents, when he told that unprofitable servant, that the Talent which
God gave him, (which are his natural and spiritual gifts, as also his
temporal goods) was not well employed by him, nor used in those works which
were agreeable to God; and he said thus to him; Matt. 25.
Thou negligent and wicked servant, since thou say, that I am rigorous, and
that I expect more then I laid out, why did thou not put out that Talent, to
profit which I gave thee? That is, why did thou not make the right use of
what I gave thee, employing it well in the exercise of virtue, in the increase
of merit, and in the multiplication of good works? And so, when he had rebuked
this sloathfull servant, he commands the ministers of his Justice, to excecute
the sentence, which he gives against him, when he says, Take that unprofitable
servant, and cast him into exterior darkness, which is that of Hell; where
there is lamentation, and everlasting torment, through the pains of
intolerable both heat and could, and other torments also, which are to be
endured there.

CHAP. VI. How Christ our Lord declares the detestation which he carries
against the sins of wicked men; whereof they are convinced, by the sentence
which he pronounces against them.
THESE are the things, whereof a man is to give account in that divine Judgment
of God. And this is that, which now is to be considered, that so he may know
how deeply God does feel the weight of sin, and consequently how to move
himself to detest it. And withal let him ponder, how after, that Christ our
Lord has demanded this account, of the^ whom he finds to be culpable, for
not having complied with these obligations; but proceeded contrary to his
commandments: How, I say, that most just Judge will convince them in that
terrible Tribunal, before all the Inhabitants both of heaven and earth, saying
to them in his manner.

You If this do not move thee, pray to God that it may, for else thou art in
ill case.
men, why have you thus offended me? why have your done me so many Injuries, I
being your God, of infinity Majesty, Goodness, and wisdom? I being your
Creator, your Father, and your Savior, who for you did give my life, and shed
my blood? Why have you spoken so many words in affront of me? Why have you
wrought so many wicked deeds, in dishonor and disobedience to my Law? Why did
you consent to those bad desires, and thoughts, whereby you came to cast me
under the feet of those creatures, esteeming and loving them more then me? Me,
whom you ought to have praised, and glorified with your tongues; whom you
should have served, and obeyed with your works; whom you should always have
desired and loved with your whole hearts; for whom you ought to have given your
lives and a thousand lives, if you had been Masters of so many. Why have you
so dishonored me, transgressing and tra^pling upon my Precepts? Why have you
excha^ged me, with so extreme contempt, for those most base advantages and
gayns of earth, and for those most vain delights, and gifts of creatures?
Since you confessed me by your words, to be your Lord and God, why would you
deny me by your works? Tell me you men since I have imparted to you so many
supernatural gifts, which I gained for you, by my Passion, and Death; A gift
of Faith, and Baptism, whereby I made you Christians; a gift of Grace,
whereby I adopted you for my Children; so many Virtues, whereby you might
adorn your souls, and be enabled to work well; The gift of Sacraments,
which might confer and convey my Grace into your souls; and innumerable
inspirations, which might quicken you up toward virtue; and so many most
high, and most precious gifts, which I purchased at my so great cost; why have
you set them at so low a rate? Why have you despised the^, and permitted them
to pass away, without being of any profit to you at all? More account did you
make of the vanity of your descent, according to your lineage of flesh and
blood, then of the faith of Christians, and the adoption of the sons of God.

More account did you make of money, which is made of dead metal; and of the
goods of this life, and of the vain punctillios of honor, then of the
blessing of my grace, and of those immense, eternal treasures of my glory: I
having given you such a holy Law, a Doctrine so pure, so profitable, and so
celestial, that you might observe and keep it; having given you so many
Prophets, Apostles, holy Doctors, and so many Preachers, and teachers of my
Gospel, to the end that they all might counsel, and persuade you to the
observation of my Commandme^ts, and to the accomplishment of my will; yea and
my self, being come visibly down to earth in flesh and blood, to teach and
preach this Law to you, by the very words of mine own mouth, why have you
made no more account of this law, nor complied with my will, nor obeyed my
words? Why would you rather do that which Satan that did tempt you to, the^
that which was commanded you by me? Why would you rather follow, and obey that
perverse enemy, who abhorred you, and endeavored nothing but your damnation,
then me, who am your God, and who was your Father, and who loved you, and did
procure your salvation and everlasting glory? Tell me yet further, O you
ungrateful me^, since it is I who gave you life, and health, and temporal
goods, and space of time, that you might sacrifice it all to my service; how
comes is to pass, that you would needs employ it in offense of me? I gave
you life, I say, and health, and strength, whereby you might have acquired
virtues, and have exercised good works, and so you might have through the
passion and promise of Christ our Lord good works arrive to be meritorious,
and not of themselves.
merited eternal happiness. And you on the other side, have employed it in the
pursuit of vain honor, and of pleasing men, for certain interests which
pass and perish; and in the search of those deadly delights which now are
carrying you on, toward eternal torments. I gave you temporal means, for
the necessary supply of this life, and that you might relieve the miseries of
your Neighbors; and you have wasted them, upon the foolish compleme^ts of the
world, and upon banquets, which served not for necessity but for gluttony; and
upon certain attires, and ornaments, which did but serve for vanity; and upon
sports, and other vicious employments. I gave you Time, to the end that you
might employ it upon praying, and ruminating, and meditating upon my benefits
and mercyes, and upon the Mysteryes of my law, and in performing works which
might have relation to euerlacting life; but you have wasted it upon
unprofitable conuersations, and upon wicked deeds, which deserve to be
rewarded with eternal fire.

These complaints does God make against sinners, by his Prophet; and there
will he make them at that day, with greater demonstration of mislike, then
ever, till that time, he will have showed. And thereby he will convince them
all, and they shall be able to make no excuse or defense, nor have so much as one
word to answer; and so shall that be fullfilled which the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 106.
All wickedness, that is, all wicked men, shall have the mouth stopped up.

Let us now consider, what every one of these sinners will think within
himself, in that point of the divine Judgment, when Make this case thine own
betymes; for one day it will be thy case, whether thou will or no
he shall see a Theater made round about him, of all the creatures, both of
heaven and earth; and that himself is placed in the midst of them; and that
both all the Angels, and men, and Devils are looking on him. And when he shall
observe, that his sins are published, and proclaimed before them all; and not
only his wicked words, and works, but even all his bad desires, and thoughts;
and when he shall perceive that all that lewdnes which he committed in the most
retired corners; yea and those impurityes, which did not so much as issue out
of his heart, shall then be clear and patent to all the world. To see that all
those Devils shall stand accusing him, and that his own very conscience is still
vpbraiding and co^demning him. And to see the Judge himself offended, and
enraged against him; and that he behoulds him with a countenance full of
terror, and of revenge, for iniuryes received; and to see that hideous pit of
hell, all open, in expectation to swallow him up; and to see himself so
evidently convinced, and that he has no word to plead for himself. And A sad
consideration but most certainly true.
that finding himself hemmed in, by such an excess of afflictions, and such
incomparable miseryes, he cannot fly away, nor has he any one hole wherein to
hide his head; nor any one thing to allege, nor any one person to whom he
may appeal, or by whom he may be succored. For to defend himself against the
Judge, is impossible, since he is of infinite power. To deceive him with false
informations, cannot be, since he is of infinite Wisdom. To work upon him by
way of presents or petitions, is not to be thought of, since he is infinitely
just. To go in search after Patrons, and Aduocats, is loss of labor. For in
that day, neither the Angels, nor the Apostles can intercede for any one, no
nor even the Queen A heavy and most desperate case.
of heaven, and the mother of mercy, can plead the cause of sinners in that
day. The gate of pardon and saving mercy, is then closed up, against all the
wicked; and all the just and blessed souls, shall approve of the divine
Justice, in that day; and shall rejoice, in that it is to be executed; because
so it is fit for the glory of God our Redeemer. And then shall that be perfectly
fullfilled, which the Psalmist says: Psalm. 57.
The Just man, seeing the punishment, and vengeance which is to be taken upon
the wicked shall rejoice, not for the pain which those sinners shallbe subject
to; nor out of any desire of revenge; but only for the zeal they have to the
glory of God, and for the love they bear to his divine Justice.

CHAP. VII. How Christ our Lord, discovers the grieuousnes of sin, and the
hatred which he carries against it, by the last sentence whereby he is to
condemn the wicked, and the punishment which he inflicteth upon them.
ANOTHER Article of the divine Judgment, which does admirably discover the
excessive hatred which Christ our Lord does carry against sin, is the last
sentence which he will thunder out against the wicked. As soon as he shall
have published their sins, and convinced them thereof, he will divide them
from the company of the Just; and then turning his terrible and fierce
countenance toward them, he will pronounce this most hideous sentence against
them. Depart Our Lord deliver us from so great a misery.
from me, you accursed into that eternal fire which is prepared for the
Devil, and the wicked Angels. Depart from me, who am an infinite good, and
the fountain of all benediction, of grace, of comfort, of joy, of life, of
salvation, and of glory. If then, they be divided from that only fountain of
al Good, what kind of miserable things will they find themselves to be? It is
plain that they must find themselves without comfort, without grace, without
joy, without repose, or ease; and full, on the contrary side, of all misery, of
all mischief, and of all pain. Depart all you accursed; because cursed are
they, who break the Commandments of the true God; for the greatest ill of all
ill, is sin, and to this ill do they submit themselves who do any thing against
that which our Lord co^ma^ds. So says David, and so does the church sing every
day, when she speaks to God, Cursed are they, O Lord, who depart from keeping
of thy Co^mandments. Psalm. 118.
In particular manner are they accursed in the Law, who do not offer the first
fruits, and tithes of those things, which God had given to them; Matt. 3.1.
and cursed also are those others, who having promised some beast, in
sacrifice, to Almighty God, do offer him such a one, as is lean and lame, and
worth nothing. Into all these curses have you fallen, because you have broken
the Commandme^ts of God, and gave him not the honor, and glory, of all the
good deeds which once you wrought, nor of all the benefits which you received.
And having consecrated and dedicated your souls to our true God, by Faith, and
Baptism; and being obliged to give him the best and chief part thereof, which
is your love, and obedience, and fidelity, and a watchful care to do him
service; you did not give this to God, but to the world, and to your own will;
and for these reasons you are indeed accursed, and your selves are the authors
of your malediction.

Let Be attentive, to see whither the wicked are to be sent, when they are once
driven from God.
us now consider, whither it is, that he sends them, when once he drives them
from himself. Go, says he, you accursed, into everlasting fire; and because
in this life you sought for contentments, for delights, and gusts according to
your own will, against the will of God, you shall now be burnt, body, and
soul, with a most furious and impetuous fire, against your will. And because
by sinning you have offended and despised God, who is infinite Good, and an
infinite Majesty, that fire shall be infinite in the continuance thereof. And
who now shall be the ministers of Justice, to torment these accursed creatures?
And with what companions shall they be sorted, in that torment of eternal
fire? Go, says our Lord, into eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil
and his wicked Angels. For the principal authors of any wickedness, the
punishment is principally to be provided; and because the devil, was the
first author of sin, therefore was the torment of eternal fire, provided
first for him. And because wicked men did follow the devil in the fault, they
shall follow him also in the pain. And because they chose to obey the
persuasion and will of the devil, rather then the commandment and will of
God; they shall therefore have him for their tormentor, and companion, in that
everlasting fire.

O what kind of pain, what kind of torment is this which is prepared for the
wicked! O what an It is sad swimming in this sea.
huge Sea of pains and torments is this; so very incomprehensible, tho rough
the intensenes and fiercenes, and so infinite in the continuance thereof! The
thing, which in this life does most of all torment, and does cause most
excessive pain, is fire. But the fire of this life, does work after a
limited manner, according to the natural power which it has; and it cannot
pass beyond those confines. Whereas the fire of hell, howsoever it be of the
same nature with this of ours, yet works it as a supernatural instrument of
God; and so it receives no other tax or limit, but the only will of God. And
An excellent consideration.
as the things which God does take for Instruments, whereby he shows mercy
to such as serve him, are sublymed by himself, above the power which they had
in nature; and are enabled to produce admirable effects; As namely he exalts
the water of baptism, so far as to be the instrument of justifying a soul;
and the Balsamum of Confirmation, and the Oil of Extreme Unction, to give
strength and increase of grace; so the fire of hell, which is so deadly fierce
of his own nature, is supernaturally strecht up, to inflict a kind of pain
and torment which is incomparably more great, and fierce, then that to which
the whole power of nature can arrive. And so it shall not only torment the
body, but the soul with all. And it shall not leave any one part, or power
either of body or soul vntormented; and the torment and grief which it will
cause, shall be greater then all, which either we can say, or think.

The Prophet Read and tremble.
Isay does signify thus much when he says, Isai 30.
That Topheth, which is hell, is prepared for the wicked by God the eternal
king, from the beginning of the world. It is mightily deep, for it is in the
very Center of the earth. It is mightily wide and capable, for the receiving of
all such as shall be damned. The nourishment and food which shall maintain it,
is fire, which shall never be quenched (as even here, the fire does never go
out, if always it have matter to intertaine it,) for the breath of God, as if
it were some torrent of brimstone, does inflame it. His meaning is, that as a
mighty quantity of brimstone will inflame this fire which we have, and as long
as the brimstone lasts, so long, does the fire also last; just so, the will
of God will kindle that fire of Hell; and as his will is eternal, so the fire
can never have an end. Now this fire, being supernaturally so fierce, and
furious, to torment and burn; the wicked will not also fail to be very How
conbustible the wicked shallbe in the last day.
well disposed, and prepared, to be tormented and burnt. Therefore does the
Prophet Malachy say, Malac. 4.
That they shall be like straw. The day of our Lord, says he, shall come burning
like a furnace of fire; and such as are proud withal the workers of wickedness,
shallbe like straw to be inflamed; and the fire of that place shall burn them.
And S. John Baptist says, that they shall be as straw; when he tells us,
that Christ our Lord shall come to judge. He shall carry, says he, in his hand
his Fan; and like a labourer he shall cleanse his barn, which is his Church;
and he shall lay up, in his granaryes, his clean and choice corn, which are
the just; and the straw (which is the wicked) he shall cast into unquenchable
fire. This chafe and straw, are things which be easily kindled by the fire,
and they make a mighty flame; and so the wicked are made apt, and well
disposed, by the divine justice to be burnt, in that eternal fire, both in
body and soul.

But yet, although they shall be burnt like chafe and straw, and to be
penetrated by the fire, from side to side; yet are they never to be consumed,
but they shall live for ever, and for ever shall their pain endure. The wicked
man shall pay for his sins (says Sophar, the friend of Job) Job. 20.
but he shall not be consumed, nor shall he loose either his being, or his
life. D. Thom. in additionibus q. 74.
This fire, to which Christ our Lord will deliver the wicked, is to be
increased by that other fire, which shall come before him; and wherewith, as
has been said, he will purge all the inferior creatures. And he will also
purge those just persons, whom he shall find alive when he comes to judge;
which persons shall dye by that forerunning fire; and in a very short time they
shall be purged, and they are to rise, with all the rest. And this very Mark
now, or never.
fire, when once the sentence shall be given, will wrap up all the wicked, both
in body and soul; and the earth opening it self, in many places, that fire,
shall descend with them all, through those ouertures of the earth, into the
bottomless pit of hell; and the earth, shall then shut up it self, and some do
hold, that the waters shall then return to cover the earth, as they did when
God first created the^. Titelm. l. 7. de Caelo c. 4. Ia^el. l. 4. Meteor.
For the cause of his discovering the earth from under the waters, was to give
convenient habitation to men, and beasts; and that cause growing once to cease,
the waters shall return into their due place, and the wicked shall remain
locked up in the center of the earth, environed upon all sids, with that fire
of hell. And The brave spirits of our time, will be mightily to seek when they
come hither.
being covered first with the whole globe of the earth, and next with the
profoundnes of the Sea, they are never to get out, from that lamentable place,
and that everlasting fire. For as S. John affirms, Apoc. 20.14.
They shall be tormented in it day and night, for all eternity.

Nor shall this torment of fire, whereby the wicked are to be tormented go
alone; but together with that they shall suffer other most bitter pains;
whereof every one will be a kind of hell to the damned. They shall have such a
cruel and fierce rage of hunger, The deadly hunger of hell.
that if it were possible, they would tear in pieces and eat themselves; and
this so raging hunger they shall ever feel, in all the moments of their time,
nor shall they ever be at peace. Withal, they shall have a most The scalding
thirst of hell.
scalding thirst, which will afflict them in all extremity. If a man who were
sick of a burning fever, should be, for some days, denied a draught of water,
toward the appeasing of his thirst; he would feel so much torment by it,
that he would rather chose death, then it. And what then shall they feel, who
burning in that hideous fire, are possessed with such a most raging thirst:
whereas yet they shall not get the least drop of water, for all eternity. For,
as S. John affirms, Apoc. 14.
The smoke of their torments shall ascend, for ever and for ever; and never
shall they rest, either by day or night. They The indissoluble chains of hell.
shall also continue in that everlasting prison, bound hand and foot; and so
are they to be cast into that fire, as Christ our Lord signifies, when giving
sentence against him that came into the Feast (which is the bosom of his
Church) without his wedding garment (which is charity and grace) he said thus
to the Ministers of his Justice: Bind him hand and foot, and so cast him bound
into exterior darkness, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. Matt. 22.
That is, the wicked shall remain obstinate, and hardened for ever, without
means of remedy, or delivery. And this is, to have the hands and feet tied up;
To be incapable of doing any one work or conceauing any one good desire; in
such sort, as that whatsoever they shall do, or think for all eternity, is to
be wickedness and sin. And as a man, who being bound hand and foot and cast
into the bottom of the sea, cannot swim nor escape from being drowned; so
those wretches can never wrestle out of those pains. For if there could be any
remedy, it must be by penance, and amendment of their lives; but that can
never be, because they are to remain obstinate in evil, and disabled to do
any thing which is good.

These miserable damned creatures, shall also be subject to most The filthy
smells of hell.
offensive smells, which shall extremly afflict and torment them. This is
signified by S. John who says, Apoc. 14.19.20.
That into that lake of fire (which is Hell) the Devil shall be cast (who is the
occasion of the pains of Hell, and of death, (for which cause he is called
sometimes, by the name of death, and hell it self) Aug. de ciuit. Dei l. 20. c.
14.
and that into the same lake, all the wicked who are not written in the book
of life shall be also cast; and that this lake of fire, shall burn with
brimstone; which signifies the detestable smell of that horrible prison, which
is caused supernaturally, either by brimstone, or some such thing.

These and innumerable other pains there are, in that most hideous prison; and
although they be all so immense, as that they exceed all expression; Riber. in
Apoc. c. 19 number. 37.
yet the If thou believe not this truth it is a sign that thou art
extraordinarily in ill case.
greatest of the^ all, is having lost the glory of God; and then being to want
it for all eternity. For as the greatest good, and suprem felicity of man, is to
see God, and to enjoy him: so the greatest misery, and mischief, and torment,
is for ever to want the sight of God, and the possession of his celestial
Kingdom. This is that, which above all things, does torment those most unhappy
souls of the damned; to see that they might have gained an infinite good, and
that they had time and commodity for it; and that through their own fault, and
negligence they gained it not, nor did serve themselves well of their time, and
of those other means which were given the^ by our Lord for that purpose. And
to see, that innumerable other men of their own natural condition, and frail
like themselves, do, for the good imployeme^t which they made of the gifts of
God, obtain to enjoy so great a good, and to possess it with a perpetual
security; whereas they, by their negligence, or malice, lost it: The
remembrance heerof, which for ever shallbe imprinted in their minds, will be so
lively and fresh, as that they will never be able to cast it off; and this will
breed in them an intolerable grief beyond all griefs; and a most vehement
indignation, and a hot boiling rage against themselves, for having so lost
God. But yet this torment do they not feel, for the respect of God; for they
do not love, but do abhor him, but only for the interest and profit which
they might have had by his glory. And this torment of indignation is that,
which Christ our Lord, did signify by the gnashing of teeth, which springs
from the enraged wrath of the heart. That Note this certain truth so piously
delivered.
excellent writer Rusbrochius, does ponder the grieuousnes of these torments
very excellently well; and particulerly he says, That the having lost the
glory of God is the greatest of them all; and he expresses it, by these
words: Rusbroch. Epist. 1.
Believe me, that whatsoever can be said of the pains of hell; if it be
compared with that which there is felt, in very deed is less then a drop of
water is, in respect of the whole Sea; and yet nevertheless, all those pains
of hell put together, are nothing, in respect of that one only pain, which is
felt by having for ever, lost the sight of God. And of this pain, S. John
Chrysostom said: Chrysostom. in Matt. c. 7. hom. 24.
If thou put before me a thousand hells, they are not all so great a mischief,
as is to loose the glory of Christ our Lord, and to be abhorred and driven away
by him, with those O infinite affliction.
words: I know you not.

CHAP. VIII. How the grieuousnes of sin is yet more discovered, by the causes,
which Christ our Lord alleges as the reasons of his Judgment.
ANOTHER point very worthy of Consideration in this divine Judgment which
discovers also the mighty hatred which Christ our Judge does carry against
sin, which shows also the greiuousnes of those pains wherewith he is to
punish the same, are the faults which he relates, and which he alleges at the
time of his Judgment, in the sentence of damnation, which he pronounces
against the wicked, saying; Matt. 25
So that men shall not be justified by faith alone, since they are to be damned
for want of Charity
I was hungry and you did not give me to eat; I was thirsty and you did not
give me to drink; I was a stranger and you did not harbor me; I was naked and
you did not cloth me; I was sick and in prison and you did not visit me. For
it is evident, that amongst all mortal sins the very least, and they whereof
men make least account and scruple, are the forbearing to succor their
neighbors; even in those cases of necessity wherein yet they are bound to do
it, by the precept of Charity. And for this reason, Christ our Lord, who had no
meaning in this relation, which he makes at the time of his Judgment, to reckon
up all those sins for which he is to condemn the wicked (for that would be a
long That is, it would have been long for Christ our Lord, to have spoken of
all a man's sins, in that speech of his.
business) did only speak of such as go for the lightest, and upon which men use
to make the least reflection; whereby all men may gather and infer concerning
those other great sins, for which he is to pass the sentence of condemnation
upon the wicked. And this following circumstance a man is to consider and
ponder, even in the very bottom of his heart: If A most necessary consequence
which deserves to be deeply pondered.
these sins of Omission, and negligence, in the performing of the works of
mercy (which in reason, and in the estimation and judgment of all men are the
lightest of all mortal sins) be yet nevertheless so abhorred by Almighty God,
as that, in the universal Judgment, he does publish them in a particular
manner, as being very grievous, and worthy of eternal condemnation; and will
complain against them, as against faults which are full of injury, and
affront, against his divine and eternal Majesty; and will proceed against such
as fell into them, as against his enemies; and will excommunicate them as
cursed people, dryuing them away for ever out of his company, and the communion
of the Church triumphant; and will deliver them over into everlasting fires;
and will execute the same pains upon them which are suffered by the very
Devils themselves, in whose infernal company they are to be tormented, and
that for ever; what will he not be sure to do to wicked men for the sins of
commission, whereby they offend their neighbors; which are more express
sins; and wherein, there is more malice showed; and which are committed by men
upon more deliberation. If the ouersights and voluntary negligences in not
giving bread to him who is hungry, or drink to him who is thirsty, or clothes
to him who is naked, or visits to him who is sick and imprisoned, in cases
when piety does oblige men to it, are yet so abhorred by Christ our Lord, and
so severely punished, what will he do to men for those impieties, when a
sinful man will take from another the goods which he had honestly gained; and
if he robb him, or usurp it otherwise by unlawful and unconscionable ways;
and for those other sins, when one man takes the health and life from another,
by wounding, and killing him, or doing it at least in his desire; and when he
depriues him of his honor, and good name, by murmurations, detractions, and
reproaches; or when he takes from him his wife, or his daughter, or his
kinswoman by fornications or adultries, or the like? And The spiritual works
of charity are of far more importance, then the corporal
if negligence in releeuing the corporal necessities of ones neighbor when
there is comodity for the same, be so abhorred and punished by Allmighty God;
how much more will he abhor and punish any slacknes in releiuing the
necessities of souls, by teaching the ignorant, those things which are
necessary to salvation; by reprehending their vices; and by admonishing and
exhorting them to a good life, in cases of necessity and obligation. Thus does
the blessed Laure^tius Iustinianus ponder this truth in these words: Laurent.
Justin. l. de humili^
" If Christ our Lord in his Judgment do so exactly and precisely examine and
chastise the faults which are committed, in failing to show those works of mercy
which are expressed toward the bodies of men which dye; what kind of examen,
and what kind of punishment will he impose upon their faults, who forbear to
show the spiritual works of mercy which they ought to have imparted, for the
salvation of souls, which are immortal?" Let him that reads this conceive
rightly, and be well assured that there is no doubt, but that, as this latter
fault is greater, so shall the examen be more rigorous, and the punishment more
severe. And if the denying of any spiritual benifit which is due to his
neighbor for the good of his soul, be a fault of so high quality, how much
more will it be so, to rob the soul of life, by giving it wicked Counsel, and
by teaching it false doctrine; and by inducing it to vice by all persuasions,
and lewd examples. Let the good Christian pass on, and consider and ponder yet
more deeply, that the sins which are Sins committed immediately against God,
are the greatest of all others.
committed imediately against God, such as are the crimes of infidelity of
several kinds, of superstitions, and blasphemies, and Sacriledges in breaking
vows and promises made to God; and of periuries which draw God as a witness of
lies, and falsehood, be greater sins then they which are committed against our
neighbors; and consequently the hatred which God does carry against them, and
the punishment which he will execute for them, is incomparably greater.

From The true use which is to be made of this consideration.
hence the Christian man will gather the great necessity that he is in, to
abhor in a most profound internal manner, all kind of sins; and to fly them
with a most watchful care; and to fear them with his whole heart. For if the
lighter sort of sins, and they whereof men are wont to make least account, are
so publicly to be recorded and reproved in that divine judgment, and to be
sentenced as worthy of condemnation, and punished with eternal torments; the
case is plain, that the sins which are more greiuous, and in greater hurt and
prejudice of our neighbors; and they again which are of more imediate injury,
and affront to God himself, shall be proclaimed in that divine judgment, to the
greater confusion of sinners; and they shall be more sharply rebuked by Christ
our Lord, and more grievously punished. And although the other torments were
also eternal, yet these shall be greater and more intense then they. For this
truth was revealed to S. John by the Holy Ghost, who says: Apoc. 18.
So much as the wicked man has glorified himself and has delivered himself
over to vicious pleasure; and so much more, as he presumed of himself, and
lifted up his face of pride against God, affronting his divine Majesty with
greater sins; and so much more as he yielded obedience to vice, in
contradiction to the law of God; so much greater torment shall be imposed upon
his body; and so much more grief and sorrow shallbe inflicted upon his soul.

CHAP. IX. How a Christian is to draw a detestation of sin, out of the
consideration of this Judgment of God; and great vigilance in the leading of a
good life.
THESE For Jesus sake read over this Chapter with sober and sound attention.
are the points and articles of that divine Judgment, which discover to us the
hatred, that God does carry against sin. And these we are to consider, with
great attention; that so we also may gather this fruit out of the divine
Judgment to abhor sin extremely, to grieve vnfaygnedly for those which we
have committed, to fear it with our whole hearts, and to fly from it with
continual care. For it is all reason that we should abhor that which God does
so highly abhor; and that we should be mightily grieved, for having committed
such things against God, as he mislikes so much, and whereby he is so much
offended. And it is most just, and fit, to fear a Judgment, which is so
severe, and full of terror; and such torments as are so excessive and so
without all end. And now, that we may with the more efficacy, rowse our selves
up toward a perfect hatred of sin, and a fear of the divine Judgment, let
every one of us go casting up his account, after this manner.

God Resolve thy self to suffer eternally in hell if thou refuse the grace,
which God is desirous to give thee even very now, if thou will concur.
who is my Creator, has resolved, that the day shall come when he will Judge
me and from this Judgment it is impossible for me to fly So also has he
resolved, that he will reward me in this Judgment, according to my works. If he
find me in the state of Grace, and with the stock of a good life in my hand,
he will give me the reward of eternal felicity. If he find me in mortal
sin, and that I have ill employed my life, he will drive me out of the sight
of his glory, and will condemn me to everlasting torments. Now, that I consider
my self, I see that I have lead a careless kind of life; and that I have
committed many offenses against his holy Commaundmentes. If now, he should call
me to his Judgment, I am sure that I should be condemned; for I have not done
penance for the sins, which I have committed, nor have I yet reformed my
life. At least I am in much doubt of my salvation; for the penance which I
have done, was lukewarm; and I have sought to mend m life, but slackly It is
necessary therefore, now, and even very now, that I change my course, that I
betake my self to my penance, and that I do it in good earnest. I will obey
the voice of God, who commands me by Ecclesiastious, saying: Before thou come
to the divine Judgment, provide thy self of works, which may be holy and
just, to the end that it may succeed well with thee. Before thou come into the
hands of God to be judged by him, ask thy self the question, examine thy
conscience well; pass an upright Judgment upon thy self; reproving thy self
with grief, and punishing thy faults with penance; and so thou shall find
mercy in the sight of God; thou shall find him a favorable Judge, and he will
cast the sentence on thy side.

Let Attention.
the Christian man consider further, in the bottom of his heart, and let him
reason thus within himself. If I Of the little difference, which there is to be
for us in substance between the day of our death and the day of the last
Judgment.
knew now that the end of the world and the Universal Judgment were to be held
within ten or twenty years; it would more seriously work upon me, and would
make me more careful to do penance, and to endeavor a total renouation of
my life; and I should more cordially fear the Judgment, and eternal
punishment of God, and the sins which make me subject to everlasting
damnation. Yet certainly, for as much as concerns me, the day when I shall dye,
is after ^sort the very day of the Universal Judgment, and of the end of the
world. For the chief of that which passes in the Universal Judgment, and
which makes it to be feared so much, is the irreuocable sentence of eternal
damnation which is then to pass upon the wicked; and This makes not against
purgatory but shows only that if a man dye in state of sin, he shall
continue so for ever: and if in state of grace, he shall also for ever continue
so; though till all be satisfied, he shall stay in purgatory and then he flies up
to heaven.
that where a man shall then be lodged he shall lie for all eternity. And he
shall then, no more, have any use of any creature of this world; or of time
wherein he may do penance, or procure salvation. Now this is, in effect, the
same thing, which is to be done with me in the hour of my death. For then I
shall be judged; and if then I be found guilty, an irreuocable sentence of
damnation shall pass upon me; and where I shall then be cast, I shall remain
for ever; and in the Universal Judgment, there is no more to be done, but to
confirm and proclaim the sentence, which was given in the particular
Judgment. And in the hour of my death, for as much as concerns me, the whole
world is at an end; and so is the use of all the creaturs thereof; since I shall
return to it or them, no more; and so is the Time also at an end, wherein
penance might have been performed, and merit might have been procured. If
therefore it be so, that the hour of my death, is to be the same thing for me,
which the Universal Judgment; and the end of the world, and the same it is to
be for all men; and The certainty of death and the vncertianty of the hour of
our death.
since it is most certain that the day of my death, will arrive ear long; and
that according to my age, and to the time which men are wont to last it cannot
exceed twenty, or thirty years; and since it is so casual, as that perhaps it
may be ear night, it follows, as a most just and necessary consequence, that
I should, even from this very instant, dispose my self to do penance for my
sins, with greater care; and to make a total amendment of my life; and to do
that which Christ our Lord commandes me, saying: Matt. 24.
Watch, for you know not the hour when your Lord will come; and that also
which the Apostle S. Peter, 2. Pet. 3.
in the name of the same Lord, does advise me saying: Brethren the day of our
Lord will come like a thief. Now the thief who steals by night, comes without
giving any news of himself; and then he does it, when he is looked for least.
Just so will christ our lord come to judge us in the end of the world, and in
the hour of our death, and no man shall know when he is to come; and the time
willbe at hand when many willbe least ready for it. Do you therefore earnestly
labor to lead a virtuous life, that so you may be free from sin, and that
there be nothing in you which may deserve reproof; but that, with a quiet and
safe conscience you may expect our Lord, when he shall come to judge.

CHAP. X. Of other Considerations, from which we may draw the detestation of
sin, and the care of leading a good life.
LET a man also consider with himself, the sentence, and punishment which
follows this Judgment; and let him be persuaded to fear God, upon this
ensuing reason. What Is it possible that thou should be so mad as not to be
able to frame this argument in thine own person.
are those things, which a man in this life will not do, for the avoiding of
pain and grief? A man who is in prison, and expects or fears a sentence of
violent death, what does he not, for the delivering of himself? He thinks of
nothing, but how he may escape; he never gives over to make friends, who may
intercede for him; he humbles himself to all such as are able to do him
favor, and to give him help; he spends his means upon Atturneyes and
Lawyers, and in sending presents to ^ch as may do him any good. A man who lies
sick under great pains which torment him day and night without ceasing, being
caused by some surcharge of humors, which he has in his body, or by some
stony gravel, which perhaps he has in his bladder, or by some Melancholy,
which is lodged at his heart; what will he not do for his recovery? How
willingly does he employ what he has, in giving fees to Physicians, and in
paying of Apothecaries bills, for druggs, which way give him ease? With what
facility and diligence, does he take purges; and permit that issues be made,
and buttons of fire be applied; yea and he endures to be cut and opened,
offering himself to one extreme pain and danger, to excuse another which is a
greater, if he can tell how.

If this be so, what then will it be fit for me to do, that I may free my self
from those miseries and torme^s, to which the wicked must be sentenced, in that
divine Judgment. Which Torments both intolerable, and eternal.
besides that they are, in themselves, extrem, beyond all that can be said or
thought; they are never to have any end, but in their contynuance, they are to
equal the eternity of God himself. For as God, in his own nature is
eternal, so are those torments to be eternal, by the determination of God,
which can never fail. Although these torments were no greater then for a man
to be cast into fire, such as here we have, (but so as that he should not dye
of it for the space of thirty years) the very thinking of it, would strike
into him extreme horror; and there is nothing imaginable which a man would not
do to keep himself from undergoing such a torment. Nay although it were no
more, but that a man were to remain thirty years, laid in a bed; without
being able once to rise or stir from thence, it would be of intolerable
pain to him; and he would perform things of very great difficulty and labor,
to deliver himself from the same.

But what then will it be, to remain in the fire of Hell, together with all
those other torments, which there are felt; and that, for the space of all
eternity; and what then will it not be fit for a man to do, that so he may not
be to endure those torments? And If thou desire to understand eternity thou
must procure to take it thus in sunder.
to the end that a man may have some little taste of this eternity, let him
think of so many thousands of years which are to pass over the head of the
damned, as there are grains of dust in the whole world, or drops of water in
the sea, or moates in the air; and that at the end of all those thousands of
years, they shall not get out of those torments, but still shall be, as if they
did but then begin to suffer, and that then as many more thousands of years
are so to pass; and then again as many more; and that still, that wheel
shall be running round without any end. And let him also know, that by this so
large contynuance, his torments are not yet to cease, nor to be in the
diminution of a hairs breadth; but that they shall be as The torments of hell
are not made more tolerable by a custom of enduring them a while.
lively felt at the end of so many thousands of years, as at the first
instant. Because those torments, do not work after a natural manner, that so
they might be the less felt by custom, but they work as instruments of the
divine Justice, which is inuariable; and does conserve them at the end of
innumerable years, in the same force and fury which they had at the first. O
with how great reason did the Prophet Hieremy exclaim to God and say: Hier. 10.
Who is he that will not fear thee, O thou King of the Nations? Thine is
supreme Dominion, and there is none like thee in wisdom and power.

By these Considerations, a Christian being assisted by God, will get, out of
the divine Judgment, agreat remorse and grief for sin, which does so much
offend God, and which is so greatly abhorred, and so greiuously punished by
him. And The cure of sin is penance.
with this grief, he is to accuse, and reprehend, and condemn, and with
penances and mortifications, to inflict punishment, and take revenge upon
himself. So did holy Job, when he confessed saying: Job. 23.
Place me before God, and I will come to Judgment, and consider what he is to
do with me; and I will load my self with reprehensions. For as S. Gregory
Greg. ibid.
Thus S. Gregory said and thus he did.
says upon these words: A man contemplating the so strict, and perfect
examen, which God does make of his sins in that terrible Judgment of his, he
turns in, upon, and against himself, and he reprehends himself with grief
and sorrow, for the offenses which he has committed against God. The A man is
to carry a quick and watchful eye over all his works.
faithful servant of God, is also to draw from this divine Judgment, a great
watchfulnes and deligence, to consider well, and with attention, all the works
that he does; and to see that they be good, and be wrought with a pure
intention of pleasing God. Not being negligent in the performing of exterior
works, and much less, giving place in his heart to the desire or love of any
thing that is ill, or consenting to any thing which is contrary to the will of
God; nor principally to seek his own interest in any thing, but only the
glory and good pleasure of God. To the end, that when our Lord shall come to
judge us, he may find us prepared, and may meet with nothing in us which he
will punish.

This Counsel was given us by S. Paul, who said, These. 5.
You know well my brethren, that the day of our Lord is to come upon us like a
thief in the night. For although it be true, that when he will come to make
the universal Judgment, he will do it with great Majesty and very manifestly to
all the world; yet, for as much as concerns the time, the day, and hour,
wherein he is to come, as well in the universal Judgment, as in the particular,
he will do it suddenly and conceald; and so as that men shall not know either
of the hour or day. He will come like a thief, who has a mind to rob, when
men are sleeping and inconsiderat; so I say will he come, suddenly, and at
unawares to pass his Judgment, upon many when they live carelessly in their
sins. Therefore Take heed of sloth in Gods service.
we who are faithful Christians, and who by lively faith are made the sons
of light; we, I say, must not slumber, nor give place to the sleep of
negligence and sin, as others are content to do, who want this faith. But let
us watch in prayers and good works, following the light of faith, and the word
of God; and let us carry our selves in all things, with sobriety: That is, we
must be very temperate and moderate, as the Eua^gelicall law, and as the
example of Christ our Lord, and of his Saints does exact at our hands, both in
our eating, drinking, clothing, sleeping, speaking, and whatsoever else. This
fruit does holy Job draw out of the consideration of of the divine Judgment,
as himself expressed saying, Job. 19.
I did observe and examine my works, with much reflection and care, to the end
that none of them might be wicked; and to the It is not enough to do good
things, but they must also be well done.
end also, that all they which were good, might be well done; for I know that
in thy Judgment, thou art not to let any sin pass without punishment. Which
yet is to be understood of When due penance is done for sin, it is no longer
liable to any punishment.
sins, which formely shall not have been purged and discharged by penance.

CHAP. XI. How a Christian is to draw out of the Consideration of the divine
Judgment, a great fear of offending God, that so he may fly far from it.
THE faithful Christian, from the consideration of this divine Judgment, is
to draw a very real, and true fear of God. And this fear of God, and of his
Judgment, is the most particular and proper fruit, which from that Judgment,
is to be drawn. So does the Psalmist signify, when he speaks to God, and
says: Psalm. 118.
O Lord I have feared thy Judgments; and upon the consideration how thou do
exercise them upon the wicked, I have conceived an excessive fear. And Solomon
his Son, speaking to God in the prayer which he made in the Temple, declared
the same truth by saying: 2. Paral. 6.
Give O Lord, to every one, in thy Judgment, the reward which is fit for their
works; and according to the desire of their hearts, to the end that they may
fear thee, and may walk in the way of thy Commandments, all the days of
their lives. And the Angel, whom S. John saw, did say: Apoc. 14.
Fear our Lord, for the hour of his Judgment is come. When a A servile fear.
man delights in wickedness, and yet calls to mind the divine Judgment, and
the punishment which God does exercise upon sinners, he does conceive a fear
of the pain; and being principally moved by that fear he abstaines from
sinning, which fear is a fear of slaves, and therefore it is called servile.
And although this fear be good, and does grow from a root which is
supernatural, it is yet imperfect, and insufficient for the obtaining of
everlasting life, or for the justification of a soul. Nor is it meritorious,
but it is a ground from whence justification may rise, and it is a disposition
toward grace, whereby we may merit; and this it is whereof the Wiseman says:
Prouer. 2.
That the Fear of God, is the beginning of Wisdom. Which is as much as to
say, That it is a beginning for the obteyning of an experimental knowledge of
God, which grows from Charity. And so does Ecclesiasticus declare it saying,
Cap. 25.
The fear of God, is the beginning of the love of God. But Of filial fear.
when a man who loves virtue, and is resolved to serve God, does by
considering the divine Judgment, ponder the grieuousnes of sin, by means of
the severity of the same Judgment, and the excessive greatness of those pains,
wherewith God does punish it, and thereupon he does incline himself to a great
fear of sin; and does tremble to think of doing any thing, which may offend
the pure eyes of God, this fear is a fear of sons; and therefore it is
called a filial fear; because he fears God his heavenly Father, more then
he does the punishment, which otherwise is due to him for the same.

So also, when a faithful servant of God, through the desire which he has to
fly from al offense of his divine Majesty, and in all things to comply with
his holy will, does settle himself after a sincere, and serious manner, to
consider the Judgments of God, and those eternal punishments and torments,
whereby he is to take vengance upon the wicked, thereby to move himself so
much the more, to a fear of those Iugdme^ts and pains; and the more to
animate himself to fly from all offense of God, and to keep his divine
Commandments; this fear, howsoever it carry a kind of respect to pain, is not
yet to be accounted a servile fear. Nor does it spring from self love, but it
is a filial love, and it grows from Charity. Because A clear proof of the
truth which he delivered before of the two Fears.
in these things which are moral, and voluntary, the nature and denomination
of the work, is principally taken from the end at which it aims. And as a man
who should steal money whereby he would enable himself to commit an adultery,
were more to be esteemed an adulterer then a thief; so the just man, who
disposes himself to fear the punishment, due to sin, that so he may fear
and abhor the sin, is rather to be accounted to fear the sin, then the
punishment. So therefore the fear of this man, is a holy fear, and belongs
to a son, and friend of God; and this very fear makes a man just and holy,
yea it is even justice and sanctity it self. This fear does make a man
acceptable to God, and is meritorious of eternal life, and it makes also the
works which proceed from thence, to be acceptable to God and meritorious both
of grace and glory. Holy The places of holy scripture reconciled which seemed
to differ.
Job says of this fear, Job. 18.
The fear of God is wisdom it self. And Ecclesiasticus says, Eccles. 1.
To fear God is entire and perfect wisdom. A servile fear is said to be the
beginning of wisdom; because it disposes a soul toward wisdom and so is
this filial fear said, to be very wisdom it self, because it imbraceth
wisdom, it locketh it up, and it does perfect, and increase it. For he that
has this fear has the gift of holy wisdom together with it, which is
that principal gift of the holy Ghost, whereby God is known and loved. And
through the exercise of this holy fear, this gift is increased; and for this
reason the Wiseman says of this fear: Prou. 14.
That it is the fountain of life, because it gives spiritual life to the
soul, and from thence do spring the works of life; since they be such as are
through the grace of God in Christ our Lord, and through his promise.
meritorious of eternal life. For they, who after this manner do fear God, as
Ecclesiasticus says, Eccles. 18.
do procure with diligence, to please God in all things.

Let us therefore, much, and many times consider this divine Judgment that so we
may draw a holy Fear from thence, and grow therein, and conserve our selves
thereby, in a virtuous life, so long as we shall continue in this pilgrimage; so
does Saint Peter advise us saying, 1. Pet. 2.
If you call him Father, as indeed he is (who is also our God, and our Lord,
and who as a most righteous Judge, shall judge, and reward every one according
to his works) most just and reasonable it is, that during all the time of our
being in pilgrimage in this world (as persons who are banished from the house
of our Father) we should live in such fear, as becomes his children.

CHAP. XII. How it is very necessary, and full of profit that a Christian do
exercise himself in this holy Fear; and accompany it with the exercise of
divine love.
BUT to this, one A doubt concerning the exercise of the acts of Fear and
Love, clearly solued.
may say, by way of question; Since the act, and exercise of the Love of God,
is more excellent, and acceptable then that of Fear, why is it not better to
exercise our selves always in the love of God, and in the consideration of his
benefits and mercies, and of his goodness, and Love, and the rest of his divine
perfections, which may induce us to love, then to be considering his divine
Judgment and the pains of Hell, which oblige us to fear? To The first answer.
this I say, first, That the act and exercise of love, is more excellent and
acceptable to God, then any other act of virtue, when that love of God, is
clean and pure from faults, and from self love. But Take heed thou walk not
in the way of spirit without advice.
if a person shall only give himself to the exercise of divine love (for as
much as ^oue does cause a kind of security and comfort to the soul) a man may
grow from thence, many times, to be slack in virtue, and forward to commit
faults, and come to be remiss in doing of penance, and mortifications, and
admit of certain delicacies, and so increase in self love. And he may also
come to presume upon himself; conceauing that he does greatly love God; and by
that very means, he goes disposing himself, to loose the same love of God, by
committing venial sins, and by increasing in them; he arriueth also to fall
at last, into mortal sin, whereby he does wholly loose love and grace. But in
the mean time, this negligence which grew to end in mortal sin, does not
grow from that very love of God, which of it self is all good, and persuades
us also to all good; but So weak is man that he may well be suspected even
when he means best.
it grows from the infirmity of man, and from his bad inclination, and so it
is wholly the fault of man; who, as he uses many other things ill, so also he
uses ill, the love of God.

It is therefore both very profitable, and very fit, and even necessary, that
the good Christian, do join the holy Fear of God, to the love of him; and
that as he is to exercise himself, in some considerations which may move him
to love God, so also he may exercise himself in some other, which may move him
to fear him.

And although it be true, that at the first when a man is but beginning to serve
God, it is more necessary that he bestow himself more upon the consideration
of fear, then that of love; yet is it also very convenient, even for them, who
have been long in his service, and are very well advanced therein; that
although their chief practice, may be in the exercises of the love of God,
yet, that many times, also, they do intertaine themselves in the thoughts of
his divine Fear; and upon those considerations which may help them to it. And
The remedy of this danger.
thus, accompaning this holy Fear, with the love of God, the inconvenience,
and danger, and loss whereof we have spoken, will cease; which yet will be sure
to grow through the frailty of man, if he shall only employ himself in the
exercises, and considerations of love. For this Fear, when it is joined with
love, keeps a man from being negligent in Gods service; and it leaves no
place for any faults to be committed against God, how venial and light soever
they be; and it keeps him from giving over his penances and mortifications, or
from using tepidity therein. Nay it causes him to continue them with care,
least else he should indeed grow tepide; and it teaches him to humble and
despise himself, giving no place to pride, but fearing still his own frailty,
and the Judgment of God. All this is wrought by this holy fear; and the same
is witnessed by Ecclesiasticus who says, Eccles. 1.
The fear of God, drives sin away from the soul. It drives it away by
penance, after it is committed, and it drives it away, by caution and
resistance of temptation, before it is committed. And in another place, he
says, He that fears God, is negligent in nothing; but fear makes him
careful, and watchful, toward every thing that is good. For this, did the
Apostle S. Paul, when he was persuading Christians to procure the purity and
sanctity of their souls by efficacious, secure, and certain means, advise
the^ to help themselves herein, with the holy fear of God; saying, Let us
cleanse our selves from all uncleanness both of flesh and spirit. 2. Cor. 7.
That is to say, from all sin; as well that which may be committed by these
exterior powers of our body, together with the consent of the mind, as that
other which is committed by the only consent of the mind without the body. And
let us perfect our sanctification, which is that purity and sanctity which we
received, either in baptism, or by penance. Let us go conseruing and
increasing it with good works, and by the exercise of virtue, and by continual
reuewing our watchfulnes and care, in flying all that is offensive to God. And
let us do all this, with a fear of his divine Majesty. And S. Thomas giving a
reason, why the Apostle says not, that we should do it with the love, but
with the fear, delivers these words: D. Thom. in 2. Cor. c. 7.
The Apostle says not, with charity, but with fear of God; To teach us that
the affection of love, which we are to carry toward God, is to be accompanied
by a solicitude, and reuerentiall fear. For this love, causes security,
whereby many times a man grows careless and negligent in the service of God;
but he who accompaineth that affect of love with fear, is watchful in the
service of God, and runs diligently toward it, and flies speedily from any
offense of him. This is delivered by S. Thomas. And for this reason it will be
fit, many times, to use the considerations of the divine Judgment, from whence
this holy and chaste fear may be fetched. And so we may comply with that, which
the holy Apostle advises us saying: Work your salvation with fear, and
trembling. Which is as much as to say, With an interior fear to offend God,
which may be so great, as that it may appear by your exterior vigilance and
care to perform your works, whereby you may obtain that true and everlasting
salvation. S. Bernard A sweet and secure guide for us to follow.
left this truth, confirmed both by his doctrine, and example, in these words:
Bernar. in Cant. ser. 7
Happy is that soul wherein Christ our Lord has set the print of his two feet;
and wherein he has left the marks and footestps of them both, which are the
fear of his divine Judgment, and the hope of his divine Mercy. For the
consideration of the divine Judgment alone, breeds disconfidence and despair;
and the memory and consideration of his mercy alone, does occasion a sly
deceit of a man's self, and ingendreth a very dangerous kind of security. And
so have I experimented in my self. For the benignity of God sometimes has
granted to me (miserable creature) that I might sit down at the feet of Jesus
Christ my Savior, and that I might with entier devotion, embrace the one foot
of fear; and at other times, the other foot of confidence, and of love. And if
at any time it happened to me, that, being forgetful for his mercy, I detayned
my self long in the consideration and apprehension of the divine Judgment, I
grew all dismayed, and distempered with an incredible kind of fear, and a
miserable confusion; and all trembling, I would be crying out with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 8^.
O Lord, who shallbe able to conceive or comprehend the power of thy wrath! And
who, through the fear he has, shall be able to measure out the greatness, and
mightines of that indignation, which thou will execute against sinners in the
other life! And See and imitate the great humility of this excellent Saint, and
learn hereby to know thy self.
if, on the other side giving over the consideration, and exercise of this
fear, I detayned my self long in the consideration and meditation of the
mercy of God, I should be grown to fall into such a deal of careless
negligence, that even then already, my prayer would become more remiss and my
self more sloathfull toward a^ good works, and I should be more disposed
toward laughter, and such idle intertaynements; more free and liberal in my
speech, and more unsettled both in my inward and outward man. Being therefore
taught by experience, which has bin a faithful Master to me, I wi^ sing to
thee, O Lord, not only Judgment, nor only Mercy, but Mercy and Judgment both
together; and both these means of justification, will I exercise, and use as
long as the time of Pilgrimage, in this banishment of mine shall last, and till
I arrive to be possessed of that most happy state, wherein all misery, and all
cause of compunction and fear, shall cease, and all my glory shall be to
praise thee for all eternity.

This saying is of S. Bernard, wherein by the testimony of what he experienced
in himself, he confirms that, which the holy Scripture and the doctrine of
the Saints do teach, concerning the necessity, wherein all the servants of God
are, (toward the keeping of themselves still his servants) to join holy fear
with love, and the considerations of the divine Judgment, and the punishments
inflicted by his Justice, with the considerations of the mercy of God; and of
the favors and benefits, which he co^municateth with a most liberal hand, to
such as keep his Law.

CHAP. XIII. Of how great value, and merit, this holy Fear is.
THIS is the first way of answring that which was demanded. The The second
answer of the former objection.
second is, that when we speak of servile fear, and of accompaning the same
with the love of God, it is true, that the exercise of love is much more
excellent the^ that of fear. For as we have said, servile fear, which has
the eye upon punishment is imperfect, and but of beginners, and it is found
even in them who are not yet in state of grace; nor can it be meritorious, nor
wholly acceptable to our Lord God. But speaking of filial fear, whereby a man
fears and flies from sin, because it is the offense of God; and of that
reuerenciall fear, whereby the soul reueareth his divine Majesty; and does
humble her self to him, by doing his divine will; and comparing this kind of
fear with the love of our Lord God, and considering that which indeed does
pass in just persons; it is not an exercise less excellent, nor less
pleasing to God, nor less meritorious then is that of love. For Filial fear
rises out of love.
this holy fear springs out of the true love of God; and imbraceth the same
love as the fountain, and root from whence it springs. For from loving of
God, does grow the fear of offe^ding him; and from the love of virtue, grows
the fear of loosing it; and from the high estimation which the soul makes of
God, and the fulfilling of his will, does grow a profound reverence of God,
and the keeping of his law, and the fear of doing any thing which is contrary
to the same. And so the good Christian, whilst he is exercising the chaste fear
of a son of God, he does also exercise the love of God.

So says S. Augustine, Aug. in psalm 118. sermon. 25.
The fear through which a man loves not virtue, but flies from the punishment
of vice, is a servile fear; and this fear is that, which shuts Charity out
of doors, and the same Charity which also shuts out this kind of fear, does
produce and breed that other chaste fear, through which the soul fears to
sin, though it were never to be punished. And this is that holy fear, which
just me^ do exercise in the consideration of the divine Judgment; because, as
we have declared, through the great desire which they have to please God, and
to do according to his will in all things, they dispose themselves to consider
the divine Judgment, so to know the better, and as it were to feel, the
greiuousnes of sin, and the punishment, that falls upon it; and the much that
God abhors it; and so to procure a sorrow and hatred of sin, as being an
offense of God; and to fear it much, and to fly from it with great care, as
being contrary to his divine will; and so exercysing this chaste fear, which is
an effect and fruit of divine love, he exercises love with all, which is the
cause of that fear: for this it is, that we have said, that the just man
exercising this filial fear, does not loose the least grain of the
excellency and merit of his love; and that the exercise of filial fear, is
not less pious and acceptable to God, then that of love. For in fine this is
the fear of Saints, to all whom the Psalmist speaks by saying, Psalm. 33.
O all you Saints fear our Lord. And this is that fear, which has for a
reward, That it obteyneth of God what it will, as the Psalmist does also
witness, saying, Psalm. 140.
God will fulfill the will of them that fear him; and will hear their
pra^ers, granting all which they ask. To True hope rises out of filial Fear.
conclude, this is that fear which makes men happy in this life, through the
lively hope, and pledge it gives of glory; in the other life it will give the
possession thereof. For a truth it is, delivered by the holy Ghost, Prou. 28.
Blessed is the man who always lives in the holy fear of God.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the favors which Christ our Lord will do to the good at the
day of Judgment; and of the Joy which they shall conceive, by seeing the
signs, which precede that Judgment; and by beholding the glory of the Cross,
which shall go before Christ our Lord.
GREAT are the benefits which we find in that divine Judgment, and the fruits
which we gather thence by our considering that which Christ our Lord will show
upon the wicked. For, as we have declared, it does clearly discover the
greiuousnes of sin, and how mightily it is abhorred by our Lord God, and it
moves us to a hatred, and a fear thereof. But yet greater are the blessings
which we find in the Judgment of God; and the profit which we reap from
thence, by considering that which Christ our Lord will then do for his
servants; and the favors which he will impart, and the felicity which he will
communicate. For in this, does he discover his goodness, and the much that he
loves such as are good; and the estimation which he makes of virtue; and he
awaketh and provoke us much to love him, and he does animate and encourage us
much, to labor hard in his service, and that for the pleasing of him, and
complying with his holy will, we must employ our selves in all kind of virtue.
Let us therefore go declaring the favors which Christ our Lord will impart to
the good, in this his Judgment; to the end that we may gather this fruit from
thence.

A great How differe^tly the same things do work upon the good and the bad.
benefit and favor shall it be for the good, that those very signs which are
to precede the divine Iugdment, as namely the darkening of the Sun, the
Moon, and Stars, the swelling up of the Sea, the opening of the earth,
withal the rest, which are to strike such excessive horror into the wicked;
and will cause in them such an extreme affliction and dismay, so far, as that
they shall go like persons even distracted and mad with grief, and shall even
be dried up and withered, thorough the deadly pain and sorrow, which they shall
receive, as our Lord himself declares, saying: Luc. 21.
Men shall whither with the fear they willbe in of those miseryes which they
expect, and of which, those signs are the forerunners: That these very signs,
I say, shall give to those just men, the servants of God whom they shall find
alive, great strength and courage great confidence and security in God; and
shall cause them great alacrity and comfort, and they shall go all refresh't,
and fully at ease, as being animated with a new spirit of hope and joy. For The
great reasons, which good men have to be glad of death, and the day of Judgment
just men, who cordially do love Almighty God, do much desire to leave the
miserable estate of this life, where God is so many ways offended; and when
themselves cannot forbear to fall into some defects; which although they be
light and venial, yet for as much as they go against the will of God, they
feel the^ much, and much pain by them; and where they also find, that they
have many impedimentes to keep them from communicating with God, and from
loving him, and tasting him as they desire: These persons do extremely covet
the state of immortality and glory, where they shall most perfectly, both in
body and soul, enjoy the favors and benedictions of God as the Apostle
declares The sense is of the B. Apostle, and it is opened and explained by our
Author.
saying: Romans 8.
We know that all creatures, that is to say, all the whole machine of the world
(which conteyns all the sensible creaturs) is groaning under the weight, and
mutability, and corruption, which it is subject to.

And as a woman, who being in labor of her child, does expect to bring him
forth; so does it remain with a kind of wearines, and grief, from the very
first beginning of the world, till this instant; desiring and hoping to see it
self free from this corruption and mutability; and to be all renewed, according
to the imitation, and resemblance of that glorious liberty of the sons of
God. And we the disciples and servants of Christ our Lord, who have received
the chief, and first fruits and gifts of the holy Ghost, do sigh, and groan
withal the affection of our hearts, toward the perfect and complete adoption of
the sons of God; which is the glory, not only of our souls, but even of our
bodies also, whereby the whole man shall be delivered from all mortality, and
corruption, and from all evil inclination and concupiscence; and shall
perfectly enjoy, both in body and soul the redemption, which was wrought by
Christ our Lord. This is of the Apostle. And for as much as this desire is of
just persons, and that, in it self, it is so very internal, and so vehement;
when they shall see the signs of the divine Judgment, they shall know that the
time is then close at hand; wherein that desire of theirs is to be satisfied,
and when they are to be possessed of that happy state, and wherein they are to
be free both in body and soul from all corruption and misery both of sin and
penance. And they shallbe full of glory in their souls; and their bodies,
being adorned with the glorious stole of immortality, are to enjoy God
eternally in his kingdom.

Now The joy which the elect will have to see themselves so near the end of
their hope.
by this so certain, and secure hope, that God will be so gracious to them, as
to grant that they may possess, and enjoy that immense good, which they so
mightily desire, and to which, then, they shall be brought so near, they will
rejoice, and be revived in a wonderful manner; and give strange thanks to
God, for having brought them to see that day, and for having continued them in
his service; and vouchsafed to give them such tokens and pledges of his glory.
All this did Christ our Lord unfold, in the Gospel. For having reckoned up
the signs which are to appear before his coming to Judgment, and the fear
and sorrow wherewith they shallbe received by the wicked; turning then his
discourse to his disciples (and in their persons to all such as would be their
imitatours, and were to be alive at that time) he says, after this manner:
When these things shall arrive, which are to precede my coming, do you lift
up your heads Be not disquieted, be not dismayed, give no place to sorrow, none
to fear, or to distrust, as the lovers of the world will do, who will go with
the head all hanging down like men afflicted and dismayed But have you great
confidence, conceive great courage, be cheerful and rejoice, and with this
confidence and joy lift up your hearts and your face, to God, for now your
redemption draws near. The time approaches, and so does that most happy
state and complete redemption, which now with my Passion and Death I am about
to gain for you, and that is, both security from all kind of misery, and
immortal glory both to body and soul.

Another great favor to the just, willbe, to see, appearing in the air (and
that high up near heaven, and before the person of Christ our Lord) the sign,
and standard of the most holy Happy souls, which here are devoted to the
Cross of Christ our Lord
Cross, not made of wood, or metal, but of other most glorious matter, and
more brightly shining, and incomparably with more beauty, then the sun; and
in proportion so very large, that being placed on high, it may be seen over
the whole earth, by all the inahbitants thereof. For a matter and motive it is
of incomparable comfort and joy, for them to see in such high honor and glory,
that Cross, which they adored, as the Image of Christ, and which they loved,
by enduring and suffering affronts and pains for his sake. When A profound,
and yet a plain consideration.
a worldly man does hate any thing, or any person, and sees it or him advanced
to honor, it puts him to pain. Wicked men, in this life, did abhor the
Cross of Christ, because they did extremely love the pleasures and delicacyes,
and transitory honors of this world, and they detested to suffer pain and
sham in the virtue, and for the love of Christ our Lord. So does S. Paul
express it saying: Phil. 3.
There are many who live and converse among you (of whom I have advertised you
many times, and now again I repeat it with grief and sorrow of my heart) who
are the enemies of the Cross of Christ, since they give themselves to delights
and delicacyes, and to ambition and pride, which the Cross of Christ does
condemn; and they fly from penance, and mortification, and abstinence, and
from the exercises of humility, to which the Cross of Christ does persuade and
teach. When therefore these men shall see, in that divine Judgment that the
Cross of Christ is so highly honored, and made so glorious, which they with
their works did so abhor, it shall replenish them with pain and grief. For
thereby they shall more clearly see their error, and the eternal
condemnation, which is prepared for them. For that, is to be the end of such
men, as the same Apostle declares saying: Whose end, is death, and the
destruction of their souls.

On The same consideration continued.
the contrary side, whosoever he be that does greatly love any thing or person,
he rejoices and takes comfort to see that it is honored and esteemed by
others. And now for as much as the servants of God do cordialy love the Cross
of Christ which is, To mortify themselves with things of difficulty to flesh
and blood; and to suffer pains, and tribulations, and affronts for his love,
and in the imitation of his Passion. For as S. Paul says: Galat. 5.
They who are of Christ, and who re lively members of him, and who have his
spirit, and who are governed by him, do crucify their flesh, and chastise it
with penances, and by willingly embracing those affronts and pains, which God
presents And by afflicting their flesh, in this manner, they do withal,
destroy and kill the vices, and ill desires which sprout from thence. Now when
the servants of God, shall see that Cross, And have we not reason to love it,
since it was the instrument of our redemption.
which they loved so much, and wherein they did so greatly rejoice, become
exalted, and so glorious, and so highly honored by Almighty God; and so
reueared by the whole world, they shall receive thereby, excessive joy, and
consolation; to see how well they chanced in following the Cross of Christ our
Lord; and they shall hold it as an express sign of the glory, which God will
give to them. For, a truth of God it is, which is pronounced by his Apostle:
That whatsoever tribulation or pain or trouble is suffered in this life for
the love of God (which how long soever it lasts is but momentary, since it
lives no longer then we live) and which how grievous soever it may seem, yet
to the souls that love God, and are assisted by his holy grace, is light and
easy) does work in us, and that as a meritorious cause, a weight of most
sovereign glory, ouerflowing beyond all measure, and exceeding all that which
we can so much as even imagine; and this is not to be of temporal glory, but a
glory which shall never end.

CHAP. XV. Of the favor which Christ our Lord will do his servants, at the day
of Judgment, by separating them from the wicked.
ANOTHER benefit and favor, and that a great one, will Christ our Lord, do to
his servants in the day of Judgment, and that will be to separate them from the
company of the wicked. This was signified by Christ our Lord, who said: Matt.
25.
" When the son of man shall come to judge, he shall sit upon the throne of
his Majesty, and all the nations of the earth shall be assembled before him; and,
as the shepherd deuides the sheep from the Goats, so shall he divide the
good and bad from one another." The good he calls sheep, for the innocence,
simplicity, meeknes, and fruitefulnes in good works wherewith they abou^d and
the wicked he calls Goats, for their barrennes in doing any thing that is
good; and for the ill odor of their vices, and the impetuousnes of their
passions, to which they are subject. Three things there are, which do
principally afflict and torment the good, when they are in company of the bad.
First, they see before their eyes, many and great offenses committed against
God, and they are not able to prevent them. This He that finds not this grief
in his heart is not so much in love with God, as he perhaps conceaues
is a greiuous torment; and the more they love God, and the fulfilling of his
law, so much greater is the grief which they conceive, by seeing him
offended, and it despised. This did S. Peter explicate, when he said of Lot, 2.
Pet. 2.
That he was a just man and as such he could not endure to see sins committed,
and yet he dwelt among such men, as tormented his very soul, by their sins.

Another thing which afflicts good men, when they live and converse with such
as are wicked, is the danger Thou little know, the extrem danger into which
ill company does cast thee.
wherein they are, of loosing the virtue which they have. For as the example of
the good, does induce men to the love of virtue, so does the example of the
wicked to the love of vice. For this cause, did the Apostle say to the
Corinthia^s who were men of virtue: 1. Cor. 15.
Do not suffer your selves to be deceived; depart from the company and
communication of the wicked; for evil words do prejudice and corrupt
goodworkes, and so make men bad of good. For as much therefore as The more
virtuous me^ are, the less they presume upon themselves.
good men do understand their own frailty; they do greatly apprehend their
spiritual hurt; therefore do they feel great pain, by running hazard of
falling into such a thing as sin, which they do so much abhor.

The third thing which afflicts good men, who find themselves in the company
of wilful sinners, is fear to be punished jointly with them. For although, in
this life, God does not punish the soul of one, for the sins of another; yet
The judgments of God, are sometimes secret, but they are ever just.
it happens, that for as much as concerns temporal things, God sends
punishment sometimes to some who are good, for the sins of other with who^e
they live. As he did, to the Children of Israel, Iosu. 7.
who for the sins of Acham (who took some part of the enemies spoils against
the commaundment of God) retired his hand of succor from them all, and
discontinued the strength, which he had given them; and so they were subdued
and slain by their enemies. And God declared, that he sent that punishment for
the sin of Acham, saying; The children of Israel, shall not be able to resist
their enemies, but they shall fly from before their face; because they are
polluted, by his sins, who took that, which was solemnly forbidden. I will
no more declare my self in favor of you, till you punish him. And so Acham
being punished, God returned again to show them favor. Now this course of
Gods punishing, in temporal things some one, for the sins of another, may be
taken by Almighty God (without the least injustice to any one, because he is
the absolute Lord of all things, and he does whatsoever he does upon perfect
reason) to declare, as S. Austine shows, Augu. in Iosue q. ^.
what a wicked thing sin is, and how profoundly it is hated by him. D. Thom.
2. ^q 108. art. 4.
And this is to be understood, when the good, who live amongst the wicked, do
not yet participate with them in their sins; for when they do partake or
consent therein, and do It is no small (...) for a (...) not to ^prehen^ sin
in due time and place.
not reprehend or correct them, as they ought, then God does not only chastise
them in temporal things, as of the body, or goods, but also in those other
which concern the soul; and that not only in this life, but in that of the
other also, according to the quality of the fault.

These are the things which put good men in pain, when they are in company of
the wicked. And so it will be a most singular benefit, and of supreme
consolation and joy, for the good to see themselves separated, and that for
ever, from the society of the wicked. And to know so clearly, that then no
longer they shall be able to see with their eyes, nor to hear with their
ears, in those eternal habitations of theyrs, any thing at all which may be
of the least offense to God. But that whatsoever they shall either hear, or
see, is to be nothing else, but the praising and glorifying of his divine
Majesty with supreme perfection. And to know, that then they shall not be able
to have so much as any occasion, or danger of it, nor that there shall be any
one, in heaven, who may give them example of sin by deed, or persuade them to
it by word. For all they whom there they are to have for companions, and that
for ever, are to be Saints; and so truly Saints, that they shall never cease,
not so much as for one little, single moment from loving God, with the very
highest top of all perfection, and from doing the holy will of God in all
things, with unspeakable comfort and joy. And yet further to know that then
they are free for ever, from all kind of punishment; and from all danger to
suffer any. For as for any sins of their own, they cannot be punished for
any such, because they can commit none; and as for the sins of others, they
cannot be punished for them, because they have not, nor cannot have the company
of any such as can sin. But on How every one of the Elect will joy in the
glory of each other.
the other side they are to have an augmentation of glory, for the most holy
society which they shall enjoy of the Blessed, through whose glory their glory
also shall increase, For the immense ardour of love, wherewith they will be
carried to God, will be the cause why they shall take particular gust, in that
love, wherewith every one of those blessed souls, shall glorify, and love
Almighty God. And so also the supreme love which every one of the same blessed
souls shall bear each other, will make the^ receive particular joy, by every one
in particular. O most blessed creatures, who are to live in such a society; and
who are to enjoy such a communication of felicity for all eternity. If it be a
great benediction to enjoy the society of good men, here on earth; what kind
of blessedness will it be to enjoy the company of blessed souls? If it be a
matter of much profit and comfort to participate in the communication of the
gifts of grace; what kind of profit, what kind of comfort will it be, to have
communication with so many Saints both men and Angels, in the gifts of glory?
O with how much reason is it said: Psalm. 23.
Blessed are they, O Lord, who dwell in thy house; they shall praise thee
there, through the eternity of all eternityes, Amen.

CHAP. XVI. Of the favor, which Christ our Lord imparteth to his servants at
the day of Judgment, by giving them his benediction, and communicating his
kingdom to them.
THIS benefit and favor, is followed by another, which yet is greater. For the
good, being once separated from the wicked, and being placed upon the right
hand of Christ our Lord; this celestial King shall cast toward them, his most
gracious countenance, being all full of suauity, and delight. And passing his
sentence of favor on them, he will say, Come ye blessed of my Father. The
benediction of God is the good gift of God; and so, to be blessed by him, is
to be filled withal those good gifts and graces, which God communicates to his
servants. That is, withal those principal benefits, which the Saints have
here on earth (when once they are made pure and clean from all imperfections)
and withal those others also, which the Angels do possess in heaven; and,
which is more, with all those goods and graces which the King of heaven
himself, does possess and enjoy. For, as S. John affirms, 1. Joan. 3.
When he shall appear, we shallbe made like to Jesus Christ our Lord,
participating of his power, of his beauty, of his wisdom, of his goodness, of
his joy, of his glory.

He How grace and glory proceed from God the Father and how also from the other
persons of the most B. Trinity.
calls them Bl ssed of his Father, to declare the fountain, and first
offspring, from whence all the benefits of grace and glory spring, and this is
the eternal Father; and besides, because all that which the Father operateth,
is also the work of God the Son as he is God; as also it is the work of God
the holy Ghost. For the Divinity, the Goodness, and the Power, is the very same
in all the three Persons; and to attribute them all to the Father (as to the
first Author of all that is good) is to offer them also to the Son, as he is
God; and it is also to offer them to the holy Ghost, who is one God, with the
Father, and the Son. O happy men, who are to receive such a benediction! A
benediction, given by Christ our Lord, in the face of heaven and earth, and of
all the creaturs! A benediction authorized by all the most Blessed Trinity, as
the Author and fountain of the same! A benediction which comprehendes all the
chief gifts of grace, and all the gifts of glory! A benediction full of
benefits, unspeakable, most high, and truly heavenly, which contain all the
most chief and choice part of heaven! A Benediction of eternal benefit! A
Benediction irreuocable, which can never be changed, as long as God shall be
God! O how highly is this benediction to be esteemed! O how much is it to be
desired, and procured, which makes men so truly happy, as our Lord himself
declares saying: Come and possess the kingdom, which is prepared for you
from the beginning of the world.

Kingdoms The great differences which are between an earthly and a heavenly
kingdom.
and dominions you had on earth, but temporal kingdoms and dominions they were
and of little value and comfort; or ratherful of miseries; and whatsoever they
were, they are now grown to an end. Laying aside those miserable kingdoms
which already are ended, come and possess another kingdom, which is
celestial and full of incomparable happiness; a kingdom of infinite value; a
kingdom which eternally shall continue. And although every one of you is to be
a king of this kingdom, and is to reign and possess the same; yet the
kingdom is still but one. For all of you are to be subject and obedient (but it
is to be with supreme love) to this Sovereign King, in whose company you are
to reign. And because all of you are to be of one heart and of one will, united
by most perfect love, in such sort that the blessings belonging to any one in
particular to be of you all (so far forth as to rejoice therein) and they of
you all to be of every one (to rejoice with them, to whom in particular they
belong) this kingdom is also to be but one. Yet still, though this kingdom
be but one, you shall all be kings, and you all shall reign. For the kingdom
is infinite in the greatness of the felicity, which is possessed therein; and it is
infinite also, in the contynuance, since it is eternal. And to the end that
you may discern the altitude of this kingdom, and the great affection where
with it is given you, Behold, it has been prepared for you since the
beginning of the world.

The election Of our election to the kingdom of heaven and the preparation,
which is made for us toward the same.
of the inhabitants of this kingdom was made before the world was created; for
they were chosen and predestined from all eternity to raigine therein. But the
preparing of those things which concern this kingdom, and the putting of
those means in practice, which had relation to the obteyning thereof, did begin
at the beginning of the world. From that time, were framed those most sumptuous
palaces, those most beautiful habitations, and those most glorious seats and
thrones, where the inhabitants of this kingdom were to live and reign. Then
were created and were made happy those first Citizens of this kingdom, which
are the Angels, who were to keep men company therein, and to augument the glory
which men were to possess in this kingdom. And so also from the first
beginning of the world, there were gifts of graces which came to be communicated
to men, whereby they were to obtain this kingdom. And for God to create man,
and withal to communicate justice and grace to him, whereby he might procure
this kingdom, all that was done at once; and from that time, to this, nothing
has been done, but to dispose and help men, and give them means that they
might come to possess and perfectly enjoy this kingdom, in glory both of body
and soul. This is that most blessed sentence, which Christ our Lord will give
in favor of his servants; and that being done, he will instantly raise them up
together with himself, and will inuest them with the most glorious possession
of his celestial kingdom.

CHAP. XVII. Of the felicity which Christ our Lord will communicate to his
servants, in the kingdom of heaven.
LET A most excellent most sweet, most profound, and yet most plain
description of the joys of heaven, throughout this whole Chapter.
us yet more particulerly co^template the Majesty of this kingdom, which
Christ our Lord imparteth to his servants; and of that felicity which is
possessed therein; to the end that we may gather that fruit, which it is fit for
us to feed upon; which is nothing else, but the disposing of our selves to the
obtaining of this kingdom, by an imitation of the virtues of Christ our Lord.
And The place of the kingdom of glory.
first, the situation and place of this kingdom, is that supreme heaven,
which for the glorious brightness and splendour which is found therein, is called
Empyreal. The altitude and capacity, and beauty and admirable design, the
grace and suauity of this place though it be such, as no tongue of flesh and
blood can declare; yet to give us to understand, some part of that which there
is found, by a comparison of those things which here we know, S. John
describes it in the Revelations after this manner. Apoc. 21. and 22.
He was carried in spirit, to a mountain which was great and very high; and he
saw that holy Jerusalem the celestial City, full of the clarity of God; all
built of perfect, pure and most resplendent gould, like clean, pure glass. It
had a wall about it of Iaspar, both very thick, and very high, the foundations
whereof, were adorned with precious stone. In this wall, were twelve gates, and
every one of them, was made of a most precious pearl and that pearl alone,
did make the gate. This City had within a very spacious open place, all paued
with gold, most pure and most resplendent, and in the midst of that place,
there was a river of infinite sweetness. A Temple also there was, to adorn this
City; and a light to illuminate it; and this Temple and Light was God himself,
and therefore it must needs be far from having any necessity of any other
Temple or Light.

By these words S. John describes the situation of the Kingdom of heaven,
and the habitation of the Saints. And although it be true, that there are not
there, any of those mettalls of gold or silver, or any of these precious stones
of earth (for all these things are poor and base, and of no value) yet We who
are sensible creatures, as well as spiritual, must be raised toward
spiritual things by such as are sensible; and therefore the use of ceremonies,
and Images, is very necessary.
he delivers himself thus, that by those things which are the most precious
and beautiful of the earth, the soul may rise to consider the greatness and
beauty of heavenly things, understanding ever, that those, are incomparably
better then these. And as the whole globe of the heavens, is so far exceeding
the earth in greatness, that the whole earth is but as a point, or in effect as
nothing, in comparison of the heavens; so is it in all the rest as well as in
greatness. And all the brightness, and beauty, and sweetness of things of this
world, being compared with those of heaven, are as if they had not, so much as
the least being at all. So that the advantage which the habitation of heaven
does carry beyond this of the earth is such that it exceeds all comparison.
For in fine such it is, as is fit to be carried by the house of the Creator in
respect of a creatures house; and by the City of God, in respect of the City
of men; and by that sphere of felicity and eternal joy, in respect of this
Center of miseryes, and this valley of tears.

The Man's supreme happynes consists in the vision of God.
chief felicity which is enjoyed in this sovereign City by clear vision, is
God himself. His servants, says S. John, Apoc. 22.
in this City of God shall see his face. What unspeakable happiness, what
Abisse, what immense kind of sea of all felicity, will it be to look the
Divinity of God in the face, without the interposition or interpretation of any
creature? To A most sweet explication of the most blessed Trinity.
see that divine essence, in three persons; and three divine persons in one,
and the self same essence; to see the power of the Father, the wisdom of the
Son, and the goodness of the holy Ghost? To see how the Father, from all
eternity, engenders the Son, communicating to him his divinity; and how the
Father and the Son, as one and the same eternal spring or root, do by
spiration, give proceeding to the holy Ghost, and communicate their divine
essence to him? To see how all the perfection of God, is in every one of the
three divine persons; and how all the perfection, that any one of the divine
persons has, the very same is possessed by either of the other divine persons.
What kind of incomparable joy will that be, so clearly to behold an infinite
Good, which is all amiable, all full of infinite beauty, of suauity, and of
delight. And not only to see it, in some manner, which might be less
excellent, but to behold it with the eyes of an incorruptible soul, and they
most brightly clarifyed by the light of glory; and everlastingly to love it,
without ceasing, and that with a most perfect love, and to possess it with a
perpetuity of security.

After Of knowledge, Love and Joy, and how they grow out of one another.
the rate of the knowledge of any thing, grows the love to be; and after the
rate of the love, is the joy for that which is so much beloved; and that
knowledge which the Saints have of God, being the greatest which can possibly
be had (since it is the clear sight of God) the love must also be so great, as
that greater cannot be conceived.

The The motives of love.
soul is moved to love a thing, which it knows, because it is good, because
it is beautiful, because it is profitable, because it is delightful, because
it concerns the soul, and is, after a sort, belonging to it. And so much more
as that thing is good, more beautiful, more profitable, more delightful, more
concerning it, and more belonging to it, so much more does the soul (if it
know that thing well, and be hindered by no impediment at all) delight in it,
and love it, with a more intense, and perfect love. Well then, since all these
reasons, and tytles, and motives of love, are found to be in God, with infinite
perfection (and the soul clearly seeing God and meeting with no impediment
which may hinder love) with what love so intense, and so immense, will it be
sure to love him?

By The rivers of joy which ouerflow a soul which is in glory.
seeing that he is infinite goodness, there is inge^dred in the soul, a most
copious river of love; By seeing that he is infinite beauty, there is produced
in it, another most abundant river of love; By seeing how full of advantage it
has been, and is, and ever will be to the soul; and that in some sort it is
even infinite, there flows from the soul another river of love, so wide, and
deep, as that it has neither bottom nor brim. By seeing that it is an
infinite delight, and sweetenes, and that it concerns the soul so much, and
that she does so dearly truly belong unto it; and that it is her creator, her
father, her God; and that all her being depends upon it; there is also created
in the soul another most copious and most abundant river of love; and all
these rivers of love, meeting then in one, the soul of every Saint in heaven
grows to have in it an unbridled boundles Sea of love.

He that Be still attentive.
loves a thing, does wish it well; and if he may see the good he wishes, it
gives him joy; and the more he loves, and the more he desires, and the greater
that the good is, so much the greater is the joy. Now the^, since the Saints in
heaven do love God, with a whole boundless Sea of love; and seeing that he
possesses all the good which they can wish (as namely that he is God himself)
and that, together with God, he is infinitely happy; who can say what delight,
who can say what joy they shall receive; since it is bound to be great
according to the rate of their love. Infallibly they shall possess a whole
immense Sea of divine joy; an immense Sea shall they possess, of celestial
and supreme delights. This is that delight and joy, which the soul receives
from God himself, being an infinite good; when once she is possessed of a clear
vision of him, and that by love. O Infinite joy.
joy, which ouercomest all joy! O joy, which imbracest all our good! O joy,
without lymit! O eternal joy! O joy which art the ever running fountain of al
joys! O joy which know how to satisfy all the desirs, and can fill up all
the hollowes and empty places of the soul; Matt. 25.
and do possess whatsoever we shall ever be able to think! To this joy does
Christ niuite al his faithful servants, and this does he give them, in reward
of their virtue, saying, Rejoice O thou good and faithful servant, enter into
the joy of thy Lord.

Another The unspeakable joy, which they shall have by seeing the the most
glorious humanity of Christ our Lord.
felicity which the blessed souls shall have, is to behold the most glorious
huma^ity of Christ our Lord; and to enjoy it, and to see him (even as he is
man) in so excessive Greatness, and Majesty, and glory. And to see him withal so
amiable, and so affable, and so deerly sweet, toward all those happy souls;
and to see that that Lord, who is man as they are, and who with his passion and
death did for the love he bare them, redeem them from eternal damnation; the
same man, I say, is the infinite and eternal God. O how will they love that
most sacred humanity, which loved them so much, and which did and suffered so
great things for them? O how will they rejoice to see that huma^ity so mightily
sublymed, and united by an incomprehensible manner, to the person of the Word?
O how will they glory in his felicity? O what delight and sweetness will they
receive, from such a sight and from such a love? For as the prophet says Isa.
33.
They shall see the king in his beauty.

Another It will be an inestimable joy to see how infinitely God loves them.
supreme felicity for those happy souls, shall be to see the love which God
carries toward them; and wherewith the eternal father, did, from all Eternity
love, and choose them, and did, in Time, bestow his Son upon them; and
deliver him over to death for them; and to see that this love, in it self, is
infinite, and the very same wherewith God loves himself. The This truth is
proved by a fit comparison.
servant of a King, will much esteem, that the king do him favor, bestowing
some important place upon him in his house, with good provision belonging to
it. But much more will he esteem it, and much more contentment and comfort
will he receive, to see himself beloved, by that king; and that he is a
favorite of his And though he have but some conjectures of this love, and that
it may easily be cooled and changed into a disaffection; yet does he
nevertheless esteem it more, then all the other favors which the king does him.
For by loving him, he gives him his heart, which is incomparably more, then if
he gave him a part of his fortune. What then will a Saint in glory feel in
himself when he shall see, that he is so beloved by God; and although the
benefits which God has done him are very great, yet the love he bears him is
much greater; and although they are most precious benefits which there he is
enjoying, by the guyft of God, yet much more precious is the love. For this
love is the root and fountain of all the benefits, and guiftes, and graces
which he has communicated; nay this love, is even very God himself. Now then
to know this love of God, not by conjecture, but by seeing it expressly in God,
with as great clarity as that wherewith he sees God himself; and still to see
with the same clarity that this love cannot be lost, no nor changed, but that
for ever it shall remain inuariable, with the self same permanency where with
the truth of God himself shall remain, of which truth it is said Psalm. 116.
that it shall remain for ever; O how highly will the Blessed esteem and value
this love of God! O how imcomparable joy will they receive to see themselves so
beloved by God!

When love is great, it has this property and power, that by the band of the
same love, it makes Of the union, of several things which is made by love.
him that loves, become the same thing with him that is beloved, and that he
lodges his whole heart in him; and that with the chains of love he becomes
imprisoned, and even captiued by him, who is beloved, and that he depend wholly
upon him; willing that which he wills, and communicating to him all his goods.
Now then, since the Blessed souls, knowing that this is the property of
intense love, and seeing themselves so beloved by God with this love which has
no measure, nor had no beginning, nor will have end; what kind of immense,
incomparable joy, will this be to them? Without all question except the joy
which they shall have in the felicity of God, whom they love more then
themselves, this other is their greatest joy, to see themselves so beloved by
him, who is omnipotent, and who is infinite beauty and glory, and the infinite
fountain of all Good. Of this Love God himself gives testimony, saying by
the Prophet Hieremy: Hier. 33.
With eternal love I have loved thee; and therefore did I in time show mercy
to thee, and I called, and drew thee to my friendship and glory.

CHAP. XVIII. Of other benefits which Christ our Lord co^municateth to his
servants, in his heavenly kingdom; and of the fruit of gratitude, which we
must gather from the Consideration of this reward.
BESIDES these benefits which are the chief, there are others yet, which are
enjoyed by happy souls in the kingdom of heaven, which are also of inualuable
value, and of incomparable joy. One of them is, to be in company of the
Blessed; where there is such a multitude of The incomprehensible number of the
Angels.
Angelical spirits, distinguished into nine Quires, as that they are in
greater number, then all the men, which have been, which are, and which shall
ever be; yea more, then all the corporeal creatures of the whole world put
together. And where there are so many Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles,
and Apostolical men, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and Virgins; and so many
others, who by penance have made their way to heaven, and whom S. John (who
saw them in a Revelation) says, Apoc. 7.
to be so many, as that they cannot be numbered. And The dignity and excellency
of those celestial inhabitants.
all of them, are the sons of God, and Grandes in the Court of God; and Kings
in the kingdom of heaven; and all of them, most perfect in virtue, and most
sanctifyedly wise, and most beautiful, and full of immense glory; and all of
them, so well content, and at ease, that they desire nothing but what they
have, because they have as much, as possibly they can desire. And What a noble
conversation will this be?
notwithstanding that they are so very high in dignity, and glory, yet withal,
every one of them is most profoundly humble; all affable, and mild, and of
most sweet condition. And being so innumerable as they are, they yet do all,
know one another much better, and in a more intrinsecall manner, then a man on
earth can ever arrive to know himself. And they all do treat, and communicate
with one another; and they love one another with such a love, as does
incomparably exceed, the love which any Mother can bear to a child. For in
them all, there is but one affection and will, which is that of God, by the
union, and conformity of will, which every one has with his; and the felicity
of all, every one esteems as his own; and the glory of every one in
particular, is held as proper to every one. And Every one of them has
excessive joy in the glory of any other.
so, every one of the Blessed has as many particular joys, as there are
Angels, and Saints in heaven. For every one of them rejoices at the others
good, as at his own; and he enjoys the joy of another, as his own joy; and
so much more will one happy soul be glad of the glory of any other, as he
shall see God to be more glorified in that other.

But amongst all the The inestimable joy which every of the Blessed have in
behoulding, and treating with the all immaculate Mother of God.
Blessed, whether they be Angels, or mere men and women, the creature, who
does more enoble, and engrandize, and delight, and make happy that most
glorious court of heaven, is the most sacred Virgin Mary, that Lady, that
Queen, that most deerly divinely sweet enamoured mother of the^ all. For she
is the true and natural mother of him who created them all, and who redeemed
them all, and who endued them all with that beatitude. They all are great, they
all are most sublimely happy; but this Lady, is more great, more happy, and
more glorious, then they all together. All of them do arde^tly love one
another, and they all converse, and behold each other with admirable sweetenes;
and they are all a cause of excessive joy and glory to one another. But And woe
will be to the^, who do not love and honor and admire, and serve this
soueraign Queen.
this soueraign Queen loves them al, and every one of them as her dearest
Children, and as her brethren and companions, and as the loving members of
Jesus Christ our Lord, who is her natural son. And she behoulds them all,
with most gracious, and most amorous eyes; and she treates and communicates
with them all, with a most incomparable sweetenes; and by that presence, and
communication of hers, she causes in every one of them far more joy, and
far more glory, then any other creature does.

This blessed life, and this company of the blessed is described by the Prophet
Isay, Isa. 60.
speaking partly of the militant Church, but principally of the triumpha^t,
which is that celestial Jerusalem, in these words: There shall never be in
thee, O thou Sovereign City, and thou land of the living, any sin or
punishment; nor any news, or noise thereof. Instead of pain, thou shall have
perfect and eternal health; and instead of sin, thou shall have the
continual and everlasting exercise of the love of God. Our Lord God shall be
al in all to thee; thy Sun, and thy Moon, and thy light and thy glory, and
all thy good. And a^l the elect are to make up, in thee, a people, and a most
glorious and blessed common wealth; to the end that all together, may eternally
enjoy the inheritance of those celestial benedictions. And let us see (since
there are to be so many inhabitants in that sovereign City, and since every
just person is to be a Citizen thereof) if there may there be found, any one
who is weak or impotent, or who is subject to the least disgust. The Prophet
does instantly proceed, and say, The least of them al shall be so full of power,
as that he may stand for a thousand, of the strongest men; and the little one
shall stand for a mighty Army. That is to say, every one of the Blessed shall
participate so much of God, and shall find God to be so truly his, as that
whatsoever he have a mind to do, for that he shall have sufficient power. And
whatsoever felicity he shall desire, the same he shall possess, for in God he
can do all, and he has all.

These The fruits which grow from the consideration of the glory of heaven.
benefits which we have here recounted, and other which be like to these, are
possessed and enjoyed in that celestial kingdom which Christ our Lord, who is
the judge both of the quick and dead, will impart to the just, in reward of
their good life. And now let us reach toward the fruit which we must procure
to gather, from the infallible knowledge of this truth. Whereof Great
estimation of the benefits; and great thansgiuing to the benefactour.
the first is this: A very great estimation, and profound internal gratitude
for this mercy, and vnspeable grace of God; that we being so poor creatures,
so weak, so ignorant, and who, by our own fault, made our selves so
miserable, so base, so unworthy of all good, and who so well deserved the
uttermost of all pain, God would yet make choice of us, from all eternity; and
first create us, and after that sin was committed, redeem us; to the end
that we might obtain that most sublyme, and supernatural end of beatitude;
which consists in seeing God, and in enjoying God, and in obteyning and
possessing that by grace, which God himself does possess by nature, which is
to love and enjoy himself. Again, that he has created, and ordained, and
called, and justified us, for the enabling us to a dignity so sublime, as it is
to be Kings of heaven; and to have seats, and thrones in that heaven which is
called Empyreall, and that for ever. And there to possess the incomprehensible
and eternal felicity of glory; and in this glory, to be companions of the
Angels, yea and of God himself who is the Lord of the Angels. This I say, is
a grace, and mercy, which we are to ponder, and most profoundly to esteem in
the very roots of our hearts, and to be grateful to God for it, withal the
powers of our soul; and with our tongue to bless and praise him for it, with
S. Peter saying; Blessed and praised be our God, and the natural favor of
Jesus Christ our Lord, who through his great and most abundant mercy, has
engendered us anew (who were borne in sin, and were the Children of wrath, by
our descent from Adam) by lively Faith, and by the Sacraments; making us, by
this spiritual generation to become the sons of God himself, and giving us
a certain and true hope of the true life, which is that blessed and
everlasting end. And this he wrought in us, by the Resurrection of Christ our
Savior. For by his Resurrection, he procured that the world should believe in
him, and should obey his gospel; and by means of this faith, and obedience,
the fruit of his life and passion might be communicated to it; and by this
lively hope, he first enabled us to expect, and afterward to obtain, the
inheritance, which is due to the Son of God.

The An insatiable thirst after the joys of heaven.
second thing which we are to draw from hence, is a very great, and lively,
and efficatious desire of this kingdom of heaven; and that once we may arrive
to possess and enjoy that celestial happiness. A man desires, even by the
very appetit of nature, to be free from the affliction of pain, and other
corporal miseries; but this desire cannot be fulfilled in this life. For all
this life is full of affliction and sickness, and pains of body, and sadness and
grief of mind; and difficulties, and troubles, and contradictions, by his
kinsmen and friends, and of persecution by injustice, and oppressions of
enemies; and of contrary and ill encounters in point of fortune; and of
temptations of devils, and of the world; and of their laws and rights; and of
our own corrupt nature, and al our evil inclinations. A man, says Job, lives
but a little time, and that little, is full of many miseries. In heaven it is,
where a man may have this desire satisfied, because there, as S. John says,
Apoc. 21.
God will wipe away the tears from his friends eyes, and there shall be no
death, nor lamentation, nor any sad note, nor grief. For all this, had an end,
in this life; and therefore it is necessary for a man to labor, with desire of
the kingdom of heaven, where only this desire can be accomplished.

A man The just reason of this thirst, drawn from the sins wherewith the
world abounds.
desires, by the appetite of grace, to see himself free from the sins of his
soul, which induce him to do ill. In this life, this delight cannot be
accomplished; because all this life is full of innumerable sins; and
whersoeuer thou go, thou shall see sin, and plenty of wickedness. And
although, in many places it abounds more, or less, then in other; yet for the
most part, every one of them is corrupted and defild with diverse kinds of
vices; yea and even the most just and holy men, have some venial sins, of
which they cannot free themselves; and the same men run hazard to fall into
other which are greater. For as S. John says, 1. Joan. 1.
If we shall say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves therein, and we
speak not truth. In heaven it is, where this desire is fulfilled; for there,
is neither fault, nether can there be any. For as the same Apostle says, Apoc.
21.
Into that celestial Jerusalem nothing can enter, which is spotted. And
therefore it is necessary, and most profitable, for a man to aspire to that
habitatio^ of heaven, where his desire may be satisfied.

CHAP. XIX. How all the things of this life which are good, and which give
delight, do induce us to a desire of the kingdom of heaven.
NOT We have reason to thirst after the kingdom of heaven through the
consideration of earthly pleasures, which are miserable things, and yet they
make a shift to please us.
only do the evils of sin, and punishment (whereof this life of ours is
full) incline us to desire the kingdom of heaven, which is free from al those
inconveniences; but so also do all good things, which give us in this life any
contentment, or gust either corporal or spiritual, persuade and move us to
the same. For they all discover to us, the immensity of that celestial
happiness; and the greatness of the appetite of our soul, which cannot be
satisfied, and put in quiet, by any thing, which is less then that. For a man
who, by his senses, takes experience of the savor of his meat, and drink,
and of the sweetenes of music, and of the contentment which he has in seeing
those things which are artificial, gallant, and full of beauty; by the light
of reason, and of faith, will grow to make this consideration. If a creature A
most certain truth, and which enters sweetly into the soul.
so base and of so small importance, as a bird, a liquor of milk, or wine, or
any other thing that concerns our food, being touched but by the course palate
of a man, do yet cause delight and gust, and such gust, as that for it, some
men do expose themselves to much trouble and cost, yea and even to the very
perdition of their souls; what savor, and what joy shall it give the soul,
to be most profoundly internally with all the powers and forces thereof, united
with God, and to taste God, he being that infinite good, and that infinite
sweetness and joy; yea and the infinite fountain of all joy and sweetness. And
with the same soul, to swallow down huge draughtes of that river of delights,
which is in the house of God; and which, in substance, is in even God himself,
and the infinite and inexhausted sea, of all chaste and pure delights.

If to see with these corporal eyes of ours, the design, the beauty, and the
grace of creatures (which yet are but compounded of earth, and water, and the
other elements; and framed by the will of man, out of metal, and wood, and
other mate^alls of this world) do cause such ^ontentment, and joy, in the heart
^f man, by the sight thereof, that for ^is sight, they endure, and suffer much;
and make long iourneys, and much expense; what comfort, and joy shall it be,
for the clear eyes of the soul (being strengthened by supernatural force and
light) to behold that beauty of the Angels, and blessed spirits; yea and the
beauty of God himself.

If to hear with our corporal ears, that Music which is made by the voice
of a man, and of other instruments of Music, does impart such sweetness, as
that a man will remain many hours as if his soul were even suspended; and he
is content to loose both his food and rest, for this earthly gust; what
sweetness will it be, for those inhabitants of heaven, with the ears of their
soul, to hear those consorts and melodious songs, wherewith all the Quires of
the Angels do praise and glorify Almighty God. And to hear that most gracious
voice, wherewith the same God does comfort, and recreate all those blessed
souls, and discovers to them his Love, together with the secrets of his
very heart. And to hear also eue^ with the ears of their bodies, the sound of
that praise, and thanksgiving, wherewith all those men who are to be made happy
after their Resurrection, shall glorify Almighty God, and give joy to the whole
court of heaven.

A man We have reason to aspire to eternal glory, since nothing of this life
can quench our thirst.
who considers and pondereth by these, and such other discourses both of
reason, and faith, the greatenes of these celestial blessings, and who
finds, that neither the natural appetite of reason, and much less the
supernatural, which he has, being caused in him by grace, is satisfied or
contented, or quieted by all the benefits, and gusts, and delights of the earth,
but that even whilst he has them he becomes more hungry, more discontent, and
more unquiet then he was before; and that only he can be satisfied by the
delights and gusts, which are in heaven, will be induced, upon this motive, to
desire the happiness of heaven with a most vehement ardour of mind. And he is
animated and encouraged to beg it of God, and to sigh and groan for it
continually; and he says with David: Psalm. 41.
As the Heart with being chased and tired, and having deadly thirst, desires the
waters and goes panting up and down in search thereof; so my soul being
ouerwrought by the miseries of this life, desires thee o my God and has a
mighty thirst, and an insatiable appetit toward thee who art the fountain of
the living water both of grace and glory, which can only satisfy and appease
my whole appetit. How long o Lord am I to live in this place of banishment!
When will it be granted me that being freed from the miseries of this exile, I
may present my self before thee, and behold thee face to face, and enjoy thy
presence, in the society of those happy souls! And as long as this sentence
of banishement lies upon me, and that the sight of thy Divinity is deferred, I
take contentment in nothing, but spending of sighs and shedding of tears, day
and night, through the excessive desire that I have to be with thee; and by
these tears my soul is comforted and mantained. Thus did David, and all those
holy Patriarcks and Prophets, and great servants of God of the old Testament
aspire, sigh and groan, with vehement desire of this celestial beatitude. And
much more, and with more reason, did the Saints of the new Testament perform
the same, and so should all true Christians do. First because till the passion
of Christ our Lord was past, the Saints, how fully soever they were purged from
all sin and pain, went not yet to heaven, but to the Lymbus of the holy
Fathers, where they staid from entering into heaven, till the redemption of the
world were accomplished by Christ our Lord. But since his death, all they, who
are purified, either in this life, or in the other, do instantly rise up, to
the possession of everlasting beatitude. And secondly now in time of the law
of grace, the gifts of the holy Ghost are more abundantly communicated to the
faithful; and so they receive more consolations, and spiritual joy, and have
more gust, and feeling, and experience of celestial graces; and do more
perfectly understand the height, the value, and the majesty thereof, and
consequently they desire them more, and with more ardour of affection then did
the Saints of the old Testament. It does also increase this desire in the time
of the law of grace, to know that heaven is full of blessed creatures, who
are of the race of mankind, and who are expecting us there; and do greatly
desire our Society. For by the entry which any one of the elect does make into
heaven, the glory of God is increased; who is far more beloved and praised, and
glorified by the just in heaven, then on earth; and so also does the
accidental joy, and glory of every one of the elect increase, upon the
arrival of any other. But much more then they altogether, does This reason
would extremely oblige us, though there were no other.
Christ our Lord (who redeemed, and saved us by his death) desire to have us
there with him. Both because he loves us much more then they all are able to
do, as also for that by the entry of the elect into heaven, and by the
possession which the^ is given the^ of that kingdom, the whole fruit of his
passion, and death is gathered, and all that is perfected and established,
which he did and suffered for us here; that so he might make us completely
happy, and be like to himself in glory; and be partakers of his heavenly
kingdom; and in fine, to make us such, as that together with him, we may
perfectly praise, and glorify, and enjoy his eternal Father. For these reasons
does he much desire to see us in heaven; and when that desire of his is
satisfied by the ascent which any of the elect makes thither; that most sacred
soul of our Lord does receive a new delight, and joy, which belongs to his
accidental glory. For as that kind of glory may increase in any of those other
Blessed Spirits, so may it also do, in the most glorious Humanity of Christ our
Lord.

CHAP. XX. How from this knowledge, concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, which
Christ our Lord will give his servants, we are to gather a resolute purpose to
fly from sin, and to fulfill the Commandments of God, and to despise the
commodityes of this life.
THE The consideration of eternal glory must awake us to hate and fly from
sin.
third, and the principal use which we are to make, of this our knowledge, and
estimation, and desire of heavenly beatitude, is a stout and resolute mind,
and a stiff and effectual purpose, to put in execution, all those means,
which are either necessary, or but even convenient, for the obteyning of this
kingdom of heaven. Now, for the entering into heaven, it is necessary to cast
sin away. For Sin gives impediment to al approach thither; and they who
have the soul laden with any one mortal sin, cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Let us therefore cleanse our souls from former sin, by
penance; and let us resist all temptations (least else we may return to fall
again) according to the advice of the Apostle, who says, Houlding fast these
promises of God, which are so great, and so certain, and do concern those
sublyme gifts of grace and glory, let us, my brethren much beloved, cleanse our
selves from all spot of sin; whether it be interior, or exterior. He says,
from all sin, because it will behooue us to be cleansed from al; and we must
fly with diligence from all. From mortal sins, because they are against
Charity, and do separate us from God; and from venial sins, because they are
contrary to the will of God, and they weaken the soul; and dispose it to
commit mortal sin, and consequently to forfaite the kingdom of heaven. So
also, for entering into heaven, it is necessary to do good works, and such as
are acceptable to God; as Christ our Lord affirms, saying, Matt. 19^
If thou will enter into that eternal life, which is true life, keep the
commaundments. Complying It must stir us up to the practice of all virtue.
therefore with this obligation, let us perform holy works, whereby we may
fulfill the commandment of God; and let us put in execution the virtues of
Humility, Chastity, Mercy, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, Religion, and
Charity; by which if they be wrought in state of grace, and do grow out of
Charity, they will make us worthy of eternal life.

Besides, It exhorts us to perseverance.
for the obteyning of this kingdom of heaven, it is necessary that we continue
in the good begun, till we end in doing well, as our Lord did teach us,
saying, Matt. 24.
He that contynueth to the end, shall be saved. Let us therefore persevere in
good life; and although the devils comber us with their temptations, and
though men do persecute us with their injuries, and though our Lord God do try
us by many tribulatio^s, let us not turn back, nor be dismayed, nor suffer
our selves to fall down, to inordinate sorrow, nor impatience, nor
disconfidence; but let us continually make our recourse to God; and praying to
him with humility, let us beg strengh at his hands, wherewith to suffer, and
constancy that we may persevere, and confidence that we may not despair. So
does the Apostle advise the Galathians saying: Galat. 6.
We who are living well, and do exercise our selves in good works, let us not
faint, nor give over, no nor grow slack in the good course begun; but let
us continue, and grow therein, with great constancy. For in due time we shall
gather the fruit, if we do not faint. That is to say, we shall eat the fruit
of glory, which shall have no end.

Moreover We must not think of finding our heaven in this life, if we mean to
have it in the next.
for the arriving to enjoy celestial beatitude, we must despise the goods, and
pleasures of this world. And it is necessary that we place not our hearts or
ends in them; nor that we seek for comfort in them, as Christ our Lord did
signify to us by saying, Luc. 6.
Woe be to you, who are the lovers of riches, and who have placed your comfort,
in the co^modityes of this life. For this reason it will be necessary, in most
particular manner, to contemn all the commodityes of this life; namely riches,
honors, and pleasures, as poor things transitory, and base; for by despising
them we shall not place our end, nor seek for comfort in them.

This is therefore that fruit, which we are to gather from the knowledge, and
desire of celestial beatitude. For knowing the greatness, and beauty, and value
of heavenly things, we grow quickly, and clearly, to see the vileness, and
poornes of such as be earthly; and by desiring and tasting eternal things, we
grow instantly to loose the love, and taste of all things transitory. And thus
shall we perfectly accomplish that which the Apostle asks at the hands of all
the faithful, saying: Coloss. 3.
If you be raised up with Christ, seek the things that are above. That is A
place of S. Paul excellently pondered.
to say, Since you are risen up in soul to a spiritual life of grace, with
hope to be raised up, in due time, to an immortal and glorious life both in
body and soul, (in imitation of Christ our Lord, who rose up from the dead to
an immortal and glorious life) seek you with your thoghts, with your desirs,
with your good works, and with continual prayer, the kingdom of heaven. And
since Christ our Lord who is your head, is seated at the right hand of his
Father, possessing and enjoying even as man, the greatest anthority and the
greatest felicity of glory which he did ever communicate in Time, or will ever
communicate for all Eternity, you that are members of his, take gust and savor
in heavenly things; and place not your delight, and love upon those of the
earth, but desire those others so from the heart, and with so great purity of
life, that you may, even by experience, find the gust and most pure savor of
them; and address your life, in order to this end of eternal glory, which you
love, and for which you hope.

This efficacious purpose, and determinate resolution to cleanse the soul from
all vice, to employ it with perseverance in good works; and cordially to
despise earthly things, is the use which we are to make, of the knowledge and
desire of celestial beatitude, as has been said. And it is most just, and
due, that so we do, and that, for the going through with this enterprise which
we are to make, upon heaven, we be content to undertake all labor, and to
encounter with any difficulty. All the things A plain demonstration, and I am
in good hope, that it will convince thee.
of this life, which are of any value, and are able to give but the least
co^tentment, do cost some trouble, and in all them some difficulty is to be
endured. The husband-ma^, for gathering in of a little corn, does manure, and
plough the ground before he sowes; and after he has sowed, and that the blade
is up, and the corn is grown, is feign first to cleanse it, and then to
sheere it, with much labor. The Shepherd for the breeding of his poor
flock, does content himself to endure the heats, and coldes, and raines, and
winds, and night-watches. All Merchants and Factors, and all the Maryners and
conductors who are of service to the^ in their negotiations, do, for the
getting of a little money, pass through intolerable troubles, both by Sea and
Land; and do expose themselves to great danger of death. All kind of tradesmen,
for the getting of a poor living, do labor and sweat both day and night, in
their several occupations. The soldier, for his miserable pay, and for a
little fume of honor, is subject to extreme inconveniences, and runs hazard of
his life, at every moment. The servants and Courtiers of great Princes, for the
obtaining of favor, which yet do pass, and change like any wind, deprive
themselves of their own gust, and deny their own will, and are hanging day
and night, upon that of others; and for the giving of contentment to their
Lords, they take an abundance of coffeehouse and disgust to themselves.
They who are enamoured of this world, the covetous, for money; the intemperate,
for curious fare; the dishonest, for that filthy pleasure; the proud, for that
vain delight in honor, and command; and all of them in fine, for the poor
commodities of this life, do suffer greiuous pains, and endure excessive
torments, and sicknesses, and other afflictions, which upon these occasious
they incur; as themselves do confess when the punishment of God shall have
laid their error before their face. And then they will say, Sap. 5.
We went astray from the way of truth and were estranged from that divine
light; and did ouerworke and tire our selves in the way of sin, and vice, and
there we endured many difficulties.

If then the men of this world, for the obteyning of most base and transitory
riches, and of certain pleasures, which are vain and pernicious, both to body
and soul; and for the giving of contentment to mortal creatures; and for the
yiedling of obedience, to those infernal Devils, who persuade them to the love
of earthly things, do ingulfe themselves into such a sea of troubles, and
break through such a world of difficultyes; what, in the name of God, will it
not be fit for Christians and the servants of Christ to do, for the being
faithful, and loyal, to that divine Majesty; and for the exact complying,
with that obedience, and love, which they owe him, both as to a father, and as
to a Lord; and for the obtaining of the kingdom of heaven, and the possessing
of those immortal riches of the house of God; and the honor and glory of
being the sons of God; and consequently the joint heirs with Christ our Lord,
of his patrimony Royal, and of his everlasting entaile; and for the inioying,
and that for ever, of those incomprehensible delights of his beatitude?

Certainly, it is most just, it is most due, that they should undergo any
trouble and overcome any difficulty, and expose themselves to any temporal
hazard, how greatsoeuer. For as the Apostle says, by way of confirming this
truth: 1. Cor. 9.
All This truth confirmed by S. Paul, most divinely, and excellently pondered
by our Author.
men who strive, and fight with others, in the place deputed to that end (as
the use of the Romans was to do in their entertainements and feasts) do for
the ouercomming of their opposites, abstain from all those things of gust,
which may be of any impediment to them in their combat, as namely from delicate
meats, from wine, from women, and the like, which are wont to make men dull,
and weak; and they feed upon gross meats, they observe the rules of
continency and temperance, and they prepare and accustom themselves before
hand, to labor. And all this they do, to obtain the reward of winning a
corruptible crown, which might perhaps be some Jewel, or some suite of
clothes, or some garland of bays or flowers, or some vain applause, and
flying praise of men. What then are we Christians obliged to do, in this
spiritual contention and strife which we are making against sin, for the
obtaining of that crown of immortality, and glory; and of that celestial
kingdom? It is most certain, that if for the giving of contentment to Almighty
God, and for the obtaining of that eternal and immense beatitude, it were
necessary to suffer all those pains put together which all the men of the
world, from the beginning of it to the end, will have been to suffer; and
which all the holy Martyrs have endured; it were all reason, that we should
willingly be content to endure them all. And if it were necessary, not only to
suffer all the pains of this life, but to endure (yea and that for many ages)
all the torments of hell, yea and of many hells; it The joys of heaven are
more to be desired, then even the pains of hell to be avoided.
were most just, and fit to endure them all, for the obtaining of the kingdom
of heaven afterward. For greater is the good of the glory of heaven, then the
evil of the pains of hell. And how much then more just, and more convenient
will it be, to suffer the pain and difficulty which belongs to virtue, and
which accompanyeth the fullfilling of Gods commandments. Which How the
difficultyes of virtue grow delightful through the goodness of God, besides
that all temporal labor is light, since it is so short.
difficultyes besides that they are short (for as much as at the most, they
last no longer then this life) they are with all both light and sweet. For the
love of God, and the heavenly consolations which he communicates to his
servants, does make them sweet; and the helps and succors of grace which
otherwise he gives the^, make them light. So do just persons find this to be
by experience, as the Apostle confesses, saying: 2. Cor. 1.
After the rate of the tribulations and afflictions, which we suffer for Christ
our Lord, and whereby we go in imitation of him, so do the consolations which
are given by Almighty God, through the virtue and merit of our B. Savior,
increase and copiously abound in us.

If Consider seriously of the conclusion of this discourse.
then the labors and troubles of this life, be, on the one side, so momentany
and so short; and on the other so sweet and light; and the reward of glory, and
of that celestial kingdom, so eternal, and immense; and that as our good
works do grow to be increased, so also does the reward of glory go
increasing; in such sort, as that to every of our good works, yea O infinite
bounty of God! And are we then in our wits when we be either sinful, or even
but slothful in Gods service.
and to every one of our desires, and even to every moment of a life which is
lead in state of grace, there is a distinct degree of glory which
correspondeth: what man is that, who will not labor for the leading of a
virtuous life? Who will not be diligent, in making resistance to all
temptations whatsoever? Who will not suffer any injury, or pain, for living
well; And who will not resolve with strength and courage, to persevere in that
good cause which he has begun? Let us all both hear, and with great fidelity,
obey the voice of that Prophet who says: 2. Paral. 25.
You who are the people of God, do you encourage, and animate yourselues to
serve him, and to continue in that service of his without dismay; for, in fine,
your labors shall (...) answered with a great reward.

CHAP. XXI. How we are much to animate our selves, to the exercise of good
works; considering the great estimation which Christ our Lord does make of
them at the day of Judgment; and the reward which he also imparteth to the^.
THERE is also another particular consideration, belonging to this divine
Judgment, and to the reward of good works, which does greatly move the soul,
to labor hard in the service of God. And this is, the Reason, and Title which
Christ our Lord alleges, in giving his benediction, and reward to the just,
when he says; Matt. 25.
Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom which is prepared for you.
For I was hungry, and you gave me to eat; I was thirsty and you gave me to
drink; I was a stranger, and you received me into your house; I was sick, and
in prison, and you came to visit me. For The great value which our Lord does
make, even of our least good works.
by these words, Christ our Lord does mightily discover the estimation, and
price which he has stamped upon good works, which are done in grace; and the
great favor and honor which they receive in his divine presence; the much that
they please him, and the immense glory wherewith he rewards them; since so
mean works, and so very easy to be wrought, as it is to give a piece of bread
to a poor hu^gry body; or a cup of water to a thirsty; or a shirt to cover the
naked; or a nights lodging to a stranger; or a visit to an imprisoned or sick
person; though it be but to comfort him with good words (for we see he does not
say, I was sick and you cured me; or I was imprisoned and you freed me; but
such easy works, as are those other, and which put us to so little cost and
trouble;) that excellent Majesty of his, is pleased to publish and proclaim in
that great Theater, upon the day of Judgment; in the presence of the whole
world, and he sets out and praises them which his own sacred mouth; and he
sublymes then so high, as to take them for services and dear favors imparted
to his own person, which give him great contenment and gust. And so much That
which makes a good work meritorious, is the flowing of it, from the grace of
God in Christ our Lord, and the being seconded by his promise of a reward,
which promise makes the reward due.
account he makes thereof, as to esteem them for merits which are worthy of
eternal life; and he receaues them as a price of the kingdom of heaven; And
he esteems them for meritorious; and that, not only, all together, but every
one of them a part; and a part he takes every one of them for the price of
glory, and of that kingdom which has no end.

But What will not our Lord do to us, for greater work since he does so much
for the less.
now, if Christ our Lord, who so highely esteems, and vouchsafes the favor of
so great reward, to so light and easy works as those, what will he do, to such
works of mercy as are great and hard; and which grow out of much Charity? As
when a man does give all his goods, or a great part thereof to the poor; or
lodge Pilgrims for a long time; and serve them, and provide them of all things
necessary; and deprive himself of clothes to cloth the poor naked Christian;
and to serve sick persons day and night; and that in the case of troublesome
and contagious diseases, as when they may be strucke^ with the plague; and to
draw with much trouble of person and charge of purse, such as are prisoners,
or Captives, out of their chains: How much, I say, will Christ our Lord
esteem such works as these, which cost much labor and money; and for the
performing whereof a man endures much incommodity, and imbraceth many paineful
things, and wrestling with store of difficulties; and mortifies himself much,
to comfort others; and renounces his own will in many things, that so others
may be comforted and relieved? There can no doubt be made, but that much more
he will esteem them, and will afford them the favor in that day of Judgment
of a reward so much higher, as the works are more excellent, and more
acceptable in his eyes, for being grown up out of greater Charity.

And if the Corporal works of mercy, which are exercised upon the bodies of
men, which must quickly die; and for the maintenance and preservation of this
corporal life, which is soon to have an end, be so much esteemed, and
favored, and so highly rewarded by Christ our Lord; what will he be sure to do
to the works of spiritual mercy, whereby immortal souls are succored, and
redrest; and whereby they, being delivered from the death of sin, and
everlasting pain, there is imparted to them salvation, and a life of
everlasting glory? A plain How much therefore are we bound to such as do
assist our souls, though it be with hazard of their lives.
case it is, that, the work of mercy, whereby a soul is assisted, is more
excellent, then that other whereby a body is relieved; and that these works of
piety, whereby the spiritual and eternal life is helped, is of much more
value, and merit, then that other, whereby that corporal and frail life is
succored. For as much, as according to S. Thomas, D. Thom. cont. Genesis l. 4.
cap. 55.
Amongst all those things which are created, no one is greater, then the
salvation of a reasonable soul, which consists in the enjoying of God: So
also there is no other greater alms, then that, whereby this salvation, and
this life of grace and glory is procured; and consequently a much greater
benefit does he impart to another, who remedieth the necessityes of his soul,
then if he had given him a great su^me of money. And since they who give a
little bread to the hungry, and a little water to the thirsty; and they who
retire a Pilgrim to their house, and apparel a naked person, with a piece of
cloth; and visit a man who is in prison or sick, giving him a little temporal
comfort, be so esteemed and honored by Almighty God, in the presence both of
heaven and earth, in that terrible tribunal of his Judgment; and are so
enobled, and sublymed with the Crown of celestial glory, and with the dignity
of the everlasting kingdom; what will Christ do, that most just and righteous
Judge, and that most liberal God with them who dispense the bread of heavenly
doctrine to such as have need, and are hungry after it; and who power out the
drink of spiritual comfort, and ease, to such as are afflicted, and dejected,
that so they may bear their miseryes with patience; and who cloth their
souls with virtues and celestial gifts, who are naked and deprived of al
spiritual graces, and who cure, and recover, out of their miserable
infirmityes, and who draw and deliver out of that horrible captivity, them who
are sick of sin, and are taken prisoners, and made slaves by Satan. Most
certain it is, that although all they who express mercy toward their
neighbors, shallbe esteemed and honored in that Tribunal; and shall be sublimed
with glory and royal dignity, yet these others who have imparted it toward
the souls of me^, shall be much more esteemed and honored, by Christ our Lord,
and his Angels, and shall be raised to greater glory, and more aduau^ced in the
kingdom of heaven.

It is also to be considered, that although these works of mercy, whether they
be corporal, or spiritual, and which respect the spiritual or corporal good
of our neighbor, are excellent and of great value, and merit, as we have
already said; yet the interior, and exterior works of Faith, Hope, Charity,
and Religion, which have How highly grateful those acts of virtue are, which
do immediately respect Almighty God.
imediate relation to Almighty God, and to the worship and service which is due
to him as our God, and our Creator, are more excellent, and of greater value,
and merit, then the works of mercy, which aim but at the comfort of our
neighbors. And so much more as any virtue does draw near, and approach to
God, so much more is the virtue more excellent. Now the virtues, which are
called Theological, which are Faith, Hope, and Charity, do look up, and serve
and immediately honor Almighty God, believing his truth, and loving his
goodness, and hoping in his mercy. And the virtue of Religion, does respect, and
exercise the worship, and veneration, which is due to God, as being sovereign
Author and Lord of all things. And these virtues being more excellent, then
that of Mercy toward our Neighbor, it is clear, that those faithful
Christians, who with firm and lively faith, have believed in Christ our Lord,
and who confessed his faith, in the face of Tyrants; and who placed all their
confidence, and in Christ, searching, with care, after his glory; and resigning
themselves entirely to his most holy will; and honoring him, and reuering him
with true worship, and with pure prayers, and with an exact performance of
their promises, and the vows which they make to his divine Majesty; certain I
say it is, that in the day of his divine Judgment, they shall be more esteemed,
and honored by Christ, for having done and suffered these things, then either
they, or any others shallbe; for any other inferior works which they may have
wroght toward their Neighbors. And therefore, the reward of glory being so
illustrious and so high, which for the works of spiritual and corporal mercy
they shall receive; and considering that yet, the reward which these others
shall obtain, is to be much more eminent and great; and since, notwithstanding
that the kingdom which is to be given in reward of these works of mercy, is
celestial and eternal; yet for these acts of faith, and Charity, and
Religion, a greater, and a better portion shall be allotted, and set out in the
same kingdom; let us be most diligent in the leading of a good life; in
co^seruing our souls pure and clean; in exercysing our selves in the
acquisitio^ of virtue. And let us be full of fervor toward the works of
mercy, whether they be spiritual or corporal, every one according to his
Tallent.

O happy Conclusion.
and for ever most happy they, who shall thus employ themselves: Happy, because
they were elected from all eternity, by almighty God; Happy because they were
called in Time to his faith, and Religion, and were instructed therein; Happy,
because they did correspond to that vocation of God, and did begin to lead a
good life; Happy, because they did continue therein; Happy, because if they
fell, they quickly rose again, by penance, and were constant therein; And Happy
beyond all happies, because, when our Lord came to call them to account, at the
hour of their death, he found them employed in a good life, and watchful in
the exercise of good works, expecting the time of his coming, to receive the
reward of their labors, at his merciful, and most liberal hands. For it is
said, by no less then Truth it self, Luc. 12.
Happy is that servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find watching,
and employed in the discharge of his duty, with fidelity and prudence, and
complying with his obligations, whether they be common to all Christians, or
particulerly belonging to his state. I tell you as an undoubted truth, that to
such a servant as this, his Lord shall deliver up the possession of all his
goods. That is, Christ our most merciful Lord, and our God, will raise him up
from the blessings of grace in this life, to the blessings of glory in the
next; and from the baseness of this earth, to reign eternally, together with
himself, in heaven. Amen.

THE CONCLUSION TO THE READER.
MAKE account, good Reader, that this discourse is a Letter, and this which now
thou art reading, is the Postscript of it. Thou have seen the torments of
Hell, and the joys which are imparted to the elect in heaven. Thou have seen
that if thou dye in mortal sin, thou will for ever be chayned in those
torments; and for ever be deprived of those joys. Take heed therefore of all
sin; and especially take heed of the sin either of Schism or Heresy, which
are of the greatest that can be committed. The nature of Heresy, consists in
this, That a man will make election of some one doctrine, or more, which is
contrary to the belief of that true Church, which is celebrated in the Creed
of the first Council of Nice; to be One, to be Holy, to be Catholic, and to
be Apostolic. Be sure thou be of that one true Church, which soever that be
(for though myself be resolved, yet I will not here handle that question, by
way of Controversy;) but there is but one wherein a Christian can be saved, one
in the faith which it professes, howsoever it may be accounted many, in
respect of the infinite persons which it conteyneth, and consequently of the
particular Churches which it imbraceth. The nature Where in the nature of
heresy, does indeed consist.
therefore of heresy, does not consist in the multitude or quality of the
Articles of Religion, which are held, in difference from the dotrine and
direction of the holy Catholic Church; but it consists properly, in the
pride and presumption of that heart, which dares prefer a private opinion, of
any one, or several Countries, or any interpretation of holy Scripture (which
interpretation, is also no more then a For he will make the scriptur affirm and
deny what he will.
mere opinion) before the Judgment of that Church, which is, and is still to
be instructed and taught by the holy Ghost. And this sin, is of so high a
nature, as that unless it be removed by penance, the man in whom it lives,
shall No heretic without repentance can be saved.
dye a double death, and never behold the face of God; howsoever he may,
otherwise, seem to be a person of most holy life, and so full of Charity, as to
sell his state, and give it all to the poor; and of so valiant and Christian a
heart, as, amongst Infidels, to suffer death, and torments for the name of
Christ. For to prove that even this will not serve the turn of an Heretic
toward salvation, see here the authority of the greatest Fathers of the
church concerning this point. Who The practice of the primitive Church in this
point. See S. Aug. ad Quod-vult Deum, and the Catalogues of S. Irenaeus, and S,
Epiphanius.
(besides, that in the way of practice, the Church of their time, did condemn
many men for Heresy, who held, though it were but one point of doctrine, in
contrariety to the Catholic Church (and somtymes of some such doctrine, as in
it self, did not seem to be of most importance) they do also declare, and
that in most clear and constant words, in what certainty of damnation they
are, who die in any Heresy at all. Whosoever, says S. Cyprian D. Cypr. epist.
in Anton.
and what kind of person soever, a man be, a No heretic is a Christian any
more then only in name.
Christian he is not, vn^es he be in the Church of Christ. And again: Idem de
unit. Eccles.
He belongs not to the rue rd of Christ, who forsakes the Church of Christ;
such a one is an alien, he is a profane person, he is an enemy. And to this
effect, he also says, if such an one should even give his life for the
confession of the name of Christ, he should yet (by the Judgment of this holy
Father) be condemned to the flames of Hell for his Heresy, and not be received
to the joys of heaven for his constancy; and he expresses himself in these
words, Non esset illi corona fidei, sed poena perfidiae. S. Hierome, in like
manner, speaking of the Church of Rome affirms it to be, D. Hier. epist. ad
Dam. l. 2.
The true house of Christ; and that whosoever eats the lamb, out of that
house, is a profane person and that unless he be found, in that Ark of Noah, he
shallbe overwhelmed, and perish in the flood.

S. Augustine does also abound every where, in the profession of this truth. D.
Aug. tom 7. super gest. c^m Emer. vlt. med.
A man, says he cannot obtain salvation, but in the Catholic Church: he may
have all except salvation; he may have honor, he may have the sacraments, he
may sing Alleluia, he may answer Amen, he may believe the Gospel, he may be
baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
but no where can he have salvation, but in the Catholic Church. D. Augu. tom.
7. de unit. Eccl. vlt. med.
No man comes, says he, to salvation, and life eternal, but he that has
Christ for his head; and no man can have Christ for his head, who is not in his
body, which is the Church. Idem. tom. 3. de fide and symb.
Heretics by believing falsely of God, do violate the faith; and Schismatikes
by their wicked dissentions, fly of from fraternall charity, although they
believe as we do. And therefore neither does the Heretic belong to the
catholic Church because he belieueth not God; nor the Schismatike, because he
loves not his Neighbor.

Let The schismatik has no Charity, and the Heretic has neither Charity, nor
Faith. Idem. tom. 7. de Bapt. cont. Don. l. 4. c. 18.
us suppose that a man were chaste, and contynent; not covetous, no worshiper of
Idols, but full of hospitality; no enemy to any man, nor contentious, but
patient and quiet; not emulating or envying any body, but sober and frugall;
but yet withal, that he were an heretic, and there can no doubt be made, but
No Heretic can be saved, though he be never so virtuous otherwise. Idem. tom.
4. l. 1. de sermon. Do. in monte c. 9.
that for this only, That he is an Heretic, he shall not possess the kingdom
of heaven.

It is not said alone, Blessed are they who suffer persecution, but these words
are added, for justice sake. Now where No heretic, or schismatike can be a
Martyr. Tom. 1. de fide ad Petrum. c. 39.
true Faith is not, there can be no Justice because the Just man lives in
Faith. Neither yet set Schismatikes promise themselves any thing thereby,
because where there is no Charity, neither can there be any Justice. For
Charity toward ones Neighbor, does work no evil; which Charity if they did
possess, they would not tear the body of Christ, which is his Church.

Believe Some doubt, whether this book be of S. Augustine, or of S. Fulgentius,
who lived within 40. years after S. Augustine.
most firmly, and have no manner of doubt, but that every Heretic and
Schismatike, though baptized in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the holy Ghost, if he return not to the Catholic Church, how great Even
the giving al in alms and suffering death for the name of Christ, will not
deliver an heretic from damnation.
Alms soever he distribute, yea and though he shed his blood for the name of
Christ, he can by no means be saved. For neither Baptism, nor most liberal
alms, nor death endured for the name of Christ, can avail any man to
salvation, who holds not fast the unity of the Catholic Church; and so long
as any How small soever that be.
heretical, or schismatic iniquity (which leads men to destruction)
remains in him.

These are they, amongst many others, whom God has given to his Church, as
lights whereby all good Christians may be guided toward their salvation; and
take heed thou be not so miserable, as to follow any ignis fatuus, instead of
them; for thy error in this life, will import thee no less then thy eternal
damnation in the next.

FAVLTS escaped in the Printing.
Page Line Fault Correction. ^. 10. intention attention ^. vlt. fo of ^. 1.
interiourly exteriourly ^. 12. he is to make deleatur he ^9. 10 unanswerable
unanswerably ^. 3. to friend to that friend ^. 13. and for zeal and zeal of
^. 1. whither wither ^. 7. for thus for this ^8. 13. infinity infinite ^9. 13.
gifts gusts ^. 14. Satan that deleatur that ^. 16. is infinite is an infinite
^1. 10. is having is their having ^bid 11. then being their being ^0. 7. by all
by ill ^3. 17. my penance deleatur my


