A CAVEAT FOR ARCHIPPVS.

A Sermon preached at a Visitation at White-Chappel Church in London, September.
23. 1618.

By IER. DYKE Minister of Gods word at Epping in Essex.

1. TIM. 4. 16. (...).

Aug. de Past.

(...) Christiani sumus, vnde rationem reddemus (...) etiam Praepositi, vnde
rationem read(...).

cross or crucifix

^

COL. 4. 17. And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
I Will not stand to dispute what might be the occasion of this errand to be
done, and this Caveat to be given to Archippus. The common conceit is, that it
was Archippus his remissness, and coldness in his ministerial labors.
Happly a more favorable and charitable construction may be this, that it was
Paul's fear, and holy jealousy, as knowing that the best have their
corruptions, and discouragements; and therefore stand in need of quickening,
awakening, and heartening admonition. Which fear of Paul's might be the
greater by reason of the greatness of the burden which lay upon Archippus his
shoulders For that burden which ere-whiles was divided between him and
Epaphras, and so the easier, was now become the heavier, by reason of Epaphras
his absence, if not imprisonment with Paul at Rome. Lest therefore this doubled
burden should discourage and dishearten, ^hilem. 23.
and make him faint under the weight thereof, therefore would Paul have him be
thus called upon. And so this advice might be occasioned rather by the
Carfulness of Paul, then the Carelessness of Archippus. It being none other
counsel then what before he gave to the Ephesian Elders, Acts 20. 18; which
yet was not caused by their guiltiness, but by his fear. But I will not swim
against the stream of Interpreters, I am content that the received conjecture
should obtain.

Well, whatsoever the occasion was, surely the words suite well with this
present occasion: So many Archippusses being here assembled, that is, called
together, it cannot be unseasonable to call for the heedfull fulfilling of that
Ministration which we have received from the Lord. Only, if I might have been
mine own chooser, I could have wished the performance of this exercise to some
one whose grauer years, grayer hairs, and greater gifts might have so vshered
and attended his good counsel, as that it might have had room and respect in
your hearts, without all contradiction.

Yet notwithstanding, I have where withal to hearten my self, not only from
this, that I speak not in mine own name, or upon mine own head, but also
from my present Scripture. For if so be the Colossians might say thus much to
Archippus, then how much more may one Archippus be bold to say so much to
another, one Minister to his fellow brethren in the same ministry? Well would
Archippus have borne with this saying from Epaphras, or from Paul, that in all
likelihood barewell with it from his Colossians.

The words then briefly contain an Apostolical Iniunction: In the which I
consider three things.

1. The persons that are enjoined to say this. 2. The person to whom they are
enjoined to say it. 3. The matter of the Iniunction, which is a Caveat, Take
heed, etc.
Which Caveat is,

First, illustrated from the Object, what it is that he must take heed unto.
It is his Ministry, and the fulfilling of it. Secondly, Enforced by a reason,
Which thou have received from the Lord.
For the first. The persons enjoined to say this; (...): Say ye, ye men of
Colossus, say ye this, do ye this errand to Archippus.

But why must they say this? Had it not been fitter for Paul himself to have
said it? Why says not he, And I say unto thee Archippus? Does not the
inspection and correction of ministerial aberrations better suite with an
Apostles office and authority, then with the Colossians? And would not an
admonition from an Apostle be with far less provocation, and far more
profit? Would not that take a deeper impression which came from a grave
Apostle, then that which should be spoken by a company of Colossians? Hardly
sometimes will a Colossian brook an admonition from Archippus, how then will
Archippus from a Colossian? Well, but for all this, Say ye to Archippus.

Hereby our Apostleteaching,

1. People to warn their Pastor of his duty. Many an Archippus is sluggish,
because the Colossians are silent. Therefore is it that Archippus says so
little, because they say nothing. Nay many are so far from saying ought to
Archippus if he be wanting, that they are readier to soothe him up in his
negligence. At least their silence, and not saying to him, is construed as an
approouement of, and a contentment with his idleness. Should Archippus but
wrong his people in taking but a little more then his due in temporals, how
soon would people not only be saying but be doing to Archippus? But let
Archippus wrong, and wring them never so much, in the injurious detention of
their spiritual dues, a little saying serves the turn. People (commonly)
having Schoole-boyes consciences, they care not how little they have for their
money.

2. Ministers not to despise good counsel from their people. Good news are
good news, though a Leper bring them to a King, 2. Kings 7. So is good
counsel never the worse for the giuers meannesse. Much loy may a Minister have
that he has so enriched his flock, that he may be relieved out of their
abundance.

If a Lay person coming with a Scripture be to be believed before a whole
Council, (as Whitakers quotes it out of Panormitan) the^ surely are not private
men to be neglected, much less despised, speaking nothing but reason and
religion to their Ministers.

3. Say ye to Archippus, that he may have nothing to say, of or against you.
The common apology of many urged to fidelity in their places, is: Their people
are wondrous well contented with their short demensum: or their people are
awke, untoward, alike respecting pains and negligence; should they be never so
painful, yet would it not by them one whit be respected, etc. And therefore
they have no heart to greater diligence. And surely true it is, that nothing
more discourageth ministerial fidelity then peoples irrespectiue
regardlesnesse to a man's pains. Therefore will Paul have the Colossians
themselves say this to Archippus, that their desires of his pains, might put
the more heart and life into Archippus to take pains. If David do but thirst
after the waters of Bethlehem, how will it make his Worthies adventure their
dearest blood and life? They will hazard all to quench his thirst But alas, what
heart has a man to adventure, and take pains for that water, which no man
thirsts to drink? nay, for that water which it may be shall be spilt on the
ground before his face?

2. But how must they say this?

1. To him, not behind him. Too many complain of their Ministers faults, but
did they ever admonish him? Did they ever say ought to him, that say thus much
against him? Complain to him that can and should amend it; other complaints
are waste: Say to Archippus.

2. But yet, with all reverence and respect to his office and person: Paul
therefore leaves it not to their discretion, but prescribes a reverent form
of exhortation. He gives no allowance here for foul mouths to say what they
list. They must say to, not rail upon Archippus. An Elder must be exhorted as
a father, 1. Tim. 5. 1. A father is to be honored by the commandment.

The person to whom they are enjoined To Archippus: Say to Archippus

Archippus it seems then was affable, of a courteous sweet nature, of an
ingenuous and Christian candor, free from a sour stern and stately carriage.
How were the Colossians blessed that they were thus happily provided for? Many
there are that indeed have better nurture, but yet but alitle better nature
then Nabal had (for pride and churlishness are alike enemies to society, and
communion.) He was so churlish, many are so proud, that they may not be spoken
to. Should a man in the meekest and moderatest manner but say thus to some, as
they must here say to Archippus; should not that round and rough answer be
returned them, Who made you a monitour? a teacher of your teacher? You teach me
what I have to do? Had Archippus been of this spirit, Paul had done enough to
set all Colossus on fire. Well fare his heart yet, that the meanest of his
poor Colossians may not only speak, but say to him. And as for this
affected state and sternnesse, how ever it may gain alitle cap and
knee-seruice, yet it loses the inward respect of the heart, if at least it
breed not a secret scorn and disdain both of person and doctrine. Learn of
me (says our Savior) for I am meek and lowely. Si Deus benignus, vt
Chrysostom.
quid sacerdos eius austerus? Indeed it holds no good proportion: A lowely
Master and a proud servant.

The Matter of the Iniunction; A Caveat that Archippus, which is first
illustrated from the Object: Take heed to thy Ministry that thou fulfill it.

A point indeed that deserves our greatest heodfulnesse and care. The
Ministry is Gods work, he loves not to have his work done by halfes: God
loves no half Ministers, he would have all his full Ministers, that is, he
would have them fulfill their Ministry. Paul wishes Archippus to be none
other, then what himself was, Coloss. 1. 25. Iam a Minister of the Gospel, to
fulfill the word of God. And Acts 20. 24, he preferres this one thing above his
life: My life is not dear unto me, so I may fulfill my course with joy, and my
ministration. Indeed it is not possible that he should fulfill his course with
joy, that fulfills not his ministration. And therefore fitly joined together by
the Apostle. How shall God brook that in us his servants, which we will not
brook in our own? which of us can endure our work to be done by halfes?

But what is to be done then, and how may

The calling of the Ministry is not of that fulfilling of the Ministry then
consists: first, in fidelity of Dispensation secondly, in sincerity of
Conversation: these two make a full and complete Minister. When a man is
furnished, as was Aaron, in whose Pectorall were the Vrim and Thummim, the
skirt of whose Roabe was hanged about with Bells and Pomegranates; when with
the Vrim, the light of our doctrine, we join the Thummim, the perfection of
our lives; when with the sound of doctrine, we join the Pomegranates and
fruit of an holy life, we then may be said to fulfill our Ministry. Of Ezra
it is said, Ezra 7. 6. that he was a ready scribe. I may say o^ him, that he
was a perfect, a complete scribe; for verse 10. He set his heart to seek the
law of the Lord, to do it, and ^o ^each Judgments and Statutes in Israel. To
speak of these in several, which yet never must be severed.

1. For fidelity in dispensation of doctrine it is not possible without this
to fulfill the Ministry.

Acts 20. 2^. That I may fulfill my ministration; but how? To testify the
Gospel of the grace of God. He that will fulfill his Ministry, must labor
to do that which Paul prayed for in the behalf of the Colossians, Coloss. 1.
9. that their People may be fulfilled with knowledge, when doctrine drops not
as the rain, nor speech stilles not as the dew? Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Christ indeed was
dumb as a sheep before the shearer, Esaias 53, but never as a shepherd among
his sheep; for it was his custom every Sabbath to preach the word in the
Synagogues, Luke 4. 16.

But yet a man may preach, and dispense the word, and yet in that part not
fulfill his Ministry. How then may a man so preach and take heed therein, as
that he may fulfill his Ministry?

A Minister in dispensation of doctrine fulfills his Ministry, when he
dispenses the Truth 1 Only and wholly. 2 Painfully and diligently. 3 Plainly.
4 Profitably. 5 Constantly.


When the word is thus dispensed, there is the Ministry fulfilled in
dispensation.

1. Only and wholly.
False prophets fulfill none of Gods work, he sets none on work to tell, and
teach lies. Aarons Bells must be golden Bells, not copper ones, nor any other
brazen metal, but pure gold; Gods pure truth must be dispensed. And as the
truth, so the whole truth. Paul testifies his desire to fulfill his Ministry,
Acts 20. 14. and therefore in verse 27. he tells them, that he Kept back
nothing, but had showed them all the counsel of God. And so he fulfilled his
Ministry by making his Ministry fully known, as he speaks to Timothy, 2.
Tim. 4. 5. Then does a man make his Ministry fully known, when in the course
of his Ministry he makes the whole truth of God fully known.

2. Painfully and diligently.
The Ministry is the work of the Lord, and Cursed is every one that does the
work of the Lord negligently. Ierem. 48. 10. A necessity is laid upon me, and
woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 16. Be diligent therefore
to know the estate of thy flock, and take heed to the herds, Pro. 27. 23.
Take heed to the herds, that is, take heed to the fulfilling of thy
Ministry. But how may that be done? Be diligent to know the estate of thy
flocks, and to let thy flock know the state of the truth.

This is that which evidences our love both to the shepherd, and the sheep. To
the shepherd. Therefore does our Savior so urge that upon Peter, John 21.
Peter, love thou me? feed my sheep: Love thou me, etc. Not only that his
threefold confession, might be equivalent to his threefold denial, but that
his threefold love might appear by his threefold diligence in his Ministry,
and to require diligence in feeding, as the most sure evidence of loving. Who
professes not with Peter, Lord I love thee? Make we good then our love by our
labor, Hebr. 6. the labor of your love. Every man's love is as his labor,
little and no labor argues the same measure of love. Therefore Love and
Diligence are of one root in Latin, because love is diligent.

Surely me thinks we have cause to blush, and to hang down our heads for shame
in the conscience of our negligence, when we shall consider, not only Paul's
prayer, and tears night and day, Acts 20, but when we shall consider Iaakobs
diligence and pains in the attendance of Labans flocks: Genesis 31. 40. In the
day time I was consumed with heat, in the night with frost, and my sleep
departed from mine mine eyes. Alas, what comparison between Christ and Laban?
between a churlish master and a merciful redeemer? What comparison between
the sheep of Christ and Laban? Ah vile shame then that Laban should be better
served then Christ, and his sheep better attended then Christ's. Is Iaakob thus
painful and careful in looking to Labans sheep? How can we then excuse our
(...); Chrysostom ad Roman. 15. hom. 29
supine negligence and gross sluggishnesse, to whom the care and cure of
reasonable souls is committed? If what Iaakob has done for Labans sheep move
us not, please we turn our eyes upon the Great shepherd himself Christ
Jesus, and see what he has done for his sheep? Behold him not only in the
Temple daily, and in the Synagogues teaching every Sabbath; but behold him in
the Garden, sweating drops of blood, and on the Cross shedding his heart
blood for these sheep. Ah insufferable sloth, and ingratitude both, that we
should make so dainty to shed alittle sweat in love to him, who in love to us
shed not sweat, but sweat groans of blood. Had he been so dainty of his
blood, as a number are of their sweat, poor sheep, poor flocks, what had
become of them?

As to the Shepherd, so it no less euidenceth our love to the Sheep. They may
plead, Peter, love thou us? feed us thy sheep. But unto many a Pastor may
the flock speak as Dalilah to Sampson; How can thou say thou love me,
when thy heart is not with me? How is thy heart with me, when neither thy
pains nor thy person is with me, but ye your selves set others to take the
charge of my Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44. 8. May not that be spoken innocently to many
which Eliab spoke churlishly to David? 1. Sam. 17. 28. With whom have thou left
these few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of
thine heart, that thou art come down to seethe battle. So to many Ministers,
Where be those Sheep? etc. It may be they are wandering, if not staruing in
the wilderness, while the Shepherd in the naughtiness of his heart is gone
up to see, and to live in the City, and under the color of a City Lecture,
neglects his country pastoral charge. A righteous man is merciful to his
beast. I will not say, what a beast then, but what an unrighteous man is he
that is not merciful to his poor flock, to those poor souls committed to
his charge? Me thinks it was an heavy case, and well worth the lamenting
which we find, Lament. 4. 4. The little ones asked bread, and no man brake it
to them: Indeed it is not lawful to cast the childrens bread unto dogs: but
what do they better, who though they give it not to dogs, yet give it not to
the children, are they better then dogs in the maunger?

Were those compassionate bowels in us, and that love to our flocks, which
should make us, with the Apostle, to deal our own souls to them, would we
then hunch at a little bodily pains? What dream we of ease, pleasure,
delicacie? Are these the things we propound to our selves in this holy
service? Thou that art thus sparing of thy sweat, what would thou do if
Christ should call for thy blood for his flocks sake? for so has Augusline
well noted, that immediately upon the Tractat. in Ioha^ 10.
threefold iniunction of feeding, our Savior tells him of his martyrdom;
thereby teaching Peter, that he must feed his people, not only by preaching
of the Gospel, but by the shedding of his blood. Now we that dream of ease
and delicacie, etc. what if Christ should call us to fulfill our testimony by
the sheding of our blood? surely, ill would he shed his blood for him, that
is so loath to shed alittle sweat for him. How would he go cheerfully to a
stake for him, that goes so like a Bear to the stake when he goes to the
Pulpit for him? He would ill abide frying, that so ill abides sweating. He
would ill abide the pains of burning, that so ill abides the pains of
preaching.

How are the Fathers magnified among us, and justly, and yet in the mean time
this their practice of frequent, and diligent preaching vilified by us? Had
they held their people to a monthly stint, and the poor pittance of a
quarterly allowance, never had their works grown to so fair volumes, nor
their names to so great renown. Chrysostomes Yesterday.
(...). and Bernards (...)
Cras, which they have in so many of their Sermons, argue, if not a daily, yet
a diligent, and a frequent preaching; Why should not this work of the Fathers
be in equal grace with the rest of their works with us? How is it that we
grace them, and disgrace their practice? It is true, it is laborious and
painful thus to attend the Ministry: But, the labor of your love, says the
Apostle, Hebr. 6. Where there is this labor of love, it will make us love the
labor: love will make the burden light. Nullo enim modo onerosi August. de
^on^ vid^it.
sunt labores amantium, sed etiam ipsi delectant, sicut venantium, piscantium,
etc. Nam in eo quod amatur, aut non laboratur, aut and labor amatur; and vide
quam pudendum and dolendum sit, fi delectat labor vt fera capiatur; I will make
bold a little to alter his words: Et non delectat labor vt anima capiatur.

Does not the Scripture make the Ministry a calling of that pains, weight,
and importance, as that Saint Paul's (...) would make a man dread the entrance?
Now if so slighty and easy a performance will discharge it, as many put it off
withal, who then may not easily be sufficient for these things: who may not
soon be sufficient to read prayers, and the Church-seruice, and once in a
Moon to bestow a mornings blessing upon his people? If this be all, how easily
may the Ministry be fulfilled? what need such a solemn charge to be given to
Archippus?

If then we would fulfill our Ministry, we should labor to have that
fulfilled of our Sabbaths which Origin speaks of the Sabbaths of his times: In
nostro die dominico semper pluit Deus Manna de coelo. Indeed the jews Manna
never fell on their Sabbath. What Manna soever fall on the week day, never
should the Sabbath pass without these Manna-shoures; every Sabbath should have
the first and the latter rain. Give a portion of this Manna to seven and to
eight. And in the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening, let not thy hand
rest, Eccl. 11. 6.

Why stand ye here idle all the day long? Matthew. 20. 6. Here, and all the day
long. Here, where? In the market place, where they could plead, Nemo nos
conduxit. Is it blame-worthie to be idle in the market place, were none had
hired them? What is it then to be idle in the Vineyard, where both hired, and
paid wages? If a sin to be idle in the market place all the day long, how much
more to be idle all the day long, all the Sabbath day long in the Vineyard?

Far be it from us above all others, to eat the bread of Idleness; Upon
none more then Ministers must that be verified, In the sweat of thy brows
shall thou eat thy bread. In the sweat of their brows, and their brains too
must they eat their bread. But certainly many do so idly and negligently
live in the ministry, that they may very well do as that priest did of whom the
Waldenses make mention Ex Vssier. de Chr. eccles. stat.
in an Apology of theirs, Qui ex sacerdote factus est agricola; and his reason
was, because he found it written, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat
thy bread. Had he so diligently discharged his calling as he ought, he never
should have needed to have turned husbandman, to have found sweat, and sauce to
his bread. But as happily he, so a number there are, that live with such dry
brows in the Ministry, that dry bread in another calling would yield them
more comfort and content, then all their fullness in the Ministry, because
they make no conscience to fulfill their Ministry.

3. Plainly.
As the word must be dispensed frequently and diligently with respect unto
Peoples Necessities, so also Plainly with respect unto peoples Capacities; so
as our plain people may be able to understand us for matter, and manner of
delivery. Thus did our Savior teach the people, not as he was able to speak,
but as they were able to hear, Mark 4. 33. and John 16. 12. as they could
hear. So the Pastors after Gods own heart should feed with knowledge and
understanding, Ier. 3. How with knowledge unless with understanding? and how
with understanding unless they could be understood? Here commonly a double
error is committed.

1. Some affect such craggie scholasticall disquisitions, as are fitter for the
Chair then for the Pulpit, as not coming within the short and shallow reach of
a popular capacity.

2. Others, though their matter be low enough, yet affect such a soaring
sublimitie of phrase, and such a Roman-English, as plain English men cannot
understand. Except ye utter words which have signification, how shall it be
understood what is spoken? for ye shall speak in the air, 1. Cor. 14. 9. And
19, I had rather in the Church to speak five words with mine understanding,
that I might also instruct others, then ten thousand words in a strange
tongue. Our language is now grown so learned, that a man may Clerum in
English, and may so speak his own language, that he may be a barbarian to the
men of his own language. It were good therefore that Ministers would all follow
that good counsel that Austin took from some learned men in his time, who
having read over his Books against the Manichees, Beneuolentissime me
monuerunt, vt communem loquendi sermonem non des^^^^e^. H^nc enim sermon^m
vsitatum and simplice^ etiam d(...) in^e^ligunt, illum autem ind^cti non
in^^lligunt. De G^n (...). Manich.
and perceiving them to be written in so learned a phrase, as the common people
could not understand; They kindly (says he) admonished me, that I would not
forsake the common and ordinary kind of speech. And he gives a reason why he
likes their counsel well. For the common and usual phrase of speech learned
men understand, but the other unlearned men understand not. And yet a man may
take far more liberty in writing then in preaching.

Therefore it was that elsewhere he chose rather to speak barbarously then
finely, and to use the barbarous word ossum, rather then Habeo in abscondito
quo ^^^m oss^m. Sic ^ni^. p^t^us loquantur. Mel^us est vt^re p^^^^^dant nos
G^^mma^ici, (...) i^tel^^^ant populi. in p^^l 138. (...). Sect. 12.
the word Os, because he desired his peoples profit above his own credit. He
allows Os in the Text, and so reads it; but in his Exposition uses ossum, as
the more intelligible word. His intention was not Rhemish, and Jesuitical to
darken the Text with absolute barbarismes, but to help their understandings
with a familiar and plain, though not so grammatical a word.

Ministers must be Nurces, 1 Thessalonians. 2. Nurces are not ashamed, nay they
delight in it, to condescend to the balbutient infancy of their nurcelings.
Even in this fence should we become all unto all, Barbarians unto Barbarians.
Indeed when a man is not to speak to Barbarians, but to learned and
intelligent Auditors, I would not then debar him the liberty of his liberal
education. But certainly, when the Jews shall hear Paul, Acts 22. 2, to
speak in the Hebrew tongue, they will both keep the more silence, and give
the better audience. It was in judgment that Christ taught the Pharisees in
Parables. What difference between a dark conueyance, and a dark phrase? So
then preach as that we may rather make our people scholars, then show our
selves scholars to our people.

4. Profitably.
Paul, in the same place where he testifies his desire to fulfill his
Ministry, instanceth at the first in this particular, Acts 20. 20. I have
kept back nothing that was profitable. Therefore the Pastors after Gods own
heart, feed not only with understanding, but with knowledge. Ierem 3 15.
Many may be understood, but what knowledge or profit can be gathered from
them? To feed with understanding only, without knowledge, is to feed with an
empty spoone. So Luke 4. 22. They wondered at the gracious words that
proceeded out of Christ's mouth; not at his cloquent, witty, conceited, picked
and affected quaint terms, but at his gracious, sanctified, sauoury,
substantial soliditie. As for that other froath, neither did our Savior
affect it, neither would it have so affected the people as to have made them
astonished.

The Conviction of the Conscience, the information of the Understanding, the
resolution of the Judgment, the gaining of the Affections, the redress of the
Life; these should be our aims in dispensing of the Word. Now for these
tricks and cranckes, this Grammatical and Rhetorical descant, these ends of
gold and silver, what help they to this business? See what it is that a
Minister should aim at, 1. Corint. 14. 24. 25. If all prophecy, and one comes
in that believes not, the secrets of his heart are made manifest: He will fall
down and say plainly, that God is in you indeed. At this should Ministers
aim, to dispense the word in that power, and evidence of Gods Spirit, that
men's consciences may (at least) be convinced, that our Ministry is of God. But
few aim at this. At this they aim rather, that it may be said; A fine wit is
in them, an eloquent tongue is in them (things indeed not to be despised;) but
in the mean time regard not that it may be said of them, God is in them;
substance, and sauourie soliditie is in them, 1. Corint. 4. 19. I will come to
you shortly, and will know, not the speech of them which are puffed up, but
their power; For the Kingdom of God is not in word, (no nor in words) but in
power. Now alas, what power have such Corinthian flashes? What power have such
Corinthian florishes? what power has such paper-shot to beat down the strong
holds of Satan? They were not Trumpets of gold or silver, but of plain
Rams horns that laid flat the high walls of Hierico. Labor so to blow the
trumpet of the Ministry, that we may have the spirit blow with it. The spirit
blows where it lists. It seldom or not at all lists to blow in a painted
pipe. Far be from us that humor of Cooks, who seek more for credit in
making of puffe-paste, and kicke-shawes, then from dressing wholesome sauourie
food. When a man has bestowed his best pains in that kind, that may be said
of him, which Austin Confess. 1. 14.
says of Homer, that he was dulcissime vanus. Though it be sweet and pleasing
to the ear, yet it is but sweet vanity. What is the life or conscience ere
the holier for these knackes? Give me leave to close this point with the two
former, with that sauory counsel of that reverend father B. Babington in Leu.
7. Are you a Minister, called of God to leaven his people with good leaven?
Look how ye do it, and be painful; faithfulness will be crowned, when
slothfulness will be condemned, and will condemn you; And submit your self to
the profit of your people, not hunting after your own glory, that you are
thus and thus, and so learned, eloquent, profound and so forth. If your people
profit not, because you fly too high a pitch for them, and scorn to lay a
foundation of the Catechism amongst them, you will be found an unprofitable
servant at the Reckoning day; one that has gained nothing to his Lord, but
has hid his talent in the foul napkin of fruitless matter, and idle figures
of affected speech. Spoken like a Bishop, spoken like a Father.

5. Constantly.
This crowns all the rest. He fulfilles not his race, who having an hundred
miles to run, sits down at ninety nine: He fulfills not his Ministry, that
gives it over before his days are fulfilled. Though all the former be done,
yet if in this we fail, our Ministry is unfulfilled. Therefore Paul ioynes
the fulfilling of his Ministry and his Course together, Acts 20. 24: and Reu.
11. 7. the two witnesses finished their lives and their testimonies together.
Herein many fail and come short of fulfilling their Ministry, being too too
like that Hetrurian Idol, who whilst he was in the woods in a mean country
fashion,

Crebra dedit quondam populo responsa petenti; But when once the people, out of
their love and affection to their Idol, built him a marble Temple and placed
him there,

Illico diuitijs obmutuit ille repertis. Vrbanus seruus seruorum Dei. Monacho
fernent^ssimo, Abbati calido, episcopo lepido, Archiepiscopo remisso. Wrote
Pope Vita^ to Baldwine sometime Archbishop of Canterbury. ex Vs^ie. de Christ.
eccles.
His preferments made him pursie, and he had now done giving Oracles. How many
in their first beginnings are wondrous painful and industrious, and deserve
well and worthily of the Church of God; but as years, and preferments come upon
them, slack and abate their former diligence, and seem both to say as those,
Zach. 11. 5. Blessed be God, for I am rich; as if therefore they may be idle,
because they are rich; and that which is worse to do with them: And their own
shepherds pity them not, and so cast a suspicion upon themselves, that they
made the stairs into the Pulpit, to be but steps unto preferment.

But what is the issue? Let Experience be witness. How many whom God has
filled with the gifts of knowledge and utterance are again emptied and
deprived of them, because they have not made conscience in the use of them, to
fulfill their Ministry? Zach. 11. 17, we shall find a terrible threatening.
His arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye utterly darkened: Against
whom may this threatening be? O Idol shepherd that leaves his flock! whether
it be in regard of presence, or pains. When men will be Idol shepherds,
having gifts and mouths and speak not, God in his justice will make them
further Idol like, they shall have eyes and see not: God will dim and darken
their right eye, yea put it out, and deprive them of that excellent gift of
Knowledge, which they have not cared to employ in the Churches service.

Psalm. 137. 5. 6. If I forget Jerusalem, let my right band forget her cunning,
yea let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not thee to my
chiefest joy. What may be the reason that many a man's right hand has forgot
her cunning? Because his arm is clean dried up: But why is his arm so dried
up, as that his hand has forgot her cunning? Surely the Idol shepherd has
forgotten Jerusalem. Therefore it is that his tongue cleaues to the roof of
his mouth, because his heart cleaves to this world: and the bent of it is so
pitched upon the prosecution of secular things, the preferments of the world,
that Jerusalem is not preferred to his chiefest delight. Therefore cleaves his
tongue to the roof of his mouth, not only in regard of negligence, but of
insufficiency; God having a plague no less for the Idol shepherds tongue,
then his arm and his eye.

I know indeed there may be a dispensation where age and painfulnesse have
disabled natural faculties: and I know that the aged Leuite, whose hands begin
now to tremble with the often and diligent lifting of the heavy Axe, has a
permission to discharge him the cleaving of the Sacrifices; yet in the strength
and vigor of a man's best gifts and years to give out, this I know not how to
excuse. I know some plead bodily indisposition and weakness, but the
question is, whether the body or the plea be weakest. Timothy was surely weak,
and but a sickely, tuely man; yet Paul that prescribes him to drink a little
wine, for his stomachs sake, and often infirmities, yet never prescribed him
but a little preaching. Nay, though a weakly sickely man, yet he charges him
before the Judge of quick and dead, to preach in season and out of season:
strange counsel one would think for a weak body.

I deny not but God will have mercy and not sacrifice, yet take we heed of
pretended disabilities, and of making our selves weaker then God has made us.
What our bodies will bear without a manifest and dangerous injury to them,
let them bear it in the name of God for the good of many souls. These bodies
of ours must perish and be consumed at last, when we have made the most of them
we can. In what more honorable service can we spend them then in the service
of the Church? For a man to spend his body in the work of the Ministry, I
hold it the next degree of honor to the crown of Martyrdom. Yea even the
aged Leuite, though his shaking hands be discharged the service of he Axe, yet
must not be idle, Number. 8. 26. Attamen seruito fratribus Sic Iunius.
suis; to wit, though he cleave not the sacrifices, yet let him counsel,
advise, direct and instruct the junior Levites in the service of the
Tabernacle, and so still minister to his brethren. And thus is the Ministry
fulfilled in the fidelity of dispensation.

The second point and part follows:

The fulfilling of the Ministry in holy Conversation. A man's Ministry
stands not all in preaching, the life of his Ministry is his life. He is
but half a Minister that preaches as he should; He is complete, and
fulfills his Ministry, that preaches and lives as he should. Though a man
should speak with the tongue of men and Angels, and yet in the mean time be
an angel of darkness, he is but a tinckling Cimball, and a Bell without a
Pomegranate. The Scripture complains of Idol shepherds. What may an Idol
shepherd be? He that is like to Idols. How they are described, see Psalm. 115.
5 7. Mouths they have and speak not, feet they have and walk not. So then
not only he that has a mouth and speaks not, but he also that has a foot
and walks not, is an Idol shepherd: not only the dumb, but also the lame
shepherd is Idoll-like. Therefore Theophylacts note is witty, Mat. 5. 2,
Christ opened his mouth and taught the people. He makes a question, whether the
first word be not superfluous, or no: for how could Christ teach, but he must
open his mouth? He answers, that these words were not idle, because Christ did
sometimes teach and opened not his mouth, viz. (...) by his life and miracles;
but now he opened his mouth, and taught them by doctrine.

This, this is that that gains credit and regard to our Ministry and
persons, even from our very enemies. For Mar. 6. 20. Herod feared John, knowing
that be was an holy and a just man: Not because he was a great man, or learned,
or a powerful preacher, though these also; but because an holy and a just man.
Holiness casts a more dreadful dazzling and sparkling luster then any other
accomplishment whatsoever. Herod was greater, but John was holier; therefore
Herod fears John.

The common complaint is that the Ministry is contemptible, and basely
accounted of; I would the complaint were not too true: but may a man be so bold
as to inquire into the causes of it? Among many other, questionless, this is
none of the least, the unholy and scandalous lives of some in the Ministry,
from whose personal scandalls the iniudicious multitude concludes the calling
it self base. The Prophet Malachi points at this, Mal. 2. 8. 9. Therefore I
have made you base and contemptible before all the people. Wherefore* see verse
8. Ye are gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the Law, ye
have broken the covenant of Leut: which conenant see what it was, ve. 5. 6. for
this cause God made them base and contemptible. Let no man despise thy youth,
1. Tim. 4. 12. He says not only to the Corinthians of Timotheus, Let no man
therefore despise him, 1. Cor. 16 11. but to Timotheus himself, Let no man
despise thee. Why? lies our credit in our own keeping? is it in our power to
keep our selves from contempt? From just contempt it is, else should Paul have
said, Let none of the people despise Timothies youth, and not have given this
counsel to Timothy. But how must he preserve him self from contempt, but be
an example to all that believe, in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit,
in faith, in pureness? Because these holy endowments are wanting, hence is it
that the Ministry is so contemptible. The more shame for such, and the greater
judgment will it be to such, who by their unholy lives bring this contempt
upon this calling, and cause the dirt and filth of their vicious courses to be
cast in the faces of all. May I not tax, and take up a number of dissolute
ones in the Ministry, as Apollonius girds up the false prophet of the
Montanists, Propheta, Eusebius. 5. eccl. his.
dic quaeso, ludit tesseris, ac tabulis? Propheta foeneratur? I may add many
such interrogatories, as, Propheta saltat? jurat? bibit? scortatur?

I should almost shame to english these things, but that these fellows are not
ashamed of their courses. What? Prophets, and gamesters? Prophets, and dicers,
dauncers, drunkards, swearers etc. Are these our Prophetical endowments? Have
we not the spawne of that cursed crew, Esaias 56. 11. 12, yet living amongst us,
who in stead of saying, Come let us fulfill our Ministry, they say, Come, I
will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink. If filling of
pots, filling of cups and Tobacco pipes, if filling their bellies; if this were
to fulfill the Ministry, oh how iollily had these discharged their taskes?
These be those bruits that come within compass of Nehemiah his Memento, Nehem.
13. 29 Remember them (O Lord) which defile the priesthood: Yes, yes, God will
remember them, though they forget him, yet he will not forget them. God of all
things will not brook the defilement of the priesthood. Number. 12. 1, we shall
find Aaron and Miriam both in the same sin of murmuring against Moses, and yet
in the process of the story, verse 10, only Miriam is smitten with the
leprosy. Both were in the same sin: what was the reason only Miriam is in the
punishment? Is God partial? God forbid. What the^ might be the reason? Surely
me thinks Chrysostom gives a passing (...). Hom. 3. ad Coloss.
good one, That Aaron was not smitten with the leprosy for the dignity of the
priesthood, lest the inflicting of such an unclean disease on his person,
should redound to the dishonor of his office, God did forbear him. God had a
respect to the holiness and honor of the priesthood. God would not therefore
have his Priest infected with Leprosy. He that was to judge of Leprosy in
others, and to separate others for the Leprosy, he himself was not to be
leprous; and therefore though I find leprous Kings, yet I find not a leprous
priest in all the Scripture.

Now then, has the Lord our God such a tender regard of the credit and honor
of the Priesthood, that for it he will forbear the execution of his justice;
and shall we be so regardlesse thereof as to defile it with the filthier
leprosy of a profane, vicious and scandalous life? If Ambrose would not admit
one into the Ministry, eo quod gestus eum dedeceret, because he had but an
uncomely gesture of his body; I make no question, if these nasty Lepers had
fallen into his hand, but he would have put the discipline of the Leper upon
them in separating them from the Congregation. Lu. 14. 34. 3^. Salt is good,
but if salt has lost his savor, (...) if it be infatuated or grown foolish
(a word that suits well with Zacharies phrase, of a foolish shepherd, Zac. 11.
15:) but if it have lost his savor, wherewithal shall it be salted? It is
neither meet for the land, nor yet for the dunghill, what then must become of
it? Men cast it out, says our Savior. How happy were it for the Church, if
that salt which has lost his savor, might also lose his place. Men cast it
out, that is, foolish and unsavory Ministers are to be deposed: So Hierome
expounds it; and so was his exposition urged in the council of Basil against
Pope Eugenius for his deposition from the Papacy.

It is neither meet for the land, nor yet for the dunghill, what a sorrow then
should it do in the Church? Is the Church worse then a dunghill? Is that fit
to be in the Church, which is not fit to be on the dunghill? This is to make
the Church worse then a dunghill. Well, howeuer such unsavory ones shuffle
out in the world, and escape the punishment of unsavory salt, yet God will be
sure to meet with them one day. He has gall and wormwood for those prophets
of Jerusalem, from whom iniquity is gone forth into all the land, Ierem. 23.
15. It is but justice, fit that they should be fed with gall and wormwood of
Gods vengeance, that have fed Gods people with gall and wormwood of their
scandalous lives. Be ye holy therefore that do bear the vessels of the Lord.
The Lord will be sanctified in all them that draw near unto him. In no calling
draw men so near to God as in the Ministry; let our lives have proportion
with our callings.

And thus we see how we must fulfill our Ministry, and what we must aim at
therein. Not at the filling of our barnes, of our bellies, of our purses, but
at the fulfilling the office of an Evangelist. For such then as walk after
this rule, and are careful to fulfill their Ministry in the former
particulars, go ye on in the name of God, and the blessing of God be upon your
heads; and howsoever ye may have but little thank and encouragement from an
ungrateful people, yet let the Prophet Esaies comfort be yours, My work is
with my God, Esaias 49. 4. To you be it spoken, 1. Pet. 5. 3. 5, Feed the flock
which depends upon you. And when the chief shepherd shall come, ye shall
receive an incorruptible crown of glory. What though ye have many a frump and
frown for your fidelity, and people be cross; yet comfort your self against
all with the view of this crown of glory, which the righteous Judge shall give
you at that day. Happy, yea thrice happy then shall that servant be, that has
so discharged his pastoral task, as that he may hear from Christ that
comfortable Euge, Well done, good and faithful servant; though in the mean
time, and till then, he, and his ouer-great officiousness, falsely so
supposed, be disgraced with the worlds Apage.

And for such as make no conscience thus to fulfill their Ministry, to them I
say, as once that good Father spoke to the Council of Rhemes, Fratres aliam
vobis pronuncio synodum: So I to you, Fratres aliam vobis pronuncio
visitationem; I give you warning of another, and of another gates Visitation,
which the great Archbishop of our souls shall hold at the dreadful day of his
appearance. At the which, as Et sireddenda est (...) de ^is quae ^^^que
gessi(...) suo, ^e^ ^uid fi^t de (...) quae q^^sque gessit in corpore (...)
quod est ecclesia!
the same good man speaks, if we must give an account of those things which we
have done, every man in his own body, how much more of those things which we
have done in the body of Christ, which is his Church! Rub up therefore your
secure and negligent consciences with Jobs meditation, Job 31. 14. What then
shall I do when God rises up, and when he visites, what shall I answer him?
God himself will one day come a visiting; Bethink your selves what ye will
then answer. Must not he needs be speechless there that has been dumb
here? Alas, how will thou be able to stand before his dreadful Tribunal,
that shall be found to stand idle in his Vineyard? How will thou be able to
appear before that glorious and holy God, whose holy Priesthood thou have
defiled with thy unholy life? In the fear of God therefore, and in the
conscience of that account which must be made, Take heed to the Ministry
which ye have received of the Lord, that ye fulfill it: fulfill it in
conscionable Dispensation, in holy Conversation.

2. The Caveat is urged by a reason.

Which thou have received of the Lord. Areason indeed which may work upon any
but such as are without all reason. We receive our Ministry by man, but not
of man* man admits, but God fits to the work. It is Gods work and not man's.
And therefore as Iehoshaphat, 2. Chron. 19. 6, speaks to the Judges, Take
heed what ye do, for ye execute the judgment, not of man, but of the Lord: So
may it be said to Ministers, Take heed what ye do, Take heed to your
Ministry to fulfill it; for ye have received it of God, and not of man. He of
whom we have received our Ministry, will look to receive an account from us
for our Ministry. Surely the Ministry is an honorable calling, and so much
this reason will imply: It is a calling received from God in a more peculiar
manner then are others. But as there is a Dignity, so there is a Duty in it,
at which these words look more then at the Dignity. How many look at the
Dignity, and forget the Duty, glorying that they have received their
Ministry from God, but neglecting the fulfilling of it, and the returning of
their glory to the glory of God? To which of the Angels Chrysostom.
has God said at any time, I will give unto you the Keys of the kingdom of
heaven? This he has said unto his Ministers, and with our Ministry we
receive these Keys from the Lord. Well then may Gods Ministers have the name
of Angels, that have a prerogative above Angels. And shall we now that have
received such an honorable Ministry from God, be idle, careless and
negligent in the fulfilling thereof? God forbid. If we had received our
Ministry but of man, that should betrust us with such a business of weight,
would we not be careful to make good his confidence he had in our fidelity?
God and not Man has betrusted us with this office, therefore for Gods sake be
entreated to be faithful in the fulfilling of your Ministry; even for the
Lords sake, of whom you have received your honor, your gifts, your calling;
take heed to your Ministry that ye fulfill it.

FINIS.
Errata
Page 2. line 23. read Assembled and called. page 13. line 2 for brazen, read
baser. page 16. line 3. read, grumes of blood.

