Micro-cosmographie. OR, A PIECE OF THE WORLD DISCOVERED; IN ESSAYS AND
CHARACTERS.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Edward Blount. 1628.

TO THE READER GENTILE OR GENTLE.
I Have (for once) aduentur'd to play the Mid-wifes part, helping to bring
forth these Infants into the World, which the Father would have smoothered: who
having left them lapt up in loose Sheets, as soon as his Fancy was delivered of
them; written especially for his private Recreation, to pass away the time in
the Country, and by the forcible request of Friends drawn from him; Yet
passing severally from hand to hand in written Copies, grew at length to be a
pretty number in a little Volume: and among so many sundry dispersed
Trans^cripts, some very imperfect and surreptitious had like to have past the
Press, if the Author had not used speedy means of prevention: When,
perceiving the hazard he ran to be wronged, was unwillingly willing to let
them pass as now they appear to the World. If any faults have escaped the
Press, (as few Books can be printed without) impose them not on the Author I
entreat Thee; but rather impute them to mine and the Printers oversight, who
seriously promise on the re-impression hereof by greater care and diligence,
for this our former default, to make Thee ample satisfaction. In the mean
while, I remain

Thine, ED: BLOVNT.

A TABLE OF CONTENTS.
A Child. 1. A young raw Preacher. 2. A grave Divine. 3. A mere dull
Physician. 4. An Alderman. 5. A discontented Man. 6. An Antiquary. 7. A younger
Brother. 9. A formal Man. 10. A Church-Papist. 11 A selfe-conceied man. 12* A
Tavern. 13* A reserved Man. 14* A Sharke. 15* A Carier. 16* An old College
Pu^ler. 17* An Vpstart Knight. 18* An idle Gallant. 19* A Constable. 20* A
downright Scholar 21* A Player. 22* A Detractor. 23* A young Gentleman o^
the University. 24* A Pot-Poet. 25. A Cook. 26. A forward Man. 27. A Baker.
28. A plain Country Fellow. 30. A Young Man. 31. The common Singing-Men. 32. A
Pretender to Learning. 33. A Shopkeeper. 34. A Handsome Hostess. 35. A Blunt
Man. 36. A Critic. 37. A Sergeant. 38. A weak Man. 39* A Tobacco seller. 40*
A plausible Man. 41* The Worlds wise Man 42* A Bowle-Alley. 43* A Surgeon. 44*
A Shee-precise Hypocrite. 45* A Contemplative Man 46* An Aturney. 47* A
Sceptick in religion. 48* A Partial man. 49* A Trumpeter. 50* A
vulgar-spirited Man 51* A ploddding Student. 52. Paul's Walk. 53. An University
Dun. 54. A stayed Man. 55.
FINIS.
Micro-cosmographic. OR, A piece of the World Uncharacterized.
1. A Child.
IS a Man in a small Letter, yet the best Copy of Adam before he tasted of
Eve, or the Apple; and he is happy whose small practice in the World can only
write this Character. He is nature^ fresh picture newly drawn in Oil, which
time, and much handling, dimmes and defaces. His Soul is yet a white paper
vnscribled with observations of the world, wherewith at length it becomes a
blurred Note-booke. He is purely happy, because he knows no evil, nor has
made means by sin to be acquainted with misery. He arriues not at the
mischief of being wise, nor endures evils to come by fore seeing them. He
kisses and loves all, and when the smart of the rod is past, smiles on his
beater. Nature and his Parents alike dandle him, and tice him on with a bait of
sugar, to a draught of worme-wood. He plays ^et, like a young Prentice ^he
first day, and is not ^ome to his task of melancholy. His hardest labor is
his tongue, as if he were loath to use so deceitful an Organ; and he ^s best
company with it when he can but prattle. We laugh at his foolish ^ports, but
his game is our ^arnest: and his drums, ^attles and hobby-horses, ^ut the
Emblems, and mock^ng of man's business. His ^ther has writ him as his ^wne
little story, wherein he reads those day e^^ his life that he cannot
^^^member; and sighs to (...) what innocence he has (...) lived. The elder he
growe^ he is a stayer lower from God; and like his first f^^ther mnch worse in
(...) ^^eeches. He is the Chr^^stians example, and the o^^mans relapse: The
o^^^mitates his pureness, an^ the other falls into his si^^plicitie. Could he
put (...) his body with his litt^^ Coat, he had got eternit^ without a
burden, and (...) changed but one Heaven for another.

2. A young raw. Preacher.
^S a Bird not yet fledged, (...) that has hopt out of his ^est to be
Chirping on a ^edge, and will be strag^ng abroad at what peril (...) ever.
His backwardness (...) the University has set ^im thus forward; for had ^e
not truanted there, he ^ad not been so hasty a ^iuine. His small standing
and time has made him a ^roficient only in bold^esse, out of which and his
^able-booke he is furnished ^or a Preacher. His Col^ections of Study are the
^otes of Sermons, which taken up at S. Mary's, (...) vtters in the Country. A
(...) if he write Brachigraphy ^ his stock is so much the better. His writing
is more then his reading; for he^ reads only what he get^ without book. Thus
accomplished he comes dow^ to his friends, and his fir^^ salutation is grace and
peac^ out of the Pulpit. His prayer is conceited, and no man remembers his
Colledg^ more at large. The pace o^ his Sermon is a full career^ and he runs
wildly (...) hill and dale till the clock^ stop him. The labor of i^ is
chiefly in his lungs. An^ the only thing he ha^^ made of it himself, is the
faces. He takes on against the Pope without mercy, and has a jest still in
lauender for Bellarmine. His action is all passion, and his speech
interiections: He has an excellent faculty in bemoaning the people, and spits
with a very good grace. He will not draw ^his handkercher out of his place,
nor blow his nose without discretion. His commendation is, that he never looks
upon book, and indeed, he was never used to it. He preaches but once a year,
though twice on Sunday: for the stuff is still the same, only dressing a
little altered. H^ has more tricks with an^ Sermon, then a Tailer with an old
Cloak, to turn^ it, and piece it, and at las^ quite disguise it with a new
Preface. If he have wade^ further in his profession and would show Reading of
his own, his Authors a^^ Postils, and his School divinity a Ca^echisme. Hi^
fashion and demure Ha^bit gets him in with some Town-precisian, and mak^ him a
Guest on Fryda^ nights. You shall know him by his narrow Velue cape, and Serge
facing, an^ his ruff, next his Hair, the shortest thing about hi^ The
companion of his walk is some zealous tradesman, whom he astonisheth with
strange points, which they both understand alike. His friends and much
painfulness may prefer him to thirty pounds a year, and this means, to a
Chamber-maide: with whom we leave him now in the bonds of Wedlock. Next
Sunday you shall have him again.

3. A Grave Divine.
IS one that knows the burden of his calling, and has studied to make his
shoulders sufficient: for which he has not been hasty to launch forth of his
port the University, hut expected the ballast of learning, and the wind of
opportunity. Divinity is not the beginning but the end of his studies, to which
he takes the ordinary stayre, and makes the Arts his way. He counts it not
profaneness to be polisht with humane reading, or to smooth his way by
Aristotle to schoole-diuinity. He has sounded both Religions and anchord in
the best, and is a Protestant out of judgment, not faction, not because his
Country, but his Reason is on this side. The ministry is his choice, not
refuge, and yet the Pulpit not his itch, but fear. His discourse there is
substance, not all Rhetorique, and he vtters more things then words. His speech
is not helped with enforced action, but the matter acts it self. He shoots
all his meditations at one Butt: and beats upon his text, not the Cushion,
making his hearers not the Pulpit groan. In citing of Popish errors, he cuts
them with Arguments, not cudgels them with barren inu^ctiues: and labors more
to show the truth of his cause then the spleen. His Sermon is limited by the
method, not the houre-glasse; and his Devotion goes along with him out of the
Pulpit. He comes not up thrice a week because he would not be idle, nor
talks three hours together, because he would not talk nothing: but his
tongue Preaches at fit times; and his conversation is the every days exercise.
In matters of ceremony he is not ceremonious, but thinks he owes that
reverence to the Church to bow his judgment to it, and make more conscience of
schism, then a Surplesse. He esteems the Churches Hirarchie, as the Churches
glory, and how-euer we jar with Rome, would not have our confusion
distinguish us. In Symoniacall purchases he thinks his Soul goes in the
bargain, and is loath to come by promition so dear. Yet his worth at the
length aduances him, and the price of his own merit buys him a Living. He is
no base Grater of his Tithes, and will not wrangle for the odd Egg. The
Lawyer is the only man he hinders, he is spited for taking up quarrels. He is
a maine pillar of our Church, though not yet Deane nor Canon, and his life our
Religions best Apology: His death is his last Sermon, where in the Pulpit of
his Bed he instructs men to dye by his example.

4. A mere dull Physician.
HIs practice is some business at bed-sides, and his speculation an Vrinall.
He is distinguish^ from an Empericke by a round velvet cap, and Doctors gown,
yet no man takes degrees more superfluously, for he is Doctor howsoever. He is
sworn to Gale^ and Hypocrates, as University men to their statutes, though
they never saw them, and his discourse is all Aphorisms, though his reading be
only Alexis of Piemont, or the Regiment of Health. The best Cure he has done
is upon his own purse, which from a lean sickliness he has made lusty, and
in flesh. His learning consists much in reckoning up the hard names of
diseases, and the superscriptions of Gally-pots in his Apothecaries Shop,
which are rank't in his Shelues, and the Doctors memory. If he have been but a
by-stander at some desperate recovery, he is slandered with it, though he be
guiltless; and this breeds his reputation, and that his Practice; for his
skill is merely opinion. Of all odors he likes best the smell of Urine, and
holds Vespatians rule, that no gain is unsavory. If you send this once to
him, you must resolve to be sick howsoever, for he will never leave examining
your Water till he have shak^ it into a Disease. Then follows a writ to his
drugger in a strange tongue, which he understands though he cannot conster. If
he see you himself, his presence is the worst visitation: for if he cannot
heal your sickness, he will be sure to help it. He translates his
Apothecaries Shop into your Chamber, and the very Windows and Benches must
take Physic. He tells you your Malady in Greek, though it be but a cold, or
headache: which by good endeavor and diligence he may bring to some moment
indeed; his most unfaithful act is, that he leaves a man gasping, and his
pretense is, death and he have a quarrel, and must not meet; but his fear
is, least the Carcass should bleed. Anatomies and other spectacles of
Mortality have hardened him, and he is no more struck with a Funeral then a
Graue-maker. Noblemen use him for a director of their stomachs, and Ladies for
wantonness, especially if he be a proper man. If he be single, he is in
league with his Shee-Apothecary, and because it is the Physician, the husband
is Patient. If he have leisure to be idle (that is to study) he has a smatch
at Alcumy, and is sick of the Pilosophers stone, a disease incurable, but by
an abundant Phlebotomy of the purse. His two main opposites are a Mountebanke,
and a good Woman, and he never shows his learning so much as in an inuectiue
against them, and their boxes. In conclusion he is a sucking consumption, and a
very brother to the worms, for they are both engendered out of man's corruption.

5. An Alderman.
He is Venerable in his Gown, more in his Beard, wherewith he sets not
forth so much his own, as the face of a City. You must look on him as one
of the Towne-Gates, and consider him not as a Body, but a Corporation. His
eminency above others has made him a man of Worship, for he had never been
preferred, but that he was worth thousands. He ouer-sees the Commonwealth, as
his Shop, and it is an argument of his Policy, that he has thriuen by his
craft. He is a rigorous Magistrate in his Ward: yet his scale of Justice is
suspected, least it be like the Balances in his Warehouse. A ponderous man
he is, and substantial: for his weight is commonly extraordinary, and in his
preferment nothing Rises so much as his Belly. His Head is of no great depth,
yet well furnished, when it is in conjunction with his Brethren, may bring
forth a City Apothegme, or some such sage matter. He is one that will not
hastily run into error, for he treds with great deliberation, and his
judgment consists much in his pace. His discourse is commonly the Annals of his
Maioralty, and what good government there was in the days of his gold Chain:
though his doore-posts were the only things that suffered reformation: He
seems not sincerely religious, especially on solemn days; for he comes often
to Church to make a show. He is the highest stayre of his profession and an
example to his Trade, what in time they may come to. He makes very much of his
authority; but more of his Satin Doublet; which, though of good years, bears
its age very well, and looks fresh every Sunday; But his Scarlet gown is a
Monument, and lasts from generation to generation.

6. A discontented Man.
IS one that is fallen out with the world, and will be reuengd' on himself.
Fortune has denied him in something, and he now takes pet, and will be
miserable in spite. The root of his disease is a selfe-humouring pride, and an
accustomed tenderness, not to be cro^t in his fancy* and the occasions
com^monly one of these three* a hard father, a peevish wench, or his ambition
thwarted. He considered not the nature of the world till he felt it, and all
blows fall on him heavier, because they light not first on his expectation. He
has now forgone all but his pride, and is yet vain glorious in the ostentation
of his melancholy. His composure of himself is a studied carelessness with his
arms a cross, and a neglected hanging of his head and cloak, and he is as
great an enemy to an hat-band, as Fortune. He quarrels at the time, and
vp-starts, and sighs at the neglect of men of Parts, that is, such as himself.
His life is a perpetual Satyr, and he is still girding the ages vanity; when
this very anger shows he too much esteems it. He is much displeased to see
men merry, and wonders what they can find to laugh at. He never draws his own
lips higher then a smile, and frowns wrinckle him before forty. He at the
last falls into that deadly melancholy to be a bitter hater of men, and is the
most apt Companion for any mischief. He is the spark that kindles the
Commonwealth, and the bellows himself to blow it: and if he turn any thing,
it is commonly one of these, either Friar, traitor, or madman.

7. An Antiquary.
HE is a man strangely thrifty of Time past, and an enemy indeed to his Maw,
whence he fetche^ out many things when they are now all rotten and stinking.
He is one tha^ has that unnatural disease to be enamored o^ old age, and
wrinckles, and loves all things (as Dutchmen do Cheese) the better for being
moldy and worme-eaten. He is of our Religion, because we say it is most
ancient; and yet a broken Statue would almost make him an Idolater. A great
admirer he is of the rust of old Monuments, and reads only those Charactars,
where time has eaten out the letters. He will go you forty miles to see a
Saints Well, or ruined Abbey: and if there be but a Cross or stone footstool
in the way, he will be considering it so long, till he forget his journey. His
estate consists much in shekels, and Roman Coins, and he has more Pictures of
Caesar, then James or Elizabeth* Beggars coozen him with musty things which
they have raked from dunghils, and he preserues their rags for precious
Relics. He loves no Library, but where there are more Spiders volums then
Authors, and looks with great admiration on the Antique work of Cob-webs.
Printed books he contemnes, as a nouetly of this latter age; but a Manu-script
the pores on everlastingly, especially if the cover be all Moth-eaten, and the
dust make a Parenthesis between every Syllable. He would give all the Books
in his Study (which are rarities all) for one of the old Roman binding, or
six lines of Tully in his own hand. His chamber is hung commonly with strange
Beasts skins, and is a kind of Charnel-house of bones extraordinary, and his
discourse upon them, if you will hear him shall last longer. His very atyre
is that which is the eldest out of fashion, and you may pick a Criticism out
of his Breeches. He never looks upon him self til he is gray-hair'd, and then
he is pleased with his own Antiquity. His Grave do^s not fright him, for he
has been used to Sepulchers, and he likes Death the better, because it
gathers him to his Fathers.

9. Younger Brother.
HIs elder Brother was the Esau, that came out first and left him like Jacob at
his heels. His father has done with him, as Phararh to the children of
Israel, that would have them make brick, and give them no straw, so he taskes
him to be a Gentleman, and leaves him nothing to maintain it. The pride of
his house has undone him, which the elder Knighthood must sustain, and his
beggary that Knighthood. His birth and bringing up will not suffer him to
descend to the means to get wealth: but he stands at the mercy of the world,
and which is worse of his brother. He is something better then the Seruing-men;
yet they more saucy with him, then he bold with the master, who beholds him
with a countenance of stern awe, and checks him oftener then his Liueries. His
brothers old suites and he are much alike in request, and cast off now and
then one to the other. Nature has furnished him with a little more wit upon
compassion; for it is like to be his best reuenew. If his Annuity stretch so
far he is sent to the University, and with great heart-burning takes upon him
the Ministry; as a profession he is condemned, to by his ill fortune. Other
take a more crooked path, yet the Kings highway, where at length their vizzard
is plucked off, and they strike fair for Tiburne: but their Brothers pride,
not love, gets them a pardon. His last refuge is the Low Countries, where rags
and lice are no scandal, where he lives a poor Gentleman of a Company, and
dies without a shirt. The only thing that may better his fortunes, is an art
he has to make a Gentlewoman, wherewith he baits now and then some rich
widow, that is hungry after his blood. He is commonly discontented, and
desperate, and the form of his exclamation is, that Churl my Brother. He
loves not his country for this unnatural custom, and would have long since
revolted to the Spaniard, but for Kent only which he holds in admiration.

10. A mere formal Man.
IS somewhat more then the shape of a man; for he has his length, breadth, and
color. When you have seen his outside, you have looked through him, and need
employ your discovery no farther. His reason is merely example, and his action
is not guided by his understanding, but he sees other men do thus, and he
follows them. He is a Negative, for we cannot call him a wise man, but not a
fool; nor an honest man, but not a knave; nor a Protestant, but not a Papist.
The chief burden of his brain is the carriage of his body, and the setting of
his face in a good frame: which he performs the better, because he is not
disiointed with other Meditations. His Religion is a good quiet subject, and he
prays, as he swears, in the Phrase of the Land. He is a fair guest, and a
fair inuiter, and can excuse his good cheer in the accustomed Apology. He
has some faculty in mangling of a Rabbet, and the distribution of his morsel
to a neighbor trencher. He apprehends a jest by seeing men smile, and laughes
orderly himself, when it comes to his turn. His discourse is the news that
he has gathered in his walk, and for other matters his discretion is, that
he will only what he can, that is, say nothing. His life is like one that
runs to the Minster-walke, to take a turn, or two, and so passes. He has
staid in the world to fill a number; and when he is gone, there wants one, and
there is an end.

11. A Church-Papist.
IS one that parts his Religion betwixt his conscience and his purse, and comes
to Church not to serve God, but the King. The face of the Law makes him wear
the mask of the Gospel, which he uses not as a means to save his soul, but
charges. He loves Popery well, but is loath to lose by it, and though he be
something scared with the Bulls of Rome, yet they are far off, and he is
struck with more terror at the Apparitor. Once a month he presents himself
at the Church, to keep off the Church warden, and brings in his body to save
his bail. He kneels with the Congregation, but prays by himself, and asks
God forgiveness for coming thither. If he be forced to stay out a Sermon, he
puts his hat over his eyes, and frowns out the hour, and when he comes home,
thinks to make amends for this fault by abusing the Preacher. His maine policy
is to shift off the Communion, for which he is never vnfurnish't of a quarrel,
and will be sure to be out of Charity at Easter; and indeed lies not, for he
has a quarrel to the Sacrament. He would make a bad Martyr, and good
trauellor, for his conscience is so large, he could never wander out of it, and
in Constantinople would be circumcised with a reservation. His wife is more
zealous, and therefore more costly, and he bates her in tyres, what she stands
him in Religion. But we leave him hatching plots against the State, and
expecting Spinola.

12. A self conceited Man.
IS one that knows himself so well that he does not know himself. Two
excellent well-dones have undone him; and he is guilty, that first commended
him to madness. He is now become to his own book, which he poares on
continually, yet like a truant-reader skips over the harsh places and surueyes
only that which is pleasant. In the speculation of his own good parts, his
eyes like a drunkards see all double, and his fancy like an old man's
spectacles, make a great letter in a small print. He imagines every place where
he comes his Theater, and not a look stirring, but his spectator; and
conceiues men's thoughts to be very idle, that is, busy about him. His walk is
still in the fashion of a March, and like his opinion vnaccompanyed, with his
eyes most fixed upon his own person, or on others with reflection to himself.
If he have done any thing that has past with applause, he is always re-acting
it alone, and conceits the ecstasy his hearers were in at every period. His
discourse is all positions, and definitive decrees, with thus it must be, and
thus it is, and he will not humble his authority to prove it. His tenent is
always singular, and aloof from the vulgar as he can, from which you must not
hope to wrest him. He has an excellent humor, for an heretic, and in these
days made the first Arminian. He prefers Ramus before Aristotle, and
Paracelsus before Galen, and whosoever with most Paradox is commended, and
Lipsius his hopping style, before either Tully or Quintilian. He much pities
the World, that has no more in sight in his Parts, when he is too well
discovered, even to this very thought. A flatterer is a dunce to him, for he can
tell him nothing but what he knows before, and yet he loves him to, because
he is like himself. Men are merciful to him, and let him alone, for if he be
once driven from his humor, he is like two inward friends fallen out; His own
bitter enemy, and discontent presently makes a murder. In sum, he is a
bladder blown up with wind, which the least flaw crushes to nothing.

13. A Tavern.
IS a degree, or (if you will) a pair of stayres above an Alehouse, where men
are drunk with more credit and Apology. If the Vintners nose be at door, it
is a sign sufficient, but the absence of this is supplied by the Iuie-bush.
The rooms are ill breathed, like the drinkers that have been washed well over
night, and are smelt too fasting next morning; not furnished with Beds apt to be
defiled, but more necessary implements, Stools, Table, and a Chamber Pot. It
is a broacher of more news then hogs-heads, and more jests then news, which
are sukt up here by some spungie brain, and from thence squeazed into a
Comedy. Men come here to make merry, but indeed make a noise, and this music
above is answered with the clinking below. The Drawers are the ciuilest people
in it, men of good bringing up, and howsoever we esteem of them, none can
boast more justly of their high calling. It Is the best Theater of natures, where
they are truly acted, not played, and the business as in the rest of the world
up and down, to wit, from the bottom of the Seller to the great Chamber. A
melancholy man would find here matter to work upon, to see Heads as brittle
as Glasses, and ofter broken. Men come hither to quarrel, and come hither to
be made friends, and if Plutarch will lend me his Simile, it is even Telephus
his sword that makes wounds, and cures them. It is the common co^sumption of
the Afternoon, and the murderer, or maker away of a rainy day. It is the
Torrid Zone that scorches the face, and Tobacco the gunpowder that blows it
up. Much harm would be done, if the charitable Vintener had not Water ready
for these flames. A house of sin you may call it but not a house of darkness
for the Candles are never out, and it is like those Countries far in the
North, where it is as clear at midnight as at midday. After a long sitting,
it becomes like a street in a dashing shower, where the spouts are flushing
above, and the Conduits running below, while the Iordans like swelling rivers
ouerflow their banks. To give you the total reckoning of it. It is the busy
man's recreation, the idle man's business, the melancholy man's Sanctuary, the
strangers welcome, the Innes a Court man's entertainment, the scholars
kindness, and the Citizens courtesy. It is the study of sparkling wits, and a
cup of Canary their book, where we leave them.

14. A too idly reserved Man.
IS one that is a fool with discretion: or a strange piece of Politician, that
manages the state of himself, His Actions are his Privy Counsel, wherein no
man must partake beside. He speaks under rule and prescription, and dare not
show his teeth without Machiauell. He conuerses with his neighbors as he would
in Spain, and fears an inquisitiue man as much as the inquisition. He
suspects all questions for examinations, and thinks you would pick something
out of him, and auoids you: His breast is lik a gentlewomans closet, which locks
up every toye and trifle, or some bragging Mounte-banke, that makes every
stinking thing a secret. He delivers you common matters with great coniuration.
of silence, and whispers you in the ear Acts of Parliament. You may as soon
wrest a tooth from him as a paper, and whatsoever he reads is letters. He dares
not talk of great men for fear of bad Comments, and he knows not how his
words may be misapplyed. Ask his opinion and he tells you his doubt: and he
never hears any thing more astonishtly then what he knows before. His words
are like the Cards at Primiuiste, where 6. is 18. and 7. 21. for they never
signify what they sound; but if he tell you he will do a thing, it is as much
as if he swore he would not. He is one indeed that takes all men to be
craftier then they are, and puts himself to a great deal of affliction to
hinder their plots, and designs where they mean freely. He has been long a
riddle himself, but at last finds Oedipusses; for his ouer-acted dissimulation
discouers him, and men do with him as they would with Hebrew letters, spell
him backwards, and read him.

15. A Sharke.
IS one whom all other means have fayl'd, and he now lives of himself. He
is some needy casheir'd fellow, whom the World has often flung off, yet still
claspes again, and is like one a drowning, fastens upon any thing that is next
at hand, amongst other of his Shipwrackes he has happyly lost shame, and this
want supplies him. No man puts his Brain to more use then he, for his life is
a daily invention, and each meal a new stratagem. He has an excellent memory
for his acquaintance, though there past but how do you betwixt them seven
years ago, it shall suffice for an Embrace, and that for money. He offers you
a Pottle of Sack out of his joy to see you, and in requital of this
courtesy, you can do no less then pay for it. He is fumbling with his
purse-strings, as a Schoole-boy with his points, when he is going to be
Whipped, till the Master weary with long Stay, forgiues him. When the reckoning
is paid, he says it must not be so, it is strait pacified, and cries what
remedy. His borrowings are like Subsidies, each man a shilling or two, as he
can well dispend, which they lend him* not with the hope to be repayd, but that
he will come no more. He holds a strange tyranny over men, for he is their
debtor, and they fear him as a creditor. He is proud of any employment, though
it be but to carry commendations, which he will be sure to deliver at eleven
of the clock. They in courtesy bid him stay, and he in manners cannot deny
them. If he find but a good look to assure his welcome, he becomes their half
boorder, and haunts the threshhold so long, till he forces good natures to the
necessity of a quarrel. Public iuuitations he will not wrong with his
absence, and is the best witness of the Sheriffs Hospitality. Men shun him at
length as they would do an infection, and he is never crossed in his way, if
there be but a lane to escape him. He has done with the Age as his clothes to
him, hung on as long as he could, and at last drops off.

16. A Carrier.
IS his own Hackneyman for he lets himself out to travel as well as his
horses. He is the ordinary Ambassador between Friend and Friend, and brings
rich Presents to the one, but never returns any back again. He is no
vnletter'd man, though in show simple, for questionless, he has much in his
Budget, which he can utter too in fit time and place; He is the Vault in
Gloucester Church, that conueyes Whispers at a distance; for he takes the sound
out of your mouth at York, and makes it be heard as far as London. He is
the young Students joy and expectation, and their most accepted guest, to whom
they lend a willing hand to discharge him of his burden. His first greeting
is, Your Friends are well; then in a piece of Gold delivers their Blessi^g. You
would think him a Churlish blunt fellow, but they find in him many tokens of
humanity. He is a great afflicter of the Highway, and beats them out of
mesure, which injury is sometimes reuengd by the Purse-taker; and then the
Voyage miscaries. No mandomineers more in his Inn, nor calls his Host
irreverently with more presumption, and this arrogance proceeds out of the
strength of his Horses. He forgets not his load where he takes his ease, for he
is drunk commonly before he goes to bed. He is like the Prodigal Child, still
packing away, and still returning again. But let him pass.

17. An old College Butler.
IS none of the worst Students in the house, for he keeps the set hours at his
book more duly then any. His authority is great over men's good names, which
he charges many times with shrewd aspersions, which they hardly wipe off
without payment. His Box and Counters prove him to be a man of reckoning; yet
he is stricter in his accounts then a Usurer, and delivers not a farthing
without writing. He doubles the pains of Gallobelgicus, for his books go out
once a quarter, and they are much in the same nature, brief notes and sums
of affairs, and are out of request as soon. His commings in are like a
Tailors from the shreds of bread, the chippings, and remnants of the broken
crust: excepting his vailes from the barrel, which poor folks buy for their
hogs, but drink themselves. He diuides a halfe-peny loaf with more subtilty
then Kekerman, and sub-diuides the a primo ortum so nicely, that a stomach of
great capacity can hardly apprehend it. He is a very sober man considering his
manifold temptations of drink and strangers, and if he be ouer-seene, it is
within his own liberties, and no man ought to take exceptions. He is never so
well pleased with his place, as when a Gentleman is beholding to him for
showing him the Buttery, whom he greets with a cup of single beer and slyst
manchet, and tells him it is the fashion of the College. He domineers over
Fresh-men when they first come to the Hatch, and puzzles them with strange
language of Cues, and Cees, and some broken Latin which he has learnt at his
Bin. His faculties extraordinary, is the warming of a pair of Cards, and
telling out a doozen of Counters for Post and Pair, and no man is more
methodicall in these businesses. Thus he spends his age, till the ^appe of it
is run out, and then a fresh one is set abroach.

18. An vp-start Country Knight.
HIs honor was somewhat preposterous, for he bare the Kings sword before he
had arms to wield it; yet being once laid ore the shoulder with a Knighthood,
he finds the Herald his friend. His father was a man of good stock, though
but a Tanner, or Usurer; he purchased the Land, and his son the Title. He has
do^t off the name of a Clown, but the look not so easy, and his face bears
still a relish of Churne-milke. He is guarded with more gold lace then all the
Gentlemen o'th Country, yet his body makes his clothes still out of fashion. His
housekeeping is seen much in the distinct families of Dogs, and Seruing-men
attendant on their kennels, and the deepenesse of their throats is the depth of
his discourse. A Hawk he esteems the true burden of Nobility, and is
exceeding ambitious to seem delighted in the sport, and have his fist glou'd
with his Iesses. A Justice of peace he is to domineere in his Parish, and do
his neighbor wrong with more right. And very scandalous he is in his
authority, for no sin almost which he will not commit. He will be drunk
with his hunters for company, and stain his Gentility with droppings of Ale.
He is fearful of being Sheriff of the Shire by instinct, and dreads the
Size-weeeke as much as the Prisoner. In sum, he is but a clod of his own
earth, or his Land is the Dunghill, and he the Cock that crows over it. And
commonly his race is quickly run, and his Childrens Children, though they
escape hanging, return to the place from whence they came.

19. A Gallant.
IS one that was born and shapt for his clothes: and if Adam had not fallen,
had lived to no purpose. He gratulates therefore the first sin, and
figleaues that were an occasion of bravery. His first care is his dress, the
nex^ his body, and in the uniting of these two lies his soul and its
faculties. He observes London trulier then the Termers, and his business is
the street: the Stage, the Court, and those places where a proper man is best
shown. If he be qualified in gaming extraordinary, he is so much the more
gentile and complete, and he learnes the best oaths for the purpose. These
are a great part of his discourse, and he is as curious in their newness as
the fashion. His other talk is Ladies and such pretty things, or some jest at
a Play. His Pick-tooth bears a great part in his discourse, so does his body;
the upper parts whereof are as starcht as his linen, and perchance use the
same Laundresse. He has learnt to ruffle his face from his Boot, and takes
great delight in his walk to hear his Spurs gingle. Though his life pass
somewhat slidingly, yet he seems very careful of the time, for he is still
drawing his Watch out of his Poket, and spends part of his hours in numbering
them. He is one never serious but with his Tailor, when he is in conspiracy
for the next device. He is furnished his Jests, as some wanderer with Sermons,
some three for all Congregations, one especially against the Scholar, a man to
him much ridiculous, whom he knows by no other definition, but a silly
fellow in black. He is a kind of walking Mercers Shop, and shows you one
Stuff to day, and another tomorrow; an ornament to the rooms he comes in, as
the fair Bed and Hangings be; and is merely ratable accordingly, fifty or an
hundred Pound as his suit is. His maine ambition is to get a Knighthood, and
then an old Lady, which if he be happy in, he fills the Stage and a Coach so
much longer. Otherwise, himself and his Clothes grow stale together, and he
is buried commonly ere he dies in the Jail, or the Country.

20. A Constable.
IS a Viceroy in the street, and no man stands more upon it that he is the
Kings Officer. His jurisdiction extends to the next stocks, where he has
Commission for the heels only, and sets the rest of the body at liberty. He
is a scar-crow to that Alehouse, where he drinks not his mornings draught, and
apprehends a Drunkard for not standing in the Kings name. Beggars fear him
more then the Justice, and as much as the Whip-stocke, whom he delivers over
to his subordinate Magistrates, the Bride-wel-man, and the Beadle. He is a
great stickler in the tumults of double Iugges, and venters his head by his
Place, which is broke many times to keep whole the peace. He is never so much
in his Majesty as in his Night-watch, where he sits in his Chair of State, a
Shop-stall, and inuiron'd with a guard of Halberts, examines all passengers. He
is a very careful man in his Office, but if he stay up after midnight, you
shall take him napping.

21. A down right Sholler.
IS one that has much learning in the Ore, unwrought and vntryde, which time
and experience fashions and refines. He is good metal in the inside, though
rough and vnscour'd without, and therefore hated of the Courtier, that is quite
contrary. The time has got a vein of making him ridiculous, and men laugh at
him by tradition, and no unlucky absurdity, but is put upon his profession,
and done like a Scholar. But his fault is only this, that his mind is
somewhat much taken up with his mind, and his thoughts not laden with any
carriage besides. He has not put on the quaint Garb of the Age, which is now
become a man's Total. He has not humbled his Meditations to the industry of
Complement, not afflicted his brain in an elaborate leg. His body is not set
upon nice Pinnes, to be turning and flexible for every motion, but his scrape
is homely, and his nod worse. He cannot kiss his hand and cry Madame, nor
talk idly enough to bear her company. His smacking of a Gentlewoman is
somewhat too sauory, and he mistakes her nose for her lip. A very Woodcock
would puzzle him in caruing, and he wants the logic of a Capon. He has not
the glib faculty of sliding over a tale, but his words come squeamishly out of
his mouth, and the laughter commonly before the jest. He names this word
College too often, and his discourse beats too much on the University. The
perplexity of mannerlinesse will not let him feed, and he is sharp set at an
Argument when he should cut his meat. He is discarded for a gamester at all
games but one and thirty, and at tables he reaches not beyond doublets. His
fingers are not long and drawn out to handle a Fiddle, but his fist is clunch't
with the habit of disputing. He ascends a Horse somewhat sinisterly, though not
on the left side, and they both go iogging in grief together. He is
exceedingly censured by the Innes a Court men, for that heinous Vice being out
of fashion. He cannot speak to a Dog in his own Dialect, and understands
Greek better then the language of a Falconer. He has been used to a dark
room, and dark Clothes, and his eyes dazzle at a Satin Doublet. The
Hermitage of his Study, has made him somewhat uncouth in the world, and men make
him worse by staring on him. Thus is he silly and ridiculous, and it continues
with him for some quarter of a year, out of the University. But practice him
a little in men, and brush him ore with good company, and he shall
out-ballance those glisterers as much as a solid substance does a feather, or
Gold Gold-lace.

22. A Player.
HE knows the right use of the World, where in he comes to play a part and so
away. His life is not idle for it is all Action, and no man need be more wary
in his doings, for the eyes of all men are upon him. His Profession has in it
a kind of contradiction, for none is more disliked, and yet none more
applauded; and he has this misfortude of some Scholar, too much wit makes him
a fool. He is like our painting Gentle-women, seldom in his own face,
seldomer in his clothes, and he pleases, the better he counterfeits, except
only when he is disguised with straw for gold lace. He does not only
personate on the Stage, but sometime in the Street, for he is masked still in
the habit of a Gentleman. His Parts find him oaths and good words, which he
keeps for his use and Discourse, and makes show with them of a fashionable
Companion. He is tragical on the Stage, but rampant in the Tyring-house, and
swears oaths there which he never con'd. The waiting women Spectators are
ouer-eares in love with him, and Ladies send for him to act in their Chambers.
Your Innes of Court men were undone but for him, he is their chief guest and
employment, and the sole business that makes them Afternoones men; The Poet only
is his Tyrant, and he is bound to make his friends friend drunk at his charges.
Shroue-tuesday he fears as much as the Baudes, and Lent is more damage to him
then the Butcher. He was never so much discredited as in one Act, and that was
of Parliament, which gives Hostlers Privilege before him, for which he abhors
it more then a corrupt Judge. But to give him his due, one wel-furnisht Actor
has enough in him for five common Gentlemen, and if he have a good body for
six, and for resolution, he shall Challenge any Cato, for it has been his
practice to die bravely.

23. A Detractor.
IS one of a more cunning and active envy, wherewith he gnaws not foolishly
himself, but throws it abroad and would have it blister others. He is
commonly some weak parted fellow, and worse minded, yet is strangely ambitious
to match others, not by mounting their worth, but bringing them down with his
Tongue to his own poorness. He is indeed like the red Dragon that pursued
the woman, for when he cannot ouerreach another, he opens his mouth and
throws a flood after to drown him. You cannot anger him worse then to do
well, and he hates you more bitterly for this, then if you had cheated him of
his patrimony with your own discredit. He is always slighting the general
opinion, and wondering why such and such men should be applauded. Commend a
good Divine, he cries Postilling, a Philologer Pedantrie, a Poet Ryming, a
School man dull wrangling, a sharp conceit, Boy-ishnesse; an honest Man
pla^sibilitie. He comes to Public things not to learn, but to catch, and if
there be but one soloecisme, that is all he carries away. He looks on all
things with a prepared sowrenesse, and is still furnished with a Pish before
hand, or some musty Proverb that dis-relishes all things whatsoever. If fear
of the company make him second a commendation, it is like a Law-writ, always
with a clause and exception, or to smooth his way to some greater scandal. He
will grant you something, and bate more; and this bating shall in conclusion take
away all he granted. His speech concludes still with an Oh but, and I coud
wish one thing amended; and this one thing shall be enough to deface all his
former commendations. He will be very inward with a man to fish some bad out
of him, and make his slanders hereafter more authenticke, when it is said a
friend reported it. He will inueigle you to naughtiness to get your good name
into his clutches, and make you drunk to show you reeling. He passes the more
plausibly because all men have a smatch of his humor, and it is thought
freenes which is malice. If he can say nothing of a man, he will seem to
speak riddles, as if he could tell strange stories if he would: and when he has
rackt his invention to the uttermost, he ends: But I wish him well, and
therefore must hold my peace. He is always listening and enquiring after men,
and suffers not a cloak to pass by him vnexamin'd. In brief, he is one that
has lost all good himself, and is loath to find it in another.

24. A mere young Genman of the University.
IS one that comes there to wear a gown, and to say hereafter, he has been at
the University. His Father sent him thither, because he heard there were the
best Fencing and Dancing-Schooles, from these he has his Education, from his
Tutor the ouer-sight. The first Element of his knowledge is to be shown the
Colleges, and initiated in a Tavern by the way, which hereafter he will
learn of himself. The two marks of his Senioritie, is the bare Velvet of his
gown, and his proficiencie at Tennis, where when he can once play a Set, he
is a Fresh-man no more. His Study has commonly handsome Shelues, his Books
near Silk strings, which he shows to his Fathers man, and is loath to untie or
take down for fear of misplacing. Upon foul days for recreation he retyres
thither, and looks over the pretty book his Tutor Reads to him, which is
commonly some short History, or a piece of Euphormio; for which his Tutor
gives him Money to spend next day. His maine loytering is at the Library, where
he studies Arms and books of Honor, and turns a Gentleman-Critick in
Pedigrees. Of all things he endures not to be mistaken for a Scholar, and
hates a black suit though it be of Satin. His companion is ordinarily some
stale fellow, that has been notorious for an Ingle to gold hatbands, whom he
admires at first, afterward scorns. If he have spirit or wit, he may light of
better company, and may learn some flashes of wit, which may do him Knights
service in the Country hereafter. But he is now gone to the Inns of Court,
where he studies to forget what he learned before, his acquaintance and the
fashion.

25. A Pot-Poet.
IS the dreggs of wit; yet mingled with good drink mae have some relish. His
Inspirations are more real then others; for they do but feign a God, but he
has his by him. His Verses run like the Tap, and his invention as the Barrel,
ebs and flows at the mercy of the spiggot. In thin drink he aspires not
above a Ballad, but a cup of Sack inflames him, and sets his Muse and Nose a
fire together. The Press is his Mint, and stamps him now and then a six pence
or two in reward of the baser coin his Pamphlet. His Works would (...) sell
for three halfe-pence, though they are given often for three Shillings, but for
the pretty Title that allures the Country Gentleman: and for which the Printer
maintains him in Ale a fortnight. His Verses are like his clothes, miserable
Cento's and patches, yet their pace is not altogether so hobbling as an
Almanacks. The death of a great man or the burning of a house furnish him with
an Argument, and the nine Muses are out strait in mourning gowns, and
Melpomine cries Fire, Fire. His other Poems are but Briefs in Rhyme, and like
the poor Greeks collections to redeem from captivity. He is a man now much
employed in commendations of our Navy, and a bitter inueigher against the
Spaniard. His frequent'st Works go out in single sheets, and are chanted from
market to market, to a vile tune, and a worse throat, whilst the poor Country
wench melts like her butter to hear them. And these are the Stories of some
men of Tyburne, or a strange Monster out of Germany: or sitting in a
Baudy-house; he writes Gods Judgments. He ends at last in some obscure
painted Cloth, to which himself made the Verses, and his life like a Can too
full spils upon the bench. He leaves twenty shillings on the score, which my
Hostess looses.

26. A Cook.
THe Kitchen is his Hell, and he the Devil in it, where his meat and he frye
together. His Reuennues are showered down from the fat of the Land, and he
enter-lards his own grease among to help the drippings. Colericke he is, not
by nature so much as his Art, and it is a shrewd temptation that the chopping
knife is so near. His weapons ofter offensive, are a mess of hot broth, and
scalding water, and woe be to him that comes in his way. In the Kitchen he will
domineere, and rule the roste, in spite of his Master, and Curses is the very
Dialect of his Calling. His labor is mere blustering and fury, and his Speech
like that of Sailors in a storm, a thousand businesses at once, yet in all
this tumult he does not love cumbustion, but will be the first man that shall
go and quench it. He is never good Christian till a hizzing Pot of Ale has
slak't him, like Water cast on a firebrand, and for that time he is tame and
disposest. His cunning is not small in Architecture, for he builds strange
Fabrics in Paste, Towers and Castles, which are offered to the assault of
valiant teeth, and like Darius his Palace, in one Banquet demolisht. He is a
pitiless murderer of Innocents, and he mangles poor fowls with unheard of
tortures, and it is thought the Martyrs persecutions were devised from hence,
sure we are St. Lawrence his Gridiron came out of his Kitchen. His best
faculty is at the Dresser, where he seems to have great skill in the
Tactickes, ranging his Dishes in order Military, and placing with great
discretion in the forefront meats more strong and hardy and the more cold and
cowardly in the rear, as quaking Tarts, and quiueri^g Custards, and such
milke-sop Dishes which escape many times the fury of the encounter. But now the
second Course is gone up, and he down into the Sellar, where he drinks and
sleeps till four a clock in the afternoon, and then returns again to his
Regiment.

27. A forward bold Man.
IS a lusty fellow in a crowd, that is beholding more to his elbow then his
legs, for he does not go but thrusts well. He is a good shuffler in the
world, wherein he is so often putting forth, that at length he puts on. He can do
something, but dare do much more, and is like a desperate soldier, who will
assault any thing where he is sure not to enter. He is not so well-opinion'd of
himself, as industrious to make other; and thinks no vice so prejudicial as
blushing. He is still citing for himself, that a candle should not be hid
under a bushel, and for his part, he will be sure not to hide his, though his
candle be but a snuff or Rush-candle. These few good parts he has, he is no
niggard in displaying, and is like some needy flanting goldsmiths, no thing in
the inner room, but all on the ^np-boord: If he be a scholar, he has
commonly stepped into the Pulpit before a degree; yet into that too before he
deserved it. He never deferres S. Mary's beyond his regencie, and his next
Sermon is at Pruls Cross, and that printed. He loves public things alife: and
for any solemn entertainment he will find a mouth, find a speech who will. He
is greedy of great acquaintance and many, and thinks it no small advancement
to rise to be known. His talk at the table is like Beniamins mess, five
times to his part, and no argument shuts him out for a quarrellour. Of all
disgraces he indures not to be Non-plust, and had rather fly for Sanctuary to
Nonsense, which few can descry, then to nothing which all. His boldness is
beholding to other men's modesty, which rescues him many times from a Bafflle;
yet his face is good Armor, and he is dashed out of any thing sooner then
Countenance. Grosser conceits are puzzel'd in him for a rare man, and wiser
men, though they know him, take him for their pleasure, or as they would do a
Sculler for being next at hand. Thus preferment at last stumbles on him because
he is still in the way. His Companions that flouted him before, now envy him,
when they see him come ready for Scarlet, whilst themselves lie Mustie in
their old Clothes and Colleges.

28. A Baker.
NO man verifies the Proverb more, that it is an Almes-deed to punish him: for
his penalty is a Dole, and does the Beggars as much good as their Dinner. He
abhors therefore works of Charity, and thinks his Bread cast away when it is
given to the poor. He loves not Justice neither, for the weigh-scales sake,
and hates the Clarke of the Market as his Executioner: yet he finds mercy in
his offenses, and his Basket only is sent to Prison. Marry a Pillory is his
deadly enemy, and he never hears well after.

30. A plain Country Fellow.
IS one that manures his ground well, but lets himself lie fallow and vntil'd.
He has reason enough to do his business, and not enough to be idle or
melancholy. He seems to have the judgment of Nabuchadnezar for his
conversation is among beasts, and his tallons none of the shortest, only he
eats not grass, because he loves not sallets. His hand guids the Plough, and
the Plough his thoughts, and his ditch and land^marke is the very mound of his
meditations. He expostulates with his Oxen very understandingly, and speaks
Gee and Ree better then English. His mind is not much distracted with objects,
but if a good fat Cow come in his way, he stands dumb and astonished, and
though his haste be never so great, will fix here half an hours
contemplation. His habitation is some poor Thatcht roof, distinguished from
his Barn, by the loope-holes that let out smoke, which the rain had long since
Washed through, but for the double seeling of Bacon on the inside, which has hung
there from his Grandsires time, and is yet to make rashers for posterity. His
Dinner is his other work, for he sweats at it as much as at his labor; he is
a terrible fastner on a piece of Beef, and you may hope to staue the Guard off
sooner. His Religion is a part of his Copyhold, which he takes from his
Landlord, and referres it wholly to his discretion. Yet if he give him leave,
he is a good Christian to his power (that is) comes to Church in his best
clothes, and sits there with his Neighbors, where he is capable only of two
Prayers, for rain, and fair weather. He apprehends Gods blessings only in a
Good Year, or a Fat pasture, and never praises him bu^ on good ground. Sunday
he esteems a day to make merry in, and thinks a Bag-pipe as essential to
it, as Evening Prayer, where he walks very solemnly after service with his
hands coupled behind him, and censures the dancing of his parish. His
complement with his Neighbor is a good thumpe on the back; and his salutation
commonly some blunt Curse. He thinks nothing to be vices but Pride and
ill-husbandrie, from which he will gravely dissuade youth and has some thriftie
Hobnayle Proverbs to Clout his discourse. He is a niggard all the Week
except only Market Day, where if his Corn sell well, he thinks he may be
drunk with a good Conscience. His feet never stink so vnbecommingly as when
he trots after a Lawyer in West-minster^hall, and even cleaues the ground with
hard scraping, in beseeching his Worship to take his money. He is sensible of
no calamity but the burning of a Stacke of Corn, or the ouer-flowing of a
Meadow, and thinks Noah's Flood the greatest Plague that ever was, not because
it Drowned the World, but spoiled the grass. For Death he is never troubled,
and if he get in but his Harvest before, let it come when it will he cares not.

31. A Young Man.
He is now out of Natures protection, though not yet able to guide himself.
But left loose to the World, and Fortune, from which the weakness of his
Childhood preserved him: and now his strength exposes him. He is indeed just
of age to be miserable, yet in his own conceit first begins to be happy; and
he is happier in this imagination, and his misery not felt is less. He sees
yet but the outside of the World and Men, and conceiues them according to their
appearing glister, and out of this ignorance believes them. He pursues all
vanities for happiness, and enioyes them best in this fancy. His reason serves
not to curb but understand his appetite, and prosecute the motions thereof
with a more eager earnestnes. Himself is his own temptation, and needs not
Satan; and the World will come hereafter. He leaves repentance for gray
hayres, and performs it in being covetous. He is mingled with the vices of
the age as the fashion and custom, ^ith which he longs to be acquainted; and
Sins to better his understanding. He conceiues his Youth as the season of his
Lust, and the Hour wherein he ought to be bad: and because he would not lose
his time, spends it. He distasts Religion as a sad thing, and is six years
elder for a thought of Heaven. He scorns and fears, and yet hopes for old
age, but dare not imagine it with wrincles. He loves and hates with the same
inflammation: and when the heat is over is cool alike to friends and enemies.
His friendship is seldom so steadfast but that lust, drink, or anger may
ouerturne it. He offers you his blood to day in kindness, and is ready to
take yours to morrow. He does seldom any thing which he wishes not to do
again, and is only wise after a misfortune. He suffers much for his
knowledge, and a great deal of folly it is makes him a wise man. He is free
from many Vices, by being not grown to the performance, and is only more
virtuous out of weakness. Every action is his danger, and every man his
ambush. He is a Ship without Pilot or Tackling, and only good fortune may
steer him. If he escape this age, he has escaped a Tempest, and may live to be
a Man.

32. The common singing-men in Cathedral Churches.
ARe a bad Society, and yet a Company of good Fellows, that roar deep in the
Quire, deeper in the Tavern. They are the eight parts of speech which go to
the Syntaxis of Service, and are distinguished by their noyses much like Bells,
for they make not a Consort but a Peale. Their pastime or recreation is
prayers, their exrecise drinking, yet herein so religiously addicted that they
serve God oftest when they are drunk. Their humanity is a leg to the
Residencer, their learning a Chapter, for they learn it commonly before they
read it, yet the old Hebrew names are little beholding to them, for they
mis-call them worse then one another. Though they never expound the Scripture,
they handle it much, and pollute the Gospel with two things, their
Conversation, and their thumbes. Upon Worky-dayes they behave themselves at
Prayers as at their Pots, for they swallow them down in an instant. Their
Gowns are laced commonly with streamings of Ale, the superfluites of cups, or
throat above measure. Their skill in melody makes them the better companions
abroad, and their Anthemes abler to sing Catches. Long-liu'd for the most part
they are not, especially the base, they ouer-flow their bank so often to drown
the Organs. Briefly, if they escape arresting, they dye constantly in Gods
Service; and to take their death with more patience, they have Wine and Cakes
at their Funeral: and now they keep the Church a great deal better, and
help to fill it with their bones as before with their noise.

33. A Pretender to Learning.
IS one that would make others more fools then himself; for though he know
nothing, he would not have the world know so much. He conceits nothing in
Learning but the opinion, which he seeks to purchase without it, though he
might with less labor cure is ignorance, then hide it. He is indeed a kind of
Scholler-Mountebank, and his Art, our delusion. He is trickt out in all the
accoutrements of Learning, and at the first encounter none passes better. He is
oftener in his study, then at his Book, and you cannot pleasure him better,
then to deprehend him. Yet he hears you not til the third knock, and then
comes out very angry, as interrupted. You find him in his Slippers, and a Pen
in his ear, in which formality he was asleep. His Table is spread wide with
some Classicke Folio, which is as constant to it as the carpet, and has laid
open in the same Page this half year. His Candle is always a longer sitter
up then himself, and the boast of his Window at Midnight. He walks much alone
in the Posture of Meditation, and has a Book still before his face in the
fields. His pocket is seldom without a Greek Testament, or Hebrew Bible,
which he opens only in the Church, and that when some stander by looks over.
He has his sentences for Company, some scatterings of Seneca and Tacitus, which
are good upon all occasions. If he read any thing in the morning, it comes up
all at dinner: and as long as that lasts, the discourse is his. He is a great
Plagiarie of Tauerne-wit: and comes to Sermons only that he may talk of
Austin. His Parcels are the mere scrapings from Company, yet he complains at
parting what time he has lost. He is wondrously capricious to seem a judgment,
and listens with a sour attention, to what he understands not: He talks much
of Scaliger and Causabone, and the Jesuits, and prefers some unheard of Dutch
name before them all. He has verses to bring in upon these and these hints, and
it shall go hard but he will wind in his opportunity. He is critical in a
language he cannot conster, and speaks seldom under Arminius in Divinity. His
business and retirement and caller away is his Study, and he protests no
delight to it comparable. He is a great Nomen-clator of Authors, which he has
read in general in the Catalogue, and in particular in the Title, and goes
seldom so far as the Dedication. He never talks of any thing, but
learning, and learnes all from talking. Three incounters with the same men
pumpe him, and then he only puts in, or gravely says no thing. He has taken
pains to be an Ass, though not to be a Scholar, and is at length discovered
and laughed at.

34. A Shopkeeper.
HIs Shop is his well stuffed Book, and himself the Title Page of it, or Index.
He vtters much to all men, though he sels but to a few, and intreates for his
own necessities by asking others what they lack. No man speaks more and no
more, for his words are like his Wares, twenty of one sort, and he goes over
them alike to all comers. He is an arrogant commender of his own things; for
whatsoever he shows you, is the best in the Town, though the worst in his
Shop. His Conscience was a thing, that would have laid upon his hands, and he
was forced to put it off: and makes great use of honesty to profess upon. He
tells you lies by rote, and not minding, as the Phrase to sell in, and the
Language he spent most of his years to learn. He never speaks so truly, as
when he says he would use you as his Brother, for he would abuse his
Brother; and in his Shop, thinks it lawful. His Religion is much in the
nature of his Customers, and indeed the Pander to it: and by a misinterpreted
sense of Scripture makes a gain of his Godliness. He is your slave while you
pay him ready Money, but if he once be-friend you, your Tyrant, and you had
better deserve his hate then his trust.

35. A handsome Hostess.
IS the fairer commendation of an Inn, above the fair Sign or fair
Lodgings. She is the Loadstone that attracts men of Iron, Gallants and Roarers,
where they cleave sometimes long, and are not easily got off. Her Lips are your
wel-come, and your entertainment her company, which is put into the reckoning
too, and is the dearest parcel in it* No Citizens wife is demurer then she at
the first greeting, nor draws in her mouth with a chaster simper, but you may
be more familiar without distaste, and she does not startle at Baudrie. She is
the confusion of a Pottle of Sack more then would have been spent els-where,
and her little Iugs are accepted, to have her Kiss excuse them. She may be an
honest woman, but is not believed so in her Parish, and no man is a greater In
fidel in it then her Husband.

36. A Blunt Man.
IS one whose wit is better pointed then his behavior, and that course, and
Impollisht not out of ignorance so much as humor. He is a great enemy to the
fine Gentleman, and these things of Complement, and hates ceremony in
conversation, as the Puritan in Religion. He distinguishes not betwixt fair
and double-dealing, and suspects all smoothness for the dress of knauerie.
He starts at the encounter of a Salutation, as an assault, and beseeches you
in choler to forbear your courtesy. He loves not any thing in Discourse
that comes before the purpose, and is always suspicious of a Preface. Himself
falls rudely still on his matter without any circumstance, except he use an old
Proverb for an Introduction. He swears old out of date innocent oaths, as by
the Mass, by our Lady, and such like; and though there be Lords present, he
cries my Masters. He is exceedingly in love with his Humor, which makes him
always profess and proclaim it, and you must take what he says patiently,
because he is a plain man. His nature is his excuse still and other men's
Tyrant for he must speak his mind, and that is his worst, and craves your
perdon most injuriously for not Pardoning you. His Jests best become him,
because they come from him rudely and unaffected: and he has the luck
commonly to have them famous. He is one that will do more then he will
speak, and yet speak more then he will hear: for though he love to touch
others, he is teachy himself, and seldom to his own abuses replies but with
his Fists. He is as squeazie of his commendations as his courtesy, and his
good word is like an Elogie in a Satyr. He is generally better favored then
he favors, as being commonly well expounded in his bitterness, and no man
speaks treason more securely. He chides great men with most boldness, and is
counted for it an honest fellow. He is grumbling much in the behalf of the
Commonwealth, and is in Prison often for it with credit. He is generally
honest, but more generally thought so, and his downe-rightnesse credits him, as
a man not well bended and crookned to the times. In conclusion, he is not
easily bad, in whom this quality is Nature, but the counterfeit is most
dangerous since he is disguised in a humor, that professes not to disguise.

37. A Critic.
IS one that has speld over a great many of Books, and his observation is the
Orthographie. He is the Surgeon of old Authors, and heales the wounds of dust
and ignorance. He conuerses much in fragments and Desunt multa's, and if he
piece it up with two Lines, he is more proud of that Book then the Author.
He runs over all Sciences to peruse their Syntaxis, and thinks all Learning
comprised in writing Latin. He tastes Styles, as some discreeter Palats do
Wine; and tells you which is Genuine, which Sophisticate and bastard. His own
Phrase is a Miscellanie of old words, deceased long before the Caesar's, and
entoomb'd by Varro, and the modern'st man he follows is Plautus. He writes
Omneis at length, and quidquid, and his Gerund is most inconformable. He is a
trouble troublesome vexer of the dead, which after so long sparing must rise up
to the Judgment of his castigations. He is one that makes all Books sell
dearer, whilst he swells them into Folio's with his Comments.

38. A Sergeant or Catch-pole.
IS one of Gods Judgment; and which our Roarers do only conceive terrible.
He is the properest shape wherein they fancy Satan; for he is at most but an
Arrester, and Hell a Dungeon. He is the Creditors Hawke, wherewith they seize
upon flying Birds, and fetch them again in his Tallons. He is the Period of
young Gentlemen, or their full stop, for when he meets with them they can go
no farther. His Ambush is a Shop-Stall, or close Lane, and his Assault is
cowardly at your back. He respites you in no place but a Tavern, where he
sels his Minutes dearer then a Clocke-maker. The common way to run from him,
is through him, which is often attempted and achieved, and no man is ofter
beaten out of Chatitie. He is one makes the street more dangerous then the
Highways, and men go better provided in their walks then their Journey. He
is the first handsell of the young Rapiers of the Templers, and they are as
proud of his repulse, as an Hungarian of killing a Turk. He is a moveable
Prison, and his hands two Manacles hard to be filled off. He is an occasioner of
di^loyal thoughts in the Commonwealth, for he makes men hate the Kings Name
worse then the Devils.

37. A weak Man.
IS one whom Nature huddled up in have, and left his best part vnfinish't. The
rest of him is grown to be a man, only his brain stays behind. He is a
man that has not improou'd his first rudiments, nor attained any proficiencie
by his stay in the world: but we may speak of him yet as when he was in the
budde a good harmless nature, a well meaning mind, if he could order his
intentions. It is his misery that he now most wants a Tutor, and is too old to
have one. He is two steps above a fool, and a great many mo below a wiseman:
yet the fool is often given him, and by those whom he esteems most. Some tokens
of him are. He loves men better upon relation then experience: for he is
exceedingly enamored of Strangers, and none quicklier a weary of his friend.
He charges you at first meeting with all his secrets, and on better
acquaintance grows more reserved. Indeed he is one that mistakes much his
abusers for friends, and his friends for enemies, and he apprehends your hate
in nothing so much, as in good counsel. One that is flexible with any thing
but reason, and then only perverse; and you may better entice then persuade
him. A servant to every tale and flatterer, and whom the last man still works
over. A great affecter of wits and such pretinesses; and his company is costly
to him, for he seldom has it but invited. His friendship commonly is begun in
a supper and lost in lending money. The Tanerne is a dangerous place to him,
for to drink and to be drunk, is with him all one, and his brain is sooner
quenchd then his thirst. He is drawn into naughtines with company, but suffers
alone, and the Bastard commonly laid to his charge. One that will be patiently
abused, and take exceptions a Month after when he understands it, and then not
endeare him more then by coozening him, and it is a temptation to those that
would not. One discouerable in all sillinesses to all men but himself, and you
may take any man's knowledge of him better then his own. He will promise the
same thing to twenty, and rather then deny one break with all. One that has
no power over himself, over his business, over his friends: but a prey and
pity to all: and if his fortunes once sink, men quickly cry alas, and forget
him.

40. A Tobacco-seller.
IS the only man that finds good in it which others brag of, but do not; for
it is meat, drink, and clothes to him. No man opens his ware with greater
seriousness, or challenges your judgment more in the approbation. His Shop is
the Randeuous of spitting, where men dialogue with their noses, and their
communication is smoke. It is the place only where Spain is commended and
preferred before England it self. He should be well experienced in the world:
for he has daily trial of men's nostrils, and none is better acquainted with
humors. He is the piecing commonly of some other trade, which is bawd to his
Tobacco, and that to his wife, which is the flame that follows this smoke.

41. A plausible Man.
IS one that would feign run an eeuen path in the world, and iutt against no
man. His endeavor is not to offend, and his aim the general opinion. His
conversation is a kind of continued Complement, and his life a practice of
manners. The relation he bears to others, a kind of fashionable respect, not
friendship, but friendlines, which is equal to all and (...) and his
kindnesses seldom exceed courtesies. He loves not deeper mutualities, because
he would not take sides, nor hazard himself on displeasures, which he
principally auoids. At your first acquaintance with him he is exceeding kind
and friendly, and at your twentieth meeting after but friendly still. He has an
excellent command over his patience and tongue, especially the last, which he
accommodates always to the times and persons, and speaks seldom what is
sincere, but what is civil. He is one that uses al companies, drinks all
healths, and is reasonable cool in all Religions. He can listen to a foolish
discourse with an applausiue attention, and conceal his Laughter at Nonsense.
Silly men much honor and esteem him, because by his fair reasoning with them
as with men of understanding, he puts them into an erroneous opinion of them
selves, and makes them forwarder hereafter to their own discovery. He is one
rather well thought on then beloved, and that love he has is more of whole
companies together then any one in particular. Men gratify him notwithstanding
with a good report, and what ever vices he has besides, yet having no enemies,
he is sure to be an honest fellow.

42. The Worlds wise Man.
IS an able and sufficient wicked man, it is a proof of his sufficiency that
he is not called wicked, but wise. A man wholly determined in himself and his
own ends, and his instruments herein any thing that will do it. His friends
are a part of his engines, and as they serve this work, used or laid by.
Indeed he knows not this thing of friend, but if he give you the name, it is
a sign he has a plot on you. Never more active in his businesses, then when
they are mixed with some harm to others: and it is his best play in this Game to
strike off and lie in the place. Sucsessfull commonly in these undertakings,
because he passes smoothly those rubs which others stumble at, as Conscience
and the like: and gratulates himself much in this advantage: Oaths and
falsehood he counts the nearest way, and loves not by any means to go about.
He has many fine quips at this folly of plain dealing, but his tush is
greatest at Religion, yet he uses this too, and Virtue, and good Words, but is
less dangerously a Devil then a Saint. He ascribes all honesty to an
vnpractis'dnesse in the World: and Conscience a thing merely for Children. He
scorns all that are so silly to trust him, and only not scorns his enemy;
especially if as bad as himself: He fears him as a man well armed, and
provided, but sets boldly on good natures, as the most vanquishable. One that
seriously admires those worst Princes, as Sforza, Borgia, and Richard the
Third: and calls matters of deep villainy things of difficulty. To whom murders
are but resolute Acts, and Treason a business of great consequence. One whom
two or three Countries make up to this compleatnesse, and he has traueld for
the purpose. His deepest indearment is a communication of mischief, and then
only you have him fast. His conclusion is commonly one of these two, either a
Great Man, or hanged.

43. A Bowl Alley.
IS the place where there are three things thrown away beside Bowls, to wit,
time, money and curses, and the last ten for one. The best Sport in it is the
Gamesters, and he enioyes it that looks on and bets not. It is the School of
wrangling, and worse then the Schools, for men will cavil here for an hairs
breadth, and make a stir where a straw would end the controversy. No
Anticke, screwes men's bodies into such strange flexures, and you would think
them senseless, to speak sense to to their Bowl, and put their trust in
entreaties for a good cast. The Betters are the factious noise of the Alley, or
the gamesters beadsmen that pray for them. They are somewhat like those that
are cheated by great Men, for they lose their money and must say nothing. It is
the best discovery of humors, especially in the losers, where you have fine
variety of impatience, whilst some fret, some rail, some swear, and others
more ridiculously comfort themselves with Philosophy. To give you the Moral of
it; It is the Em^leme of the world, or the worlds ambition: where most are
short, or over, or wide or wrong-Byas'r, and some few iustle in to the Mistress
Fortune. And it is here as in the Court, where the nearest are most spighted,
and all blows aimed at the Toucher.

44. A Surgeon.
IS one that has some business about his Building or little house of man,
whereof Nature is as it were the Tyler, and he the Playsterer. It is ofter out
of reparations, then an old Parsonage, and then he is set on work to patch it
again. He deals most with broken Commodities, as a broken Head, or a mangled
face, and his gains are very ill got, for he lives by the hurts of the
Commonwealth. He differs from a Physician as a sore does from a disease, or
the sick from those that are not whole, the one distempers you within, the
other blisters you without. He complains of the decay of Valor in these
days, and sighs for that slashing Age of Sword and Buckler; and thinks the
Law against Duels, was made merely to wound his Vocation. He had been long
since undone, if the charity of the Stews had not relieved him, from whom he
has his Tribute as duly as the Pope, or a wind-fall sometimes from a Tavern,
if a quart Pot hit right. The rareness of his custom maks him pitiless when
it comes: and he holds a Patient longer then our Courts a Cause. He tells you
what danger you had been in if he had staide but a minute longer, and though
it be but a pricked finger, he makes of it much matter. He is a reareasonable
cleanely man, considering the Scabs he has to deal with, and your finest
Ladies now and then are beholding to him for their best dressings. He curses
old Gentlewomen, and their charity that maks his Trade their Alms: but his
envy is never stirred so much as when Gentlemen go over to sight upon Calice
Sands, whom he wishes drowned ere they come there, rather then the French
shall get his Custom.

45. A Shee-precise. Hypocrite.
IS one in whom good Women suffer, and have their truth mis-interpreted by her
folly.

She is one, she knows not what her self if you ask her, but she is indeed
one that has taken a toy at the fashion of Religion, and is enamored of the
Newfangle. See is a Nonconformist in a close Stomacher and Ruff of Geneua
Print, and her purity consists much in her Linen. She has heard of the Rag
of Rome, and thinks it a very sluttish Religion, and rayles at the Whore of
Babylon for a very naughty Woman. She has left her Virginity as a Relic of
Popery, and marries in her Tribe without a Ring. Her devotion at the Church is
much in the turning up of her eye, and turning down the lease in her Book
when she hears named Chapter and Verse. When she comes home, she commends
the Sermon for the Scripture, and two hours. She loves Preaching better then
Praying, and of Preachers Lecturers, and thinks the Weeke-dayes Exercise far
more edifying then the Sundaies. Her oftest Gossippings are Sabaoth-dayes
iourneyes, where (though an enemy to Superstition) she will go in Pilgrimage
five mile to a silenced Minister, when there is a better Sermon in her own
Parish. She doubts of the Virgin Marie's Salvation, and dare not Saint her,
but knows her own place in heaven as perfectly, as the Pew she has a key to.
She is so taken up with Faith, she has no room for Charity, and understands
no good Works, but what are wrought on the Sampler. She accounts nothing Vices
but Superstition, and an Oath, and thinks Adultery a less sin, then to
swear by my Truly. She rayles at other Women by the names of Iezabel and
Dalilah: and calls her own daughters Rebecka and Abigail, and not Anne but
Hannah. She suffers them not to learn on the Virginalls, because of their
affinity with the Organs, but is reconciled to the Bells for the Chymes sake,
since they were reformed to the tune of a Psalm. She over flows so with the
Bible, that she spils it upon every occasion, and will not Cudgel her Maids
without Scripture. It is a question whether she is more troubled with the
Devil or the Devil with her: she is always challenging and daring him, and
her weapons are Spells no less potent then different, as being the sage
Sentences of some of her own Sectaries. No thing angers her so much as that
Women cannot Preach, and in this point only thinks the Brownist erroneous:
but what she cannot at the Church, she does at the Table, where she prattles
more then any against sense, and Antichrist, till a Capon wing silence her.
She expounds the Priests of Baal Reading Ministers, and thinks the Salvation
of that Parish as desperate as the Turks. She is a maine derider to her
capacity of those that are not her Preachers, and censures all Sermons but bad
ones. If her Husband be a Tradsman, she helps him to Customers, how soever to
good cheer, and they are a most faithful couple at these meetings, for they
never fail. Her Conscience is like others Lust never satisfied, and you might
better answer Scotus then her Scruples. She is one that thinks she
performs all her duty to God in hearing, and shows the fruits of it in
talking. She is more fiery against the May Pole then her Husband, and thinks
he might do a Phinehas his act to break the pate of the Fiddler. She is an
everlasting Argument; but I am weary of her.

46. A Contemplative Man.
IS a Scholar in this great University the World; and the same his Book and
Study. He cloisters not his Meditations in the narrow darkness of a Room,
but sends them abroad with his Eyes, and his Brain travels with his Feet. He
looks upon Man from a high Tower, and sees him trulyer at this distance in his
Infirmities and poorness. He scorns to mix himself in men's actions; as he
would to act upon a Stage; but sits aloft on the Scaffold a censuring
Spectator. Nature admits him as a partaker of her Sports, and asks his
approbation as it were of her own Works, and variety. He comes not in
Company, because he would not be solitary, but finds Discourse enough with
himself, and his own thoughts are his excellent play-fellowes. He looks not
upon a thing as a yawning Stranger at novelties; but his search is more
mysterious and inward, and he spells Heaven out of earth. He knits his
observations together, and makes a Ladder of them all to climb to God. He is
free from vice, because he has no occasion to employ it, and is above those
ends that make men wicked. He has learnt all can here be taught him, and
comes now to Heaven to see more.

47. An Aturney.
HIs Ancient beginning was a blue coat, since a livery, and his hatching under
a Lawer; whence though but pen-feather'd, he has now nested for himself, and
with his horded pence purchased an Office. Two Deskes, and a quire of Pader set
him up, where he now sits in state for all comers. We can-call him no great
Anthor, yet he writes very much, and with the infamy of the Court is maintained
in his libels. He has some smatch of a Scholar, and yet uses Latin very
hardly, and le^t it should accuse him, cuts it off in the midst, and will not
let it speak, out. He is contrary to great men, maintained by his followers,
that is his poor country Clients, that worship him more then their Landlord,
and be there never such churles, he looks for their courtesy. He first racks
them soundly himself, and then delivers them to the Lawier for execution. His
looks are very solicitous importing much have and dispatch, he is never without
his hanfull of business, that is, of paper. His skin becomes at last as dry as
his parchment and his face as intricate as the most winding cause. He talks
Statutes as fiercely, as if he had mooted seven years in the Inns of Court;
when all his skill is stuck in his girdle, or in his office window. Strife and
wrangling have made him rich, and he is thankful to his benefactor, and
nourishes it. If he live in a Country village, he makes all his neighbors good
Subjects; for there shall be nothing done but what there is law for. His
business gives him not leave to think of his conscience, and when the time,
or term of his life is going out, for Doomes-day he is secure; for he hopes he
has a trick to reuerse judgment.

48. A Skeptic in Religion.
IS one that hangs in the balance with all sorts of opinions, whereof not one
but stirs him and none swayes him. A man guiltier of credulity then he is
taken to be; for it is out of his belief of every thing, that he fully
believes nothing. Each Religion scarres him from it is contrary: none persuades
him to it self. He would be wholly a Christian, but that he is something of an
Atheist, and wholly an Atheist, but that he is partly a Christian; and a
perfect Heretic, but that there are so many to distract him. He finds reason
in all opinions, truth in none: indeed the least reason perplexes him, and the
best will not satisfy him. He is at most a confused and wild Christian, not
specializ'd, by any form, but capable of all. He uses the Lands Religion,
because it is next him, yet he sees not why he may not take the other, but he
chooses ^his, not as better, but because there is not a pin to choose. He finds
doubts and sernples better then resolves them, and is always too hard for
himself. His Learning is too much for his brain; and his judgment too little
for his learning, and his oueropinion of both spoils all Pity it was his
mischance of being a Scholar; for it does only distract and irregulate him and
the world by him. He hammers much in general upon our opinions uncertainty,
and the possibility of erring makes him not venture on what is true. He is
troubled at this naturalnesse of Religion to Countries, that Protestantisme
should be borne so in England and Popery abroad, and that fortune and the
Stars should so much share in it. He likes not this connection of the
Commonweal, and Divinity, and fears it may be an Arch-practice of State. In
our differences with Rome he is strangely vnfix't, and a new man every new day,
as his last discourse-books Meditations transport him. He could like the gray
hairs of Popery, did not some dotages there stagger him; he would come to us
sooner, but our new name affrights him. He is taken with their Miracles but
doubts an imposture; he conceiues of our Doctrine better; but it seems too
empty and naked. He cannot drive into his fancy the circumscription of Truth to
our corner, and is as hardly persuaded to think their old Legends true. He
approues well of our Faith, and more of their works, and is sometimes much
affected at the zeal of Amsterdam. His conscience interposes it self betwixt
Duellers, and whillst it would part both, is by both wounded. He will sometimes
propend much to us upon the reading a good Writer, and at Bellarmine recoyles
as far back again; and the Fathers iustle him from one side to another Now
Sosinaas and Vorstius afr^sh torture him, and he agrees with none worse then
himself. He puts his foot into Heresies tenderly as a Cat in the water, and
pulls it out again, and still something vnanswer'd delays him yet he bears
away some parcel of each, and you may sooner pick all Religions out of him
then one, He cannot think so many wise men should be in error, nor so many
honest men out of the way and his wounder is dubled, when he sees these oppose
one annother. He hates authority as the Tyrant of reason, and you cannot anger
him worse then with a Fathers dixit, and yet that many are not persuaded with
reason, shall authorize his doubt. In sum, his whole life is a question, and
his salvation a greater, which death only concludes, and then he is resolved.

47. A Partial Man.
IS the opposite extreme to a Defamer, for the one speaks ill falsely, and the
other well, and both slander the Truth. He is one that is still weighing men in
the Scale of Comparisons, and puts his affection in the one balance, and that
swayes. His friend always shall do best, and you shall rarely hear good of
his enemy. He considers first the man, and then the thing, and restraines all
merit to what they deserve of him. Commendations he esteems not the debt of
Worth, but the requital of kindness: and if you ask his reason, shows his
Interest, and tells you how much he is beholding to that Man. He is one that
ties his judgment to the Wheel of Fortune, and they determine giddily both
alike. He preferres England before other Countries, because he was borne there,
and Oxford before other Universities, because he was brought up there, and the
best Scholar there, is one of his own College and the best Schooler there is
one of his friends. He is a great favorer of great persons, and his argument
is still that which should be Antecedent, as he is in high place, therefore
virtuous, he is preferred, therefore worthy. Never ask his opinion, for you
shall hear but his faction, and he is indifferent in nothing but Conscience.
Men esteem him for this a zealous affectionate, but they mistake him many
times, for he does it but to be esteemed so. Of all men he is worst to write
an History, for he will praise a Seianus or Tiberius, and for some petty
respect of his all posterity shall be cosen'd.

50. A Trumpeter.
IS the Elephant with the great Trunk, for he eats nothing but what comes
through this way. His Profession is not so worthy as to occasion insolence, and
yet no man so much puffed up. His face is as Brazen as his Trumpet, and (which is
worse) as a Fiddlers, from whom he differs only in this, that his impudence
is dearer. The Sea of Drink, and much wind make a Storm perpetually in his
Cheeks, and his look is like his noise, blustering and tempestuous. He wa's
whilome the sound of War, but now of Peace; yet as terrible as ever, for
wheresoere he comes they are sure to pay for it. He is the common attendant of
glittering folks, whether in the Court or Stage, where he is always the
Prologues Prologue. He is somewhat in the nature of a Hogshed shrillest when he
is empty; when his belly is full he is quiet enough. No man proves life more
to be a blast, or himself a bubble, and he is like a counterfeit Bankrupt,
thriues best when he is blown up.

50. A vulgar-spirited Man.
IS one of the heard of World. One that follows merely the common cry, and
makes it louder by one. A man that loves none but who are publicly affected,
and he will not be wiser then the rest of the Town. That never ownes a friend
after an ill name, or some general imputation though he knows it most
unworthy. That opposes to reason, Thus men say, and thus most do, and thus the
world goes, and thinks this enough to poyse the other. That worships men in
place, and those only, and thinks all a great man speaks Oracles. Much taken
with my Lords I^st, and repeats you it all to a syllable. One that iustifies
nothing out of fashion, nor any opinion out of the applauded way. That thinks
certainly all Spaniards and Jesuits very villains, and is still cursing the
Pope and Spynola. One that thinks the grauest Cassocke the best Scholar: and
the best Clothes the finest man. That is taken only with broad and obscoene
wit, and hisses any thing too deep for him. That cries Chaucer for his Money
above all our English Poets, because the voice has gone so, and he has read
none. That is much ravished with such a Noble-mans courtesy, and would venture
his life for him, because he put off his Hat. One that is foremost still to
kiss the Kings hand, and cries God bless his Majesty loudest. That rayles on
all men condemned and out of favor, and the first that says away with the
Traitors: yet struck with much ruth at Executions, and for pity to see a man
die, could kill the Hangman. That comes to London to see it, and the pretty
things in it, and the chief cause of his journey the Bears: That measures the
happiness of the Kingdom, by the cheapnesse of corn; and conceiues no harm
of State, but il trading. Within this compass too, come those that are too
much wedged into the world, and have no lifting thoughts above those things
that call to thrive, to do well, and Preferment only the grace of God. That
aim all Studies at this mark, and show you poor Scholars as an example to
take heed by. That think the Prison and want, a Judgment for some sin, and
never like well hereafter of a Iayle-bird. That know no other Content but
wealth, bravery, and the Towne-Pleasures; that think all else but idle
speculation, and the Philosophers, madmen: In short, men that are carried away
with all outwardnesses, shows, appearances, the stream, the people; for there
is no man of worth but has a piece of singularity, and scorns something.

32. A Herald.
IS the spawne, or indeed but the resultancie of Nobility, and to the making of
him went not a Generation, but a Genealogy. His Trade is Honor, and he sells
it, and gives Arms himself, though he be no Gentleman. His bribes are like
those of a corrupt Judge, for they are the prices of blood. He seems very rich
in discourse, for he tells you of whole fields of gold and silver, Or and
Argent, worth much in French, but in English nothing. He is a great diuer in
the streams or issues of Gentry, and not a by-Channell of bastard escapes
him, yet he dos with them like some shameless Queen, fathers more children on
them, then ever they begot. His Trafficks is a kind of Pedlery ware,
Scutchions, and Pennons and little Daggers, and Lions, such as Children esteem
and Gentlemen: but his peni-worths are rampant, for you may buy three whole
Brawns cheaper, then three Boars heads of him painted. He was sometimes the
terrible Coat of Mars, but is now for more merciful Battles in the Tilt-yard,
where whosoever is victorious, the spoils are his. He is an Art in England,
but in Wales Nature, where they are borne with Heraldry in their mouths, and
each Name is a Pedigree.

52. A Plodding Student.
IS a kind of Alchymist or, Persecurer of Nature, that would change the dull
lead of his Brain into finer mettle with success, many times as unprosperous,
or at least not quitting the cost, to wit, of his own Oil and Candles. He
has a strange forced appetite to Learning, and to atchieue it brings nothing
but patience and a body. His Study is not great but continual, and consists
much in the sitting up till after Midnight in a Rug-gowne, and a Nightcap to
the vanquishing perhaps of some six lines: yet what he has, he has perfect,
for he reads it so long to understand it, till he gets it without Book. He
may with much industry make a breach into Logic, and ariue at some ability in
an Argument: but for politer Studies he dare not skirmish with them, and for
Poetry accounts it impregnable. His Invention is no more then the finding out
of his Papers, and his few gleanings there, and his disposition of them is as
just as the Book-binders, a setting or glewing of them together. He is a great
discomforter of young Students, by telling them what travel it has cost him,
and how often his brain turned at Philosophy, and makes others fear Studying
as a cause of Duncery. He is a man much given to Apothegms which serve him for
wit, and seldom breaks any Jest, but which belonged to some Lacedemonian or
Roman in Lycosthenes. He is like a dull Cariers horse, that will go a whole
week together but never out of a foot-pace: and he that sets forth on the
Saturday shall overtake him.

53. Paul's Walk.
IS the Lands Epitome, or you may call it the lesser I Will of Great Britain. It
is more then this, the whole worlds Map, which you may here discern in it is
perfect'st motion iustling and turning. It is a heap of stones and men, with a
vast confusion of Languages, and were the Steeple not sanctified nothing liker
Babel. The noise in it is like that of Bees, a strange humming or buzze, mixed
of walking, tongues, and feet: It is a kind of still roar or loud whisper. It
is the great Exchange of all discourse, and no business whatsoever but is here
stirring and a foot. It is the Synod of all pates politic, ioynted and laid
together in most serious posture, and they are not half so busy at the
Parliament. It is the Anticke of tails to tails, and backs to backs, and
for vizards you need go no further then faces. It is the Market of young
Lecturers, whom you may cheapen here at all rates and sizes. It is the general
Mint of all famous lies, which are here like the legends of Popery, first
coined and stamped in the Church. All inventions are emptyed here, and not few
pockets. The best sign of a Temple in it is, that it is the Thieves Sanctuary,
which rob more safely in the Crowd, then a wilderness, whilst every searcher
is a bush to hide them. It is the other expense of the day, after Plays,
Tavern, and a Baudy-House, and men have still some Oaths left to swear here.
It is the ears Brothell, and satisfies their lust, and ytch. The Visitants are
all men without exceptions, but the principal Inhabitants and possessors, are
stale Knights, and Captains out of Service, men of long Rapiers, and Breeches,
which after all turn Merchants here, and traffic for News. Some make it a
Preface to their Dinner, and Travel for a Stomach: but thriftier men make it
their Ordinary: and Board here very cheap. Of all such places it is least
haunted with Hobgoblins, for if a Ghost would walk more, he could not.

54. A University Dunne.
IS a Gentleman's follower cheaply purchased, for his own money has hired him.
He is an inferior Creditour of some ten shillings or downwards, contracted
for Horse-hire, or perchance for drink, to weak to be put in Suite. and he
arrests your modesty. He is now very expensiue of his time, for he will wait
upon your Stairs a whole Afternoon, and dance attendance with more patience
then a Gentleman-usher. He is a sore beleaguerer of Chambers, and assaults
them sometimes with furious knockes: yet finds strong resistance commonly, and
is kept out. He is a great complayner of Scholars loytering, for he is sure
never to find them within, and yet he is the chief cause many times that
makes them study. He Grumbles at the in Gratitude of men, that shun him for
his kindness, but indeed it is his own fault, for he is too great an
vpbrayder. No man put them more to their brain then he: and by shifting him
off they learn to shift in the world. Some choose their rooms a purpose to
avoid his surprizals, and think the best commodity in them his Prospect. He
is like a rejected acquaintance, hunts those that care not for his company, and
he knows it well enough; and yet will not keep away. The sole place to
supply him is the Butterie, where he takes grievous use upon your Name, and
he is one much wrought with good Beer and Rhetoric. He is a man of most
unfortunate voyages, and no Gallant walks the streets to less purpose.

55. A stayed Man.
IS a man. One that has taken order with himself, and set a rule to those
lawlesnesses within him. Whose life is distinct and in Method, and his Actions
as it were cast up before. Not loosed into the Worlds vanities, but gathered up
and contracted in his station. Not scattered into many pieces of businesses,
but that one course he takes, goes thorough with. A man firm and standing in
his purposes, nor heau'd off with each wind and passion. That squares his
expense to his Coffers, and makes the Total first, and then the Items. One
that thinks what he does, and does what he says, and forsees what he may
do, before he purposes. One whose (if I can) is more then another assurance,
and his doubtful tale before some men's protestations. That is confident of
nothing in futurity, yet his conjectures often true Prophecies. That makes a
pause still betwixt his ^are and belief, and is not too hasty to say after
others: One whose Tongue is strung up like a Clock till the time, and then
strikes, and says much when he talks little. That can see the Truth betwixt
two wranglers, and sees them agree even in that they fall out upon. That
speaks no Rebellion in a bravery, or talks big from the spirit of Sack. A
man cool and temperate in his passions, not easily betrayed by his choler:
That vies not oath with oath, nor heat with heat: but replies calmly to an
angry man, and is too hard for him too. That can come fairly off from
Captains companies, and neither drink nor quarrel. One whom no ill hunting
fends home discontented, and makes him swear at his dogs and family. One not
hasty to pursue the new Fashion, nor yet affectedly true to his old round
Breeches. But gravely handsome, and to his place, which suites him better then
his Tailor. Active in the world without disquiet, and careful without misery:
yet neither ingu^^^ in his pleasures, nor a seeker of business, but has his
hours for both. A man that seldom laughes violently, but his mirth is a
cheerful look. Of a composed end settled countenance, not set, nor much
alterable with sadness or joy. He affects nothing so wholly, that he must be
a miserable man when he loses it: but forethinks what will come hereafter, and
spares Fortune his thanks and curses. One that loves his Credit, not this word
Reputation; yet can save both without a Duel: whose entertainments to greater
men are respectfull not complementary, and to his friends plain not rude. A
good Husband, Father, Master: that is without doting, pampring, familiarity. A
man well poys'd in all humors, in whom Nature shwed most Geometry, and he
has not spoiled the work. A man of more wisdom then wittiness, and brain
then fancy; and abler to any thing then to make Verses.

FINIS.

