THE LAWS OR STANDING ORDERS OF THE EAST INDIA COMPANY.

1621.

A Table Containing the several Heads from whence all the Orders in this
Book are Drawn. Anno Dom. 1621.
A.
ARmorer Page 49 Auditors in the Court of Committees 68 Auditors General 69
Accomptants General 66 Audit of Accounts. 70
B.
BOatswaine General 25 Boatswaines of Ships 46 Beadle of the Company 64
Boat-maker. 34
C.
COurts 1 Clarke of the Yard 20 Clarke of the Cordage 27 Clarke of the Iron
works 29 Clarke of the Slaughterhouse. 35 Cooper 34 Chirurgions of Ships 48
Committees of the Yard 41 Comittees of the Warehouse. 58 Clerks of the
Warehouses 57 Carpenters in Ships 49 Cooks 49 Committees General 9 Comittees
for Commissions. Page 49 Committees for Entertaining of Mariners 42 Clarke of
the stores in London. 16 Surgeon General 32 Committees for Provisions of
Victuals, Stores, and Provisions to the Ships 44 Comittees which take Account
of old Provisions and Stores 39 Committees to Appraise the Ships which return
home 40 Comittees which discharge the Companies Ships 56 Clarke of the Jumprest
money 43 Caruer. 34
D.
DEputy. 5
E.
ELection of Officers. 11
F.
FActories in the Jndies 50 Freedoms. 71
G.
GVnner Page 49 Governor 4 Generality 6 Gratifications 63 Guardians to Recover
old stores returned in the Ships. 38
H.
Husband. 14
I.
IOyner. 34
K.
KEeper of the Stores in the Downs. 34
L.
Laws or Orders. 74
M.
MEasurer of Timber 19 Mast-maker 34 Masters and their Mates. 45 Method of the
general Accounts. 75
P.
PYlot 23 Purueyers for Timber and Planckes 17 Paynter 34 Purcer General 25
Porter of the Lodge 26 Purcers and their Mates 46 Penalties 72 Porter of the
Companies House in London. Page 65
Q.
QVarter Masters. 46
R,
REmembrancer. 13
S.
SHipwrights 22 Seruers of Iron works to the building of the Ships. 30 Smith
30 Steward 49 Secretary 12 Solicitor in the Law 60 Solicitors for Bills of Debt
60 Sales of Merchandise. 59
T.
TReasurer 8 Trade 64 Taphouse. 31
V.
VOuchers of Accounts. 79
W.
WOrkmen in the Yards. 37 Watchmen in the Yard 36 Wages 61 Warrants. 17
LAWS OR STANDING ORDERS, MADE AND ORDAINED BY THE GOVERNOR AND COMPANY OF
MERCHANTS OF LONDON TRADING TO THE EAST INDYES, For the better Governing of the
Affairs and actions of the said Company here in ENGLAND residing. Anno Dom.
1621.
Courts.
I.
THERE shall be general Courts summoned, and kept every year by the Governor
or his Deputy on the First day of the month of July, or on all the five days
next following if need shall require, for the Election of a Governor, a
Deputy, Treasurers, and Committees, according to his Majesty's Letters Patents.

II.
Also there shall be a general Court summoned by the Governor or his Deputy
to be kept yearly on the last Tuesday in the Month of May, in which Court the
Laws or standing Orders of the Company shall be publicly read, if it be
required. And then if there be occasion, or that inquiry be made, the Auditors
in the Court of Committees shall satisfy the Company concerning the
performance of their said Laws or Orders.

III.
The Governor or his Deputy upon the Arrival of the Companies Ships out of
the Jndyes, or any other needful occasions, shall summon a general Court, and
there deliver and debate the Affairs of the Company so far as shall be
found convenient.

IIII.
The Governor or his Deputy and the Committees shall keep their ordinary
Courts, and as many other extraordinary Courts and private meetings, as shall
be needful for the speedy dispatch, and ordering of the Companies affairs.

V.
It is ordered, that upon receipt of public Letters from the Indyes, there
shall be Courts summoned and continued daily, by the Governor or his Deputy
and Committees, until all the said Letters be openly read by the Secretary,
or by any other whom the Court shall appoint.

VI.
All Courts shall begin at Eight a clock in the Morning, and Two a clock in
the afternoon, and shall dissolve at the rising of the Governor or of the
Deputy in his absence.

VII.
It shall not be accounted a Court of Committees except (besides the Governor
or his Deputy) there be also present, thirteen Committees at the least,
neither shall it be lawful for a lesser number to chose a Commander, Factor
or Officer, or to displace any of them, or to make their wages, or to gratify
and reward any man, or to conclude any other important matter in the affairs
of the Company.

VIII.
In debating the Affairs of the Company in a Court of Committees, where the
matter is brought to the question, of the Governor, Deputy and Committees
only (and no other persons whatsoever) shall have their voices, and the
resolution of the greater number, shall stand for an order.

IX.
In the first Court of Committees after every Quarter day, the Treasurers shall
be entreated to signify in writing what Sums of money the Company are
indebted at Interest. And the Auditors shall be then called also to testify
the true and fair passage of the business, in the behalf of the Company.

X.
At the first or second Court of Committees next after their Election, yearly
the particular employments of the said Committees for the buying of several
provisions and other duties shall be assigned them by the Court.

XI.
It shall not be lawful for the Governor, Deputy, Treasurers, or any of the
Committees to make a Motion, or speak in Court in the behalf and for the
entertainment of any, who has bin justly condemned as a Malefactor or wrong
doer to the Company, except they do show a manifest necessity for the
employment of such offenders.

XII.
No man shall be present in Court, whilst himself or his Cause passes the
Judgment of the Court.

XIII.
It shall not be lawful to alter, divert, or break any Order of Court of
Committees, where there shall not concur as great a number of Committees as
were assembled to the making of such an Order.

XIIII.
At the first Court of Committees after every Quarter day, the Bills of all
Expenses disbursed by the Governor, Deputy, Treasurer, Committees, and all
other inferior Officers, concerning Boat-hire, Horse-hire, Postage of Letters,
Diet, and all other petty charges in their occasions for the Company, shall be
openly read, and after delivered to the Auditors to be examined, approved and
Signed, before any Warrant pass for payment of the said Expenses.

XV.
And to prevent the dangerous disturbance of the general Courts by uncivil
intruders, and such as are no members of this Company, It is ordered that the
Court of Committees, shall appoint some of the Companies Officers to withstand
the entrance of such persons into the said general Courts, for Elections and
other Consultations.

Governor.
XVI.
THE Governors office is to summon and keep the Courts ordinary and
extraordinary, in all which, he is to have a casting or double voice.

XVII.
He is to have a care that the Deputy, Treasurers, Committees, and Officers,
do take their Oaths as they are chosen; or being absent, at the next Court
they come unto, and that they keep their meetings in all occasions of
business for the Company*

XVIII.
The Governor at his pleasure shall sit in any Court or Assembly of
Committees, ordinary or extraordinary (except the matter do concern himself)
and he is to moderate the Courts, causing grauety and good order to be observed.

XIX.
He is to have care that all the Orders of the Courts be duly performed, and
that the Committees, or other Officers appointed to several businesses do
prosecute the same, and give reasonable Account of their doings to the Court.

XX.
The Governor upon receipt of public Letters from th Indyes, shall presently
assemble a Court of Committees, and in their presence, and by their Assents,
shall cause them to be opened, registered, and after read in open Court. And the
like shall be performed with all the Letters directed to particular men from
the Companies Factors or Commanders in the Indyes.

XXI.
He is to propound and put all things to question, which the Court shall
require (being not contrary to his Majesty's Letters Patents) or the standing
Orders of this Company.

XXII.
The Governor is to attend his Majesty, and the Honorable Lords of his
Counsel, upon all occasions requisite, and to be accompanied with such persons
as the Court shall appoint.

Deputy.
XXIII.
THE Deputy (in all matters which concern the Company) is to assist the
Governor, in whose absence he shall perform his Office, to keep the Courts
upon all occasions requisite, and in them he shall have a double voice.

XXIIII.
He is to have care that the Governor take his Oath openly in Court when he
is chosen, or being absent, at the next Court he comes unto.

Generality.
XXV.
A Special care is to be had in the choice of the Governor, Deputy,
Treasurers, and Committees, that they be not only fit men and of the best
experience in Marchandizing, but also such as may and will attend the business.

XXVI.
In matters which concern the Company, all the particular members thereof
shall be subject to the general Courts. And if any man refuse to obey the said
Court, he shall be both Disfranchized, and further proceeded against as the
cause shall require.

XXVII.
All the particular members of the Company, who have underwritten any
Adventures, in the present second Joint Stock, or shall hereafter vnderwrite
Adventures in any other Stock or Voyage, shall bring in their just proportions
of money unto the Treasurer of the Company, at the times appointed by a
general Court, wherein if any man fail, he shall pay the Brokes imposed upon
such defaults. And also if upon further warning, and a certain day given him
by the said Court, he do neglect to make due payment, the Company have power
to Disfranchize him.

XXVIII.
And whereas it falls out at the setting forth of any Voyage, or at the
return home; that good Sums of money is suddenly to be taken up at Interest
for payment of men's wages and other occasions; for which diverse particular men
of the Company are entreated by the Court of Committees to give their Bonds; It
is therefore ordered and agreed, for the better security and encouragement of
such as shall at any time hereafter give their Bonds to this effect, That they
shall not only be saved harmless by the general Company, but also for their
better indemnity, they shall likewise have several Counter-bonds under the
Companies Seal, if they shall so think good.

XXIX.
It shall not be lawful for any man to transport his Adventures to another
man, otherwise then in open Court of Committees, and not before it do appear
under the Accomptants hand, that the party transporting is not indebted, or his
Adventure engaged unto the Company.

XXX.
If any man in Office, or otherwise a member of the Company, be found through
Bribery or corrupt Reward, directly or indirectly received, to prefer a
Suter, perform a Bargain, make a motion in Court, or do any other thing,
tending to the hurt or damage of the Company, he shall forthwith be made
incapable of any Office in the Company, and also be fined as the Court shall
see cause.

XXXI.
Every man speaking in Court shall stand up and be barcheaded, and shall
address his speech to the Governor, or Deputy in his absence, as representing
the Court: and all private speeches, or directed to particular persons shall be
forborne.

XXXII.
No man in Court shall speak above thrice to one matter, save the Governor
and the Deputy, being to moderate the business.

XXXIII.
No man with his Speech shall interrupt the Speech of another before he have
finished, (except the Governor) or in his absence the Deputy see cause to put
any to silence, for impertinency or other unseemly speaking, and such persons
as do obstinately offend herein, shall be Fined at the discretion of the Court.

Treasurers.
XXXIIII.
THE Office of the Treasurers is to keep the general Cashes of the Company
for receipts and payments. In which they shall perform nothing concerning
Payments, without sufficient Warrant from the Governor or his Deputy, and
four Committees at the least, under their hands to vouch the parcels in the
Audite of their Accounts, only the payments to Adventures upon Stock, shall
pass by the Warrant of the Auditors in the Courts of Committees.

XXXV.
They shall give perfect Acquittances to all the Adventurers, or any others who
pay in Sums of money to the Company, and they shall likewise for their
discharge take plain Receipts for every parcel of money, which they shall pay
forth upon Warrants.

XXXVI.
They are to keep a Cash of purpose for all the Spanish Ryals which shall be
received and Issued for the Company.

XXXVII.
They shall at the dispatch of any of the Companies Ships, deliver up unto the
Accomptants a true and perfect note of every Chest or bag of Ryals, severally
setting down the numbers of Pieces and the just Weight, to the end they may
be Inuoiced accordingly unto the Factors in the Indyes.

XXXVIII.
They are to keep the Bonds and other Bills, for Debts owing to the Company,
and to call for the payment of all when they fall due.

XXXIX.
In the first Court of Committees after every Quarter day, they shall there
signify in writing, what Sums of money the Company are indebted at Interest.

XL.
They are to acquaint the Court of Committees with the names of such
Adventurers, or other Debtors, who neglect to bring in their monyes at the due
times, so that some speedy course may be taken for Recovery of the Debts.

XLI.
They are to have the Custody of his Majesty's Letters Patents to the Company:
also all the Orders, Letters, Directions, and other writings from his Majesty,
the Lords of his Counsel, and other great Officers; together with the Letters
from the East India Company in Holland, and the Coppies of the several Answers
made unto them. Also the Companies common Seal, the Treaty with the Dutch, and
Contracts for bargains. All which Writings, together with the Companies money,
Ryals and other Treasure, are safely to be kept in some convenient place of the
Companies house, for their ordinary meeting in London and not elsewhere.

XLII.
They shall not pay a Warrant in full payment for any Wares whereunto the Bill
of parcels is not fastened, and also subscribed by two Committees at the least
who bought the goods, and the party who sold them for the use of the Company.

XLIII.
They shall keep fair Books of Accounts of their proceedings in the Affairs
of the Company, And they shall prepare them to be Audited once every Quarter at
the least. And at the times of the said Audits, they shall also present a view
of all the money and Ryals which ought to be in Cash, if it be required by the
Court.

Committees general.
XLIIII.
THE Committees general, being to be Twenty four in number, shall be yearly
chosen, according to the Tenor of his Majesty's Letters Patents.

XLV.
They shall diligently keep their Courts ordinary and extraordinary,
whenever occasion of business shall require, being Summoned by the Governor
of this Company, or his Deputy.

XLVI.
They shall perform the Orders of Courts for setting out of Ships, selling of
goods, buying of Provisions, Victuals, Stores and Merchandise: wherein
especial care is to be had, that no one man alone is to be entrusted with the
making of those provisions, but Two at least appointed unto it by the Court:
and if any one Committee be absent, the other shall not conclude any bargain
for the Company, before he have acquainted the Court of Committees and from
thence receive his Order.

XLVII.
They shall deliver up to the Treasurer, Bills of parcels under written by
those persons of whom they shall buy any Merchandise or provisions for the
Company. And in the said Bills, the quantity, quality, price, and all other
circumstances concerning the Bargains made, shall be plainly set down to
vouch their proceedings.

XLVIII.
They shall not Assign or entrust the buying of any of the said Merchandise,
Provisions, Victuals, or Stores, unto the Husband or to any others, but they
shall personally perform the charge appointed them by the Court, with their
best endeavor and skill: But they may use the Assistance of the Husband, or
any other the Companies Officers upon all necessary occasions.

XLIX.
And to prevent confusion, disturbance, or discontents, it shall not be lawful
for any Committee to intrude, inter-meddle or deal in the things which are
ordered by Court unto the charge of other Committees, more then by advise and
counsel for the good of the Company, in which if any find themselves
neglected, they shall make complaint thereof to the Court.

L.
They shall have power and Authority at their pleasure, to examine and review
any of the Accounts, which shall have bin Audited and allowed by the several
Auditors, and if they find any errors or wrongs done to the Company, they are
presently to make it known unto the Court.

LI.
Every Committee shall take an Oath as he is chosen, or being, absent at the
next Court he comes to, and shall faithfully perform all the things which
are contained in the said Oath.

Election of Officers.
LII.
ALL the Offices of this Company upon yearly Salary within the Realm of
England, shall be void once every year on the Four and Twenty day of June, or
within Three days next following.

LIII.
The Governor of his Deputy, and Thirteen Committees at the least, who shall
be present in their ordinary place of meeting, on the Four and Twenty day of
June yearly, or within three days next following, shall proceed to an
Election of new Officers, and establishing of their Wages, by the order of the
Ballating box, or by erection of hands, as unto the greater number of them
present shall seem most convenient.

LIIII.
There shall be a fair admittance of all men, but first and especially of the
free Brethren of this Company, who shall concur at the time appointed, to the
Election and preferment of any Office in the said Company.

LV.
Every Officer as he is chosen shall take his Oath openly in Court, or if he
be absent, then at the next Court which he shall come unto being called, and
shall give Bonds with such sufficient Suerties for their true performance, as
the said Court shall require.

LVI.
Any of the said Officers, upon perfect knowledge of their insufficiency or
other misdemeanors, shall loose their places within the term of the year at
the discretion of the Governor, or his Deputy, and Thirteen Committees at the
least, who shall make choice of others as unto them shall seem needful, and
the like in occasion of any Officers Death.

Secretary.
LVII.
THE Secretaries Office, is to attend the Governor, Deputy and Committees, in
all their Courts, ordinary and extraordinary, and also in the general Courts,
to take note of their proceedings, which he shall faithfully and truly
ingrosse, into a fair Book for that purpose.

LVIII.
At the beginning of every Court, he shall read his collections of the Court
next before, and he shall faithfully observe that nothing of importance be
registered at the breaking up of any Court when the Committees are departed, or
do not remain in the number of 13. at the least.

LIX.
He shall in due time remember and put the Courts in mind, of such particular
Affairs as are ordered to be handled once every Quarter, or at other certain
times appointed.

LX.
He shall be bound by Oath not to discover any of the Secrets of this Company,
neither yet to draw up any part of the said Courts, by the persuasions or
directions of any particular men whosoever, but only by the Authority of the
Court, according to the very truth of their resolutions and Orders.

LXI.
He shall upon Reference of any business from the Court to particular
Committees or others, give a true Note thereof unto the Remembrancer, that he
may acquaint the parties, with the Order of the Company.

LXII.
He shall keep a Book, and therein by Alphabet set down the names of every
particular member of this Company, and also another Book, in which he shall
note down the Names of them, who shall hereafter be made free Brethren of this
Company, with the Conditions: and the like for Commanders, Factors, and others
who shall be entertained by the Court of Committees.

LXIII.
He shall perform the Messages, and write the Letters of the Company, to such
noble Personages and others, which shall be given him in charge by the
Governor, Deputy, and Committees, and the Coppies of the said Letters, he
shall register in a fair Book for that purpose.

Remembrancer.
LXIIII.
THE Remembrancer shall take such information and Notes from the Secretary, as
shall concern the Reference of Affairs from the Court to a selected
Committee, whom he shall acquaint with the Business, the time and place
appointed for the same.

LXV.
He shall attend the Governor, Deputy, or Committees, at their general
meetings in the Yard, where he shall take true Notes of their proceedings, and
bring the same to the consideration of the next Court of Committees.

LXVI.
He shall from time to time (in a Book for that purpose) deliver unto the
Accomptant general, all such Orders of Court as do concern the Entertainment
of Commanders, Factors, Masters, Purcers and the like* or the Alteration of
any of their Wages, or any other things which do appertain to the Companies
Accounts: that true Entry may be made thereof according to the Acts of Court.

LXVII.
He shall supply the Office of the Secretary in any occasion of his absence,
to perform all the Duties of his place.

Husband.
LXVIII.
THE Husband shall attend and take the Resolutions of the Court of Committees,
concerning the Shipping which they yearly appoint for their Voyages into the
Jndyes, and thereupon he shall presently draw out a Table of each Ships
proportions of Victuals, ordinary and extraordinary, together with all other
Munitions needful: which he shall perform in a Book for that purpose, to
remain in the common Comptinghouse of this Company, for direction unto them
who shall be appointed to make the provisions.

LXIX.
He shall use his best endeauours, and faithfully provide in due times to the
best advantage of this Company, all such petty provisions and Stores as shall
be given him in charge by the Court of Committees.

LXX.
He shall deliver up all the said Provisions and Stores, into the Warehouses
of this Company, and for his Discharge he shall take a Receipt from the Clarke
of the said Warehouses, unto whom he shall give a Note of the particular cost
of every thing so delivered, that he may accordingly make Entry thereof in his
Book.

LXXI.
He shall take a Bill of Parcels under the parties own hand Writing of whom
he shall buy any thing for the use of this Company, and the said Bills he
shall deliver up for his Vouchers unto the Auditors of his Accounts.

LXXII.
He shall solicit and assist the Committees or any others, who shall have
charge to buy any Provisions, Stores, or Merchandise for the Voyages of this
Company, so that all things may be performed in due time.

LXXIII.
He shall defray the charges of Lyteridge, Cranage, Wharfage, Portage, Rents of
Warehouses, and petty Expenses disbursed by the Committees or others in the
Affairs of this Company, taking Notes under their hands, viewed by the Court
and after warranted by the Auditors, to vouch the parcel in the Audit of his
Accounts.

LXXIIII.
He shall receive all the Iron both English and Spanish, which shall be bought
by the Committees for the use of this Company, and he shall deliver of the said
Iron to the Smith in their Yard, and to the other Smiths which make the Hoopes,
and he shall keep Account with them of their several works, ordinary and
extraordinary, at such rates as are already or may hereafter be agreed upon for
this Company. And the like he shall perform with the Coopers for Caske, and
he shall defray the charges of workmanship, both with the said Smithes and
Coopers.

LXXV.
He shall ouersee the Clerks in the said Warehouses, to give them
instructions and directions for the fitting and furnishing of each of the
Companies Ships with their proportions of Stores and provisions, and for the
ordering of their Accounts.

LXXVI.
He shall upon all occasions make Entry in the Custom House of the Companies
Ships and goods, and likewise perform any other Service, which shall be
thought fit for his employment by the Governor, Deputy, and Committees.

LXXVII.
He shall keep fair Books of Accounts of all his proceedings in the Affairs
of this Company, and he shall deliver them once every Month to the general
Auditors to be perused.

Clarke of the Stores in London.
LXXVIII.
THE said Clarke shall receive all the provisions, Stores, Victuals or
Merchandise, which shall be delivered him by the Committees, or the Husband, or
any other for the use of this Company, by measure, weight or number, and shall
give Receipts for the same, and the like he shall perform for all things
whatsoever which shall be sent and delivered him, out of the Companies Ships
which return home from the Jndyes, or from any other place.

LXXIX.
He shall deliver of the said Victuals, Merchandise, Provisions, and Stores,
both new and old, unto the Companies Ships and Yardes, or otherwise as
occasions shall require, by the directions of the Husband or any other in
Authority; and shall send some of the Companies Servants to see the same safely
delivered, with a Note of the perticulars and their prizes directed to the
Clarke of the Yard, or in the Ships to the Purcers, together with the several
Officers whom the Stores shall concern, and to bring from them Receipts for
all, without which, the said Clarke shall not be discharged in the Audit of his
Accounts.

LXXX.
He shall deliver the Companies Iron, Lead, Tin, Elephants teeth, Corrall,
Quick silver, Vermillion and the like, unto the Purcers of each Ship by weight,
and all other things which he shall send unto the said Ships, or to the
Yardes, he shall perform it with as much plainness as possible he can for his
Discharge, and to avoid all suspicion and error.

LXXXI.
He shall keep fair Books of Accounts of all his proceedings in the
Affairs of this Company, and shall deliver them up once every Quarter to be
Audited by the general Auditors.

Warrants.
LXXXII.
HEreafter all Warrants to the Treasurers for money, or to the Committees of
the Warehouses for wares shall be framed and made, only by the Accomptants
general, and by the Husband, with their subscription for a leading hand unto
the Governor, Deputy, and Committees.

LXXXIII.
The Warrants unto the Treasurers for money, shall be underwritten by the
Governor, or his Deputy, and Four Committees at the least.

LXXXIIII.
The Warrants unto the Committees of the warehouses for Wares to be delivered
unto the Adventurers, shall be subscribed by the Governor, or his Deputy.

LXXXV.
The Warrants unto the Treasurers for money upon Deuidents to the Adventurers,
shall be underwritten by the Auditors of the Court.

Purueyers of Timber and Plancke.
LXXXVI.
THE said Purueyers shall take notice from time to time of the Clarke of the
Yard, concerning the Stores of Timber, Planckes, Sheathingboards, and
Treenayles which remain in the Yard, and so by the counsel and direction of
the Committees of the Yard and of the Mr. Shipwright, they shall proceed to the
Purueying of those Materials whereof there shall be any want and occasion, for
the Companies buildings.

LXXXVII.
They shall use their endeavor to provide the Timber and Plancke seasonable
felled, and at the best hand, for the most advantage of the Company. And they
shall bring all the Bargains of the said Materials unto the consideration and
resolution of the Governor, Deputy, Treasurer, and Mr. Shipwright, by whose
Order and in whose names the Bargains and Contracts shall be made in the
behalf of the Company.

LXXXVIII.
There shall be power left to the said Purueyers to make Bargain of themselves
(rather then to loose opportunity) for some special pieces of Timber or Knees
which cannot ever be had, provided always that the Bargain exceed not the
sum of Ten pounds, and that they give present notice thereof to the
Governor, Deputy, Treasurer, and Mr. Shipwright.

LXXXIX.
They shall as near as possible they can, avoid all dark bargains by Girt
Measure in the Woods* but when some special occasion shall urge them to that
course. They shall be faithful and true in the Account of the charges, and in
the measure which they shall deliver into the Yardes, squared, according to
such advantage as is usual, and shall happen in the hewing from Girt into
square measure.

XC.
They shall set a Mark and number, and keep the contents of every piece of
the Companies timber before it be lodged in the Yardes at Reading, and other
places, to prevent the great wrongs, which might happen by the change of the
said Timber.

XCI.
They shall appoint the Wharfingers by every Barge from Reading and those
places, to send up a true Note with the mark, number and content of every
piece of Timber, that so the Clarke of the Yard may receive the same
accordingly.

XCII.
The said Purueyers shall keep Books, thereby to give a true Account of all
their proceedings in the Affairs of this Company.

Measurer of Timber and Plancke.
XCIII.
THE Measurer shall give his diligent Attendance daily in the Yard at the
Water*side, to take up all such Timber, Plancks, sheathing Bordes, Mastes, or
other Materials, that concern him to receive by Measure, which he shall
carefully and justly perform that the Company may not be wronged in the
goodness of the said Materials, neither yet through any wants in the said
Measure.

XCIIII.
He shall not receive any provisions into the Companies Yard, without a Note or
writing from those persons, who shall have Order to provide and send the said
provisions, and he shall refuse to unlade any such Timber, Plancke, Boardes,
Mastes, or the like, which are faulty and unfit for the Companies use,
acquainting the Clarke of the Yard presently of his proceedings therein, unto
whom also he shall deliver the said Notes, that some Resolution may be taken by
the Committees of the Yards to determine the business.

XCV.
He shall in the vnlading of the said Timber, Plancke, Boards, Mastes and the
like, from the Five and twenty day of March next, mark every piece in the head
with the Letter A. until the Five and twenty day of March next following, and
then he shall begin to mark with the Letter B. and so every year change a
Letter.

XCVI.
He shall see the said Timber, Plancke, and Boardes, lodged in the most
convenient places of the Yard near their use, laying the straight Timber,
Beam timber, Floor timber, Phittocks, Squire knees, Racking knees, and the
several fortes of Planckes by themselves, to avoid the great labor and
charge, which has bin heretofore in the often remouings of the said Materials
in the occasions of their use, when they were mingled all together.

XCVII.
He shall set a number near the Mark, or at both ends of every piece of
Timber, Plancke, boords, and the like: and he shall keep a Book, noting down
therein the contents, and the tares by the said numbers; and thereof he shall
give a true and perfect Account of all, unto the Clarke of the Yard, to the
intent that he also may enter the same, every piece particularly in a Book as
is given him in charge to perform.

XCVIII.
He shall deliver of the said Timber, Planckes, Deals, Tree-nayles and Boords,
to the building and repayring of the Companies Ships, or otherwise to their
uses, keeping a true Account in his book of the Numbers and contents which
shall be used upon each particular Ship, and he shall give a true copy daily
of all his proceedings herein, unto the Clarke of the Yard, that thereby he may
also enter the same orderly in his Books of Accounts.

Clarke of the Yard.
XCIX.
THE Clarke of the Yard shall call the Workmen and Laborers every day at the
times appointed: and the Foreman of the Shipwrights, Cawlkers, Carpenters, and
Laborers, shall be always present until the whole Ging be called, to the
end that one Workman answer not for another. And he shall have Authority to
ouersee all the said Workmen that they do not loyter in the Taphouse, or in
any other place, nor suffer more Laborers to be at the carrying of a piece of
Timber or Plancke, then are needful.

C.
He shall upon the Arrival of any Barge, Hoy or other Vessels, with Timber,
Plancke, Sheathing bordes, or*whatsoeuer other materials, demand a Note or
writing from those Committees or other persons who shall have Order to make the
said provisions, and according to the contents of the said Notes he shall
receive all into the said Yard, and make true Entry thereof in his Book.

CI.
He shall assist the Measurer in the Yard, to order the Receiving and bestowing
of the Companies Timber and Plancke, laying each sort by it self, to prevent
much labor and charge in the often removing. And he shall keep a Book of
purpose in the form of an Inuoyce for every sort, marked and numbered with the
contents and tares, to the end that the Committees may with ease examine the
measure of any piece or pieces of Timber or Plancke, when they shall mistrust
and desire to be satisfied.

CII.
He shall receive the Accounts of the Iron works, Timber, Planckes, Pipe
staves, or any other Materials, which shall be issued by other subordinate
Clerks in the Yard, to the building or repairing of any of the Companies
Ships, Boats, Mastes or the like, and he shall truly and orderly digest them
in his Books upon their several Accounts.

CIII.
He shall give a Receipt, and stand charged to yield a true Account of all the
old provisions and Stores which shall be sent to the Yardes, out of the
Companies Ships that return home, except only those provisions and Stores
which shall be delivered up to the Clarke of the Cordage, and the Clarke of the
Iron works. And he shall also give Receipts unto the Husband, or to any other
man who shall deliver provisions to his charge in the Yard.

CIIII.
He shall cause the Barrels of Pitch, Tar, or any other Materials which are
light and easy to be conveyed from the Wharse, to be carried a sufficient
distance from the Waterside, to prevent the danger of stealing: and he shall
not suffer any old Timber, Plancks, Chips or the like, (whereof there is no
use for the Company) to be carried out of the Yard, before that some of the
Committees have first seen and given Order to sell the same, whereof he shall
after give a true Account.

CV.
He shall appoint honest and trusty Watchmen every Evening when the Workmen
come to their Call, and he shall remember them carefully to perform their
Charge, and he shall presently after the departure of the said Workmen, call
all the Officers who are Lodged in the Yard to walk the Round with him, to see
that the Fires be well put out, where Plancke has bin burned that day, or
under the Pitch Kettles, Coopers house, or other places to prevent danger.

CVI.
He shall rebate from every Workman and Labourer (upon the pay day) what they
shall owe to the Taphouse, Surgeon, or otherwise within the Yard, and he
shall diligently observe that no disorders be used in the said Taphouse by
drawing of strong Beer, entertainment of Strangers, or otherwise, and he shall
generally look into all other abuses in the Yardes to give notice thereof in
due time unto the Governor, Deputy, and Committees.

CVII.
He shall keep fair and true Books of Accounts, of all things committed to
his charge for the Company in the Yard, and he shall deliver them unto their
Auditors to be perused and examined, at all times when they shall require.

Mr. Shipwright.
CVIII.
THE Mr. Shipwrights duty, is to build and repair the Companies Ships, upon
which works, he shall not make any Entrance or beginning without Order of
Court, obtained for his Warrant and direction, subscribed by the Governor, or
his Deputy, and thirteen Committees at the least.

CIX.
He shall bring in convenient time unto the said Court of Committees his Plots
and Models complete, of all the new Ships which are intended to be by him
builded for the Company.

CX.
He shall have a special care that his Deputy or Foreman, and all other
Carpenters, Cawlkers, or Laborers in the Companies Yard, be able, honest and
skillful men to the business which they shall undertake, and he shall hire them
with as much advantage as possible he can for the Company, without any
sinister respect in the rate of their wages, or in keeping them longer in pay
then there shall be necessary occasion of their work.

CXI.
He shall not break up any part of the Companies old Ships indocked, before
the Appraisers have valued the hulles, neither shall he launch out any of
their Ships from the docke where they are built or repaired, before he have
obtained an order of Court for his Warrant.

CXII.
He shall assist with his best endeavor and skill those Committees, who shall
be appointed with him to contract bargains for Timber, Planck, sheathing
Bords, Treenayles, and the like, or to let out the Ioyners Work, the Caruers
Work, the making of Masts, Boats, Painting, or any other the Companies Works
in the Yard by the great, or to hier Carpenters to the shipping and voyages of
this Company.

CXIII.
He shall give diligent attendance in his own person, to the ordering of those
Works in the Yards which concern his charge: And he shall also give account
unto the Court of Committees of his proceedings in the said Yards weekly, or
so often as shall be needful. And for the better performance of this Article,
he shall not undertake or perform the Building of any Ships or other Vessels,
but only for this Company, without an order of Court obtained for his Warrant
to the contrary, subscribed by the Governor or his Deputy, and thirteen
Committees at the least.

Mr. Pylot.
CXIIII.
THE Mr. Pylot his Office is, to command and order the works which concern
the setting up and taking down of Masts, Yards, Rigging, vnrigging and
proportioning the quantities, sorts and sizes of Cordage to the Companies
Ships, both new and old, and to use care and diligence both by himself, and
his Deputies, that the Company may not be ouercharged with idle, unskillful, or
a needless number of Workmen, or in the rate of their wages.

CXV.
He shall at convenient times, Suruay the building and repairing of the
Companies Ships, at Deptford and Blackwall, assisting also to the indocking and
launching the Companies said Ships, and being launched, to see them safely
Moored, with such mooring Cables and Anchors as are best fitting, and most for
the Companies profit; And to provide a competent number of Ship-keepers for
each Ship.

CXVI.
He shall assist with his best endeavor and skill, those Committees unto whom
he shall be joined by order of Court, for the hiring of Saylors to the shipping
and voyages of this Company. And he shall in like manner assist those persons
who shall be appointed with him to provide Canuas, and to deliver the same
proportioned to be made into Sails for the Companies shipping, and for stores,
or the like.

CXVII.
He shall solicit by his Deputies, and especially in his own person, the
dispatch of the Companies Ships, at Deptford, Blackwall, and Erith, giving
notice from day to day of their several wants, that they may be speedily
supplied, and once every week at the least, he shall acquaint the Court of
Committees of the state and forwardnes of the said Ships.

CXVIII.
He shall after order of Court given him, at convenient and fit times, Pylot
down the Companies Ships to Erith and Grauesend, attending them there, until
they shall be dispatched into the Downs, and he shall likewise take charge to
bring up the Companies Ships from Grauesend, until they be safely moored at an
Auchor, or indocked at Blackwall, and he shall keep a Book, in which he shall
truly and orderly set down all the proportions of Cordage by their length and
size, which he shall appoint to the Rigging, and also for the storing of each
of the Companies Ships to Sea severally: And the like diligence shall he
perform for the quantity and quallity of Canuas, to be spent in their Sails,
and for their stores to Sea.

Boateswaine general.
CXIX.
THE Boateswaine general, shall attend the works under the Mr Pylot, to
proportion and serve Cordage to the Rigging of the Companies Ships, and to
solicit the Saylors or Laborers to their work, to set up or take down
Mastes, rigge and vnrigge the Ships; to new lay Ropes; to lodge in appointed
places, the Companies Boats, Anchors, Cables, and the like, when the Ships
shall be Docked; To attend and be present at the call of the Saylors and
Laborers, and to give notice of those, who are unable or unwilling to do
their work; To assist them that shall be sent to the Companies Ships, when
they return home to take Account of the provisions, Stores and Victuals
remaining, which are to be conveyed to the places and Officers appointed to
take charge of them; To have a special care that nothing be imbeazeled by day
or by night, for want of good Watch, and to do any other work which shall be
thought fit for his employment.

Purcer general.
CXX.
THE Purcer general, his Duty is, when the Companies Ships are afloate, to
receive money of the Treasurers once every week (or as often as need shall
require) to pay the wages of Saylors and Laborers, who set the Mastes and
rigge the Ships, As also the Harbor wages, to Officers and Maryners, who go
the Voyage, and other petty charges incident.

CXXI.
He shall repair once every week (or as often as shall be needful) aboard all
the Companies Ships, at Deptford, Blackwall, and Erith, to confer with the
Purcers, or their Mates, concerning the Days and rates of payment due to the
said Officers, Saylors or Laborers, which when he shall have paid and
satisfied, then shall the said Purcers or their Mates, certify by him the
perticulars under their hands to the Treasurer in a Book for that purpose, to
vouch the Parcels in the Audit of his Accounts.

CXXII.
He shall every time when he returns from paying of Wages (as is aforesaid)
bring Notes with him to the Court of Committees from all the Officers,
concerning the wants of provisions, Stores, or any other thing which might
hinder the speedy dispatch of all the said Ships.

CXXIII.
He shall keep a true Account with the Clarke of the storehouse of the
proportions of Cordage, which shall be delivered to the Rigging of the
Companies ships, and likewise for their Stores severally, which he shall see
justly performed by weight, size, and length, and he shall deliver up a Book
thereof yearly unto the Auditors, in the month of March, or at any other
time, if he be required.

CXXIIII.
He shall keep Account with the Baker for Bread, Biscuit, Meal and Flower:
with the Brewer for Beer, and empty Caske in Harbor, and for the Voyage: of
all which, he shall deliver up in due time a true Account of the particular
disposing thereof to the Companies several Ships, or otherwise to their uses.

Porter of the Lodge.
CXXV.
THE Porter shall carefully, look to the Yard from time to time, that neither
Timber, Planckes, Iron, Lead, or any other provisions, do pass out of the
Gate, without knowledge of the Clarke of the Yard.

CXXVI.
He shall upon just suspicion, search any of the Workmen for Iron work, or
other Materials, which they may have stolen in the Yard, and if he take any man
in the manner, he shall give present notice thereof to the Mr. Shipwright, and
to the Clarke of the Yard, that they may proceed against the Offender as the
cause shall require: and he shall use the like diligence in the search of
those, who under color of carrying out of Chips, might offend in the like
kind.

CXXVII.
He shall assist the Clarke of the Yard to walk the Round, every evening to
set the Watch, which shall continue all Night, until the Bell ring in the
Morning to call the workmen to their labor. At which time the said Porter
shall diligently attend the Gate in his own person: And if any workman or
Laborers shall be absent at the Call in the Morning or after Dinner, they
shall not be admitted into the Yard, but shall loose their pay for that time.

CXXVIII.
He shall keep an Account daily of all the provisions which shall be carried
out of the Yards (of what kind soever) and he shall note down the perticulars
(so near as possible he can) in a Book for that purpose, to be delivered to
the Committees of the Yardes, at all times when they shall require the same.
And he shall not suffer any of the Laborers to depart out of the Yard from
their work at unlawful times.

CXXIX.
He shall not receive any Money or make any profit for letting in of Gentlemen,
Strangers or any others into the Yards: Neither shall he open the Gates at
unseasonable hours, to the Mr. Shipwrights servants, or to any others, but
only upon urgent occasions, as he will answer the contrary at his peril.

Clarke of the Cordage and other Stores.
CXXX.
THE said Clarke shall from time to time, orderly and justly receive into the
Storehouses of this Company, all such Cordage, Marlin, Twyne, Ordnance, great
Shot, Brass sheuers, Pullyes, blocks and the like, by the Order and Warrant
only of those Committees, or others, who shall be authorized to buy the said
provisions, whereof he shall make true entry in his Books, and likewise give
his receipt of all the perticulars under his own hand unto the parties, who
shall deliver the same.

CXXXI.
He shall in like manner receive, and also give his Receipt for every
particular thing, which shall be delivered unto him out of the Companies Ships
when they return home, setting down the weight of every piece of Ordnance,
the length, size, and weight of the Cables and Hawsers, the weight of the old
Ropes, rigging Ockam and the like, the weight of the Brass Shiuers, and
generally every other thing, with as much plainness as possible he can, both
for the quantity and quality thereof.

CXXXII.
He shall rank or place the said Cordage, and other things in the Companies
Storehouses by their sorts and sizes, severally laying the Cables and other
weighty things nearest the Waterside, the old Ropes by themselves, and so of
every other thing, to avoid confusion, and great charges in the often removing.

CXXXIII.
He shall take directions from the Mr. Pylot, under his hand writing,
concerning the proportions of Cordage, and other things, to be assigned to the
Rigging and storing of each of this Companies Ships severally, which he shall
after deliver out of the Storehouse, by such order of Measure, weight or tale,
as the said provisions were received into the storehouses, whereby the Account
may rest plain and without suspect: Wherefore it is further ordered, that the
Purcer general and Purcer of each Ship, or his Mate, shall be present to see
the weight and delivery of every particular thing, and to keep a true Account
thereof in their Books.

CXXXIIII.
He shall for his Discharge in the Audit of his Accounts, deliver no provisions
without receipts, and perticularly he shall take a fair and plain Receipt of
the Purcer of each of the Companies Ships, for all such provisions and Stores
as shall be by him delivered to the Rigging and furnishing of the said Ships to
Sea. And he shall keep fair and true Books of accounts, of all his
proceedings in the Affairs of this Company, to be delivered and examined by
their Auditors at all times, when they shall require them.

Clarke of the Iron Works in the Yard.
CXXXV.
THE Clarke of the Iron Works shall receive from the Smith in the Yard
weekly, or so often as need shall require, all the Anchors, Nails, Spicks,
Bolts, Chaineplates, or whatsoever Iron Works, by weight and tale, for the
which he shall give a Receipt of perticulars unto the said Smith for his
discharge, and the like to the Committees, to the Husband, or to any others,
for Lead, Candles, Copper, or whatsoever else he shall receive of them for the
Company.

CXXXVI.
He shall receive from the Companies Ships, which return home, the Carpenters
tools, the Smiths tools and Stores, all the Anchors, Polts, Spicks, Nails,
Chains, Chaineplates and the like, by weight and tale, for the which he shall
accordingly give a Receipt of the perticulars unto the Committees for recovery
of old Stores: And he shall give a true note unto the Clarke of the Yard, of
the weight of all the old Iron works, which shall be recovered and delivered
him in the breaking up of the Companies Ships and sheathings.

CXXXVII.
He shall deliver unto the building and repairing of the Companies Ships, the
Carpenters tools Lead, Copper, and the like, all kind of Iron works, by
weight and tale, by the hands of such persons, who shall be put in trust to
serve them to the Work men, and he shall take their Receipt in his Book for
his discharge, and likewise subscribe the true Copies of all in their books, to
avoid difference and error, and he shall examine the said Seruers of Iron
works, daily, concerning the expense and use of all; and he shall likewise in
his own person (every evening at the least) view the works, especially taking
notice where, and how many great Bolts, or the like things of valuo be driven
or used.

CXXXVIII.
He shall keep a fair Book with true Accounts, of all his proceedings in
this Companies affairs, plainly and orderly setting down every particular to
each Ship severally, and the said Books he shall deliver up unto the Clarke
of the Yard, so often as he shall require, to the intent he may examine and
digest all into his books of Accounts.

Seruars of Iron works to the Companies Ships.
CXXXIX.
THey shall receive from the Clarke of the Iron Works, the Carpenters Tools,
Lead, Candles, Copper, Bolts, Nails, Spickes, Chaineplates or the like, which
shall be required for the Works in the Companies Ships, and they shall give a
Receipt for the same; plainly setting down the perticulars by weight and
tale, and they shall keep the true Coppies of every such Receipt to
themselves, subscribed by the said Clarke, to avoid error and difference.

CXL.
They shall deliver of the said Iron works and other things unto the Workmen
in the Companies Ships, where they shall attend with diligence, observing the
use of every particular thing, as near as possible they may, and especially of
the great Bolts, and other things of value, whereof every Evening they shall
give a reason unto the said Clarke.

CXLI.
They shall be very careful that none of the said Iron Works or other
Materials be imbeazeled by the Work men, or any others; and if they find any
man faulty in this kind, or in the neglect of their work, or otherwise
howsoever, they shall presently give notice thereof to the Master Shipwright,
and the Clarke of the Yard: and likewise to the Committees when they come
thither, that such courses may be taken against the Offenders as the cause
shall require.

Smith in the Yard.
XLII.
THE Smith from henceforth shall receive all the Iron (both English and
Spanish) at certain prises agreed, or to be agreed upon from the Husband for
this Company, who shall deliver and keep account with him for the same, and he
shall receive only so much Iron from time to time, as his present working shall
needfully require, for which he shall give Receipts to the said Husband for the
use of this Company.

CXLIII.
He shall diligently work the said Iron in good and substantial manner, into
such several works, of Anchors, Bolts, Spicks, Chaineplates, Nails, or the
like works, ordinary and extraordinary, according to such manner, weight, and
size, as shall be appointed him by the Clarke of the Iron works, for such
several rates and prizes, as are already, or may hereafter be agreed upon for
this Company.

CXLIIII.
He shall deliver up all his said works, which shall be ready made, once every
week, or so often as shall be required, unto the Clarke of the Iron works in
the Yard, by weight and tale, taking his Receipt for the perticulars, that he
may render a true Account accordingly.

CXLV.
He shall make choice and trial of all the Iron, which he shall receive of the
said Husband: and if he find any part thereof which shall not be good for his
use, then he shall refuse the same, that all excuse may be taken away in the
defects of Anchors, Chaineplates, or any other works.

Taphouse in the Yard.
CXLVI.
THey who now are, or hereafter shall be lycensed by the Company from year to
year, to keep the Taphouse in the Yard, shall dwell and abide in the said
Taphouse rent free, for their performance, according to the Articles following.

CXLVII.
First, they shall not have, or retale any Beer in the said Taphouse, above
the price of six shillings the Barrel, neither shall they sell of the said
Beer less then three full pynts of Ale measure for a penny, and the bread
likewise which they shall retale, shall be from time to time of full weight and
size, made of good and wholesome Corn.

CXLVIII.
They shall have Liberty to sell or retale to the Companies Workmen in the
Yard, and to no other persons whatsoever, viz. six shillings Beer, Bread,
Pease and Milk, Porrage, Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and no other kind of
victuals, or drink whatsoever.

CXLIX.
They shall not suffer any of the Companies Workmen, to come within Rooms of
the Taphouse, to drink, rest, or hide themselves in the time of work* But
they shall deliver them drink for their refreshing, in places open, to the view
of the Yard; neither shall they deliver more then two pence in Beer to one man
every day at breakefast, and betwixt Meals.

CL.
They shall permit the Clarke of the Yard, to have free access into all the
Rooms and places of the said Taphouse, when he shall so require, to search for
Strangers, or Loyterers, or any other disorders which might be committed,
contrary to the before written Articles.

CLI.
They shall acquaint the said Clarke of the Yard every pay day of all such
sums of money, as shall be due unto them for drink and victuals, entrusted
unto any of the Companies Workmen in the Yard, that he may rebate the same
for them, out of their wages.

Surgeon general.
CLII.
THE said Surgeon and his Deputy shall have a Lodging or a place in the
Yard, where one of them shall give Attendance every working day, from morning
until night, to cure any person or persons who may be hurt in the Service of
this Company, and the like in all their Ships riding at an Anchor at Deptford
and Blackwall, and at Erith, where he shall also keep a Deputy with his Chest
furnished, to remain there continually, until all the said Ships be vayled
down from thence to Grauesend.

CLIII.
They shall also cut the hair of the Carpenters, Saylors, Caulkers, Laborers,
and any other Workmen in the Companies said Yards, and Ships, once every forty
days, in a seemly manner, performing their works at Breakfast and Dinner
times, or in raynie weather, and in an open place where no man may loyter or
lie hidden, under pretense to attend his turn of Trimming.

CLIIII.
They shall discover unto the Clarke of the Yard, and to others who shall be in
places of Authority, all such persons whom they shall find decrepit, lame,
unclean, or unable to the Companies service, that they may be forthwith
dismissed from the same.

CLV.
In consideration of the afore-written Attendance and performance, it is
ordered, that every Carpenter, Saylor, Labourer, or other Workman whatsoever
in the said Yards, and Ships, shall pay two pence every month out of his
Wages, to the said Surgeon general.

CLVI.
And the said Surgeon general shall assist the Committees to hire unto the
Shipping, and voyages of this Company, skillful and honest Chirurgions and
their Mates, at such reasonable rates of wages, as possible he may: and he
shall acquaint and show them from time to time, all such Medicines and things
as shall be furnished into the Chests, of which they are to take charge for the
voyages.

CLVII.
He shall use diligence to furnish up all the said Chests, in such due times,
that they be hereafter brought unto the Companies house, fourteen days at
least before there shall be occasion to ship them, that so every particular
thing may be seen and allowed, by those Committees, Doctors, Apothicaries, or
any others, whom the Court of Committees shall please to appoint for that
purpose.

CLVIII.
He shall at the return home of the Companies Ships from the Indies, receive,
and also given a Receipt, to be accomptable to the said Company, for the
Chirurgions Chests, Tools, Medicines, and Ingredients: of all which he shall
take a due account of the ship Surgeon, when he delivers up his chest.

Keepers of Anchors and Stores in the Downs.
CLIX.
HE shall have charge of the Companies Cables, Hawsers, Anchors, Boats, or
any other provisions already sent, or hereafter to be sent into the Downs, and
shall keep a true Account in his Book of every particular, setting down
orderly the time and the parties name, from whom he shall receive such things,
and shall give them Receipts for their discharge.

CLX.
He shall use diligence when any of the Companies Ships arrive, in or near
the Downs, to see them speedily furnished with such part of the said
provisions as they shall need, or require, and for what he shall so deliver: he
shall take a Receipt for his discharge of the Master and Purser of such Ships,
whereof he shall give present notice by his Letters unto the Governor, Deputy,
and Committees, that so they may demand an account of all accordingly.

Cowper, Boatmaker, Caruer, Mast-maker, Paynter, Ioyner.
CLXI.
THey shall in their several places perform their works in due time
substantially and well wrought, according to such agreements and rates as now
are, or hereafter shall be bargained with them in the behalf of the Company.

CLXII.
They shall keep a true Account of all the Materials whatsoever, which shall
be delivered them from time to time by the Companies Officers, or any others,
to the performing of their said works, and so the said Accounts orderly kept of
each Ships Materials by themselves, they shall deliver up, together with those
Accounts which they shall give in for their own workmanships, thereby to
receive satisfaction and payment from the Company.

CLXIII.
They shall once every week at least compare their Books with the Companies
Officers, to see how they agree upon the perticulars, that errors may be
avoided.

Clarke of the Slaughterhouse.
CLXIIII.
THE said Clarke shall hereafter use his best endeavor and diligence, to see
all those Orders duly performed, which are given him by private Instructions in
writing, for the pounding, killing, bleeding, cutting, salting, repacking,
pickling, and all other diligences to be used in the Slaughterhouse, for the
better preservation of all the Beefes and Hogs, which shall be hereafter
packed and shipped for the voyages of this Company.

CLXV.
He shall appoint a trusty man to keep the door of the cutting Room, who
shall suffer no man (without good cause) to go out and in, and to have a
special care, that they carry nothing with them, more then their own,
setting a Watch likewise over the windows, and to search all the Laborers at
such times when they leave work, and depart the Room.

CLXVI.
He shall keep a true Account of the Receipts of all the Beefes and Hogs, by
their weight, and thereof shall give a Copy to the Committees (appointed for
that business) that thereby they may cause a Warrant to be framed for the
payment of the Debt.

CLXVII.
He shall likewise keep a true Account of the delivery of all the said Hogs
and Beefes, by the number of pieces (in each Hogshead) and weight, and to what
several Ships: plainly setting down the waste, shancks, Harborough victuals,
Sewet, Tongues, and the like, distinctly; that the Company may see, that all is
orderly and justly issued to their uses, and he shall require sufficient
Receipts from the Pursers or others, to whom he shall deliver any thing, that
they may serve for his discharge in the Audit of his Accounts.

CLXVIII.
He shall keep a true Account of the Charges in the Slaughterhouse, and of
the Salt, Caske, and other things expended there.

CLXIX.
He shall also receive the Remains of all the victuals whatsoever, which shall
hereafter return home in the Companies Ships from the Indies or other
places, and he shall give his Receipts to be accomptable for the same.

Watchmen in the Yard.
CLXX.
THE Watchmen shall begin their Watch in the Evening, when the Workmen depart
out of the Yard, and so continue all night, until the said Workmen (at the
ringing of the Bell in the Morning) return to their labor again.

CLXXI.
They shall watch diligently at their standings, often calling one to another
to prevent sleep, and every hour when the Clock strikes, they shall walk
the Round, and likewise ring the Bell in the Yards, that the Companies Officers
(who are lodged there) may take notice of their watchfulness.

CLXXII.
They shall have charge of the Plugs, to perform that work at due times, for
which they shall have allowance as heretofore.

Workmen generally in the Yard.
CLXXIII.
ALL the said Workmen shall come to their Labor at appointed times, and shall
attend to answer to their Calls severally, for if any of them be absent, Then
such persons shall not be entertained into the Companies works, until the
next call, when they shall be present, and apply themselves unto their Labors.

CLXXIIII.
They shall be obedient unto the Mr. Shipwright, to the Clarke of the Yard,
the Foremen, and other the Companies chief Officers, who shall have Authority
to direct and order the Affairs of the Yard, and shall suffer themselves to be
searched, by the Porter of the Lodge, upon suspicion that they may convey away
any of the Companies Iron works, or other things.

CLXXV.
They shall not loyter nor hide themselves in the times of work in the
Taphouse, or in any other place, Neither yet depart the Yard upon their own
occasions* without license of the Clarke, or some other chief Officer in his
absence.

CLXXVI.
They shall not commit or do any Riot, by Fighting, Swearing, breaking of Pots
in the Taphouse, hewing of good pieces of Timber, and Planckes into Chips, or
any other waste or hurt: for being convicted of such defaults, they shall pay
the Damage, and so be presently dismissed out of the Companies works.

CLXXVII.
They shall rebate out of their Wages, every pay day, so much money as they
shall be found indebted in the Yard to the Taphouse, and also to the
Chyrurgion, after the rate of Two pence a Month per man for their Trimming and
Cures as is ordered. And they shall make complaint unto the Governor, Deputy
and Committees, of all disorders, which they shall perceive or know to be
performed in the Yard by any man, or of oppressions or wrongs which might be
offered them, by any of the Companies chief Officers, that such courses may be
presently taken for Remedies, as the causes shall require.

Guardians for Recovery of old Stores, Provisions and Victuals, which return
home in the Companies Ships.
CLXXVIII.
THERE shall be a trusty Guardian sent to each of the Companies Ships after
they return home, and are come on this side of Grauesend, who shall carefully
receive all the old provisions, Stores and Victuals, from the custody of those
Officers, who shall have had the charge of them in the said Ships.

CLXXIX.
He shall lade the said Provisions, Victuals or Stores, in one or more
Lighters* to be delivered into the Companies Yardes, and other places
appointed: keeping a true Account of all, and sending a trusty man in each
Lighter, with a Note of the perticulars, that nothing may be imbeazeled.

CLXXX.
He shall set down orderly and plainly, every particular thing in his Book,
declaring the names of the Ordnance, the number of the Pieces, and their
weight, the great Shot by their number and size, the Anchors by their number
and weight, the old Iron works, Vessels of Pewter, Brass, Copper or the
like, by their weight, Oil, Wine, Syder or the like, by their. Vessels, and
all the Remnants by Gage, measure, weight or esteem. The Cables, Cablets,
Hawsers or Coyles, by their length and sizes, and generally all things with
as much plainenes concerning the quantity, quality and use, as possible he may.

CLXXXI.
He shall direct, and cause to be delivered unto the Clarke of the Cordage, all
the Cables, and other Cordage, together with the Rigging and all other things
thereunto belonging, as the Pullyes, blocks, brass Sheuers, and the like,
Ordnance, great Shot, Sails and remains of Canuas.

To the Clarke of the Storehouse in London, the Gunners, Cooks, and Armorers,
Stores, the lock Smiths works, and the Coopers tools, with the Caske, Iron
hoopes, and other stores.

To the Chyrurgion general, he shall cause to be delivered, the Chyrurgion
chest with all Instruments, Medicines, or Ingredients which shall remain.

To the Clarke of the Yard, the Carpenters stores.

To the Clarke of the Slaughterhouse, the Beef, Porke, and all other sorts of
Victuals whatsoever.

To the Clarke of the Iron works, the Carpenters tools, all the Sheetload,
Anchors, Boltes, Spikes, Nails or the like.

CLXXXII.
He shall set down severally in his Book all the perticulars, which he shall
have delivered (as is before written) unto the said Officers, who shall after
subscribe the same, and acknowledge to have received all, for and to the use of
this Company: and the said Book so subscribed, he shall deliver up unto the
Committees appointed to take Account of the said provisions, Victuals and
stores.

Committees to take Account of old Stores, returned in the Companies Ships.
CLXXXIII.
THE said Committees shall be Two in number, and at the Return home of the
Companies Ships, they shall appoint some trusty man for Guardian in each Ship
to recover the old provisions, Stores and Victuals, in such manner and form,
as is ordered in the Articles of the said Guardians.

CLXXXIIII.
They shall give order at the Arrival of every Ship of the Company, that no
Officer be paid his wages without their Warrant, certifying that they have
received an Account of the things committed to their charge.

CLXXXV.
They shall examine the Purcers Books for the provisions, Stores and Victuals,
which remained in each Officers custody, at their departure from the Jndies,
with their discharge by the expense thereof, and the Remain which have bin
delivered up; and if they find any exorbitance in the expense, or wants in
things which may import, then they shall acquaint the Court of Committees
thereof, that they may proceed against the Offenders in such manner as the
cause shall require.

CLXXXVI.
They shall be present, to see such Biscuit and other Victuals given to the
Poor, as shall be found unfit to be kept for the Companies service, and has
heretofore in the like cases bin left to the discretion of others to distribute.

CLXXXVII.
They shall cause the said Guardians Book to be safely kept (in the
Compting-house) by the Accomptant, thereby to charge the several Officers,
with the things which they have received, according to their Subscriptions: and
they shall cause the said Guardians Books to be truly coppyed into a general
Book of all the Companies Ships, by order as they shall return home, to the
end that the Appraisers of the said Ships from one Stock to another, may make
use thereof in their Appraisement.

Committees to Appraise the Companies Ships which return.
CLXXXVIII.
THE Committees who shall be appointed with any others, to appraise the
Companies Ships, from one Account to another, shall proceed with care and
diligence, that all things may be esteemed and valued with such skill, that
neither party may have just occasion to complain.

CLXXXIX.
They shall for their better direction make use of the Book of Inuentories,
for old provisions and Stores appertaining to the Ships, which they shall
appraise, and therein take notice of the just quantity and quality of every
particular thing.

CXC.
They shall after they have agreed upon all things necessary to be considered,
deliver up their Appraisement in writing, and subscribe the same, that it may
warrant the Entrance thereof, in the Companies Books.

Committees of the Yard.
CXCI.
THE said Committees, shall be Twelve in number, and they shall take their
turn by Two and two weekly, attended by a Clarke to take notice of all the
workmen generally in the yard, and to see them paid their wages, which shall be
noted down in a Book for that purpose, whereunto they shall subscribe their
Names, that thereby every Weeks payments disbursed by the Clarke of the Yard,
may be vouched in the Audit of his Accounts.

CXCII.
They shall take good view and information of all the Workmen, concerning
their Ability to their several works, and also the rates of their wages,
least through favor, they might be ouer-valued, or kept in Service longer
then there shall be occasion of their work, upon discovery of which wrongs or
any other, the said Committees of the Yard, or the greater number of them shall
dismiss some and place others as unto them shall seem fit, for the good of
the Company. And in occasion of any Difference in opinion among themselves,
they shall bring the matter into the Court of Committees for a Resolution.

CXCIII.
They shall on the first Tuesday of every Quarter in the year (and oftener if
need shall require) make their general meetings at the Yard, to take a view of
all things there, and to understand the Complaints or other passages of the
Companies Affairs, that such remedies and courses may be ordered, as they
shall judge to be needful.

Committees for Entertaining of Mariners.
CXCIIII.
THE said Committees shall have a special care to entertain able men,
unmarried and approved Saylors, as near as possible they may, and they shall
agree for their wages, with as much advantage as they can, for the Company.

CXCV.
They shall keep a Book, in which they shall note down, the names of every
particular man, with the day of his Entertainment, his wages, his place, or
Office, and in what Ship, and thereof they shall give a Note under their hands
to the party hired, that he may deliver the same unto the Clarke of the
Impressed money, to make true Entry thereof in his Book, and the said Note to
keep by him for his Warrant.

CXCVI.
They shall every Month at the least, Audit up the Accounts of the said
Clarke, and once every year by the first day of May, or as often as shall be
required, deliver up the said Accounts perfectly Audited, and subscribed by
them, that they may be by the general Auditors reueiwed, and so entered in the
Companies great Books by the Accomptants.

Clarke of the Impressed and Wages.
CXCVII.
THE said Clarke shall attend the Committees, who shall have authority to
entertain Saylors for the Voyages of this Company, and in a fair Book, set
down the Impressed monyes which he shall pay to every particular man so
entertained upon their several bonds with Suerties, and this shall he perform
only by a Note from the said Committees under their hands, which (together
with the said bond) shall be his Warrant in the Audit of his Accounts.

CXCVIII.
He shall upon the like Warrant pay the wages which is allowed, to the Wives of
the said Saylors upon Account of every years Service in the Shipping of this
Company, if they bring good Testimony that they are the Wives of the said
Saylors.

CXCIX.
He shall likewise pay the wages due unto all the Mariners, which shall
return home in the Companies Ships, or to their Assigns, according as he
shall be directed by several Warrants from the said Committees, the chief
Accomptant and Auditors for the Company, which Notes he shall also keep by
him for his Vouchers in the Audit of his Accounts.

CC.
He shall attend the dispatch of all the Companies Ships at Grauesend, and in
the Downs, and immediately after their departure, deliver up his Account to be
Audited by the said Committees, concerning all the charges which shall be by
them disbursed, in whatsoever manner for the said Dispatch.

Committees for the Buying of Victuals, provisions and Stores to the Ships.
CCI.
THE said Committees shall be Two at the least, for every several employment,
neither shall any one of them conclude a Bargain, or buy any Wares whatsoever
for this Company, without the knowledge and consent of the other who shall be
joined in Commission with him: and if any one be absent (by whatsoever
occasion) th*other shall make it known unto the Court, and from thence receive
his direction and Order.

CCII.
They shall not buy, directly nor indirectly, any Merchandise whatsoever for
the use of this Company of themselves, nor from any others, wherein they have
any part or interest: for being convicted thereof, the Bargain shall be void,
and the offense shall be offered to the consideration of a general Court.

CCIII.
They shall take Bills of Parcels under the parties own hand writing, of whom
they shall buy any Wares for this Company, and therein the bargain concerning
weight, tare, price, and the like, shall be plainly set down, which Bill of
parcels they shall deliver to the Accomptant, that he may pin the same unto the
Warrant, which shall be directed unto the Treasurers for payment of the Debt.

CCIIII.
They shall take a sufficient Receipt for their Discharge of the Clerks of the
Storehouses, or any other, unto whom they shall have Order to consigne the said
Wares so bought, to be disposed for this Company.

CCV.
And lastly, for such Merchandise as they shall cause to be brought from any of
the parts beyond the Seas by Order, and for the use of this Company, They
shall at due time present the Factors Accounts thereof, dilidently examined,
and subscribed also by themselves, that so they may be reviewed by the
Auditors, and after, entered orderly by the Accomptants into the Companies great
Books.

Masters of Ships and their Mates.
CCVI.
THe said Master and their Mates, after they shall be hired for a voyage in the
Companies Ships, and are entered into Harborough Wages, shall take their Oaths
openly in a Court of Committees, and shall endeavor to find out able and good
Mariners, whom they shall prefer for Entertainment, unto the Committees
appointed to that business.

CCVII.
They shall give their Attendance in the day time, and lodge every night aboard
the said Ships, to further their dispatch, and to keep good order among the
Mariners, and over every other thing, to the benefit of this Company.

CCVIII.
They shall carefully appoint the quarter Masters and Boateswaynes to be daily
present in the Ships hold, to see the victuals, provisions, Stores, and
Merchandise, well and orderly stowed, and that the Boatswaine, Gunner, Cook,
Steward, Carpenter, and other Officers, do attend in the Ships, to receive and
take charge of their several Stores for the voyage, and to give a true account
of the disposing of every particular thing unto the Purser.

CCIX.
They shall once every week give Account unto the Court of Committees, of the
forwardnes of their Ships, and of their several wants, that order may be taken
for a speedy dispatch of all.

CCX.
They shall within ten days next after their return from the Indies, into
the River of Thames, deliver up unto the Governor, Deputy, and Committees,
fair Copies of their Iournell Books, concerning their Navigations, and other
worthy observations in the course of their whole voyage.

CCXI.
They shall be aboard the Ships when they veil down to Erith and Grauesend,
to assist the Master Pylot or his Deputy, in what shall be needful, And for
all other Duties, to be by them performed in the whole course of their voyage,
they are at large set down in the Companies Commissions for their affairs at
Sea.

Quarter Masters and Boateswaynes.
CCXII.
THE Quarter Masters and Boatswaines shall diligently attend aboard the
Companies Ships every day, to see all the victuals, provisions, stores, and
Merchandise, orderly stowed in places fit and convenient, and they shall not
suffer any thing to be laden into the Ships hold, before the Purser or his
Mate have taken a true note thereof.

Pursers and their Mates.
CCXIII.
THey shall (as they are chosen) take their Oaths openly in a Court of
Committees, and after give their daily attendance aboard Ships, to take a true
account of all the Harborough victuals, and victuals for the Voyage,
Provisions, Stores, and Merchandise, of whatsoever kind: and they shall
appoint the Quarter Masters, Boatswaines, and other Officers, that they neither
lade nor unlade any thing without their knowledge, to keep a true account
thereof.

CCXIIII.
The said Pursers or their Mates shall be present in the Companies Storehouse,
to take the length, size, and weight of all the Cordage, which shall be served
to the Rigging of the Ships, or for Stores severally. Also one of them shall be
present, to take the weight of the Biscuit, Flower and Meal, from the Baker for
the voyage; All which, they shall after see carefelly laden into the Companies,
Ships, And they shall give their Receipts unto the several Officers, or any
other, who shall lade, or deliver them any manner of provisions, Stores,
victuals, or Merchandise, for the use of this Company.

CCXV.
They shall have a Beam and Scales, to receive, and note down the weight of
Cheese, Butter, Bread, Brass, Copper and Pewter vessels, or any other things
which are charged to the Company by weight.

CCXVI.
They shall at the appointed times every day call the Saylors to their work,
keeping a true note of every man's days and rates of payment, whereby they may
receive their due pay weekly by the hands of the Purser general, unto whom
they shall also give a note, certifying the Totals of every weeks
disbursements unto the Treasurers of this Company.

CCXVII.
They shall take Receipts (in a book for that purpose) of the Boatswaine,
Gunner, Cook, Steward, Carpenter, Cooper, and Armourer, for all their several
Stores and Tools which they shall receive for the voyage, that they may be
accomptable for the same, and the said Receipts shall be orderly testified by
the Master of the Ship, or some other known men, And they shall keep a true
account, with all the said Officers, of the daily expending of all the said
stores and victuals, to the end that at all times it may be known what
provisions remain in the Ships.

CCXVIII.
They shall use their best endeavor to learn out, and accordingly to advise
the Governor, Deputy, and Committees, concerning all private trade in the
Companies Ships, to and from the Indies, and in those parts from port to port.

CCXIX.
They shall have particular charge carefully to observe, and truly to advise
the Governor, Deputy, and Committees by their Letters, from the Cape of Good
Hope, or from any other place, where they shall have opportunity to write,
concerning the goodness or defects, of the beef, porke, biscuit, Wine, beer,
Sider, Cordage, powder, or any other provisions whatsoever; and also concerning
any want, which shall be found in the number of pieces of beef and porke, in
any of the Caske differing from their packing here, or any want of weight in
the said pieces of beef and porke, or powder, or the like, which aduices they
shall send, testified and underwritten by the Master, or some other principal
Officers of the ship.

CCXX.
They shall keep fair Books of accounts of all the aforesaid things
whatsoever they shall receive into the Ships from several men, to the use of
the Company, noting down every thing with as much plainness as possible they
can, concerning number, weight, and measure, and so the said books (together
with the book of Receipts from the Officers aforewritten, at the departure of
the Ships from Grauesend) they shall deliver up to the Governor and
Committees, or to any other who shall have authority from them. The rest of the
duties which concern the said Pursers and their Mates, in the whole course of
their voyage, are to be seen in the Companies Commissions for the Seas.

Chirurgions in the Companies Ships.
CCXXI.
THE said Chirurgions, after they are entertained into the Companies Ships,
shall attend the Surgeon general, to the furnishing of their Chests, which
they ought to carry to Sea with them, and they shall give their best advice
and counsel, that all needful Medicines and other things, may be provided,
whereof they shall take a careful view, when the Chest shall be delivered to
their charge, that nothing be wanting, which conveniently may be had for the
preservation of men's lives, and curing of their diseases.

CCXXII.
They shall use their best endeavor and skill (through the whole course of
their Voyage) in those things which concern their places, and at their
return home, they shall deliver up their said Chests with all things, which
ought to remain in them, unto the said Surgeon general, for the use of
this Company.

Boateswaine, Gunner, Cook, Steward, Cooper, Carpenter and Armorer.
CCXXIII.
ALL the said Officers shall give their diligent Attendance aboard Ship from
time to time, to receive and take charge of all the Provisions, Victuals and
Stores for the Voyage, which shall be assigned unto them severally to use, and to
give Account of the same to the Purcers or their Mates, at all times when it
shall be required.

CCXXIIII.
They shall also give their Receipts severally, of all the particular things
which they shall have received, plainly and orderly set down in the said
Receipt, which they shall after deliver up unto the Purcer or his Mate, for the
use of this Company.

Committees for Commissions, and Letters.
CCXXV.
THE said Committees shall be Eight in number, besides the Governor, Deputy and
Treasurers, and they shall diligently meet together whenever occasion of
business shall require, being Summoned by order from the Governor or his Deputy.

CCXXVI.
They shall with their best advice and Counsel, set down good Laws and
Orders for government at Sea in the Companies Ships, and they shall give ample
and plain directions by Letters unto the English Factors in the Jndies, for
the general Affairs of this Company in those parts: And lastly they shall
bring the said Commissions and Letters to be openly read in a full Court of
Committees, to pass the Judgment of the said Court, and then be subscribed by
the Governor or his Deputy, and thirteen Committees at the least.

Factories in the Indies.
CCXXVII.
THE Election, continuance, and change of the Presidents, Generals, Captains,
Counsels, Factors, and all other Officers employed in the affairs of this
Company in the parts of the East Jndies, shall be at the Discretion of the
Governor, or his Deputy and Committees, to be performed by the order of the
Ballotting Box, or by Erection of hands, as unto the greater number of them
being assembled together shall seem most convenient.

CCXXVIII.
All the said Commanders and Factors (as they are chosen) shall presently take
their Oaths openly in a Court of Committees, and shall give Bonds with
sufficient Suerties, for their true performance, as the said Court shall
require.

CCXXIX.
The Affairs of this Company in all the parts of the East Indies, shall have
Dependence upon two principal Factories (viz.) Bantam in the Island of Jaua
Mayor, and Suratt in the Gulf of Cambaia, under the Great Mogoll, or any other
places where the Presidents shall reside: and unto them, all the other
Factories shall be subordinate, in manner following.

CCXXX.
And first unto Bantam shall be Accomptable, all the Factories in the several
Islands of the Moluccoes, Banda, Amboyna, China, Japan, the Celebes, Borneo,
Iaua, Sumatra, and in the Provinces of Chochinchina, Siam, Patania, Camboia,
and all the Factories upon the Coast of Coromandell, as Petipoli, Mesulipatan
Pelicato, and all the rest in the Gulf of Bengala, together with all the
Factories upon the Coast of Jndia or Malabar, from Goa Southwards.

CCXXXI.
And unto Suratt shall be Accomptable, Amadauar, Agemir, Agra, Baroche, the
Court of the great Mogoll, and all the Factories within the Gulf of Cambaia,
and upon the Coast of Malabar, Southwards as far as Goa, together with Mocha,
and all other places in or near the Red Sea, and the Coast of Melinda, and all
the Factories in Persia, or within the Persian Gulf.

CCXXXII.
The said two principal Factories, shall keep Books of all the Letters which
they write unto the several Factories, and receive from them, fairly coppyed
into other Books, which they shall yearly send into England unto the
Governor, Deputy, and Committees: and the like they shall perform of all the
notable occurrences in those parts, briefly set down day by day in form of a
Iournall.

CCXXXIII.
They shall have English Beams and Scales, both great and small, to use in all
needful occasions, and especially by them to receive all the Wares and
Merchandise which shall be sent from hence, and Inuoiced unto them by weight,
which shall be diligently compared in the presence of the Purcers of every
Ship, and if any want be found, they shall presently by the first Ship send
ample Testimony thereof to the Governor, Deputy and Committees.

CCXXXIIII.
They shall likewise receive all the Companies Spanish Ryals, both by Weight
and tale, in the presence of the Purcers and their Mates, of those Ships by
whom they shall receive such Ryals, and if any want be found, they shall send
ample testimony thereof, as in the last Article.

CCXXXV.
And forasmuch as the Affairs of this Company, will require the employment of
diverse Ships to be kept continually in the Jndies, for whose Reparations and
victualing, it is conceived very needful to send great store of Provisions
from hence yearly* The Factorie of Bantam shall therefore provide convenient
Storehouses, and places for the receipt of Cordage, Tar, Ordnance, Powder,
Shot, Victuals, and diverse other Munitions* that so all things may remain in
safe and careful Custody.

CCXXXVI.
They shall appoint a sufficient Boateswaine, and other skillful Officers, to
the ordering of the said Storehouses, that the Companies Shipping may be
furnished from thence in such measure, as by their approbation shall be found
needful, so that nothing may be wasted.

CCXXXVII.
They shall appoint certain Factors, to the ouerseeing and charge of the said
Storehouses, with order to keep fair Books of Accounts of all the said
Provisions, which shall be received or delivered unto the Companies Ships, or
otherwise to their uses, And the said Accounts being first examined, allowed
and subscribed by the President and his Counsel, shall once every year be
sent into England, unto the Governor, Deputy and Committees.

CCXXXVIII.
The said two principal Factories shall solicit all the Factories which have
dependence on them, to send the Accounts of their proceedings in the Affairs
of this Company at due times, so that they may be examined and digested into
their general Books, the which (together with the originals of the said
Accounts) they shall once every year send into England, unto the Governor,
Deputy and Committees, subscribed by the President, his Counsel, and the
Accomptants.

CCXXXIX.
All the Factories in the Jndies, shall keep their Books of Accounts for the
Company diligently, and in an open place fit for that purpose, that so every
Factor in each Factorie may daily view the same, to see and know the true
passages of the Companies Affairs, and thereby the better to avoid the
dangerous negligence of some principal Factors, who assuming the private
keeping of the Accounts to themselves, it has bin found or at the least
pretended after their Death, that they have kept no Accounts at all, or such as
were very imperfect, whereby the Company may have bin much wronged.

CCXL.
They shall send bills of lading under written by the Master and the Purser, And
perfect Inuoyces of all the Wares which they do lade for the Company. And
this not only to be performed by the Ships or other vessels, wherein such
Wares shall be transported; but also by the very next convenient passage unto
those places whereunto the goods are directed, reserving likewise bills of
lading to themselves for their own discharge, in any occasion which may happen.

CCXLI.
They shall not admit any man into this Companies Service, as a Factor, without
the order of the Governor, Deputy, and Committees; But in cases where they
shall find it very needful to make use of some men for their good experience
and worth. The wages of such persons, and the approbation of their Service
shall be reserved to the said Governor, Deputy, and Committees.

CCXLII.
They shall take strict accounts of all the Officers of every Ship at their
Arrival in the Jndies, concerning the several Stores committed to their
charge: and at their return for England, they shall send the several Receipts
of all the said Officers for the Stores, which shall then remain in their
charge to the use of the Ships, that so they may render a true account thereof
unto this Company.

CCXLIII.
They shall upon the Arrival of the Companies Shipping, take account of all
the Pursers, concerning the debts and death of all men (whosoever) in the
voyage, setting down the time, the place, and the persons. And the like, they
shall require from all the Factories in the Jndies, whereof by every Ship which
comes for England, they shall send a plain and perfect information to the
Governor, Deputy, and Committees, for their direction in the accounts, and
Wages of the said dead men.

CCXLIIII.
After the death of any of the Companies Factors, or other Servants in the
Jndies, the President and his Counsel, shall by the first passage send home to
the Governor, Deputy, and Committees, the last wills of the deceased, together
with all their books of accounts, letters, papers, and other writings, which
do either concern the Company, or any other private affairs whatsoever:
Reserving only such writings, as may serve to recover in debts, or otherwise
to determine any business in the Indies* of which likewise they shall send a
perfect note, and also a true Inuentary of the Estates which shall be found to
belong unto such deceased Factors, or other Servants.

CCXLV.
From henceforth all the Commanders and Factors employed for the Company in the
Jndies, shall convey all their private Letters to whomsoever, under a covert,
directed to the Governor, Deputy, and Committees: for whosoever shall be found
to send Letters by any other ways or means, the Company will proceed against
them as obstinate offenders, and breakers of their orders; neither shall it be
lawful to write the said private Letters, otherwise then in plain English,
and without any Character.

CCXLVI.
It shall be lawful for all the said Factors, to write their particular
Letters unto the Company* But for the Prizes and vent of Merchandise, or any
other matter which may concern the Trade, it shall be wholely referred unto
the general Letters, for the avoiding of confusion and doubts, which might
arise by the diversity of aduises.

CCXLVII.
The chief Factors in all the several Factories of the Jndies, shall
diligently enquire, and carefully seize upon all such private Trade, as shall
be hereafter performed by any person or persons whosoever, contrary to the
orders of this Company, as in the Articles. 205 and 206 And of their
proceedings herein from time to time, they shall send advice and true
Inuentaries, by the first passages for England, unto the Governor, Deputy, and
Committees. And also unto the President and his Counsel in the Jndies, who by
the first shipping for England, shall lade the goods seized as aforesaid, and
direct the same unto the Governor and Company under their mark.

CCXLVIII.
A diligent inquiry shall be made from time to time, concerning the life and
conversation of all the Factors in the several Factories of the Jndies* and if
any of them be found to break the orders of the Company, to deal iniustly, or
to be of an evil disposition* as a common Drunkard, a notorious Gamester or
Whoremaster, or wronger of the Company by private Trade, or otherwise
insufficient, The President (with approbation of his Counsel) shall by the
first passage, ship home such unworthy Factors, together with the proofs and
testimonies of their defaults: that so the Company may proceed against them,
according to the quality of their offense.

CCXLIX.
For diverse reasons (which have been duly considered) it is ordered, that all
the gifts, presents, or other profits, given or bestowed, by any foreign
Prince, Ruler, or Commander, upon any whom the Company shall employ in their
affairs, shall be from henceforth reserved to the use, and brought to the
general account of this Company.

CCL.
And for all other matters occurring from time to time in the affairs of this
Company, in the said parts of the East Jndies, they shall be wholly referred to
the discretion and ordering of the Governor, Deputy, and Committees, by their
Letters, Commissions, directions, or instructions: All which writings (for
weighty reasons it is thought convenient) shall be underwritten by the
Governor or his Deputy, and thirteen Committees at the least: for otherwise
they shall not be of strength and power, to direct and order the said
Factories. Except only those Commissions, whereby the Presidents (together
with their Counsel) shall have authority to direct, and govern the General
affairs of this Company, both by Sea and land in the Jndies: Unto which
Commissions shall be fixed, only the great Scale, which by his Majesty's
Letters Patents, is granted unto the said Company.

Committees for discharge of the Companies Ships.
CCLI.
THE Committees who shall be appointed to see the Companies Ships discharged
(after they return home laden from the Jndies) shall be present to see the
Hold opened, and diligently observe, whether it be full with Wares, or how much
it wants, that they may report the true estate of all as they shall find it,
unto the Court of Committees.

CCLII.
They shall prepare strong and good Padlocks (of their own choosing) with
which they shall lock the Hold carefully, when they retire to Dinner, and when
they give over the work at night, always commanding the Porters and others
to be searched, when they come out of the Hold, to prevent such deceit, as
they might use by secret conueyance of Wares, in their Breeches, or otherwise.

CCLIII.
They shall appoint some of the Companies Servants to assist and attend with
them vigilantly at the Hold, that nothing may be conuayed from thence without
their knowledge, and a true note taken of the perticulars, in as plain and
perfect manner as possible they may: and the said notes of every several days
discharge, they shall deliver up under their own hands unto the Governor, to
be by him delivered to the Accomptants, who shall enter the same orderly into a
Book for that purpose.

CCLIIII.
They shall send in every Lighter laden with Wares from the Ships, one of the
Companies trusty Servants, with a note of the perticulars, and also to watch
continually (until all be discharged at the Custom House) that nothing be
imbeselled: and for more safety they shall lock up the Holds of the said close
Lighters, and deliver the keys unto them, who shall have charge to unlade the
said goods.

CCLV.
They shall at the full discharge of every Ship, go down into the Hold,
diligently to search, that nothing do remain between the Seelings, or in any
other place of secret conuayance, whereby the Company might be wronged.

CCLVI.
They shall cause some of the Companies Servants, to keep a board continually
(day and night) during the time of the Ships discharge, with careful Watch
that nothing be conuayed away by the Captain, Master, Factors, Officers,
Mariners, or any others, without their knowledge: and notes taken of the
perticulars, to be sent, and safely kept in the Customehouse, until order
taken at a Court of Committees, how the said Goods shall be disposed.

CCLVII.
They shall appoint some of the Companies trusty Servants to assist them, in
the receiving up of all the said goods at the Custom House, keeping a true
note of all things by weight, measure, or tale, according as the Merchandise
shall require, and the said note to be by them subscribed, that they may after
be entered by the Accomptants in to the Book before written, whereby the just
quantity of Wares may appear, which shall be delivered into the custody of
them, who shall have charge of the Companies Warehouses.

Clerks of the Warehouses.
CCLVIII.
THE said Clerks shall receive into the Companies Warehouses, all the Spices,
Indico, raw Silk, wrought Silk, Callicoes, Drugs, Carpets, or any other
Wares which shall be delivered them in charge by the Committees of the said
Warehouses, for the use and account of this Company.

CCLIX.
They shall receive all the said Wares carefully and justly, by number, weight,
or measure, as the Merchandise it self shall require, and thereof make true
entry in a Book of purpose, setting down the Wares of each Ship severally,
and the commodities of sundry kinds by themselves, that the charge of every
Warehouse may appear, when any inquiry shall be made thereof.

CCLX.
They shall give their attendance with all carefulnes, especially when the
Wares are Garboled and repacked, locking up the doors in time of work, and
suffering no man who shall be employed in those labors, to depart before he be
searched: against which order, if any of them resist, he shall be presently
dismissed out of the Companies service.

CCLXI.
They shall deliver of the said Goods from day to day unto those persons, and in
such manner as they shall receive Warrant to perform from the Governor or his
Deputy, and the Committees of the Warehouses: and the said Warrants they shall
reserve for their discharge; noting down in a fair Book every particular
thing delivered, the time, the parties name, his suerties, tares, trets, price,
and every other circumstance, to make the parcel plain and perfect, and in
the Margent to note down the number of each Warrant.

CCLXII.
They shall keep a true account of all manner of charges which they shall
disburse to Porters, Carmen, or the like, in the Warehouses, and of the Caske,
or Canuas, which they shall receive to pack or imbale the Companies Goods: and
they shall likewise render a true account, of all the Skins, Wrappers, Cotton
Wools, or other things, which shall be sold to the most advantage of this
Company.

Committees of Warehouses.
CCLXIII.
THE said Committees shall be six in number, and they shall see all the
Merchandise whatsoever for this Company, safely and orderly lodged in the
VVarehouses, taking a true account of every Ships lading, concerning the
quality and quantity of the VVares severally, and so shall they compare all
things by the Accounts from the Jndies, to see that the Company be not wronged
in their weight, number, measure, false packing, or other defects, whereof they
shall presently acquaint the Court of Committees, that such course may be taken
for remedy, as unto them shall seem needful.

CCLXIIII.
They shall ouersee the said Warehouses, and command, that all things there be
well and orderly placed, so that no part of the Wares may receive any hurt, or
be wasted; and they shall cause three Locks of several openings to be made to
the outward doors of every Warehouse, that so the keys of two of them may be
in the power of two several Committees, and the third shall be reserved in the
charge of the said Clarke.

CCLXV.
They shall vnder-write the Warrants to the said Clerks, together with the
Governor or his Deputy, for the delivery of Wares upon Stock unto the
Adventurers, or upon Bills, according to the bargains, which shall be made by
the Candels, or otherwise; in which they shall have a special care* that
nothing be trusted, but upon good security

CCLXVI.
They shall Audit up the Warehouse books, concerning the particular charges
disbursed by the Clerks, and take account of the Wrappers, Skins, Cotton
Wools, and the like, to be sold for the use of the Company.

Sales of Merchandise.
CCLXVII.
THE Custom which has been used heretofore in selling the Wares of this
Company at a general Court, and the Remnants of small value in the Warehouses
by the light of a Candle, shall be continued; only in some cases excepted,
where the Governor, Deputy, and Committees, shall conceive it needful to take
some other course for the good of the Company.

CCLXVIII.
All adventures of Stocks which shall hereafter be sold by the light of a
Candle in open Court, shall be published and put to sale in the names of the
Adventurers of such Stock; And it shall not be lawful for any man* either by
himself or by any others for him, to offer price for the said Adventures;
only they have power in the beginning of every sale to set down their lowest
rates, and then to take their fortune of that which shall follow by the offers
of other men.

Solicitor for Payment of Debts.
CCLXIX.
THE said Solicitor shall attend the Warehouses, to take notice of all the
Wares which shall be entrusted to any man by this Company, and shall make the
Bills of Debt, and procure them to be signed and sealed by the principal
Debtors and their Suerties; which Bills so signed and sealed, he shall deliver
up to the custody of the Treasurers for this Company.

CCLXX.
He shall likewise solicit all the Companies Debtors, to bring in their money
to the Treasurers at the due time: and if he find any man negligent or
careless to discharge his debt, he shall acquaint the Court of Committees
thereof, that they may take some speedy course for satisfaction.

Solicitor in the Law.
CCLXXI.
IN all occasions of controversies, actions, and suites of Law, the said
Solicitor shall follow the cause by his own experience, and according to
directions of his learned Counsel assigned him by the Court; concerning which,
and all other his proceedings in the affairs of this Company, He shall from
time to time acquaint the Court of Committees, and attend their resolutions.

CCLXXII*
He shall assist to make contracts, covenants, and other Writings, wherein the
Company shall have any occasion to make use of his knowledge and endeavors in
matters of that kind.

Wages.
CCLXXIII.
THE Wages or Allowance unto the Presidents, Generals, Captains, Commanders,
Factors, and all other Officers in this Companies Service (wheresoever) shall
be agreed and established by the Governor or his Deputy, with the greater
number of the Committees.

CCLXXIIII.
There shall be allowance of two Months wages imprested aforehand, unto all
such persons as shall serve this Company in their Shipping to the East Jndies,
and for some special reasons, there shall be allowance of three Months wages
imprested aforehand, unto all the Ship Carpenters employed in the said Voyages.

CCLXXV.
There shall be allowance also of two Months wages (upon Account of every
years Service) unto the Wives of all such persons, as shall be employed in the
Companies Shipping to the East Jndies.

CCLXXVI.
All the Factors for the Company in the East Indies, shall have one third part
of their wages allowed them there yearly (if they require it) for maintenance
of Apparel and the like, after the rate of Five shillings sterling for every
Ryall of Eight. But the other two third parts shall be paid here in England
unto their Assigns. And the said Factors shall not be entertained into the
Companies service for less then Seven years, except only in some special
occasions of principal men it is left unto the discretion of the Governor,
Deputy and Committees, to agree with them as they shall see cause.

CCLXXVII.
The wages which herafter shall be paid unto any of the Commanders, Factors or
Marryners, that return home in the Companies Ships from the Jndies, or to the
Executors and Assigns of them who happen to dye in the Voyage, shall be made
up justly by the chief Accomptant, assisted by any one of the Auditors, in the
presence and with the approbation of one or more of the Committees appointed
for entertaining of Maryners: and thus by warrant from them all signed, the
Clarke of the wages shall pay every particular man his due, reserving the said
Warrants for his discharge in the Audit of his Accounts.

CCLXXVIII.
The Companies Officers here in England upon yearly Sallary, shall have their
wages paid them Quarterly by just proportions.

CCLXXIX.
The said Officers from henceforth, shall not take directly nor indirectly, any
Fee, payment or Gift of the Brethren of this Company, concerning Warrants,
Bonds, Bills, Transportations of Adventures, or any other service which ought
to be by them performed in their several places, but their labors of this
kind shall wholly depend upon the yearly Sallarie or other rewards, which
shall be agreed or allowed them by the Court of Committees: only the
Secretaries Fees, which are usually paid by them who are made free Brethren of
the Company shall be continued.

CCLXXX.
There shall be no increase of wages given to any man, who (in the course of the
Voyage whereunto he is hired) shall happen to succeed or to be preferred to a
higher Office then that place wherein he was first Shipped. But if any such
persons so advanced shall be found to have well deserved for the benefit of
the Company, the Court of Committees may gratify and reward them, as they
shall think fit.

Gratifications.
CCLXXXI.
THE Gifts and Liberality of this Company unto worthy and well deserving
Persons, shall be at the discretions and disposing of the Governor or his
Deputy, with the greater number of Committees; Provided always that no Gift
or Gratification to one man shall amount to a greater value then the sum of
One hundredth pounds. For if there shall be occasion to give a larger Reward to
any particular man, Then in that case they shall acquaint the general Court
therewith, and from thence receive resolution and direction.

CCLXXXII.
All Gratifications which either have been given heretofore or shall be given
hereafter, to any of the Companies Officers in the Realm of England, over and
above their yearly Sallarie, shall not remain constant unto them in the
nature of wages, but such gratifications shall pass the Judgment of the Court
of Committees once every year, at the time of their Election.

CCLXXXIII.
The said Governor, Deputy, and Committees, shall not allow or take unto
themselves, any sum or sums of money for and in consideration of their
cares and labors in the Affairs of this Company, but the Rewards of their
Deserts shall be referred once every year to the pleasure of the general
Court, wherein new Directors shall be chosen, or to the next general Court
following.

CCLXXXIIII.
All Gifts of whatseuer kind, or to whomsoever given, either openly in Court,
or privately by the Order of Court, shall be delivered in the name of the
Company, by some Committees appointed thereunto by the Court, who shall render
a particular Account of such private distributions at all times when the said
Court shall require the same.

Trade.
CCLXXXV.
THE Trade for the East Jndies shall be unlawful to all men, otherwise then in
the general or Joint Stock, which shall be managed by the Governor, Deputy
and Committees, for and in the behalf of all the Adventurers. And whosoever
shall be found directly or indirectly, to perform any other private Trade, to
or from the said Jndies, or within any of the several Factories, or from Port
to Port there, he shall Forfeit all the monyes, Wares, Interests, and other
profits whatsoever (or the value) which shall be found to belong, proceed, or
arise by any such private Trade. And the said Forfeitures shall be recovered
according to the Tenor of his Majesty's Letters Pattents granted unto the
Company.

CCLXXXVI.
There shall be a Tolleration, only for the encouragement of all the
Commanders, Factors and Marryners, who shall return home in the Companies
Ships and service: to bring with them for their own proper Accounts, so much
Raw Silk, Benjamin, Gumlacke, Musk, Sugar Candy, Drugges, Carpets, Quilts,
Hard-wax, Preserues, Wormeseeds, Silk Stuffes, Beazar-stones, or any other
Wares whatsoever (Jndico, Callicoes, Dyamonds, and all sorts of Spices only
excepted) as they can bestow or pack into one Chest for each man, of Four
foot long, 1. Foot and a half broad, and 1. foot and a half deep, for which
they shall not pay Freight or any other duty unto this Company.

Beadle.
CCLXXXVII.
THE said Beadle shall daily give his Attendance at the Companies House, to
know the pleasure of the Governor or his Deputy, for the Summoning of Courts
ordinary and extraordinary, and other meetings of the Committees, and shall
diligently attend the Courts, to perform such other Duties as concern his
place.

CCLXXXVIII.
He shall use all possible Diligence in the warning of the General Courts, and
especially the Court for Election of the Governor, Deputy, Treasurers, and
Committees, leaving Tickets at each man's House, and setting up Bills in the
Exchange three days at the least before the said Courts.

Porter of the Companies House in London.
CCLXXXIX.
THE said Porter shall have a Room in the Companies House near the street
Door, for his abode in the day time, and a Chamber for his Lodging in the
Night.

CCXC.
He shall attend daily to open and shut the Street Door, and the back Gate
upon all occasions needful, and he shall diligently observe such persons who
enter and depart the Companies House, especially those who may seem to be
suspicious, or are found to be troublesome by outrageous speaking, Swearing,
Gaming, Quarrelling, Fighting, or other disorders, and shall cause them
forthwith to avoid the House. Also to apprehend such as shall have stolen or
do attempt to pilfer, or perform any other thing in the said House, contrary
to his Majesty's Laws.

CCXCI.
He shall every Night before Supper, call John Blount one of the Companies
Officers, who is Lodged in their said House, to walk the Round with him into
all the open Rooms and places, where they shall carefully view, and after
lock up the doors, and deliver the Keys unto the Companies Secretary.

CCXCII.
The street Door shall be shut and chayned every Evening presently after
departure of the Officers: and if any chance to knock later within Night,
answer shall be made them without vnchayning the Door, until the party and his
Arrand be known unto the rest of the Officers lodged in the Companies house.

CCXCIII.
The Street door and back Gates, shall shut each of them with Two locks of
several openings, to the intent that every Evening one Key of each door may
remain with the Porter, and the other Keys to be delivered to John Blount
aforesaid, who shall be present to see the said Door shut and opened daily, and
shall also have care and, assist the Porter to prevent all disorders in the
Companies house.

CCXCIIII.
The Porter shall have the custody and care of the Companies Fuel and
Candles, that they be not wasted by others, and shall make the Fires in the
several Offices at the times appointed, and shall daily sweep the great Hall
and Parlour, the Street door, and all the Yardes, light Candles to the Offices
and in the Lanthornes about the House, and to do all other things fitting his
place.

CCXCV.
All the Officers and their Servants (who do lodge in the said House) shall
have egresse and regresse into the same, Viz from Six a clock in the Morning
until Ten a clock at Night, and not before, or after those times, except
only upon some special occasion by License, or by the general consent of the
said Officers.

CCXCVI.
The said Porter, shall once every week sweep the Treasury, and all the other
Offices in the Companies said House.

Accomptants general.
CCXCVII.
THE Booke-keepers shall observe such Order and Method, in the Mannaging of the
Accounts for the Affairs of the Company, as is at large set down and
delivered them in an Instruction. Page. 75.

CCXCVIII.
They shall not digest or enter into the great Books, the Accounts of the
Yards, Factors, Husband, Warehouses, Wages, Impressed, Storehouses, or any other
Accounts whatsoever, before they be Audited, and signed by the several
Auditors appointed thereunto by the Court.

CCXCIX.
They shall carefully review the works of the said Auditors, and if they find
any oversight or error, they shall presently cause the same to be reformed.

CCC.
They shall not frame or make a Warrant in full payment of any Provisions
whatsoever, bought by the Committees or others, without a Bill of parcels
subscribed by them, and also by the parties who sold the goods, that so the
said Bills may be fastened to the Warrant for the Discharge of the Debts.

CCCI.
They shall by the direction of the Court, write all the Companies Letters,
Inuoices, Bills, of lading, Commissions, or instructions for the Jndies, or to
any other place beyond the Seas, and the Coppies they shall see fairly written
into the several Books appointed for that purpose.

CCCII.
They shall note down in a Book from time to time, all the Bargains for
Timber, Plancke, Mastes, Treenailes, Deals, Sheathing-boards, and the Coppies
of all, they shall deliver unto the Clarke of the Yard for his direction, in
the receiving of the said Bargains for the Company.

CCCIII.
They shall carefully pass the Brokes upon all men's Accounts, whosoever shall
not pay in their monyes at the times appointed.

CCCIIII.
They shall declare where any Defect is at any time, either in the Officers in
not delivering up their Accounts, or in the Auditors in not Auditing the same.

CCCV.
They shall not deliver out of the Companies house any the originals, or
Coppies of Letters, Iournals, Consultations, Commissions, Accounts, or other
writings which do concern Navigations, Trade, or other secrets of the said
Company, neither yet shall they suffer any of them to be perused or read in the
said House by any person or persons, but only by such who shall be authorized
thereunto by the Court.

CCCVI.
They shall yearly deliver up unto the Court at the Fine of June, a perfect
Balance of all Accounts in their charge.

Auditors in the Court of Committees.
CCCVII.
THE said Auditors shall be Six in number, and in all occasions of difference
for matter of Accounts which concern the Company, they are to examine and
search out the Truth, and to deliver their opinions unto the Court, or else to
determine and end those causes which shall be referred unto them.

CCCVIII.
They shall acquaint the Court when any Diuident in money is due unto the
Adventurers, which take not out their Stocks in goods.

CCCIX.
They shall vnderwrite all the Warrants, which are directed unto the
Treasurers, for payment of the Diuidents in money unto the Adventurers, And
they shall subscribe to all the particular Accounts Audited by the general
Auditors, before they be entered into the Companies great Books.

CCCX.
They shall have Authority to make Inquiry and ouersee the Affairs of this
Company, concerning the performance of all their Laws and standing Orders.

CCCXI.
They shall carefully take notice of the errors, negligence, obstinacy, or
insufficiency of any man whosoever in the Companies business.

CCCXII.
They shall be prepared at the general Court, on the last Tuesday in the
month of May, yearly appointed for reformations, faithfully to deliver up
their Collections or complaints to the Company, if they be required thereunto.

Auditors general.
CCCXIII.
THE said Auditors shall be two in number, and they shall have a room or place
to themselves, for their meetings in the Companies house.

CCCXIIII.
They shall once every quarter (at the least) Audit up the Cashes of the two
Treasurers, and the accounts of the Husband, together with the accounts of the
Clerks of the Storehouses in London: The accounts of the Clerks of the
Impressed money and wages, the account of the Clarke of the Cordage, of the
Clarke of the Yard, of the Clarke of Beef and Porke, of the Clerks of the
Warehouses, etc. And also all the accounts from the Companies Factors in the
Jndies, or any other accounts of Factors, who make provision of Wares for the
Company beyond the Seas: And after they have exactly Audited all the said
accounts, they shall bring them to the view of the Auditors Committees, to be
by them approved and subscribed, before they be delivered up unto the
Accomptant general, to be entered in the Companies great Books.

CCCXV.
They shall use special care and diligence in the Audit of the accounts of
money taken up at intrest, to see from time to time, that the Company be not
charged with more then their occasions require; whereof they shall give a
reason in the first Court of Committees after every quarter day.

CCCXVI.
They shall have care of the general accounts, to see that all the other
accounts and parcels be fairly and truly entered into them by the
Bookekeepers, and that they be prepared to deliver up a perfect Balance of all
the said accounts unto the Company, by the last day of June yearly.

Audit of Accounts.
CCCXVII.
IN the Audit of all the Companies Accounts, it is required that the several
Auditors thereunto appointed, do carefully cast up every parcel, and so to
follow the Accomptants in all other their performance, that no miscasting or
other errors may be passed for want of search.

CCCXVIII.
It is necessary not only to draw up accounts by form unto a perfect
Balance, but also the very matter it self is diligently to be regarded
concerning the issuing of the Companies materials to their buildings, the
prices of provisions bought, the disbursements of charges and the like; in any
of which, if there be found exorbitance, or excess, it shall be brought to the
consideration of the Governor, Deputy, and Committees, before the accounts be
allowed.

CCCXIX.
And forasmuch as the affairs of the Company are so contrived, that there is
now little or no trust imposed in any particular man's accounts: But that he
has also some check by Warrants, Bills of parcels, or the accounts of other
men: It is therefore carefully to be observed by the Auditors, that each
Accomptant produce such Vouchers, as are at large set down in an instruction
for that purpose. Page 79.

Freedoms.
CCCXX.
IT is Ordered and agreed: That if by any means the names of any of the
Company are not mentioned in the Charter granted by his Majesty unto this
Society, That (notwithstanding) as well they as any other, that are or shall be
admitted of the Company, by virtue of an Order of Court, heretofore or
hereafter to be made, are in all respects as free of the Company, as if they
were expressly mentioned in the said Charter.

CCCXXI.
It shall be lawful for each Brother of the Company, already Free, or
hereafter to be admitted, to make all his Sons Free of this Society at their
several Ages of XXI. years or upwards, and all their Apprentizes, who shall
have served them VII. years at least by Indenture, after they themselves were
made Free of this Company. But such as are or hereafter shall be admitted a
free Brother of this Society Gratis, that is to be understood only in their
own persons, and no otherwise.

CCCXXII.
And it is further Ordered, that any person or persons (his Majesty's Subjects)
may from henceforth be admitted a free Brother of this Company by redemption.
That is to say a mere Merchant shall pay Fifty pounds, and all others of
whatsoever Profession, vocation, or Trade, shall pay one Hundred Marks for
their several Fines, at their admissions by the Governor, Deputy and
Committees.

CCCXXIII.
All the Apprentizes of this Company, and also such Factors who shall have
served them faithfully Seven years in the East Jndies, shall be made Free
Brethren of this Company.

CCCXXIIII.
It shall be lawful for the Governor, or his Deputy, with the greater number
of the Committees, to admit into this Society Gratis, any Noble or well
deserving persons who have merited, or may by them be thought worthy to
receive such favor from the Company, paying only the Officers Fees, and XX.
s. to the Poores Box, at the time of their several admissions.

CCCXXV.
All such as shall be made free Brethren (hereafter) of this Company, shall take
an Oath in the presence of the Governor, or his Deputy, and Six Committes at
the least, before they be admitted into this Society.

CCCXXVI.
From henceforth all such as are to be made Free of this Company by Patrimony
or by Service, shall require the said Freedom within Twelve Months after they
are capeable of the same, Pena Five pounds, except by motion made in a Court of
Committees, they shall have further time granted them.

Penalties or Fines.
CCCXXVII.
GENERALLY whosoever (in Office for this Company) shall be found to break any
of the Companies Laws or Orders, through wilful neglect or insufficiency to
the performance of his charge, he shall be forth with Displaced, and also be
further proceeded against according to the quality of his Offense.

CCCXXVIII.
It is Ordered and agreed, that all such as hereafter be chosen Governor,
Deputy, Treasurer, or Committees of this Company, and do refuse or will not
take the said Offices upon them: shall Forfeit and pay to be freed thereof for
One whole year, such reasonable Fines as the general Court shall think good.

CCCXXIX.
The Forfeitures which hereafter are to be paid by the Committees for absence,
or late appearance, in their Courts, and other meetings, without lawful
excuse; or for unseemly speaking, or wilful and uncivil interrupting of each
others speech, or private conferences, to the disturbance of their said Courts
and the like: Shall be imposed from time to time, at such rates as the
Governor, or his Deputy, with the greater number of the Committees shall see
cause, for the better effecting of the Companies Affairs, and preservation of
Order among themselves.

CCCXXX.
It is ordered for pacification of controversy in Arguments in the General
Courts and meetings of Committees, and of loud or confused speeches, That when
the Governor or his Deputy, commands silence by the stroke of the Hammer,
that then every person be quiet and still, Pena XII. d. for every such Offense.

CCCXXXI.
For better and more speedy payment of all Debts due unto the Company by Bond,
Bill, or for Adventures, or otherwise by any Brethren of the same, who shall
not make payment to the Treasurer or to such other as shall be appointed for
that purpose, at the time and place limited and set down, shall forfeit and
pay to the use of the General Company (besides their principal Debts) the
sum of XL s. upon every C. l. for each Month they shall omit to bring in the
same, and so after the said rate for a shorter or longer time, whether it be
upon a greater or a lesser Sum of money to be proportioned.

CCCXXXII.
All Fines now or hereafter to be Forfeited by the Brethren of this Company,
for breach of any the Ordinances of the same, shall be by him or them presently
paid to the use of the general Company, or charged upon his or their stocks
or Adventures with this Society, to the use aforesaid: or having no Stock or
Adventure with them, to suffer Imprisonment during the pleasure of the Company,
according to the power which is granted them by his Majesty's Letters Patents.

Laws or Orders.
CCCXXXIII.
THE Laws or Orders now made, together with his Majesty's Letters Patents to
the Company, shall be brought by the Secretary unto every Court, that they may
be perused in all occasions which shall happen.

CCCXXXIIII.
The Laws or standing Orders of the Company, shall be publicly read in the
beginning of a general Court, to be holden on the last Tuesday of the month
of May yearly if it be required, And then the making of any new Orders, or the
Abrogating of any of these which are already made, shall be offered to the
consideration and resolution of the Generality.

CCCXXXV.
All Laws or Orders heretofore made, being repugnant or swaruing from these,
shall henceforth be void.

THE ORDER AND METHOD THAT THE ACCOMPTANTS GENERAL SHALL OBSERVE AND PERFORM
IN THE Mannaging and digesting the Accounts of the Company: As follows.
FOR the more conueniencie in the Mannaging of the said Accounts, consisting of
so many particular estates and Adventures, and disposed into such diversity of
employments and returns; you shall divide the said Accounts into two Books,
namely, two Iournals, with their two Lidgers: The one whereof shall be the
Account proper, and the other the Account current, in each of which, you shall
handle these perticulars following.

IN the Book entitled Account proper, you shall enter every particular man's
Adventure (according to the proportion he has) mentioning his name and quality
so near as you may, making him Creditor for his said Adventure in particular,
according to the Payments he brings and pays in, that the Acquittances
given per the Treasurers, and your Books may agree upon all occasions.

IN this Book you shall enter perticularly the payments and satisfaction that
is made to every Aduenturer (for his Adventure) as it is taken out by him, be
it in money or goods; plainly showing wherein, and when every man is satisfied
his Adventure: and you shall in these Books charge no man for any thing, save
what is delivered on his Stock.

IN this Book likewise you shall enter every years total employment sent to
Sea, be it Merchandise, Ships, Victuals or Charges incident, after the same
shall be first at large, and after perticularly contracted and digested in the
Books of the Account current, which you shall yearly by a parcel of Balance
bring over to this Account, and here in one account enter plainly and
distinctly the Merchandise first, then the Ships with their victualling, and
that years charge successively; that it may readily appear what every years
employment and charge amounts unto, and wherein it consists.

IN this Book you shall also enter all Factors Accounts both for Sales and
employments made in and received from Jndia, and although every Ships return
may consist of diverse sorts of Merchandise, you shall notwithstanding in this
Book arm but one Account for any one Ship, but shall in that Account both in
Iournall and Lidger, successively enter every commodity, expressing his
quantity and cost.

IN this Book you shall also only keep the Account of profit and loss, and
shall clear no Account or Voyage, till the same be fully accounted for, and
shall also in this Account pass unto every man his profit or loss, as the
Stock general shall produce.

In the other Books called the Account Current, you shall enter and digest all
manner employments and returns, amply and perticularly; in the mannaging
whereof you shall observe this order following.
FOR the outward employment or issue of the Stock before mentioned in the other
Book, you shall divide the same into four Branches, that is to say;

1 THE State of Merchandise, and of them you shall keep distinct and several
Accounts in their proper kinds and denominations, not confounding many
together: and the said Commodities as they are disposed into voyages, you shall
clear by the voyage whereunto they are dissigned, and so every year clear
this branch, unless any be left which may remain on their Accounts till the
future year.

2 THE State of Shipping, which you shall likewise severally keep every Ship
by it self, charging the same perticularly with every Material that is
expended thereon, as well to the Building, as furnishing, and for store,
together with the Charge of wages of Workmen employed therein, till the such
Ship be fully furnished to Sea. And for plainer and ready performance hereof,
you shall keep all the Materials, that are required to the building and
furnishing of Ships in their several denominations and kinds, (and not heap
them confusedly in the names of Officers and Storehouses) that so it may
readily appear how much of every Provision is spent Yearly, and how it is
spent, to the end necessary and competent proportions may always be provided,
without superfluety and unnecessary Charge.

3 THE State of Victualling, you shall likewise keep in their several
Denominations and kinds, and the expense of them, Charge on every Ship
according to his proportions, that of these kinds may appear what is yearly
expended, and needful to be provided.

4 EXPENSES General, such as are Gratueties, Salary of Officers, Rents,
Charges, ordinary and extraordinary, and such like: which you shall likewise
keep distinctly, every one in his proper Name and title, that of this quality
also may appear what is expended yearly.

AND for Conclusion of this Account of Employment, for that every Year
breeds his Voyage, and charge of Ships, Victuals, etc. as above; you shall
draw out of these Branches every years Employment, to one head or Voyage, and
thereon charge, first, the Merchandise agreeing with the Inuoice; next the
Ships, and the Victuals; and lastly that years general Charge, and this in
particular, and successively: which thus contracted, you shall in one parcel
balance and bear over to the Book called Account Proper, and there reenter
as is ordered in the third Article, for the ordering of that Book.

SVCH necessary Accounts as arise in the current of this business with Factors
beyond the Seas for Provision of Foreign Commodities, Officers at home for the
defraying of Charges, and monyes delivered for Provisions before hand, be
careful to keep distinctly and plainly that one Account be not confounded
with another.

FOR all commodities returned from Jndia, which in the other book you have
entered according to the Inuoyce in one Account, you shall in these Books
handle perticularly each commodity in an Account by it self, and the Sales
thereof, on which commodities you shall charge his proper charges, and duties
paid here in England, and the same being fully sold, you shall pass the nett
Proceed thereof into the other books, and there make the same good to the
Inuoyce or Account it belongs.

FOR such Ships as shall return from Jndia, being first praised, according to
the Companies order, you shall enter perticularly in this Book, and the same
being fully perfected, you shall in one parcel pass the same over to the
other Book, and there allow the same in one total (referred to this Book) to
the Voyage it belongs.

FOR wages and charges that shall arise upon any Ships discharge or return,
you shall likewise handle in this book, and the same being perfected, pass
the same in one entire parcel to the other Book, and there charge the same
upon the Account or Inuoyce it belongs* that by this means it may plainly
appear, what is got by each particular commodity, and every Ships whole lading.

BOTH in the one and the other Account, you shall not pass any thing without a
sufficient Voucher to justify your Iournals parcels under some Committy or
Officers hand.

AND for conclusion of all, you shall digest and enter all Accounts into the
Iournall your self with your own hand, For we will admit of no diversity of
hands: And being therein digested, we have appointed Jeremy Sambrooke to
assist you for the passing of the said Iournals into their Lidgers, and also in
any business belonging to these Accounts; whom we would have to be acquainted
with all other matters, to the end (That if God shall otherwise dispose you) he
may be able to go forwards with the business, and give us a reason of the
premises.

Orders to be observed For the better Vouching of sundry Accounts, and have
reference to certain other Articles, set down for the perfect Auditing of the
Companies Accounts, as in Page. 70
Treasurers.
FIRST Let the Treasurers vouch all their Payments in general, by the Receipts
of the Parties who shall receive any money of them, and also by the Warrant of
the Governor, or his Deputy, with Four Committees at the least; only the
payments to the Adventurers upon Stock, shall pass by the Warrant of the
Auditors.

Let the Monyes received for Freedoms be compared with the Secretaries Book,
wherein he notes down the times, Conditions and Names* of all those who are
made Free Brethren of the Company.

Clerks of the Yard and Storehouse.
LET the Payment of every Weeks wages to all the Workmen in the Yardes, be
vouched by the Notes of the Committees, who go weekly to the Yardes to see the
said wages paid.

Let the Accounts be carefully examined for all things whatsoever delivered
into the Yardes upon Bargains made, and the like concerning the Clerks
Receipts for all the Materials provided and sent into the Yard by the Husband,
or by any other for the Company.

Let the Books of all the subordinate Officers in the Yard, which are digested
into the Clerks great Books, be diligently compared together, and the like
by the Receipts for Materials delivered over from one Officer to another.

Let the Books and Receipts of the Purcers in the Companies Ships be duly
examined for all Provisions, Stores, Victuals, or Merchandise delivered out of
the Storehouses, Yardes, or by any of the Companies Officers, and charged upon
the said Ships.

Clarke of the Slaughterhouse.
LET the charge of the Clarke of the Slaughterhouse, be compared with the
Accounts of Beef and Porke, and let his Discharge upon Shipping be examined
with the Purcers Books.

Let no Account pass (without the knowledge and Order of the Court) wherein
the Offals of the Beef and Porke, do exceed those several rates in the
trial made for the Company, which is Registered in the Book of Remembrances,
in Page. 13.

Clarke of the Impressed money and wages.
LET the Accounts of the Clerks concerning Impressed money, be examined by the
Book of the Committees, who entertain the Mariners; and by the Bonds of the
parties to whom the money is Imprested.

Let the Wages which is paid to Mariners Wives upon Account for their
Husbands, be vouched by the Order and Warrant under the hands of the
Committees, who entertain the said Mariners.

Let the Wages which is paid to the Mariners after they return home, be
vouched by Order and Warrant under the hands of the Committees, the Accomptant
general, and one of the Auditors.

Accounts of wages.
LET the Accounts of wages for Commanders, Factors or Mariners, be compared
with the Acts of Court, and with the Book of entertainment kept by the Clarke
of the Impressed; and let the time of any of their Deaths, and their Debts be
examined, by the Aduises or Letters out of the Jndies, and by the Purcers
books.

Warehouses.
LET the Warehouses for Merchandise be charged with a Book for that purpose,
wherein every particular Commodity is set down by number, weight or measure,
as it is received out of each Ship severally.

Let the said Warehouses be Discharged according as all the said Commodities
shall be delivered out, by lawful Warrant subscribed by the Governor or his
Deputy, and the Committees of the Warehouses.

Purcer general.
LET the Purcer generals Accounts for Wages paid aboard Ships, be vouched by
the Purcers Books of each Ships.

Petty Charges.
LET all petty Charges which is disbursed by the Husband or any Officer to the
Committees, or to any others, for their occasions in the Companies business, be
vouched with a Note under the Parties hand writing, to whom the money is paid
and warranted, as is ordered.

Factors Accounts.
LET the Factors Accounts concerning Number, Weight and Measure of every
Cargazon sent out or received home, be examined, the one by the Inuoyces, and
the other by the Book for Discharge of each Ship, into the Companies
Warehouses.

Let the Books of Accounts from Bantam and Suratt, concerning the Affairs of
the subordinate Factories, which are digested into the said Books, be compared
with the Original Accounts.

Old Stores.
LET it be diligently observed that every Officer, who shall receive any old
Stores from the Companies Ships which return home, be accomptable for the
same by the Book of Inuentaries, wherein all such things are noted down
perticularly.

Brokes.
LET there be care taken, that the Brokes be justly charged upon all men's
Accounts whosoever, that shall not pay in their Monyes at the times appointed,
and if any man's Account be found to receive favor in this kind by Order of
Court, then let the Court Books be searched, to vouch the parcel.

Gratifications.
CONCERNING all the Gratifications given by Order of Court, let every parcel
be examined by the Court Books.

Bills of Parcels for all Goods bought.
AND generally let all the Merchandise, Provisions, Victuals, and Stores
bought, either by the Committees, the Husband, or any other for the Company,
be vouched by a Bill of parcels subscribed by them, and by the Parties who
sold the goods.

FINIS.

