depiction of ship

A LETTER WRITTEN TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE GOVERNOVRS AND ASSISTANTS OF
THE EAST INDIAN MERCHANTS IN LONDON: CONTAINING THE ESTATE OF THE EAST INDIAN:
FLEET, WITH THE NAMES OF THE CHIEF MEN OF NOTE DEAD IN THE VOYAGE

AT LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Thorppe, and are to be sold by William Aspley.

1603.

A LETTER WRITTEN TO THE RIGHT worshipful the Governors and Assistants of
the East Indian Merchants in London; containing the estate of the East Indian
Fleet, with the names of the chief men of note dead in the Voyage.
RIght Worshipful my duty remembered. It may please you to understand, that we
wayed Anchor the 20. of April 1601. and set sail out of Torbaye by Dartmouthe.

The 21. of June following, being in the height of three degrees to the
Northwards of the line, we took a ship of Vianna bound for Brasill, of the
burden of 130. tun, her lading was Wine, Oil and Meal, which has stood us
in great steed in this our voyage: five or six days after we turned her off
after we had pillaged her as we thought good.

The 20. day of July we turned away the Guifte being in the height of 19.
degrees to the Southward of the Line, the 24. day we came under the Tropicke of
Capricorn.

The 19. day of September we came to Anchor at Saldaiua, being in very great
distress by reason of the scuruy disease then raging among us. The Ascension
and Susans company were scarce able to let fall their Anchors without the help
of other ships, there we stayed and refreshed our men with fresh victuals, as
Beef and Mutton in great abundance which cost us little or nothing, there we
stayed about seven weeks, and had stayed there longer if the inhabitants had
continued to bring us fresh victuals, so we departed thence the 9. of October.

The 29. of December we came to Anchor in the baye of Antoga, here we trucked
with the inhabitants for Rice, Lemmans and Plantaines and such like fruit, we
set up one of our Pinnaces: here also we lost diverse of our men which dyed
of the Filx by reason of the great heat, and feeding of the Plantaines and
Lemmans which they did devour immoderately.

This Baye is the Inland of Saint Laurence and stands in the height of
sixeteene degrees.

The 4. day of March we departed thence in the evening, and the first day of
June 1602. we discried the land Sumatra.

The 3. day we Anchored in the Road of Achin in seven faddome water. To make
any large discourse of matters which passed whilst we lay in the Road of
Achin I omit, because time will not permit: But in few words you shall
understand, that here we found little Pepper, not sufficient to load the
Ascension, having in her little above eight score tons, we could not I think
in all the East Indiaes have come to a worser place for loading.

The 30. of July the General sent away the Susan to Priaman to seek her
loading, being an Island which lies toward the southwardes eight score
leagues, a little distance from Sumatra, and about 20. days before our coming
to Achin, the little Pinnace came from her and certified our general she was
almost laden, that we hope she will not be long after us.

The 11. of September we departed out of the road of Achin for the straights
of Mallaca to seek purchase: The Red Dragon, the Assention, the Hector and a
Flemming which came into the Road os Achin but 4. days before.

The 3. of October being Sunday about five of the clock in the afternoon we
saw a sail and gave her chase, about nine of the clock we fetched her up and
hayled her, and found her to be a Ship come from Goa and bound for Mallaca
laden with Portingals goods, as Pintados, Calicottes and other stuffes great
store, a great part of her loading was Rice and victuals, and in her about
seven or eight hundred persons men women and children, we had out of her 958.
Fardils: and diverse chests with other things as Canistees: we were forced from
her by force of weather being put from our Anchors.

The 25. day we Anchored in the road of Achin.

The 11. day of November being Thurseday we waied our Anchors and set sail
from Achin, viz. the Dragon, the Hector, and a little Pinnace, and the
Ascension, they did keep us company till the next day being bound for Priaman
unto the Susan, and so from thence they were purposed to go for Bantam, God
grant they may get thither in safety, for then it is not to be doubted they
shall get their full lading of Pepper according to their desires, as shall
appear unto you hereafter: So we leaving them the day above said, departed
for England, to the great rejoicing of us all that were to go home into out
Country after so tedious a pilgrimage.

The 3. day of February about 10. of the clock before noone, we had sight of
the Cape Bona esperanse a Frenchman which we left in the road of Achin being
in our company, which came out a day after us, who together had determined to
go for Saldauia if two Flemmings who came then into our company had not
altered our determination, for after we had hailed them, we understood they
were unwilling to put in for that place, but to go for Saint Hellena, so we
stood along with them, and altogether arrived at Saint Hellena.

The 21. day of the same month, the Ascension and the Frenchman called the
Creset of Saint Mallows, the two Dutchmen, the Admiral was called the
Amsterdam about the burden of 300. Last, and the other called the Tergow, of
the bigness of the Ascension: which ship has been almost thirty three
months from home, and as they told us laden at Petauia, most of her lading
being Pepper, and in their way homeward they touched at Banton, the people of
Banton were glad when they came thither because they thought they would have
laden Pepper, having great store lying upon their hands and being cheaper then
ours is.

The general of the Flemmings whose name is Jacob Cornelius Van Neskes toulde
us that there is Pepper enough to lade four or five Ships, so that if the
Dragon came there in any time convenient it is not to be doubted but they are
upon the way homewardes full laden with Pepper, etc.

The Frenchmen have determined suddenly to leave our company to depart
homewardes, which has made me to trouble you with this discourse, although
not so large as willingly I would it were, for that time will not permit me
to do otherwise, hoping that it will not be any thing displeasing unto you,
having as I think not before this heard any certainety of us since our
departure out of England being very willing it should come to your hands
before you hear of us any more, the better to prepare your minds for the
setting forth of a new voyage. We shall be ready to depart from hence the
fifteenth day of this month of March, GOD send us home in safetye.

The names of the chief men of note which are dead in the Voyage.
THere was 182. men which were dead out of our Fleet before we parted from our
General, three of our men dead since. Men of note which are dead, are these:
William Leake Purser of this Ship, George Parsons Purser of the Hector,
Master Casell, Master Horton who married Alderman Wattes his daughter, which
four dyed before we came to Saldauia.

Brad^ncke Master of the Dragon, Master Pullion our Preacher, Master Winter
Masters mate, Master Napper Master of the Hector, these four dyed at
Antogill.

Master Brand Captain of the Ascension, going a shore in his Boat to the
burial of Master Winter, very unfortunately by a shot that was made by the
Gunner of the Admiral, was slain, with another called John Parker, who
steered the Boat.

The 27. of February being Satterday, Master Haward Captain of the Susan
dyed in the Road of Achin, Master Stradling, Master Winchcombe, John Island,
James Chamley, dyed in the Road of Achin, Master Robert Pope in the straights
of Mallaca, Master Thomas Saltin in the Road of Achin.

Thus being enforced to cut short, I cease for this present, praying for your
prosperities in all your intended enterprises, according to your disires.

Fare you well, from aboard the Ascension at S. Hellena, the 9. of March, 1602.

