AN EASE FOR OVERSEERS of the poor: ABSTRACTED FROM THE STATVTES, allowed by
practice, and now reduced into Form, as a necessary Directorie for Employing,
Releeuing, and ordering of the poor. With an easy and ready Table for
recording the number, names, ages, exercises and defects of the poor, fit to
be observed of the Overseers in every parish. Also hereunto is annexed a
prospect for rich men to induce them to give, and a pattern for poor men to
provoke them to labor, very pertinent to the matter. The principal heads
hereof appear in the next page.

Romans 12. 7. If we have an office let us wait on the office.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINTER to the University of Cambridge. 1601.

The Inscriptions or titles of the principal heads handled in this Book.
A table for a ready view of the poor. 1 Of the word Ouerseer. 2 What an
Ouerseer is. 3 The diversity of overseers. 4 What persons be fit to be made
overseers. 5 How to discern such men as be unmeet to be overseers. 6 What
Overseers should consider being called to office. 7 The office of overseers. 8
Who be liable to taxations. 9 The cause of taxations. 10 What stock will serve
to set the poor on work. 11 What poor must be set to work of the stock. 12
The place where they are to be set on work. 13 What works are fit to be done
by the poor. 14 How their works may be profitable. 15 What poor are to be
relieved with money. 16 A description of poor by their defects. 17 The
signification of the word Impotent. 18 What children are to be put Apprentices.
19 Observations for Overseers. 20 A prospect for rich men to induce them to
give to the poor. 21 A pattern for poor men to provoke them to labor for
their living.
A note of such poor as be chargeable and burdenous in the parish of Wo^ in
the County of Suffolk.
A ready form for a speedy inspection of the poor.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Wards Names and Families. years Defects usual
works weekly gettings of whom they have work. who want work Such as be fit
for Apprentices and service. Such as keep orphans and others weekly
allowance. Beggars licensed in the parish. East Father Got 71 palsy John Got.
x. d. Rich. Got. his wife 69 Ioane 19 knitte viii. d. W. True. Richard 15 idiot
West mother Ter 67 lame Alice Terre. mother Terre keeps W. Ren. Io. Ren.
base. ii. s. Marie 20 spinne x. d. John Mart. John 15 deaf Alice 9 North
Widow Fit 51 diseased R. Fit. Richard Fit. viii. d. John Fit. William 16
weaueth xii. d. H. Till. Richard 1^ John 8 dumme Henry 6 South Thomas Fig 43
labourer ii. s. of diverse men. Raph Fig. Raph Fig. Thomas Fig keeps To.
Segge. Th. Rere. Hen. Tod.
orphans. iii. s. Rose Fig. Susan 34 bedred Raph 14 Leonard 9 blind Rose 5
lame Henry 3 Thomas 2 persons 20. diseased 9 workers 4 idle 3 Apprentices. 4
orphans and other 5 Allow. 6. s. 6. d. Beggars. 3 This Table may be extracted
to a greater or lesser number according to the multiplicitie of the poor.


In distribution of this money their must be ^espect of the persons seasons
by their Impediments That they may have a proportional allowance according to
the continuance and measure of their maladies and miseries.
Temperature That somewhat be retained and reserved in summer, that their
relief may be more liberal in winter.



To all Overseers: the Author wishes Care to their office, health to their
bodies, and Heaven to their ^oules.
ALexander that magnanimious and mighty Monarch, in his martial affairs
would admit conference with his meanest follows: holding it for a principle of
experience, that as many threddes are stronger then one by co^bination, so many
heads are better then one in consultation.

By which president we may learn in business tending to a common benefit, not
to reject or pretermit the judgment of any well affected writer: for as the
Philistim was slain by David whom Saul thought a man disable to do it, so a
work of some worth may be performed by him, whom the world deem very weak
to accomplish it.

In cases of Commonwealth every one must be ready to extract his talent to
the best, as the Jews did stretch their estates to fortify the ruinous walls
of Jerusalem at the worst; and he which does his best is not to be blamed for
his forwardnes, no more then the soldier in the field which gives the first
on set to fight.

He that is most skillful in Architecture does find more trouble in contriuing
the frame, then in finishing the work: and so it is with the best Artist, the
form of invention is more busy then the action it self: and therefore seeing
I have framed an easy platform to begin a good work, I must leave the
finishing, to them which are better able to build it. For this work is brought
to best perfection by protraction of time: because practice and experience do
always add somewhat to the Action.

Excellent is that law which is last provided for the poor, but yet as gold be
it never so precious is unprofitable without use, so Laws be they never so
laudable want life without execution: therefore such as be Ouersees for the
poor must consider that the letter the laws be, which are provided for the
poor, the more they are condemned that neglect the looking to the poor: and
the greater glory a Prince gets by enacting good laws, the greater shame
the subjects reap by disobeying the laws.

I have set forth this Treatise, not for ambition, as Nimrod did the tower of
Babel to get a name, nor for vain glory, as Absalom did a pillar to preserve
his name (for that cause I forbear my name:) but of mere affection to my
native country to further it.

If there be any thing omitted, amend it: if there be something worth the
following, use it: if it be a little defective, excuse it: for Argus could
never see all, nor Christ himself content all.

An Abstract of so much as concerns Overseers in this Treatise.
In this table is summarily contained I. The Division 1. of the word Ouerseer
which does illustrate and set forth the Antiquity Excellency
of the Title whether it be taken Simply. Compositiuely.
2. of the kinds of Overseers Pastoral to be Apostles, Preachers, etc.
Mechanical to be Architects, etc.
Testamental to be Superuisors of wills.
Political to be Governors of the poor.


II. What an Ouerseer is 1. by Description of his Office, to have charge over
the poor as the shepherd over his shee^
2. by Execution of his Actions to employ by work to relieve by money to order
by discretion
the defects of the poor.

III. The men 1. fit to be made Overseers by the gifts of Fortune as wealth.
Nature as wit.
Grace as a good Conscience.

2. unfit to be made Overseers by their Dispositions which will appear by
their froward speeche^
Dealings which will appear by their dilatiue paymen^


IV. What Overseers should consider when they are chosen. 1. the Author which
is God, that they ouersee others, as he ouerseeth all.
2. the Office which is Good, that they shroud not malice, etc. under it.
3. the Rule of Charity, to do as they would be done to.
V. The Office of Overseers. VI. The persons Temporal liable to Taxations by
Statute.
Spiritual liable to Taxations by Proclamation.

VII. The Cause of Taxations, which serve for three singular uses 1. for a
Stock to set the poor on work. 2. for a Relief of the aged and impotent,
etc. 3. for the putting forth of Apprentices.
VIII. The order 1. of Raising of a Stock in respect of the Substance and
quantity which is to be moderated according to the multiplicitie of the poor.
ability of the parrish. place of habitation.

2. of using of a Stock in respect of Circumstance and quality 1. of the
persons: who are to be set on work. 2. of the place 3. of the works
to be agreeable to the dispositions educations constitutions
of the po^

IX. The Releeuing of the poor with money: who are described Specially by the
Defects of Nature as old.
of Senses as blind.
of Members as lame.
of the whole body. as not able to work.


Generally by the word Impotent: by reason of decrepitie. infancy. nativity.
casualtie.
etc.

X. A Table to contriue whatsoever is necessary for recording of the number,
names, and necessities of the poor.


I have employed my time to publish it, bestow your pains to peruse it, and
practice it so far as it is tolerable with the Law, profitable for the
place, and imitable in your discretions.

AN EASE FOR OVERSEERS.
Of the word Ouerseer.
Our first parent was called Adam, that his name derived from the earth might
signify his dissoluble nature; Caine was called a tiller of the ground that
his addition might bewray his education and faculty; so men are called
Overseers, that their titles might illustrate and distinguish their offices,
which titles being aptly attributed and extracted from the essence of the
office are singular arguments of wisdom, as it was in Adam to give proper
names to every creature to manifest their dispositions.

The word Ouerseer by division may be taken Simply. Compositiuely.


Simply it is called Seer (as a special title of inspiration) and as among the
heathens the Philosophers were deemed the wisest men in their days, so among
the Israelites a Seer was reputed an honorable person in the old time, and
was called a man of God: because by divine inspiration he had foresight and
pre-science of future things: hereof the prophets were afterward called Seers.
1. Sam. 9. 9.

Compositiuely it is called Ouerseer) as a title of distinction of offices) and
such were so expressly called which were employed about the building of the
Material and Spiritual Temple.

When the material Temple of Solomon was erecting, there was six thousand
Overseers and Judges, which were officers appointed to see the building of it.
1. Chro. 23. 4.

Those that labor for the building up of the Spiritual temple, are by the
holy Ghost phrased to be Overseers. Act. 20. 28.

So that how soever the word be taken, it may appear that an Ouerseer is not
a title of noualtie, but antiquity, of indignity, but excellency: and it is
an office that may beseem the best, and not not the basest men.

What an Ouerseer is.
AN Ouerseer by the very etymology of the word is one placed or set over
others to see unto them, as the son of Adiel was set over Salomons treasure
to see unto it.

He is rightly called an Ouerseer by the natural and essential signification
of the word: which sees what is to be done, foreseeeth how it may be done,
and ouerseeth that it be well done.

There be diverse sorts of Overseers: Pastoral. as Apostles and preachers.
Mechanical. as Architects, etc.
Testamental. as Superuisors of wills.
Political. as Governors of the poor.



The title is imposed according to the propriety of the office, and the
persons are dignified according to the singularity of the subject.

An Ouerseer of the poor is he which has the charge of employing by work,
releeuing by money, and ordering by discretion, the defects of the poor; and
this is not the least office, to be adorned with the title of Ouerseer of the
poor: for as God himself has a special respect to the miseries of the
poor, so they be like God, which provide for the necessities of the poor, as
the Samaritane was like Christ, because he relieved him that was wounded and
distressed.

If he which was both God and man did not think much to become poor for our
sakes, let us not disdain to Ouersee the poor for his sake.

What persons be fit to be made Overseers of the poor.
IN the primitive Church such as had the dealings for the poor, were called
Deacons, and those which were called to that office, are set forth in the Acts
2. ways 1. by their names to be men of honest report.
2. by their virtues to be men full of the holy Ghost. of wisdom.




The office being so excellent, the persons cannot be too good to undergo it.

The Statute appoints overseers for the poor to be Subsedie ^en, or for want
of such substantial men, which word as I conceive may be thus taken:

A substantial person is he which has Competencie of wealth. of wisdom.
Care of a good conscienc.


Competencie of wealth in an Ouerseer is very requisite by reasons drawn from
wealth and want.

I. The very ornament of wealth does add a kind of grace and majesty to a
man, although he be destitute of the chief habit of a man, whereas poverty
makes a man dispiseable, which by his properties is commendable.

II. The sufficiency of wealth will cause circumspection in the officer: for
he that has no inward remorse to make conscience of his office, the penalty
of the law will constrain him to an outward carfulness; because he has
somewhat to loose.

III. The execution of the office requires diligence, therefore he that is
wealthy may the better neglect his own affairs to attend of his office, but
the poor cannot so conveniently forbear their business, unless they neglect
their own family, and so consequently incur the Apostles reprehension.

IV. If he be poor he will not be respected: for commonly the poor despise
him that is poor, if he be set in office over the^, and will not let to say
in derision as Joseph's brethren said of him, Shall thou reign over us.

5 If he be poor, it is to be suspected he will abuse his office for benefit
sake, though he bereave it from the poor, like Judas, who repined for the
loss of ointment, not so much for the good of the poor, as for the gain of
the money: because he kept the bag and was but poor.

6 If he be poor he has no countenance to control: for where a man's wealth
is not answerable to his heart, nor his estate suitable to his calling, it does
but discourage him in the execution of his office.

Albeit wealth and riches be precious of themselves, yet if the possessour
wants wit to use them, he is no better then the Indian earth that breeds the
bullion of gold, or the ass that bears the burden of it, and yet neither
take benefit by it: therefore to wealth must be united wisdom, which although
it be of it self singular, yet as pearl set in gold makes it more beautiful
to the eye, so wisdom varnisht with wealth, makes a man more estimable to the
world.

Competencie of wisdom is necessary in an Ouerseer for these three respects,
of the Laws. of the office. of the person.


1 Of the Laws: for as laws are enacted by wisdom, so should officers be
elected for wisdom, least the benefit of the law be abused through the
ignorance of the executioners.

2 Of the office: if it be an honorable office to be an Ouerseer, why should
the dignity of the office be impaired by the insufficicie of the person.

3 Of the person, as he is reputed Foolish. Discrete.


If he be foolish he shall be skorned, and who will commit the managing of
serious matters to a fool, neither is he fit to be made Governor over others,
which wants discretion to govern himself.

If he be discrete he shall be feared and regarded for his wisdom, as Pharao
was feared for his cruelty, David for his sanctity, Samson for his strength,
so was Solomon feared for his wisdom.

As wealth and wisdom are excellent gifts, yet to make a competent Ouerseer
must be conjoined the Care of a good conscience. as the best agenr in this
office: for there be many wealthy, yet damnable as Dives was: there be many
wise, yet wicked as Achitophel was: there be many strict in their lives, yet
hypocrites, as the Pharisees were, and there be many offensive in their persons,
and yet will not be defective in their office, as many of the Jews were, but
he which has the custody of a good conscience does never miscarrie: for it
confirms all where it is used, and confounds all where it is wanting.

Care of good conscience, is necessary in regard of God. Men.


Of God: for riches, learning, honor, life, and such like are indifferent to
Pagans and profane persons as well as other: but a good Conscience is incident
to a few that fear God: therefore a good Conscience seasoned with grace is
better accepted of God, then all the wisdom, worship, and wealth in the world
possessed with a seared conscience.

Of men: which will appear by the Fruition Defection
of a good Conscience.

The fruition of a good Conscience, though it be close will be discovered by a
man's dealings, as musk in the bosom will be bewraied by the savor: such an
one will have an eye into his office to perform it with all diligence, and
what auailes good laws if officers make no conscience to execute them.

Where there is Defection of conscience, there is confusion of all order: such
an Ouerseer will ouersee all, but do nothing at all: he will look like a
lion, and dominere like a devil over the poor.

Many seek for offices of countenance, most sue for offices of profit, but few
will take an office that brings nothing but trouble, as the office of an
Ouerseer, etc. which although it be a place of credit for the benefit of a
common wealth, yet who for conscience sake would undertake it unless it were
imposed upon him by compulsion of law. And what is the reason there is so much
corruption, negligence, and abuse in officers, but only the defect of a good
conscience.

How to discern such men as be very unmeet to be made Overseers.
AS brass may be bewtified with gilding, so a bad man may be graced with
glorious titles, as Pilate was a Judge, and a Jew, Haman a governor and a
tyrant, Judas an Apostle and a traitor, so a man may be an Ouerseer and an
Atheist.

The Magistrates which have the election and nomination of Overseers should
have a special respect therein, that as Paul willed Timothy to choose such
widows as were widows indeed, so they should appoint such to be Overseers as
be men indeed, and as Pharao choosed Joseph to be Governor: because he was
the fittest in the land, so should they choose such men to be Overseers which
be fittest in the town.

The indiscrete and unfit choice of many men which be made officers, is one
chief cause to diminish the dignity of offices, therefore as Iethro willed
Moses in choosing of offices to cull out me^ by their conditions, so should
magistrates in making overseers find out men by their dispositions, and set a
mark upon their names for a note of distinction, as the shepherd sets a
brande on his sheep to know his from other sheep.

The Ouerseer is an eye to the Magistrate in these actions, and therefore it
were not amiss to take his information: for in that he makes collection of the
money, he is best acquainted with the inclination of the men, and if they be
credible, charitable, and conscionable, it will appear (as the bell by the
sound) by their willing speeches and paiments: as for instance.

I. There be some Contributors (be they never so reasonably rated) will
complain of their taxing, give with such grutching, and pay with such
delaying, that most of the time is taken up with attendance about them.

II. There be others which bewray their minds by sinister means; go to their
houses for money, they will absent themselves on purpose, ask them at Church,
they will say they have no money about them, bid them bring it to Church, and
they will say they forgot it: nay rather then fail they will not come at
church.

III. There be others that have money at commandment, who will follow the
law for every trifle, frequent idle pastimes to abuse the time, consort with
ill company to corrupt their manners, exceed in apparel and diet beyond their
degrees, but will not part with a penny (unless it be compulsitiuely) to do
the poor good.

There be some have less kindness to the poor, then Dives dogs had to
Lazarus, they will scandalize and abuse the overseers with speeches as (Shimei
did David) when they demand money, and rather then fail outface them with a
false oath to defraud the poor of their money.

V. Their be others which are backward in all good actions, they will not
yield a penny for the preferment of the Word, or for the supplying of any
good uses, but will pay no more then the law will constrain them, alleging
like the Jews, we have a law and by our law we must live.

These and such as these which are such Arch-enemies to the poor, be not meet
to be made overseers for the poor: for they which pay with such repining, and
practice such shifts of impiety, will but gripe and beguile the poor, if they
be made governors over the poor.

What Overseers should consider when they are called to office.
I. AS the hearts of kings are in the hands of God, so he rules the hearts of
all, be their intents never so secret, therefore though overseers be chosen by
men, yet remember that he which searches the raines has the greatest stroke
in it: and so discharge your office in the sight of men, as God himself has
the oversight of you: for he is called Pantoculus because he sees all things.

II. You must sequester all malice from the office, as you would purge gross
humors from the head: for it is a common fault in these days that men will
revenge their private displeasures under color of their office, when they
cannot, or dare not do it in other lawful courses; as the law imposes
nothing, or punishes any of malice, so should the executioners of the law do,
but if they shroud their malice under it, it is not only an abuse to the
office, but a sin in overseers to be tainted with malice: and therefore if
David was punished for making away Vriah under color of office, and the
governors devoured of Lions for abusing Daniel under color of their office;
let such fear to be some way afflicted, that are so ill affected in their
office.

III. Such as be overseers should remember that they hold not their office by
patent, but as tenants at will for a year, and as they ouersee others, so they
shall be ouerseene themselves. And therefore it is wisdom so to demean
themselves in their office, as they would be dealt with when they are out of
office.

The office of Overseers.
THe office of an ouerseer extends far, but it consists speciallly in
taxing Contributions for the releife of the poor, and in the discretiue
disposition and ordering thereof.

In taxing of Contributors consideration must be had To equality. To estates.
To the time.


I. To Equality, for where things are not equal there is much injury; if
balances be not equal the weight cannot be just, if oxen be not equally yoked
they cannot draw well, if cocks be not equally matched they cannot fight well,
and so if men be not equally rated with their neighbors they cannot agree
well: if the Corinths were admonished to supply the necessity of the Saints,
that there might be some equallitie, why should not Contributors be equalized
according to their proportion, seeing it is for the poor.

It is a common oversight in this age, that in most cases of impositions,
taxations, etc. the square of equality is dissolved, and and men are charged
as the dice chance, dewce-ace cannot, sise-sinke will not, but cater-tray bear
all away: that is to say, the pore cannot, the rich will not, but the middle
sort must pay all. Paul told the Corinthians it was not fit that other men be
eased and they grieved: so say I, it is not good that some should be remitted,
and others racked: for as a burden if it be equally borne by many according to
their strength and stature, seems light though it be heavy: so common
charges (which many count a burden though they be a benefit) if they be
supported according to every man's portion, though they seem great they will
not be grievous.

2 To Estates: which must be counterpoised by their portions. by their charge.


By their portions: for many in these days are abused by supputations,
estimations, affectations, or reports. If one be worth an hundred pounds, some
will double it, many will triple it, but most will report more then it is:
hereupon men are drawn to greater charges then their ability will bear, and
that is the next way to make poor to maintain poor, or (as we say in our
common prouer be) to rob Peter to pay Paul.

By their charge: for the occupier can not set down what he gains by his
ware, unless he defraieth his detriments and charges sustained by it. The
husbandman knows not what commodity he gets by his croppe, until he
recounteth his charge of ending the corn: even so Overseers can not with
equity descend into men's estates, unless their revenues and retinew, their
countenance and charge, their livings and families be conferred together. As
for example: If one valued at five hundredth pounds has but his wife and
himself, and an other estimated at a thousand pounds has wife and many
children, the first man's estate for wealth is better then the second,
respecting his portion by his charge, and by all reason is to be rated as much
as the other.

3. To the Time: for when things are plentiful and cheap, those rates must
discontinue which were taxed in dear and extreme times. Contributions are not
given to make or multiply poor, but to mitigate poverty: and therefore as
the law gives liberty to tax men always as occasion requires: so it leaves a
discretion, to abate something as the time serves.

Who be liable to Taxations.
TAxations are to be raised upon men Temporal. Spiritual.


That is to say,

By statute Every inhabitant Every occupier of lands
in the parish are to be taxed.

By proclamation Parsons and vicars etc. be bound to the relief of the poor
as well as others being inhabiting within the parish as an inhabitant. Every
one that has tithes appropriate, colemines, or lands in manuell occupation,
etc. is chargeable, and so for such as have saleable woods proportioning the
same to an annual benefit.


If God had made all rich one would not care for another, if all poor, one
could not help another: therefore rich and poor have need one of another:
and as the priests, and Levites, and Laymen, conjoined to fortify the decayed
walls of Jerusalem without compulsion, so men of all degrees must combine to
further the works of charity, of compassion.

The cause of Taxations.
Taxations serve for singular uses, for A stock to set the poor on work. The
relief of the impotent, etc. The putting forth of apprentises.
Anno ^. Elizabeth Regine.

Our forefathers were so forward in good works that they thought they should
never die well, if at their deaths they disposed not somewhat ad impios vsus,
to remain as a stock to the town where they inhabited, for the redeeming of
captives, succouring of prisoners, releeuing of poor, furthering of young
married couples, etc. but sithence, either by reason that such stocks have bin
subverted contrary to the disposition of the donors, or that men in this
iron-age have no devotion to do good; it falls out, that where one dies as a
benefactour to a townstocke, many thousands die, and bequeath all to their own
stock.

What stock will serve to set the poor on work.
The charge must be considered and moderated according to the Stocks of
cities. of towns.
Place of habitation. Multitude of the poor. Ability of the parrish.


Cities and towns which have common stocks for these uses find the benefit
of them by case of charges, such as want the^, feel the continual burden of
them, therefore such places being so well provided, require the raising of a
small stock.

The place of habitation is to be respected: for where there inhabit
clothiers, dornix-weauers and such which set many on work, it is pity they
should be permitted to send their work into the country, or take strangers
for apprentises, when they may supply themselves even of their poor neighbors
that dwell in town with them, and if they had that care of the common weal,
it were some cause of mitigation of the charge of a town, and a manifest
demonstration of their natural kindness to their town.

The multitude of the poor must be reduced to number: for in some places they
be very few, in many places they swarm, and therefore as no martialist can
make proportional provision for war without a just computation of his
soldiers, so the taxing of money for a stock must be ordered according to the
multitude of the poor, for which cause the statute inioyne^h a book of record
to be kept, that the names, numbers, and necessities of the poor may be seen
and considered with the charge.

The ability of the parish must not be pretermitted: a pitiful man will not
ouer-burthen his beast, much less his brethren: as God has not given wealth
to every man alike, so he has not given poor to every town alike: and
therefore if the multiplicitie of the poor does exceed the ability of the
parish, it must be supplied to other towns appropriate, adjacent and better
able, according to the tenor of the Statute.

What poor must be set to work with the stock.
I. The children of those parents which shall not be thought able to keep and
maintain them. Sat. 39. Eliz. Reg.

II. All such persons married or unmarried, as (having no means to maintain
them) use no ordinary and daily trade of life to get their livings by. Stat.
39. Eliz. Reg.

Whereof there be four sorts: the Willing. Wilful. Negligent. Fraudulent.


I. There be some willing to work, but by reason either of the pennurie of
their estate, or deficiancie of credit, or scarsitie of work, or disabilitie
in doing of work, they are constrained to live idly against their wills.

II. There be others that are wilful, and by reason they are rooted in
idleness, or desperately addicted, they will not work though they have it, but
had rather practice picking, stealing, begging, shifting, or any unlawful
course; then till the ground of good husbandry.

III. There be many which be negligent about their work; when it is done
Abusiuely In doing of it they care not how, and so spoil the work.
Dilatiuely In delaying the finishing of the work, which in a manner is to
refuse to work.



IV. There be others which will apply their work, and yet will defraud the
owner by imbeaselling or purloyning some away, and this does both cause
distrust in themselves, and hinder others by their dissolute dealing.

Where the poor are to be set on work.
The place must be appointed according to the dispositions of the poor as they
be Wilful and incorrigible. Willing and tractible.


The wilful and incorrigible must be constrained to work, in the house of
correction, that by applying labor and punishment to their bodies, their
froward natures may be bridled, their evil minds may be bettered, and others
terrified by their example.

The willing and tractible, it is fit to continue them at work in their own
houses: for as the house of correction is a place of chastisement for
malefactors, so those which be of honest disposition hold it a reproach to be
put there: and therefore it were indiscretion to offer them any place of
discredit, when they are pliable in their business at home.

What works are to be done by the poor.
The works are to be ordered according to the Educations Constitutions
of the poor.

The Education of the poor must have reference to those works they have been
commonly brought up with, either by use or art: for if they be not appointed to
easy and fit works, the loss will be greater in learning, then the gain
will be in working: and therefore the statute well provides that these stocks
for the poor should be raised of sundry things; as flax, hemp, wool,
thread, iron, etc. to the end that some of them may be fitting and agreeable to
the educable faculties and works of the poor.

The Constitutions of the poor must be respected, wherein consideration must
be had to these three things.

I. To the Sex, whether they be men or women: for some persons be more
unfit to perform many works, then some other.

II. To the years, whether they be young or old: for some works are more easy
to learn then other, and of lesser charge, curious works are more busy, and
the pains will not requite the cost.

III. To their bodies, whether they be feeble or able: for some works be more
laborious then other.

These things being expended by Overseers, they must tender the poor and lay
no more upon them, then they are able to bear, as we entreat God to lay no
more upon us then he will make us able to bear: and those whom God does
punish with poverty, let no man seek to oppress with cruelty, as the
Taskmakers did the Israelites in Egypt.

How the works of the poor may be profitable.
HE that works expects to reap some profit by his pains, or else Gods
blessing is not upon his labor: therefore if you will have any commodity of
the works of the poor

You must Hold the poor to work. Have account of their work. Make sale of
their work.


I. Hold the poor to work, for most are so by nature given to ease, that it
is as hard to bring their bodies to labor, as the ox that has not been used
to the yoke to draw.

The law provides a stock to set them on work, but if you will have any
profit extracted from the stock, you must hold the poor to work, and you
shall find it will be a great extenuation of poverty, otherwise their own
negligence will be the cause of their necessity.

The Indian heathens would not give their children or servants any meat to
their dinner, unless they had some way deserved to be fed by their industry
or labor: and certes such as will not work when they have it, or neglect
their work when they are at it, are by the Apostles rule not worthy to eat:
and if Draco that famous lawe-maker were alive, he would not suffer him to live
which does refuse to labor.

II. You must take account of their works, if you will have commodity by
their work: as gentlemen take account of their stewards for their household
charges, and of their bailifes for their revenues; so must overseers do for
the works of the poor, least the stock be consumed by their slacknesse, as
the estates of many gentlemen be, which neglect the taking of their accounts,
till their arrerages have eaten up their revenues.

This account may be done by way of examination in this sort.

Inquire 1. how many can work. 2. what works they can do. 3. how much every
one can work in a day and follow it 4. what they can have for their works at
the weeks end.


If you know what they may get in a week if they apply their work, you may
conceive in discretion by their charge what their necessities be; and how they
may live by their work and if they follow it.

The Egyptians kept the names of all the inhabitants in a register book, to
know how every one lived, and how they were able to maintain them and their
family: and many times in the year they were examined, what they gained or
received, to see if their gettings and expenses were proportionable: and so the
magistrate might easily perceive who lived by his lawefull calling, or by
shifting; this example should be imitated of overseers.

III. You must make sale of their works, to the end you may reserve a
sufficient stock always to employ the poor, and to have money to pay the
poor for their work as they do it.

The statute limiteth a stock to be raised of such things, as may be easily
learned, and readily sold: as spinning of flax into thread for linen, carding
and spinning of wool into yarne for woollen, bunching of hemp, etc. as they
are works soon compassed by any that are capable of wit; so they are things
very vendible to put away when they are done. Therefore if there be any
occupiers, artificers, or trads-men in the town, which have use for those
things; the overseers should do well to persuade them to buy these
commodities, seeing it is for the benefit of their town.

Overseers must as much as in them lie increase, or at least continue the
stock it self: and as for the benefit that may be made of the use of it, it
must support the necessities of those which work.

You must conceive, that at the first there will be some waste of the stock,
by reason of the unto wardnesse and unaptness of many to work, and therefore
it must be supplied again; and yet this kind of waste is tolerable in two
respects. 1. of the inconvenience: for it is better to sustain some loss in
learning them to work, then to keep them idle to induce them to evil. 2. of
the entrance: for every one must have a beginning, and where there are many
learners there will be much loss, as the scholar wastes much paper before
he can well use his pen.

This may suffice for the ordering of the stock for the poor, now it
remains to entreat of the releeuing of poor by money.

What poor are to be relieved with money.
IF the rule of charity toward the poor were observed, the establishing of
statutes for releeuing the poor might be omitted.

In the days of king Edward the sixth, the law appointed the ministers on
holidaies to use good persuasions to excite the people to extend their charity
to the poor, and to give according to their degrees and devotions; but in this
obdurate age of ours, neither godly persuasions of the pastors, or pitiful
exclamations of the poor, can move any to mercy: unless there were a law
made to compel them: whereby it appears, that most give to the poor rather
by compulsion then of compassion.

Those generally are to be deemed poor, which cannot live without releife of
the law.

It is called releife, because it is (releuamen oneris) an ease or lightening
of the burden: now who knows not that the poor endure many burdens, and
that a little thing will ease where there is want or oppression.

A description of poor by their Defects.
Such poor as should have relief in money are discribed by their defects of
nature as old.
senses as blind.
members as lame.
Body as not able to work.



The last defect, not able to work is an exposition of the former, as for
instance.

There be many aged can work, and there be some works require more use then
labor, and may easily be done by the old: and therefore by old is not meant
such as be only in years, but by reason of the imbicillitie of their age they
cannot work, or live of their work.

There be some that want an eye, and yet can work with the use of one eye, and
therefore by blind is intended such an one as cannot see at all to work, or
live of his work.

There be other that want a leg, and yet he may do many works having the use
of his hands, and therefore by lame is meant such an one, as for want of his
limbs he cannot labor, nor live of his labor.

So long as there is any natural or necessary means left to live, none must
depend upon the help of the law.

If a man has strength he shall be constrained to work to relieve his want.

If poor parents have children or grandchildren of ability, they are by law
to relieve them.

If poor children have father or grandfather of ability, they are by law to
relieve them.

Honorable is that law that prouides for the preservation of life, but
miserable is that age, that must be compelled by penalty of law, to do that
it should extend by instinct of nature.

Joseph nourished his father Jacob in his old age when he was distressed, the
father received his prodigal son, when he had consumed all, and therefore
why should not parents and children tender one another, when their own stocks
be in distress.

As the works of nature should be done of necessity, so the works against
nature must be forborne of necessity, though there were no law: for this cause
the heathen man thought it needless to make a law against parricide, because
he thought there was not any so monstrous to commit an act against nature: and
if parents and children were natural, there should need no positive law to
compel them to do the works of nature.

There is another word of defect given to the poor, of greater emphasis then
the other (as Impotent) and such poor especially are to be relieved with
money: therefore it is necessary to know how far that word extends, for
the better information of Overseers.

The signification of the word Impotent.
THe word Impotent is derived from the latin and imports as much as unable:
and such be deemed impotent by the law as be deprived and destitute of all
means to live, that they must either have releife to nourish their lives, as
the lamp must have oil to cherish the light, or else they must starve for want
of releife as Lazarus did; and that is no better then murder, as one of the
Fathers says, Si non pauisti occidisti.

In the statute against vagonbondrie made in the 23 year of King Edward the
third, Impotent (being opposed against strong and sturdie) is taken for weak
or lame; and so it is commonly in vulgar acception: but the word stretches to
a larger signification: for it includes and comprehends all other defects of
nature or necessity.

Under this word Impotent is implied a disabilitie by reason of Decrepitie.
Infancy. Nativity. Casualtie. Family.


I. By Decrepitie, when a man is so old that he is past labor. It is great
reason that such as are yielding to nature should have some relief to preserve
nature.

II. By infancy, when poor or phans and others be left fatherless and
motherlesse to the world, and by reason of their tender years, cannot work,
or be unable to live of their work, it is fit they should have relief: for
if the bird will cherish her young till they be able to fly, we are bound by
nature to nourish these till they be able to shift.

III. By nativity, when any be traduced with natiuall defects, either of
wit. members.


Of wit, as the idiot, or the natural fool.

Of members, as those which be blind, dumme, lame, etc.

They which want wit to shift in the world, and those which cannot see,
speak, or travail in the world, have need of some relief to live in the
world.

IV. By casualtie when any be made unable. By adventure in war maimed in the
Queens service.

By misaduenture in work maimed in some lawful labor.

By lunacie, being deprived of reason. By infirmity Temporary as Visitation
of sickness. A running issue. Any infectious disease.
Perpetual as the numme palsy. bedrecie, etc.




There is none so void of mercy, that will not comiserate these men, and
relieve them in some reasonable proportion according to their several wants
and necessities.

V. By family, when a man is ouercharged with many young children, that though
he toil day and night to keep his family, (as Jacob did for Laban) yet he
cannot maintain his charge with his labor, therefore such an one is to be
considered: for if a man in pity will ease his beast which is oppressed with
burden, he must in nature relieve his neighbor which is oppressed with charge.

There be diverse others which are made poor, some by prodigality. by
casualtie of fire. of water.
by suertishippe.


But how these are to be relieved and by whom I refer to the statutes and
your considerations; only I will add this in the end, that if you hold so
many to work as be able to work, and ought to work, you shall need the less
money to distribute and give away.

The law first provides a stock to employ such and so many as can work, and
then appoints money as a secondary mean to ease such as be unable to work:
for indeed that which is got by a man's labor is a natural relief as the
mothers breast is to the child; and such as be chargeable to the town which
can live in some measure either of their labors or otherwise, are no better
then thieves: for they take it from others, to whom it justly belongs: and
those which give it, are guilty as accessaries with the^, if they know they
may forbear it.

Who are to be put forth apprentises.
Our ancestors did pass over many years before they would take them wives,
Jacob served long for his wives because he would not marry until he had
maintenance: but in this age, the poorer sort of men are straight inclined to
marry without any respect how to live: hereof it is that the world grows so
populous and poor: for commonly the poor do most of all multiply children;
therefore (because children though they be blessings, are a burden to many
poor men) we may further see into the excellency of this law: for it does
not only provide sums of money to be taxed for a stock to set the poor on
work, and for competent relief to be given to such as be impotent, but also
it appoints sums of money to be levied for the ease of poor men which be
ouercharged by putting forth their children: and if the philosopher would say
that children were more bound to their tutors that teach them how to live
well, then to their parents that gave them life: how much are they bound to
pray for the Founders of this law, which prouides they should be trained up to
some honest trade of life, when their parents for poverty cannot perform it.

Anno 39. Eli^beth. Regine. The children of those parents which shall not be
thought able to keep and maintain them, are by the statute to be put
apprentises until they determine certain years.

That is to say A man child xxiiii. years. A woman child xxi. years.


In putting forth Apprentises there must be regard had to The inclination The
placing The necessity
of the poor.

To the inclination: for the poor are by nature much inclined to ease and
idleness: and therefore they are to be put forth very timely: for as a twigge
will best bend when it is green, so children are fittest to be bound when they
are young, otherwise by reason of their idle and base educations, they will
hardly hold service: but as they have wavering and straying minds, so they
will have wandering and unstaid bodies, which will sooner be disposed to
vagrancie then actiuitie, to idleness then to work.

To the placing: for there be many Overseers, that without respect of the
faculty, honesty, or ability of the masters are ready to thrust out poor
men's children for apprentises, when either the masters not being able to
receive them, will by some devise or hard entreaty provoke the apprentises
vnlawefully to depart; or else the apprentise shall consume his time without
experience of his trade: if they be thus posted off it will nothing at all
benefit, but rather increase the charge of the parish.

To the necessity: for if parents have six or seven children, and amongst
them all there is one which by his labor is able to keep himself, and yield
some relief to his parents to take away such an one from them is a point of
small policy: but rather put forth those which are a burden and charge to
their parents.

There be many other things might be inserted, but because the work is brought
to more perfection by practice then the pen, I will leave the rest to your
experience.

OBSERVATIONS for Overseers.
WHerein they shall perceive 1. their authority as it is Conjoined. Confirmed.
2. in their oversight. 3. Some actions incident to their office.


1. Their authority as it is Conjoined. Confirmed.


As it is conjoined: for whatsoever is written in this treatise, appertains
as well to Churchwardens as Overseers: for both are equally conjoined in the
office.

As it is confirmed: for whatsoever is done by the Churchwardens and Overseers
in their office, must be confirmed with the consent of two justices of peace
or more, whereof one to be of the Quorum.

2. Their oversight: tender the poor but do not tyranize over them for it is
no more glory to triumph over the poor, then to tread of a worm, it is
better to deserve commendation by discrete government, then exclamation by
rigorous dealing.

There be many in this office which be too mild, and that is a means to
animate the idle: for where the officer has not a countenance mixed with some
austeritie the poor will presume too much of liberty.

There be others are to busy, which have no felicity but in ra^ing reuiling,
and abusing the poor: and therefore they are contemned, according to that
saying or Solomon, a busy body is hated.

The poor of all others are most intractable, but an officer must sometime
consider what the wise man says, It is the glory of a man to pass by an
offense: and let it suffice that God does punish them with poverty, though man
does not always cross them with severity.

There are others so high conceited, that they will hardly incline to consul^
with their fellows but will bear the whole sway; it was one note of
insolency observed in such an Ouerseer, who being to subscribe his name to an
ordinary pasport, he could not be content to write as all wise men use, his
name, and title ouerseer, but in a glorious manner he confirms it thus: per me
R. L. capitalem pelagium.

Men that are equal in office should not be captious in conferring or
consulting one with an other, but when every one has delivered his opinion,
let his speech be preferred, which accords most with reason, and consists
best in action for the benefit of the commonweal.

3 Some Actions incident to their office which before may be omitted, and now
not amiss to be remembered.

1 Let your Taxations be made as well with discretion as affection, and
endeavor to proportion the rates by the necessity of the poor, and not the
poor by the direction of your rates: for if you tax ten shillings a week
more then need, and then give largely because there is enough, you shall
increase the number of the poor, and nothing decrease the charge of the
parrish.

2 The Law is made to ease and extenuate the penury of the poor, and
therefore as one of the fathers says of temperate men, Sumi debent alimenta vt
medicamenta, they must take meat like medecines to refresh and not oppress
nature: so say I of poor men, they must have relief for necessity, much
less superfluity.

3 To relieve such by pretense of the law which may forbear it by intent of
the law, is a direct course to nourish them in idleness which take it: to rob
others of relief that want it: to wrong those of their money that pay it, and
to condemn them of oversight which dispose it.

4. To inquire after poor is the next way to procure poor: for such is the
impudency of this age, that many will dissemble their estates to have relief,
if you do but examine their estates to see if they want relief: and some will
sue to be recorded in the book for the poor when they are better able to
contribute to the poor.

5 Joseph by foresight did good to an whole country in laying up of corn: the
pismere does hoard up corn beforehand to serve for a hard season: therefore
learn by the example both of reasonable and unreasonable creatures to be
provident in time of year, to buie corn, wood, coals, and other necessaries,
at a reasonable price for the benefit of the poor, and that will be a mean to
restrain them from straying to woods, breaking of hedges, and many other
abuses.

6 It is a renown to any nation to have no common, sturdie, or wandering
beggars. The Dutchman cannot endure a beggar in his country. It is so
shameful a life that Sirach may well say it is better to die then beg. Yet
because the impotencie and impediments of some will stir up many to mercy,
more by the sight of their persons then otherwise, and for that many fragments
would be cast away, which many of these are glad to come by; our Law for good
considerations has given authority to Overseers in their discretion to
license some beggars within the parrish, therefore they should be careful to
observe the tenor of the law, to contain such as they license within their
limits, and to punish such which wander out of the parrish according to the
Statute.

7 When Obadiah hid many prophets in a cave, he did bring them bread and water:
he which keeps his dog in a string will give him somewhat: and therefore if
the poor be barred of the benefit of begging, and you which be Overseers
supply not their necessities at home, you are guilty of their deaths if they
perish for want of provision: for when they might go abroad and beg of
others, it was their sin to deny relief, as it was the rich man's sin, not
to give when Lazarus begged at his door, but since the Law has committed the
oversight of the poor to you, it is your sin if you suffer them to perish
for want of succor.

8 As the law has given Overseers authority to tax men, so it provides a
remedy to recover taxations by way of distress, etc. therefore if you abridge
the poor of their duty, rather the^ you will distrain the rich for
displeasure, you deserve double punishment.

9 If every one be rated equally accoding to their estates, let every one pay
their rates, though their be sufficient beside for the poor: when the willing
and the weaker sort have paid their due, they are iniuried if the backward and
better able be forborne; because they are not equally used: therefore the
arrerages and remainders would be levied for two reasons: 1. for example sake
least others be animated by so bad a president to become backward in paying
their due. 2. For the good of the inhabitants: for if there be a surplusage
left and collected, it will somewhat ease and abate the taxation for the year
following.

10 Distresses would be taken of such things (if it be possible) as may be
inseparable, portable, and saleable: and if they can not conveniently be had
there is a more speedy course to be taken: for upon return of defect of
distresses by the Overseers, the magistrate may commit the offenders to
prison, there to remain without bail or maineprize until their duty be
paid.

11 As the authority of the Overseers is great, so the penalty which the law
inflicteth is great, if they be negligent in the works of their office, or
refuse to yield account of their actions at the discontinuing of their office:
therefore, as you will discharge a good conscience before God, and avoid the
danger of law amongst men, have a special care to execute your office.

Homines hominum causa esse generatos.
A prospect for rich men to induce them to give to the poor.
THat we ought to give, is manifest by many reasons drawn from the Creator.
Creatures. Laws.


1. The Creator.
1 God is called Deus a dando: because he gives all things. And if God in
mercy give us all, shall we want mercy to give to others.

2 He which is Lord of all, can take us from all, as he did the glutton, or
take all from us, as he did by Job; and therefore let us give as God wills us.

2. The Creatures
Motive. Vegetative. Insensible.
1 Motive creatures bewray their glory in giving: for the Sun, moon, and
stars give their light to the world for the benefit of man.

2 Vegetative creatures show their goodness by giving: for trees, plants,
herbs, etc. they yield fruit for the use of man.

3 Insensible creatures are beneficial to man: for the fire gives his heat, the
earth yields corn, grass, and great abundance of other things.

If these Creatures give in their kind, much more ought man for whom they
were made: and if creatures give for the use of man, shall one man refuse to
give for the good of an other.

3. The Laws
Natural. Moral. Political.
1 By Natural law we ought to give in respect of Nativity. Humanity.


In respect of Nativity Carnal. Spiritual.


By carnal nativity, we are conceived and traduced in sin: we have all one
entrance into life and egredience out of life: and therefore being all by
birth no better then an other, why should not one do for an other.

By spiritual nativity, we are all brothers in Christ, we are begotten all
with one spirit, we have all one God to our father, one Catholic church to our
mother: and therefore why should not one brother do for an other.

In respect of Humanity 1. If every creature in his kind will compassionate an
other, much more ought we to have a fellow-feeling of our own flesh. 2. If a
good man is merciful to his beast, is not he worse then a beast that will be
merciless to his brother.


2. by Moral law we ought to give in regard of 1. promises of rewards
Temporary. Eternal.
of punishments by malediction. by conde^natio^.

2. presidents in Christ. Patriarchs. Apostles. All good professors.



These temporary rewards are promised. He which gives to the poor shall not
lack, says Solomon; he shall have delivery from his troubles in the time of
need, says the Psalmist. So that is true which Augustine says, he which
gives to the poor gains by it, as the husbandman has an ear of corn,
for a kernel of grain.

This eternal reward is promised amongst the beatitudes, to him that
performed the works of charity, enter the everlasting kingdom: and this
echo sounded in the ears of the faithful servant, enter thy masters joy: and
what thing in all the world can pleasure us, if we be excluded the kingdom of
heaven and the joys thereof.

Let us give for fear of punishments of malediction. of condemnation.


Of malediction: for he which does not give to the poor shall have many
curses, as appear in the proverbs; and the curses of the righteous many times
avail as it did with Eliah.

Of condemnation: for it is said to the wicked which wanted the works of
charity, go ye into everlasting fire: as ye have example in Dives who went to
hell for his hardness.

we have many presidents in Christ he spent his whole life in passion and
compassion, and in the end he gave his own life for us, and shall not we
give some part of our goods for his sake.
in Patriarks Prophets Apostles All good professors
the Scripture yields plentiful examples of them.


3 Political law should move us to give in respect of the law maker. the
benefit of the law.


Of the law maker: if the Athenians prospered by the laws of Solon, or the
Lacedaemonians by the laws of Licurgus, or the Israelites by the laws of
Moses: then Englishmen cannot but prosper (as in many other) so in this last
good law for provision of the poor enacted by their Prince: and therefore if
we ought to obey a tyrant if he did rule, much more ought we to yield obedience
to the laws of so godly a governor.

The benefit of the law does appear four ways: for it 1 Represseth
idleness and provides to set the poor on work, and to relieve such as
cannot work. 2 Extirpeth infinite swarms of rogues and vagabounds which
wandered up and down to the great danger and indignity of our nation. 3
Compels us but to relieve the poor of our own parish, whose conditions and
estates we know: whereas before we gave to all passengers, which peradventure
were ready to cut our throats, if opportunity served. 4 Appoints us to a
certainty of our gift, before we gave we know not what, nor to whom, now we
pay but that we are taxed, and that to our own poor neighbors, such as
dwell in town with us.


In what manner and measure we must give to the poor.
We must give 1. liberally 2. willingly 3. readily
for Christ himself did sit over against the treasury, to see how liberal,
willing, and ready the people were to put into the treasury.

Give liberally in respect of the giver for he which gives to the poor
lends to the Lord, and shall we not lend him liberally which gives us all.
the gain for the more we minister, the more it multiplieth; like him, which
the more seed he sows, the greater croppe of corn he reapeth.



Give willingly in regard of the works the words
of charity.

Of the works of charity; for the will is the work in every action, as the
root is the life of every plant: and whatsoever a man gives if it be against
his will, it is no work of charity but iniquity. The gift may do good
amongst men, but the will condemns the giver before God.

The words of charity are phrased by the names of benevolence it signifies
wel-willing, which teaches us to give with a willing mind.
Alms it signifies mercy, which argues we ought to give in fraternal
comiseration.



Give readily in respect of our own natures. others necessities.


Of our own natures: for if we have a will to do good, and be not ready to
execute it, corruption will infect and alter our affections by delay, as the
fly will putrify the ointment if it be let alone: therefore this readiness
of giving was commended in the Corinths by S. Paul.

Of others necessities, much comfort comes of ready giving when many perish
by delaie in giving: the wounded man had much comfort, because the Samaritane
was ready to do him him good: but Lazarus did perish because the rich man's
crummes were not ready to relieve him: and therefore Timothy was willed to
charge such as were rich to be ready to give, laying up a good foundation, etc.

These reasons may persuade us to give, if we have grace, and a thousand more
be superfluous if we want grace. God has given riches to many to see how they
will use them, and he has made many poor as his instruments to prove them.

A Pattern for poor men, to provoke them to labor for their living.
We ought to labor by reasons taken from Creatures Elementall. Unreasonable.
Reasonable.
Laws Divine. Humane.



1 Elementall creatures give us example of labor: for we see by daily
experience that the firmament it self is mooueable, the sun, moon, and
stars are stirring; and therefore we are not worthy to live if we incline
not to labor, when these creatures give us light to labor.

2 Unreasonable creatures Employed. Idle.


Unreasonable creatures being employed are a pattern to us; the glase-worme
spinneth silk, the spider weaueth a web, the bees till the flowers, the ant
provides corn, and shall men refuse pains to endeavor to live.

Unreasonable creatures being idle, may make us eschew idleness: for the drone
which lives upon the bees, the caterpiller that lives on the fruit, and the
boudes that live on the malt, they are all by nature abhorred, and shall not
men which neglect their labor to live of others be much more odible.

3 Reasonable creatures Christians. Heathens.


All good Christians are ensamples to us of labor.

As for example Adam did dress the garden. Noah did plant a vineyard. David
kept sheep. Paul labored with his hands.


If Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles do labor, shall we live idely: and if
all men be enjoined to labor in some lawful vocation, shall the poor refuse
to take pains which of all others ^aue need to work.

Heathens did ever best like a laborious life, and therefore Solon said, that
such as did devour and no way advantage a commonwealth, were not worthy to
live; non vivit qui nemini vivit, says Seneca, he which lives not to do
himself good lives not at all.

As by the statute of Queen Marie none might beg openly but such as did
wear a badge, that they might be known to be beggars, anno. 2. and 3. so by
the laws of the Romans none might wander in the streets without a badge of
their occupation, that it might appear whereby they lived; so detestable an
inconvenience was Idleness in all ages.

4 Every one ought to labor by the Laws Divine. Humane.


By the Divine law we ought to labor. As wine and drunkenness began both in
Noah; so sin and servitude came both with Adam: for he did no sooner fall but
this was imposed as a punishment upon him, In the sweat of thy face shall thou
get thy living.

Therefore we must not look to be fed with a raven like Eliiah, or to live
of the honey like the drone, or to live of relief like the idle, but we must
take pains, and lay to our helping hands, as well as say, Lord help us.

He that will not by labor relieve nature, is not by law worthy to have to
refresh nature: therefore S. Paul says, he that will not work let him not eat.

Who would live upon alms that has any thing of his own, nay rather strive
of a little to give something, then having a little, to take any thing,
considering what is written, It is a better thing to give then to receive.

By Humane Laws we ought to labor and not live idly, as appears by our
own national Statutes: which be instant The last Statute provides a stock
to set the poor on work, to the end they might live by labor. Eliz. 39.
precedent The Statute of Edward the third did forbid any to give relief to
such as were able to work. Ed. 3. ann. 23. The Statute of king Henry the 8.
did appoint that these idle and sturdie persons should be whipped and bound by
oath to go to the place they were borne. Hen. 8. ann. 22. The Statute of king
Edward the 6. did provide that these idle wanderers, in token of vagrancie
should be marked with the letter V. and the presenters might take them for
slaves, and feed them with bread and water. Ed. 6. cap. 3.



Therefore seeing Idleness is so condemned, by example of all creatures, by
observation of all ages, and by prescription of all laws, let every one strive
to live of his labor, and not upon relief, considering it is commanded by
God, compelled by law, imitated of the godly, and commended of all good men.

FINIS.

