^ ^ermon preached a^ Paul's Cross the 19. of Iuli 1579: setting forth the
excellencye of Gods heavenly word: The exceeding mercy of Christ our
Savior: The state of this world: A proof of the true Church: A detection of
the false Church: or rather malignant rabble: A confutation of sundry haeresies:
and other things necessary to the unskillful to be known.

By John Dyos.

Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate.

Anno. 1579.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable and reverend Father John by Gods gracious providence
Bishop of London, I. D. wishes everlasting felicitye.
ALBEIT (right learned and virtuous Prelate) the wonderful workma^ship of the
whole world: the greatness and beawtye of the celestial bodies: the inviolable
order which they keep in their continual and most swift moving: the
inestimable benefits which they yield to the inferior parts by their
seasonable interchaunges: the strange and sometime terrible effects that
proceed of their secret influences and operations: the continual intercourses
of the days and nights: the orderly succeeding of the times, as winter,
Springtyme, Summer, and Harvest: the generation of Clouds, Frosts, dewes,
winds, thunder, lightning, and such other impressions and alterations of the
air: the situation of the huge earth in the mids of the world without any
proppe or stay to hold it up: the highness of the mountains: the fertilitye of
the valleys: the largenes of the cha^pio^ grou^des: the beawtye and virtue of
plants, trees, herbs, and flowers wherewith the earth is so excellently
adorned: the unmeasurable widenes of the maine seas, some inuironing the
compass of the whole earth, and some shooting forth into the maine land, to
the incomparable commoditye of all countries: the marvelous coming and going
of the tides: the dreadfulnes of the waves rayzed by tempestuous winds: the
great plentye of all kind of fishes and mo^sters in them the amiablenes of the
fresh waters, some flowing with restless stream into the great Ocean sea,
some sincking into the earth from whence they spring, some standing in
immovable Lakes, and all of them fraught with fishes and other living
creatures necessary to the use of man: the propagation, multiplication, and
preservation of all living things in their several kinds; and finally the
most wise and skillful making of man, the Lord of all earthly things, who is
rightly called mikrkosmo, that is to say, a little world whose head is even as
it were a little globe of the world, and conceiueth all worldly things: do
plainly declare and show that there is a God, a wise deviser, a mighty worker,
and fatherly preserver and maintayner of all things, to whom we ought of
right to be subject, in such sort as all our doings may be agreeable to his
will: yet notwithstanding sin the mother of all calamityes has by the fall
of our first parents so venemously infected us all their miserable posteritye
and progenye, and so blinded us: that what God is, and what his will is
concerning true religion, righteousness, and eternal life, we of our selves
are utterly ignorant. Therefore has he mercifully given us his heavenly word,
a rule whereby we may learn to acknowledge, celebrate, invoke, and worship
him according to the saying of the kingly Prophet: Thy Psalm. 118.
word is a lantern unto my feet. Of the virtue of this heavenly word,
according to the abilitye which God has graciously given me, I having not long
sithe^ce publicly spoken, and being earnestly requested of certain
virtuously disposed, to communicate my labors to them and others: have thought
it meet to satisfy their reasonable request: which labor I consecrate to
your good Lordship, and offer the same to your learned judgment, as a scholar
to his Master as a soldier to his captain. Wherein my endeavor is to seek
the glory of God: to encourage the faithful: and to bring into the kings high
way of their salvation, such as go astray, and daungerously wander in the
marshes of idolatrye and superstition. Yet I protest to your Lordship, that
considering the infelicitye and malignity of this present time, and the vanitye
of opinions, I was almost discouraged to speak or to write. And if I could do
it without offense to God, I would enjoin me self, (not with Pythagoras
scholars, to five years silence, but) to seven years silence. 1. Tim. 4. ^
2. Tim. 3. ^
These be the unhappy days that the Apostle saw so long before, wherein men
can not abide sound doctrine. The Prophet Esai says there were scholars in
his time that would say to their teachers: Loquimini ^sa. 30. 10.
nobis placentia: Speak to us such things as may like us. And truly there
are now a days I fear me too many such scholars: too many itching ears: too
many newfangled persons, and to many wranglers. But I am comforted when I
consider that the veritye overcomes falshod, and that the things which are
of God, do daunt whatsoever is objected of men, and of Satan himself* what
hurts the enemy, if God protect? what prevails envy, if the highest
preserve? They may mutter and murmr, brawle, and cavil: but they cannot
hurt. Truth will get the upper hand: Christ will have the field. I would to God
every man would seek the truth in the word of God. S. August. says: ^ugust.
^^m. 1. ^onfes. lib. ^. cap. 24.
Vbi inueni veritatem: ibi inueni Deum meum ipsam veritatem: Where I found the
truth: there I found my God, who is the truth it self. I would to God men
would embrace the truth and now at length stick no longer in their mire, but
cease to defend the den of Antichrist, the house of their spiritual
whoredom, and shops of falshode, fraughted with shadows, dreams, pride,
vaineglory, and all other abominable abuses. It is great pity that learning
should be so ill bestowed. For how much might they be able to do to the
aduaunceme^t of the truth, which show so great cunning and skill in defense of
falshod? Erasmus a man of excellent and exquisite learning, writ much of the
praise of folly: what could he have written in the praise of wit? Cornelius
Agrippa writ much of the vanitye of sciences: what could he have written in
the commendation of sciences? how could he have praised health, that praised the
fever quartane? how could he have praised bewtifull hear, that praised
deformed baldnes? how many adventure wit in desperate causes? It is a
desperate cause that can not be smoothed with words of eloquence. No folly so
vain, but by some shift it may be maintained. By means whereof, the blind
drincketh many a fly, and the simple eye is sone beguiled. Yet notwithstanding
their Transubstantiation, their Purgatory, their Merits, their Invocation of
Saints, their Supremacy, and such other Romish platyre can not be justly
defended by scripture or Doctors. Therefore it were good for those kind of
teachers to cease to abuse the simplicitye of the people, and to profess the
truth. S. Ambrose says: Nullus pudor est ad Ambros. in Epist. ad Theodosium.
Tom. 1.
melior a transire: It is no shame to remove to the better. Augustine was an
infant in Christ's religion the three and thirtye year of his age. S. in
Possidonio.
Paul began ill: and yet he ended well. Of a cruel persecutour, he became a
mighty defender of Christ's religion: Of a scatterer he became a gatherer: Of a
wolf, a lamb: Of an Antichristian enemy, a Christian soldier: Of a learnd
lawier at Jerusalem, a learner of the Gospel at Damascus: and of a Saul, a
Paul.

God of his mercy grant that all they which have traced the path of
Antichrist, may renounce their foolish dreams, and fond assertions, and
(after the example of S. Paul) profess Christ: detest Antichrist: and go
forward in all godlynes, even unto their lives end. David may fall, and Saul
may rise. We ought to hope the best of all men, to judge the best, and to
think the best: For charity thinks no evil. S. August. says well: Bononorum
desyderu^ est vt 1. Cor. 13.
qui mali sunt corrigantur: ma(...)dium est vt qui boni sunt consumantur: Good
men would feign have ill men amended: and ill men would feign have good men
consumed. There are too many such in this doting age of the world, which hate
all me^ extremely that please not their fancies: yet they make great show of
holiness. But if their visardes were pulled of, (Good Lord,) what a mass of
malice should a man see? what envy, what falshode, what spightfulnes, and
rancour should a man behold? Turks and Jews are better to be lyked, than such
hipocriticall Christians. Charity over comes all things: without charity
nothing prevails: and wheresoever charity is, she draws all things unto
her: and she is the bewtye of the soul. I surcease humbly and heartily
beseeching Christ the Prince of Pastors to perserue your honor by the virtue
of his holy Spirit many years, to the advancement of his glory: to the
repayring of the ruins of Sion: To the utter ruin of Babylon: and finally
after your peregrination upon earth, to give you the laborers penny of
everlasting blessedness.

At London the 2. day of September. Your Lordships always most humble at
commandment John Dyos.

COntio Dios celebrata crebris
Vocibus, flexit populum potentem,
Atque plebeios animos rigauit
Nectare suaui.
Pauit aeternis epulis Iehouae
Indigas mentes: sitibunda prata:
Rore diuino, fluuioque sparsit
Corda salubri.
Fregit and vires Latij Tyranni,
Praescidit cristas: triplicem coronam
Contudit: fido Salios salaces
Arguit ore.
Inuidi Momi malesuada lingua
Putreat: corui lanient dolosos
Zoilos: Laruae valiant: facessat
Dira Megaera.
.

Papa loquitur.
NOs pedibus nostris dominos supponimus orbis:
Nos plantis premimus, Caesareumque genus.
Si placeat, Genios volumus detrudere coelo:
Nostra manus Manes ex Acheronte vocat.
Posse sacerdotes Paniscum condere Christum,
Dicimus: Ergo Dei gloria danda mihi.
Namque creatorem mundi facit ille: quis ipse?
Nonne Deus summus? solus vtrunque creo*
Mayor caelitibus sacrifex, genijsque supremis:
Sacrificis praesto: dicite, quantus ego?
Sacrificus praestat Mariae: semel illa gerebat
Christum: sed sacrifex saepius ore vorat.
Saepius ore vorat, carnem cum saenguine crudo,
Ossa vorat, pectus, brachia, crura pedes.
Est nostrum genus, eximijs spectabile factis,
Gregorius Magnus carminae mirae canit:
Christo pulsanti patuit vix ianua Ditis:
Sed mihi pulsanti mox paetuere fores.
Namque ego Trae^^^um tetri de faucib^s Orci
Extr^xi, and ^^^trem, Dite fremente meam.
Semper bonos, no^enque meum, laudesque manebu^t:
Quae Christus c^ndis, condere iure queo.
Christus respondet.
TV lupus, et vulpes: Tu summum de decus orbis:
Tu ruis in baerathrum: te manet atra dies.
A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross, the xix. day of July. An. 1579.
By John Dyos.
Luc. 5. IT came to pass, that (when the people preassed upon him, to hear
the word of God) he stood by the lake of Genezareth, and saw two ships stand
by the lakes side, but the fisherme^ were gone out of them, and were washing
their nets. And he entered into one of the ships (which pertained to Simon)
and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat
down, and taught the people out of the ship. When he had left speaking, he
said unto Simon: launche out into the deep, and let slip your nets to make
a draught. And Simon answered and said unto him: Master, we have labored all
night, and have taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy commandment I will lose
forth the net. And when they had so done, they enclosed a great multitude of
fishes. But their net brake, and they beckned to their fellows (which were in
the other ship) that they should come and help them. And they came and
filled both ships, that they sonke again. When Simon Peter saw this, he fell
down at Jesus knees, saying: Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man. For he
was astonyed, and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which
they had taken, and so was also James and John the sons of Zebede, which
were parteners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon: Fear not, from
he^ceforth thou shall catch men. And they brought the ships to land, and
forsook all, and followed him.
IT is written in the 5. of Luke: and read in the Church this day: It came to
pass, that when the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God, he was
standing by the lake of Genezareth. etc.

In the end of the former chapter (Christian audience) Christ our Savior
being ill entreated in Nazareth (no Prophet is accepted in his own country)
came down to Caphernau^ a City of Galilee, and there taught the people on the
Sabbath days, cast out devils, and cured Simo^s wives mother sick of a great
fever, and when the sun was down, healed what soever sick were brought to
him, laying his hands on every of them. Devils also came out of many, crying
and saying: Thou art that Christ ye son of God. etc. There they preassed, and
here they preasse.

The sum of all: Seek ye first Mat. 6. 33.
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
ministered unto you.







It came to pass when the people preassed upon him to hear the word of God.
Sinful men of every condition preassed upon him to hear his heavenly
doctrine. We never read of any such preassing of Scribes and Phariseis to
Christ: I thank thee O Father, Mat. 11. 25.
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have showed them unto babes.

The people preassed upon him to hear the word of God. Luc. says not, people
came to him, etc. But the people preassed upon him. These words are very
emphaticall, and significa^t, notifieng the fervent study of those people to
hear ye word of God. For this cause: they followed him from Galilee, from
Decapolis, from Jerusalem, from Judea, from beyond Jordan. They followed him
ascendyng Mat. 5.
to the mountain, they followed him descending from the mountain: Mat. 13.
they followed him to the sea side, they Marc. 3.
followed on foot to the wilderness. Mat. 14.
Whether did they not follow him? The paynefull clyming of the mountains Mat.
15,
did nothing discourage them, the high craggye rocks did nothing terrify
them, the te^pestuous waves of the sea did nothing dismay them. Great
multitudes came unto him: lame, blind, dombe, etc.

Of multitudes following, read Mar. 3. and. 8. Luke 6. Ioh. 6. Mat. 15. Certain
women followed him with Luc. 8.
multitude of other folks, and they that carried the man sick of the Palsy,
Luc. 5.
because of the preasse, went up on the top of the house, and let him down
through the roof, You also hear how to day they preassed upon him. They
departed not from him sodeinly, but continued sometime iij. whole days with
him: and not a few: sometime iiij. thousand, some time v. thousand at a time,
beside women and children. Mat. 15.
You see how ye people in those days, fervently pressed upon Christ, paynfully
followed him, lovingly continued with him. They followed him to the wilderness, to
hear the sweetenes of his word: we Citizens having the same within ye walls
of Cities, love it not, but often ragingly contemn it. They tarried with him
whole days: we think long to tarry with him few hours: and think not long
to wait upon vanity many hours: Every thing increases saving godliness.
Houses now are more large, and smoke less, more eating, more drinkyng, more
sleepyng, more spendyng, more cost for apparel: more vanity in talk; and me^
more vicious: but at Sermons in any case we cannot tarry longer the^ an hour:
It is tedious to many, to tarry so long. They preassed upon him: we leisurely,
and slowly scarce come to him. To the world, as quick as bees: to the word,
as flow as snayles. They heard him atte^tiuely: we hear him negligently,
without courage, as we were half asleep, and our mind a pilgrimage, coldly,
coldly. Such is the behavior of ye multitude of this time: such is the
contempt of the word: such is the folly of men: such is the love of earthly
things, and hate of heavenly things. And therefore look surely for plague and
punishment.

They preassed upon him: Not upon Hickscorner: not upon Jack Iuglar: not upon
Tomtumbler: not upon corruptours and destroyers, as vain men of our time: but
upon him, eue^ upon Jesus Christ, the Physician of the sinful, Mat. 9.
the light of the world, the express Ioh. 8.
Image of the invisible God, the first borne of all creatures, the wisdom
Collos. 1.
and power of God: the way, the truth, 1. Cor. 1.
and life: the Prince of Pastors, the great shepherd of our souls, the Ioh.
14.
founder and finisher of our faith, the 1. Pet. 1.
Evangelical hen, the true Vine, Ebru. 12.
the bread of life, the rock and fountain of the living waters, the Emanuel,
Ioh. 15.
the blessed seed, the reconciler Ioh. 6. 1. Cor. 10. Ioh. 4. Marc. 12. Luc.
20. 1. Pet. 1. Psalm. 24. Esai. 9. Esai. 62. Luc. 4. Ioh. 1. Psalm. 130. Genesis 28.
Malach. 4. Ioh. 1. Number. 24. Luc. 10. Ebru. 7. 8. 9. Ose. 13. Mich. 7. 1. Cor.
15. Zach. 13. Ebru. 1.
of God and man, the cornerstone of the buildyng, the foundation of the same,
the king of glory, the prince of peace, the high Priest, the anointed of God,
the lamb of God that takes away the sins of ye world, the hope and
redemption of Israel, Jacobs ladder, whereby we clyme to the omnipotent
father, the son of righteousness, the true light, the star of Jacob, the
merciful Samaritane, the price of our redemption, our sacrifice for sin, our
satisfaction, our righteousness, our guide, our way to God, ye conqueror of
Death, Hell, Sin, and Satan, the giver of life, the fountain of grace and
verity. They preassed upon him whose nobility, riches, wisdom, beauty,
strength, purity, honor and goodness can never be sufficiently commended:
without him, our light is full of darkness: Our strength full of weakness,
our truth full of falsehode, our perfection full of imperfection. He is good,
we are evil: yea our nature is evil. Saint Austen Ephesians. 2. 3.
says, Nemo erit bonus qui non erat malus: August. de Ciuit. Dei Lib. 15. cap.
1.
None shall be good, which has not been evil. He only is happy, we are
miserable wretches. He is omnipote^t and eternal, we are weak, yea weakness
it self, dust and corruption.

By his righteousness, we be made righteous: by his holiness, we be made holy:
by his glory we are glorified. It is honest and comely, that the wayfaryng man
should follow his guide: The creature, his creator: the saved, his Savior: The
subjects their king: the sheep their shepherd: the seruau^ts, their master:
the scholars, their teacher: the members their head: the children their
parents: the soldiers their captain: the patie^ts their Physician.

He is our guide, we are the wayfaring men: he is our creator, we his
creatures: he our Savior, we the saved: he is our king, we his subjects: he
our shepherd, we his sheep: he our master, we his unprofitable servants: he
our heavenly scholemaister, we his negligent scholars: he our head, we his
members: he our father, we his children: he our captain, we his soldiers:
he the omnipotent Physician, we the faint and feeble patientes. Therefore it is
good to follow him, to preasse upon him, and with the disseased woman to touch
him. Mat. 9.


Consider the cause why they preassed upon him. The final cause why they
preassed upon him, was to hear the word of God: note their fervent desire to
hear the word of God. The word of God: not the traditions of men, not
vanities, as vain men of our days preasse to hear vanities, yea eue^ on the
Sabbath day, which is intolerable. The Sabbath day ought to be co^ secrate to
the service of God. The true sanctifieng and halowyng of this day, consists
in the true worshippyng of God. Many other followed, and preassed on him for
other causes.

The hypocritical Phariseis followed Luc. 16. 4.
and preassed, to deride him.

Some followed and preassed, for novelty. Such were the me^ of Athens, Act. 17.
21.
which gave them selves to nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some
news. We have multitudes of men of Athens now a days.

Some preassed to see his miracles: Vidimus mirabilia hodie: we have seen
strange things to day. Luc. 5. 26.


Some to get bodily health. Luc. 6.


Some follow Christum Fortunatu^: wealthy and rich Christ, for their
co^momoditie: Mat. 8. Luc. 9.
yt they maybe enriched, as ye man that offered his service to Christ, saying,
master I will follow thee whether soever you go: And Jesus au^swered and said
to him: Fores have holes and ye birds of the air have nests: but ye son of
man has not where to rest his head. The Fox has his hole in hipocrites: the
birds of ye air, ye devils, have their nestes in hypocrites: no place for ye
son of man in hipocrites.

Some follow and preasse for their Ioh. 6.
belly sake: as those which said, Rabbi when came thou hither? etc.

Some to enta^gle him in his talk. Mat. 22. Luc. 20. Marc. 12. Origin: in Mat.
cap. 22
The ancient father Origin calls all them brethren of the Phariseis, which
seek to entrap men. And Aretius a learned man says: Diabolicum est quaerere
quod carpas, quod damnes: Aretius in Psalm. 1.
It is deuilishe to seek to taunt, to carpe, to condemn.

Some followed him to see: as vain curious persons do now a days, which come
to Sermons to see, and not to learn: Domine volumus a te signu^ videre: Mat.
12. 38.
Master we would see a sign of thee: but he answered and said unto them:
this evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign: but there shall no sign
be given to it, save the sign of the Prophet Jonas.

Some preasse to hear inuectiues.

Some to be more ready to conte^d: and a few (alas to few) for the love of Gods
holy word, as this company. And yet not unlike but that some of them afterward
cried: Toll eu^, crucifige Ioh. 19. 15.
eu^: away with him, crucify him. Such is the inconsta^cie, of the unconstant
multitude. To this tends the parable of the seed: some fell by the Mat. 13.
Marc. 4. Luc. 8.
high ways side, some upon stony places, some among thorns, and some fell
into good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundred fold, some sixty,
and some thyrtie fold. Thus much for that point.

By the word of God, I understand here the word of the Gospel, that is, that
Jesus is the true Messiah, the son of the woman of whom it is said, Conteret
caput Serpentis: he shall Genesis 3.
break the Serpents head, and valiantly vanquish the power and puissance Genesis
22*
of Satan. That son of Abraham, in whom all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed. The son of Luc. 1.
David, which in the house of Jacob shall reign for ever. That son to Psalm.
2.
whom it is said: ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance: Psalm. 110.
and sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy foot stole. To be
short, that ladder of Jacob, Genesis 28.
which reaches to heaven.

Christ taught sometime the law, sometime the Gospel. Albeit ye Sermon of
Christ in the v. vj. and vij. Math. is a true interpretation of the law: yet
notwithstanding the law is not the thing, for preaching whereof Christ was sent
in to this world. For (as we read in Esaias. 61. 1. verse.) The spirit of the Lord
is upon me, for the Lord has anointed me, and sent me to preach good tidings
unto the poor. Christ came not as a law maker, or a law teacher, as Moses
came before. Hereunto is added, that the word of the law does slay or kill, as
S. Paul 2. Cor. 3. 6.
teaches: but the word of Christ gives life, as he testifies him self:
verily verily I say unto you, if a man Ioh. 8. 51.
keep my saying, he shall never see death.

The law is a knowledge known Romans 1.
by nature, as the Apostle witnesses: The Gospel is not known by nature, but
published from the secret determination of the Godhead, by our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: Lex per Mosen Ioh. 1. 17.
data est: gratia, and veritas per Iesum Christu^ facta est: The law was given
by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. And our Savior says to
his disciples: To you it is given to know the secrets of ye kingdom Mat. 13.
of God. etc. And also to Peter he says, flesh and blood has not opened that
unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. Read. 1. Cor. 2. and 1. Cor. 4. 2
Cor. 5. Collos. 4. 1. Tim. 3. Romans 16.

The law shows sin: The Gospel shows Christ the Savior of the world,
teaching that sins are forgiven to all yt believe in him, and that they are
reconciled to God. These Mat. 23.
things do the wisemen, Prophets, and Scribes specially teach, which are sent
from the son of God.

The law requires only obedience, and conde^neth the guilty: The Gospel
gives remission of sins, freely in the name of Christ to the penitent:
relieueth and comfort the troubled consciences, with his sweet promises.

The promises of the law are conditional: Leuit. 18. Galat. 3. Deuteronomy. 30. Romans
10.
ye shall keep my ordinances and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall
live in them: the promises of the Gospel are certain and free: Come to the
waters all ye that Esai. 55.
be thirsty, and ye that have no money come buy wine and milk, without any
money or moneys worth. All Romans 3. 23.
have sinned and have need of the glory of God, but are justified freely by
Romans 4. 16.
his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Therefore by faith
is the inheritance given, that it might be by grace.

The law proposes precepts: the Gospel has promises. Genesis 3.


The law is a rule of good works: the Gospel is a doctrine of the person
Exodus 20.
and benefits of the Messiah.

The law denounces the wrath of God, eternal malediction; death and damnation
to all men for sin: Maledictus Deuteronomy. 27. vlt. verse.
omnis qui no^ perma^serit in omnibus his. etc: Cursed be he that continues
not in all the words of this law, to do them, and all the people shall say
Amen: The Gospel offers remission of sins to all men: To give Luc. 1.
knowledge of salvation to his people for the remission of their sins.

The law justifies none, saves none, delivers none from sin, but
accuses, bewrays sin, and condemns all: the Gospel of Christ is the
power of God to salvation, to all that believe, offering to all remission of
sins, righteousness, and eternal life.

To be short the law is to be terribly thundered to the wicked, negligent, and
impenitent: the Gospel is sweetly to be sounded, to those that acknowledge
their sins and heartily repent for the same. The sweet proclamation of Christ
teaches the same: Come unto me all ye that labor sore Mat. 11. 28.
and are laden and I will ease you. etc. Of this we have example in the Prophet
Nathan: who by a similitude, thundered the law against king David: 2. Reg. 12.
13.
David repents saying: I have sinned against the Lord: Nathan pronounces the
Gospel: The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye.

The word of God, or doctrine of Christ, is called the word of God: that is,
the doctrine which Christ him self revealed to men. Whereof the principal
point, is free remission and forgiveness of sins, by faith in Christ Jesus.

The efficient cause of this Gospel is the whole Godhead: the eternal Father,
eternal Son, and eternal holy Ghost.

The mouyng cause, is the exceedyng mercy of God, and his passing love toward
ma^kynd. So God loved Ioh. 3. 16.
the world, that he gave his only begotten son: that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

The first instrume^tall cause, is the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ. An
other isntrumental cause, are the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists and other
teachers of the doctrine of the Gospel. Therefore the Apostle says, Let men
esteem us as the Ministers 1. Cor. 4.
of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. We together are Gods laborers
1. Cor. 3. 9. 2. Cor. 5. 20
etc. we are messengers for Christ, even as though God did beseech you through
us.

The material cause, is Christ with all his benefits.

The formal cause, is ye gladsome message of free remission of sins,
purchased by Christ Jesus.

The final cause, is that mankind being delivered out of the hands of his
enemies Death, Sin, Hell, and Satan, should serve God in holiness and
righteousness all the days of his life.

He that is of God, hears Gods word, he loves it, believes it, and does it.
These things are included in the word Hear.

The word of God has sundry hearers: Mat. 10.
some receive it, some receive it not. Note ye parable of the seed. The Mat.
13.
seed of the word of God when it was Marc. 4.
sowed, fell some by the ways side, Luc. 8.
some upon stones, some upon thorns, and some in good ground etc. but more
strictly and briefly, the word of God has two sorts of hears: Elect and
Reprobate. The elect say with Peter: Domine ad quem ibimus? verba vitae
aeternae habes: Master to whom shall Ioh. 6.
we go? thou have the words of eternal life. The reprobate say: Durus est
hic sermo: This is a hard saying, who can hear it? Can this mortality put on
immortality? Ca^ this corruption put on incorruption? Can Christ be God and
man? Can God beget a son, as of late ye devil of Norwiche deuilishlye said?
yea worse then a devil was he. For the devils in ye former Chapter
acknowledged Christ, crying and saying: Thou art Christ the son of God: but
this devil denied Christ.

The word of God is preached in vain to many, the honey is lost, that is put
into vessels of gall: the fish is cast away, that is cast into dry pooles: and
the seed perishes, that is sowed upon the sand. S. Cypria^ says: Certe Cyp.
contra Demetrianum Tract. 1. page
labor irritus est and nullius effectus, offerre lumen coeco, sermonem surdo,
sapientiam bruto: Cum nec sentire brutus possit, nec coecus lume^ admittere,
nec surdus audire: Truly it is lost labor and to no purpose: to offer light to
a blind man, speech to a deaf man, wisdom to a gross head, seeing that a
gross head cannot perceive, a blind man can not see, a deaf man can not
hear. The ancient father Origin Origin. in Nume. 6. Hom. 3.
says: Qua^to melius esset nonnullis omnino non audire verbum Dei, quam audire
cum malitia, vel audire cum hypocrisi: melius autem dicimus ad comparationem
malorum: How much better were it to some, not to hear the word of God at all,
tha^ to hear it with malice, or to hear it with hypocrisy: we say better, in
respect of evils.

Excellent is this word: therefore ought we to hear it.

It differreth from ours manifoldly: in truth, for God is true, yea truth it
self: man is false, yea falshode it Ioh. 14.
self: Omnis homo mandax: Every man Psalm. 115.
is a liar.

It differs from ours in profit: Lord to whom shall we go (says Peter) Ioh.
6.
thou have the words of eternal life: our words have no profit, they are
words of eternal death.

It differs in certainty, for very truth and certainty it self says: that
the most firm Elements of heaven Mat. 24.
and earth shall pass, but his word shall in no wise pass. The Prophet Esaias
says: Verbum Domini manet in Esa. 40. 8.
aeternum: The word of the Lord endures for ever: Mary has chose^ the good
part, which shall not be taken away Luc. 10. 42.
from her: our words are uncertain, as unconstant as the Weathercocke. We say
and unsay, and unsay and say again. That which likes us to day, misliketh us
to morrow.

It differs in power: as soon as he had said to the band of men, and
officers of the high Priests, I am Ioh. 18.
he: they went backewarde and fell to the ground. Note here the power of the
word of God: They came armed, they came to take Jesus: and after they heard his
mightfull word, they fell to the ground. Matthew says: Docebat eos ta^quam
authoritatem habens: Mat. 7. vl.. verse.
He taught them as one having power, and not as the Scribes: Our words are
sinful, corrupt, and imperfect.

It differs in spirit: The words that I speak unto you, are spirit and Ioh.
6. 63.
life: But our words are profane and transitory. Christ says, Qui de terra
est, terrenus est and de terra loquitur: He that is of the earth is earthly,
and speaks of the earth.

It differs from our words in sweetness: The servant of ye Phariseis and
high Priests, which were sent to take Christ, returned and said thus of the
excellency of his word, Nunquam sic loquutus est homo: Never man Ioh. 7. 46.
spoke as this man does. Not Demosthenes, out of whose mouth flowed fluddes of
eloquence: not Cicero the Father of eloquence: not eloquent Pericles, of whom
it is written, that he did thunder out his words. But Christ's Arguments were
so mighty and his words so sweet, that a certain woman having great
admiration thereof: lifted up her voice and said unto him: happy is the womb
that bare thee, and the pappes which Luc. 11. 27.
thou have sucked.

To be brief, this word differs in perfection: In his word all things endure.
Eccl. 43. 26.
Take away this perfect word, what is man? a brute beast.

Take the Sun out of ye world, what remains? Horrible darkness. Lactantius
says: Lumen me^tis humanae Lactan. de ira Dei cap. 1.
Deus est: remoto Deo coelestique doctrina omnia erroribus plena sunt: God is
the light of man's soul: If you set a side, or put away from you God and his
heavenly word: All things are full of errors. Take away this word, what is a
man? a captive of Satan, a pray of death, a slave of sin, a firebrand of
hell: Ignorantia Scripturaru^, Hierom. in Prologo Esaiae.
Christi ignorantia est: Ignorance of ye Scriptures is ignorance of Christ.
As far as heaven is distant from earth: so far ought heavenly things always
to be preferred before humane things: yea incomparably ought they always to be
preferred.

It is compared to the Sun, whose office is, by spreadyng of his radiant and
bright beams to expel darkness, and to dispose every thing to bear fruit:
Right so ye office of Gods word is, with his bright and shinyng beams of grace
to expel the darkness of heresies and errors, to take away the cold frost of
iniquity, and to dispose and frame every man and woman to bring forth the
fruits of piety and godlynes.

It is compared to fire, for that it enflameth us by love. The two Disciples
which went to Emans, said (after that Christ had interpreted unto them in all
the Scriptures) did not our hearts burn within us while he Luc. 24. 23.
talked with us by the way, and opened to us the Scriptures? and Christ says,
I am come to send fire on the Luc. 12. 49.
earth, and what is my desire, but that it be already kindled?

It is likened to a glass: in this glass every man may see whence he came,
what he is, whether he goes: his sin, his banishment, his misery. S. Hiero^
gives sweet counsel to a certain virgin: Vtere lectione diuina, vtere
Hierom: in Episto. ad Demetriadem virginem.
speculo, vide speculu^, foeda corrigenda, pulchra co^serua^da, and pulchra
facie^da. Scriptura enim speculu^ est foeda oste^dens, and corrige dicens: Use
to read the holy Scripture, use the glass, see the glass: That deformity may
be amended, fayrenesse preserved, and fair things performed. For the
Scripture is a glass showing deformity, and saying amend. Gregory says:
Sacra Scriptura tanquam speculum quoddam Gregor. in moral.
mentis: The holy Scripture is as a certain glass of the mind. S. August.
says: Scriptura sancta sit tibi ta^quam August. in Psalm. 48.
speculu^: Speculum hoc habet sple^dorem non me^dacem, non adulante^, nullius
personam amantem. Formosus es? Formosum te ibi vides. Sed cum foedus
accesseris, and foedum te ibi videris, noli accusare speculum: ad te redi, no^
te fallit speculum, tu te noli fallere: Let the holy Scripture be to thee as a
glass. This glass has no deceitful or flatteryng brightness, it is not in
love with any man's person. Art thou bewtifull? Thou see thy self there
bewtifull. But when thou come deformed, and see thy self there deformed:
accuse not the glass, advise thee self. The glass deceives thee not,
deceive not thou thy self.

It is like to a clear fountain or well. The woman of Samaria found Ioh. 4.
Christ at the well. Would you find Christ? At the well of his word shall you
find him.

S. Basil says, the Scripture of Basil. in Psalm. 1.
God is like to Apothecaries shop full of medecines sundry sorts, that every
man may there chose a convenient remedy for his dissease.

This is that pillar exhibited to the children of Israel: Factae sunt tene
brae Exodus 10. 22
horribiles in vniuersa terra Aegypti, vbicunque habitabant filij Israel lux
erat: There was a thick darkness upon all the la^d of Egypt: but all ye
children of Israel had light where they dwelled. Where the word of God is,
there is light: Where the same is not, there is darkness. Without this fiery
pillar, we can not walk in the light. He that walks in darkness, Ioh. 12.
35.
knows not whether he goes. This is that pillar which mightily conducteth
Exodus 13. 21
our understanding, out of the the Egypt of infidelity. This is that Lucifer
the bright morning star, which comes before the sun of righteousness,
by whom the light of grace does rise, whom follows the day of glory.

This is that star of the sea, descrying port and country to the sailors on
the sea of this world. This is that star, which led the wise and faithful
men from a far country to Christ.

This is that most heavenly jewel Mat. 13. 45.
and treasure, the precious stone which the Christian Marchantman sought with
great diligence, and care* and when he had found it, sold all that he had to
buy the same. He which prefers the word of God before all transitory
things: Which for saketh him self, takes up his Cross, and follows Mat.
16. 24.
Christ, is truly said to sell all that he has, and to buy the same.

This is a most pleasant garden. In this garden you may gather many sweet
flowers: the plantain of says, the roses of patience, the lillies of
innoce^cie, the olives of mercy, and many other of most excellent virtue. In
this garden are planted many goodly and fair trees, bringyng forth most sweet
and delitesome fruit: The Ceders of contemplation, the Cyprusses of noble fame,
the Oaks of consta^cie, the Laurels or Bay trees of virtue, and many other such
like.

It is called a candle or light. The kingly Prophet says: thy word is a Psalm.
118.
candle unto my feet, and a light unto my paths. The lighters of this ca^dle
(says Chrisost.) are the father the Chrisost. in cap. 5. Mat.
son and the holy ghost. The candle stick is the Church: or every godly man
having the word. By this ca^dle the thief or false teacher is espied: so says
Theophilact. Theophilactus in Luc. 16. cap.


It is called the bread of the soul: for that it feeds the soul. Man shall
not live by bread only, but by every Deuteronomy. 8.
word that proceeds out of ye mouth of God. A fish can not live without Mat.
4.
water, a sheep can not live without pasture, this mortal body ca^ not long
endure without food, the soul ca^ not long live without the word of God. This
is the meat of faith.

This word is light. The people that walked in darkness have seen a Esa. 9. 1.
great light. This is comdemnation, that Ioh. 3. 19.
light is come into the world, and men have loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds were evil. To give light to them yt sit in darkness. etc
Luc. 2.


It is named water: Christ said to ye Ioh. 4. 10. Esai. 12. Esai. 55. Psalm. 46.
Hier. 2. Esai. 25.
woman of Samaria: if thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to
thee give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given
thee the water of life.

It is a royal and kyngly feast. Mat. 22. Luc. 14.


It is the sword of the spirit. This sword is very necessary to all that be
Ephesians. 6.
in this warfare. For who goes to Luc. 22.
battle without a sword. He that has no sword let him sell his coat and
buy a sword.

The spiritual Ma^na. Gather your Manna while you have time. The horn of
salvation: The incorruptible Luc. 1.
seed which lives and lasts for 1. Pet. 1. Hier. 23.
ever: A hammer that breaks the hard stone: A key that gives entry into the
house, which is the kingdom of Psalm. 45. Origin. in number. Hom. 18. page vlt.
August. in Psalm. 86. Luc. 5. Luc. 4. Act. 13.
of heaven: The scepter of the kingdom: An arrow that pearceth ye enemy: A
heavenly trumpet: A net enclosing and bringyng us together: The word of grace:
The word of salvation: The word of reco^ciliation: The word of truth: The word
of virtue: The word of life everlasting: The word 2. Cor. 5. Ebtu. 2. Iac. 1.
2. Cor. 6. Romans 1. Ioh. 6. 1. Ioh. 1. Psalm. 40. 1. Cor. 7. Esai. 39. 8. Mat. 21.
and way of righteousness: yea righteousness it self: Grace and verity: The
wisdom of God in a mystery: That good word whereof Esaias speaks: which is
called good, for that it brings all goodness: And (to conclude) it is called
the kingdom of God: The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
nation bringyng forth the fruits thereof.

The premises considered, I may say with the Prophet Hieremie, Terra, Hier.
22. 29
terra, terra, audi verbum Domini: O thou earth, earth, earth, hear the word
of the Lord. The foolish carle Nabal still carries earth in his eyes, earth in
his ears, and earth in his tongue. Above all things he desires to see earth,
to hear of earth, and to speak of earth. Many Nabals, many carles, many
fools. But one thing is necessary, one thing is necessary, one thing is
necessary, and that is the word of God. Mary has chosen the good part, which
shall not be taken away Luc. 10. vlt. verse.
from her.

The first precept that Isocrates gave to prince Demonicus was tma tn the^:
fear God.

The first law that should be given to any man says Plato, should be to the
increase of godlynes.

The chiefest oath which the Atheniens took, was this: Pugnabo pro facris and
cum alijs and solus. In defense of Religion I will fight, both in company and
alone. Among the Atheniens no king was created, before he had taken orders and
was a priest. They judged the wisest, best, and most renowned, to be fittest to
offer sacrifice to their Gods, to the great shame of Christians now adays,
which thinck the most abject and outcast good enough, to take upon him so high
and holy a function. The ancient Romans, through ye instinct of nature,
thought so reverently of religion, that they sent their children, yea even the
noblest men of Rome, sent their sons into Hetruria, to learn the service of
God. Nowadayes a mean gentleman thinks his child to good, to learn and
profess true religion. Hereby it is clear and evident, what care heathen men
ignorant of the true worshipping of God, have had of Religion. Poets by their
feyninges have commended it, Orators have exhorted unto it, Philosophers have
thought it necessary in a common wealth, common people have sworn to defend
it, Noble men have preferred it, Kings have professed it. There is no religion
without the word of God. We have the understanding of the will of God by his
only word. For without ye same, our sight is blindness, our understanding
ignorance, our wisdom foolishnes, our devotion deuilishnes.

The profit and fruit of this heavenly word, is wonderful. All scripture 2.
Tim. 3. 16
given by inspiration of God, is profitable Romans 15. 4
to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in righteousness, that we may be
patient and find comfort. S. August: says, In scripturis didicimus Christum,
in scripturis didicimus Ecclesiam: August. tom. 2. Epist. 166.
In the scriptures we have learned Christ, in the scriptures we have learned
the church. S. Basil: says, Basil. in co^cione: quod Deus non causa malorum.
Verbum Dei ex quo solo noscitur deus, regiam via^ monstrat, and est lucerna
pedum nostrorum: The word of God by the which only God is known, shows the
kings highway, and is the light of our feet.

We learn faith in the scriptures. S. Hilary says to the Emperor Hilarious ad
Imperat. Constant.
Constantinus: Fidem Imperator quaeris? audi eam, no^ de nouis chartulis, sed
de dei libris: Does your Majesty seek the faith? Hear it then, not out of
any new schrolles, but out of the book of God.

S. Ambrose says, Christus oritur Ambros. in Hexam: lib. 4. cap. 1.
in lectione scripturarum sol iusticiae: In reading the scriptures, Christ the
sun of righteousness rises. To be short, S. August: says, verbo Dei docemur in
omnibus: By the word of God we are instructed in all things. All things
necessary to salvation are contained in ye scripture: for proof whereof,
(because other matters call me away) I leave briefly these places: Ioh: 14.
25. verse. 2. Timo: 3. 15. Luc: 14. 17. Math: 22. 4. verse. Esai: 5. 4. verse.
This matter is proved out of the most ancient fathers: Irenaeus and
Tertullian, read Irenaeus. lib. 3. cap. 1. and 4. Tertul. de praescript.
haeres. As many as drink of this heavenly fountain, shall receive benefit
of it: the blind shall see, the deaf shall hear, the dumme shall speak, the
lame shall walk, fools shall be wise, the sick shall be whole, the dead shall
revive. The drincking of this fountain, has made many proud men, humble: many
covetous misers merciful: many faythles, faithful: many filthy fornicators,
chaste: many furious and wrathful, meek, and mild: many slothful and
drousie, vigilant and watchful: many fearful, bold: yea and even contemners
of Phalaris Bull: many Saules, many Paul's: many many children of darcknes,
the children of light. God by his word, offers to us his merciful hand: by
faith we give to God our hand: and the sacraments are as a third hand, which
confirm and stablish the joining of the other two together. If you fear the
judgment of sin: This most precious word offers you righteousness in
Christ: if you fear death, it offers life: If you fear the fire of hell, it
offers the joys of heaven: and breefely, you have in this word, whence you
may take both in life recreation, and in death preservation. Moses having the
word of God, could divide the sea. The Apostles (although poor fishermen) with
the word of God overcame the world. The blind which heard the voice of
Christ, received sight: The dombe speech, wherewith they glorified God: the
lame strength, which they applied to the service of God: the deaf hearing,
whereby they became attentive hearers of this gracious word. Christ said to
the rulers daughter: Maid arise, and she Mat. 9. Luc. 8.
arose straight way. He said to the widows son: young man I say to thee
arise, and he that was dead sat up Luc. 7.
and began to speak. And to Lazarus he cried with a loud voice: Lazarus Io. 11.
come forth, and he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot. The
te^pestnous winds heard his voice, and forthwith they were alayed: the sea and
waves heard it, and they became calm: men possessed with devils heard it, and
they obeyed: yea the very devils hearing his voice, humbled themselves. O deaf
and obstinat minds of wicked men: O you that lie groueling on the ground, and
have no feeling of things above* Christ cries daily. Damsel arise: young man
I say to thee arise: Lazarus come forth: dead sinner, embrace life: But all are
in a deep sleep; a sleep of sin; and neglect to awake. Yet these miserable
men ought to remember, that ye day will come, ye day will come when (will they,
nil they) they shall hear the voice of the son of God coming in the
clouds; with great power and majesty: Then shall they stand before his
judgment seat. Then shall they hear to their endless smart the thu^der of
the law: depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire which is Mat. 25. 41.
prepared for the devils and his angels.

Hear therefore the word of God, while you have time: Consider the Romans 13.
season: it is now time to arise from sleep. It is now high time to hear: You
have no color of excuse. What more could have been done for the vyneyard?
Esai. 5.
All things inuit, move, and desire you to hear. The clearenes of the holy
Scriptures calls you. For the Scriptures generally are easy and clear. So
says S. Paul: If our Gospel 2. Cor. 4. 3.
be hid, it is hid to them yt are lost. So says the Prophet Oseas: The Oseas
vlt. cap. vlt. ver.
ways of the Lord be straight: but the wicked shall fall in them. So says
the Prophet David: The Scriptures Psalm. 118.
are a candle and a guide to our feet. So says the old father Origene:
Clausum Origin. in Exodus Hom. 9.
est negligent ibus, iuuenitur quare^tibus: If is shut from the negligent: but
it is opened to them that seek, and knock for it. So says Clemens
Alexandrinus: Clem. Alex. in Orat. Adhor. Ad Gentes. pagina. 63.
Audite qui estis long, Audite qui prope: nullis celatum est verbum, lux est
communis, omnibus illucescit hominibus. Nullus est in verbo Cimmerius,
festinemus ad salutem, ad regenerationem: Hearken ye that be far of, hearken ye
that be near. The word of God is hid from no man: It is a light common unto
all men: There is no darkness in Gods word. Let us make have to salvation, to
regeneration. So Fulgentius: In Scripturis diuinis abundat Fulgentius in Sermon.
de Co^fessoribus.
and quod robustus comedat, and quod paruulus sugat: In the Scriptures of God
there is plenty sufficient, both for the strong to eat, and for the little one
to suck. So Irenaeus: Scripturae in Iraeneus. lib. 1. cap. 31
aperto sunt, and sine ambiguitate, and similiter ab omnibus audiri possunt:
The Scriptures are plain, and without doubtfulnes, and may be heard
indifferently of all men. So says Chrisost. Chrisost. in 2 Thessalonians. Hom. 3.
Omnia clara and plana sunt in Scripturis diuinis: quaecu^que necessaria sunt,
manifesta sunt: All things are clear and plane in the holy Scriptures:
whatsoever thing is necessary for us, is also manifest. So says Epiphanius
Lib. 2. So says Saint Hierom. in Psalm. 86. So (to conclude) Gregory: says
Greg. in Epist. ad Leandrum.
it is a stream wherein the little lamb may wade, and the great Elephantes may
swymme.

But touching the discourse of natural reason, S. Ambrose says that, No
creature in earth or in heaven, is able to reach to the depth of these things.
These are his words: Men's Ambros. ad Gratianum de fide. lib. 1. cap. 5.
deficit, vox silet, non mea tantum sed angelorum: supra potestates, supra
angelos, supra Cherubim, supra Seraphim, supra omne^ sensum est: The mind is
astonyed, the voice fails, not only of me, but also of ye angels: it is
above the powers, above ye angels, above the Cherubins, above ye Seraphins, and
above all manner of understanding.

Notwithstanding all these excellent properties of Gods word, and mo then a
thousand thousand tounges ca^ declare: We become Citizens of Corazin,
Bethsaida, and Capharnaum. Tyrus, Sido^, Sodom, the Queen of the South, the
men of Niniue, and that barbarous Eunuche, shall rise against Act. 8.
us in the day of judgment. If such preaching had been in Tyrus and Sidon, as
has been in England (especially these xx. years): they would have repented in
sackcloth and ashes. Therefore it shall be easier for Tyrus and Sidon at the day
of judgment, the^ for England. If ye mighty works which have been done in
England, had been done among them of Sodom: They had remained without plague of
fire and brimstone. The Queen of the South shall rise against us at the day of
judgment. A woman and a Queen, a frail sex, the weaker vessel, yet of
Princely power: men the stronger vessel, and yet most of them not of Princely
power. She was a stranger: we are now Domestici: of the household. She wanted
the promises of Messiah: we have the promises of Messiah. She came to Salomo^ a
wise man certainly, yet a mortal and sinful man, which could not help her
but in external things, and therein peradventure barely and slenderly: we
refuse to come to Christ God and man, who can help us in all things, who is
all in all, and all to all. She came to hear the wisdom of Solomon?
Wonderful was his wisdom: his wisdom exceeded ye wisdom of all the^ of
the East, and all the wisdom of the Egyptia^s: he exceeded all me^ in
wisdom: he wrote iij. thousand Proverbs. His songs were a thousand and
five. He disputed of trees, even from ye Ceder tree that grows in Libano^,
unto the Isop that springs out of the wall. And he disputed of beasts,
fowls, worms and fishes. There came of all nations to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, and from all kings of the earth which had heard of his wisdom. But
behold he that preaches this day out of ye ship, is greater then Salamon, and
preaches far greater and better matters. Notwithstanding fools refuse to
hear his preaching. This famous Queen came to Solomon from far, and out of a
sweet, and fruitful country, the fruitful Arabia, called also Saba: so
fruitful that it brings corn and fruit twice in the year, where grows
all kind of spices, and sweet gummes: and the Towns are unwalled, because the
people do live always in peace. But we neglect to walk a little way within the
walls of our Cities, and to leave ill air, ill soil, ill company, ill
exercises, ill manners, to come to Christ. She came with great peril: we may
come without peril, yet we come not. She left her happy kingdom, and with
long and painful travail, came to Solomon: we have Christ in the kingdom of
England, without leaving of kingdom, and with little travail may we hear
him: yet we hear him not. She came with gifts: She came to Jerusalem with a
very Reg. 10. 2. Paralip. 2. 9 Mat. 12. 3.
great train, with Camels that bare sweet odours: and gold exceedyng much, and
precious stones. But we may have access to Jesus Christ, coming Esai. 55. 1.
without train, without gifts: Come to the waters all ye that be thirsty, and
ye that have no money come buy. etc. We refuse grace offered freely. This noble
Queen knew Salomo^ by only fame: we know Christ by his manifold miracles, and
yet we come not, yet we believe not, yet we bring forth no good fruits.
Therefore justly shall we be condemned. It is shameful to be vanquished of a
woman, more shameful of an heathen woman, most shameful in such a cause.

The men of Niniue shall rise against us and condemn us, and reprove us of
unbelief: not by authority, but by comparison of the better act. They heard
Jonas a very man: we reject Christ God and man. They heard Jonas a stranger:
we neglect to hear Christ a Savior, a father, a master, a friend,
co^nuersant with us many years. They repented at the preaching of Jonas: we
repent not at the preaching of Christ. Jonas preached but only three days:
Christ has preached most graciously, and mercifully these Twenty years in
England: and for all his so gracious and merciful preaching, we repent not.
Jonas wrought no miracle: Christ has wrought many marvelous miracles. He has
mightily delivered us from Pharao of Egypt, from Nabuchadnazer of Babylon, from
Holofernes of Syria, and has miraculously preserved Judith of England, and her
people. For all these graces and gifts, we are nothing thankful: we are
become carnal gospellers: we wax cold in religion: the Papists wax whot,
and we wax cold: I know it. We amend Mandrabuli more, as sower ale in
summer: we become every day worse and worse.

That barbarous Eunuche of the Act. 8.
Queen of the Ethiopians, shall at the day of judgment rise against us and
condemn us. He was an Eunuche, flourishing in authority, estimation, and
riches: and yet for all that, in his journey sitting in his chariot, he read
Esaias the prophet. Moreover he understood not what was contained in the
prophet. He answered Philip not only gentlely and courteously, (albeit he
asked him saying, understand thou what thou read:) but also desired him,
(notwithstanding he was clothed in poor attire,) that he would come up and sit
with him in the chariot. You see the promptnes of his mind: you see the godly
ferue^cie of a barbarous Eunuche. Chrisost. largely and sweetly discoursing of
this matter, in fine concludes thus: Idoneus est barbarus iste Chrisost. in
Genesis Hom. 35.
qui nobis omnibus doctor fiat: This barbarous Eunuch, is meet to be a doctor
and teacher to us all.

Sithence the case thus stands that we are wearye of spiritual Manna, the
best meat: and demean our selves with the unthankful Israelites vngratiously
in heart, word, and work against God and Moses, saying: Anima nostra nauseat
super cibo Number. 21. 5.
isto leuissimo: Our soul lotheth this light bread: we may assuredly look to
be plagued with the Israelites. God Psalm. 7. 12.
is a righteous judge, strong and patient, and God is provoked every day. If a
man will not turn, he will whet his sword, he has bent his how, and has made
it ready. He has prepared for him the instruments of death: he has ordained
his arrows against the persequtours. Behold the day is Amos. 8. 11.
come (says the Lord) that I will se^d a famine in the land: not a famine of
bread, nor a thirst of water, but a hunger, and thirst of hearing the word of
God. And they shall wander from sea to sea: and from the North unto the East
shall they run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord. In that day shall
the fair virgins, and the young men perish for thirst. He will also send
famine of bread, pestilence, fire, and sword, he will send Tamerlane,
Nabuchadnazer, the host of Se^nacherib, Titus and Vespatian. The Syrians shall
devour before, and the Philistines behind. He will destroy Mat. 22.
murderers, and burn up their city, and (as Esaias says) the leage which
Esaias. 28. d. 15. 18.
they have made with death and hell, shall be disanulled. He suffers long, he
is a patient God. It is said that he has leaden feet: but he has iron
hands. He comes slowlye, but when he comes he pays home. Violatours, and
contemnours, of Gods word always have bin punished. For this fault Adam and
Eve were banished out of Eden, a most fruitful and delightsome garden, into
Genesis 3.
a valley of tears, misery, and calamitye, there to eat their bread with the
sweat of their face. The enemies of Noah were miserablye Genesis 7.
drowned in the flood. The enemies of Lot were destroyed with brimstone Genesis 19.
and fire. The Israelites were grievously punished and plagued, as Moses and
the Prophets in many places make mention. David lost 1. Paral. ca. 21.
seventy thousand men plagued with pestilence. Absolon was hanged, 2. Sam. 18.
slain, and cast into a pit. Saul was sore plagued, deposed from his
kingdom, 1. Reg. 15. 18. and. last. cap. 1. Paral. 10.
afflicted and vexed with a devil, and finally slain with his three sons,
his harnes bearer, and all his men, in one day. Sedechias was sent 4. Reg. 25.
3. Ren. 12. 2. Paral. 32. Exodus 14. Act. 12. 4. Reg. 9.
into Babylon and made blind. Roboam the son of Solomon, of twelve tribes
lost ten. Sennacherib was slain of his sons. Pharao with all his chivalry
was drowned in the red sea. Herod horriblely ended his life. Iesabel was cast
out of a window, and dogs did eat her. Jonas was Ionae. 1.
cast into the sea. A certain Prophet was killed by a Lion. The children 3.
Reg. 20. 4. Reg. 2. 24
that mocked Eliseus were torn of bears. Corazin, Bethsaida, and Caphernaum
were cursed with woe Mat. 11.
woe, and cast down to hell. That famous city Jerusalem, named sometime the
holy city, was piteouslye plagued, made even to the ground Miche. 3. Luc. 19.
with the children within it, destroyed stick and stone, and turned to a heap
of stones, for contemning the gracious and merciful visitation: rejecting
Christ's heavenly word, miracles, and all his benefits. So Christ prophesied,
and so it came to pass. For the same fault, (truly a horrible fault) the
kingdom of the Romans was destroyed, the kingdom of ye Chaldeans, the
kingdom of the Macedonians, the kingdom of the Persians, the kingdom of the
Carthaginia^s, and many other more. Paul preached to the Collossians,
Hierapolians, and Laodiceans, but they conte^ned his words, and therefore (as
Orosius witnesses) the earth Orosius. lib. 7. cap. 5.
opened and swallowed them up. O Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou that Mat. 23. Luc.
13.
killest the Prophets and stonest them which have been sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not: behold, your house is left
unto you desolate.

O England england which conte^nest the word of god, and dealest unthankfully
with them that are sent unto thee, hating them that rebuke Amos. 5. 10
thee in the gate, and abhorring them that speak uprightly, how often (says
Christ) would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your house shall be left
unto you desolate, and the vineyard shall be let out unto other Mat. 21.
husbandmen, which shall yield fruit in due season: except ye spedely Mat. 3
repent. For now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree: and every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, shall be cut down and cast into the sire.
Therefore know the time, redeem the time while you have time. The swallow
knows her time: The Crane knows her time. The whery man takes his tide:
The seaman his gale: The Smith stryketh whilst the Iron is whot. The
husbandman felleth his corn when it is ripe: ye harvest man makes hay when
the sun shines: The sower casts his seed, when the ground is melow. As
yet the sun shines, as yet is the acceptable time, as yet to day lasts, as
yet the gate is open, as yet grace is offered, yet the tide serves, and yet
Christ cries by his preachers, Earth, earth, earth hear the word of the Lord.
Therefore, especially considering the season, after the example of this people,
let us with all endeavor and feruencye preasse upon Christ, to hear his sweet
and comfortable word. Thus much for the first part.

And he stood by the lake of Genezareth and saw two shyps stand by the lakes
side: but the fishermen. etc. The place is noted where these things were done.
Matthew and Mark call it the sea of Galilee. It is called also ye sea of
Tiberias. The place was pleasant and delectable, not without goodly pastures.
Nighe to the same were many goodly and populous Cities: as Capharnau^,
Bethsaida, Corazin, the regio^ of the ten Cities, and Egesip. lib. 3. cap. 26.
de excidio Hieroso. Josephus. lib. 3. cap. 18. Belli Iudaici. Plin. lib. 5.
cap. 15.
the region of the Gadarenes. In these Cities he often taught, both in their
Synagoges and houses, as occasion served. You have an elegant description of
this place in Egesippus, Josephus, and Plini.

Here he saw two ships: but the fisherme^ were gone out of them, and were
washyng their nets. They had now no hope at all to catch any fish: but God of
his infinite mercy, does often times, show his power in workyng, when things
are past all hope of good recovery.

And when he was entered into one of the ships, which belonged to Simon: he
prayed him, that he would thrust out a little from the land. etc. Behold the
wonderful humility of Christ, he might have commanded, but he prays. For
the earth is the Lords and all that therein is, the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein etc. Learn humility of this Psalm. 24.
Doctor of humility, the best doctor that ever was, who says: Learn of
Mat. 11. 29.
me: for I am meek and low in heart. Which wholesome counsel that excellent
and learned divine S. August. August. Tom. 10. de verbis Domini secundum Mat.
sermo. 10.
notyng says: Ille ille cui omnia tradidit Pater. etc: That: even ye king of
kings and Lord of Lords, and only son of the euerliuyng God to who^ the
father had given all things. etc. says not, learn of me to make the world:
or to raise the dead: but to be humble and meek. O wholesome and comfortable
counsel. O faithful doctor: humble Doctor, Lord, and Master of mankind. He
would not teach that he was not: he would not command that he him self did
not. Consider Act. 1. Ezech. 34.
this you which with ill shepherds by force and cruelty govern.

And he sat down and taught the people out of the ship. Christ every where
and always shows him self a Savior, and is set forth unto us in the
Gospel, preaching diverse and sundry ways: Walkyng on the land, sittyng in the
ship, paynefully trauailyng by the way, sittyng upon the well, in the
Synagogues, in the streets, in houses, in wilderness, upon hills. He healed the
sick, he comforted the afflicted.

Does not wisdom cry: does not Prou. 8. 1.
understanding put forth her voice? She stands in the top of high places, by
the way in the place of the paths. She cries at the gates of Cities, and at
the entries of men's doors. These things according to the letter, are best
spoken of Christ, which preached the Gospel publicly, not only in
Synagogues, and temples, but also in other places where the people assembled
together.

Upon the mountain he made that Mat. 5. 6. and 7.
excellent and passing Sermon, written in Matthew.

In his journeys he oftentimes disputed with his adversaries, taught the
multitude and his Disciples sundry excellent matters, and confirmed his Mat.
20. Luc. 17.
doctrine with wonderful miracles.

At the gate of the City Naim he Luc. 7.
showed him self, by raising the widows son.

In private houses when he sat at Luc. 7. Luc. 14.
the table, he gave heavenly instruction, and would not suffer so much as that
time to pass without doing good.

When he was but xij. years old, Luc. 2. 42.
he sat in the temple among Doctors, hearing the^ and posing them, so that
all men which heard him, had him in maruailous admiration, for his singular
wisdom, and passing understanding.

He made many Sermons publikly, Ioh. 7. Ioh. 12.
and openly in the temple at Jerusalem.

When he was brought bound to Ioh. 18. 19.
Caiphas, and of him demanded concerning his Disciples and doctrine: He
answered, I spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Sinagogue and in
the temple, whether all the Jews resort, and in secret have I said nothing.
etc. Briefly, in all places he graciously sought means to instruct the people.

He calls all me^, he excludes no man. They that were not entered in Music
and Geometry, were not admitted into Platoes schole: but the merciful
goodness of Christ Jesus, admits all me^ into his school, not excludyng
even children: He teaches all men out of the ship, of what soever age, sex,
state or condition they be.

He instructed Nicodemus familiarly. Io. 3.


Most gently he entreated the Ce^turion, Mat. 8.
albeit a Heathen man.

He behaved him self mildly toward Ioh. 4.
the woman of Samaria, sittyng on the well. Notable sinners he despised not.

What kind of dissease did he ever cry fie upon, or turn his face from? He
turned his merciful face to Leapers, to men possessed with devils, afflicted
with bloody flixes, disseased with palsy, and many other dangerous maladies,
and cured the^ all. He Mat. 19. Marc. 10. Luc. 18.
commanded infantes to be brought unto him, against the will and mind of his
Apostles. He taught that young Mat. 19. Marc. 10. Luc. 18.
man, which demanded what good thing he should do, that he might have
eternal life. He rejects not the weak in faith: but he inuiteth, allureth,
and desires all to come to him.

You have heard how wisdom in this place, and in all places cries to all
men. And at this day she slacketh not to cry, and to put forth her voice in
England and many other places, by Preachers, by holy Scripture, by signs and
wonders. What matters Christ taught in this place, I find not expressed. A
learned man says: Nefas est quaerere quae in sacris Scripturis Gualterus in 8.
Romans
non traduntur: It is wickedness to search those things which are not taught
in scripture. Thus much touching the letter.

Four things come to be observed in this mystery: The sea, Christ in the ship,
ye people on the shore, and the ship it self. The sea is an Image of the
world: Christ is an image of true and sincere teachers: The people on the
shore, an image of hearers: and the ship, an image of the true Church.

Touching the first: The sea has his name of bitterness: Isidorus says:
Isidorus lib. 13. cap. 14. Etimolog.
Propterea Mare appellatum, quod eius aquae sunt amarae: The sea has his name
Mare in Latin, of the Latin word Amarum which signifies bitter, because the
waters thereof are bitter. The sea is very bitter: notwithstanding, to fishes
nourished in the same it sauoureth sweetelye: Right so the world is very
bitter, yet to worldly men chiefly delighting in the same, it sauoureth
sweetly. But woe be to Esai. 5. 20.
them which make sour sweet, and sweet sour: which call evil good, and
good evil: which make darkness light, and light darkness. The sea is bitter:
the dealings of the world are bitter. Pride is bitter, covetousness is
bitter, usury is bitter, adultery, fornication, cosenyng, swearyng,
forswearyng, deceitful vilanie, traitorous treachery, and murder are bitter.
These horrible and hateful vices with many more, ouerflow the world. The world
is bitter.

The sea is inconsta^t, it ebbeth and flows: The world is inconstant, it
chau^geth every day. Some be borne, and some dye. Some be sick, and some be
whole. Some grow toward man's estate. Some draw in age. Sometimes comes good
tidings, some times heavy. To day in favor, to morrow quite out of credit. To
day a man, to morrow none.

The sea is full of dangers: dangers of winds, pirates, Mermaide^s, rocks,
quickesandes, and other dangers. There are things creepyng innumerable Psalm.
104. 25.
both small and great beasts. There is that Leuiathan whom God has made to
play therein. They that Eccl. 42. 24.
sail over the sea tell of the perilles thereof, and when we hear it with our
ears, we marvel thereat. They that go down to the sea in shyps, and occupy
by the great waters: they see the words of the Lord, and his wonders in the
deep. They see as it were a thousand deaths. In the sea no rest can be had.
The world is full of dangers: in the world a thousand deaths, in the world no
rest Dangers in the world more then in ye sea. The world has tempestuous
winds, Pirates, rocks, waves, Mermaidens, quick sands, and many more
dangers the^ can be numbered. More perish in the world, then in the sea.

The sea is te^pestuous: the world is tempestuous. If the sea seem never so
calm, yet look for a tempest: If the world seem never so prosperous, it may
look for a tempest of aduersitye. The world has never long stood without
storms and tempests. The case is clear, and S. Ambrose calls Ambros. in 7.
Luc. Cyp. de bono patientiae.
them. Procellae mundi. Te^pestes or storms of the world. The same words has
S. Cyprian and many other. Here is tempest of evil tongues, tempest of lying,
tempest of slander, tempest of aduersitye, tempest of sickness, tempest of
loss of friends and good men: shaking and extreme tempest of death, eternal
tempest for the wicked in hell.

The sea is full of monsters: the world is full of monsters: the world is full
of monstrous men, not worthy the name of men. Some have their faces in their
feet, and their feet in their faces, as all foolish Nabals and covetous
carles. But God gave man a face to look up to heaven, which thing even the
heathen Poet knew. Some have many heads: for yt they serve many masters,
pride, covetousness, dronke^nes, drowsines, murder, etc: such and so great
vices reign in them. Therefore have they as many heads and masters, as they
have lusts and affections reigning in them. Qui Ioh. 8. 34.
facit peccatu^ seruus est peccati: Whosoever commits sin, is the slave of
sin. Some have two tongues, as all flatterers and slaunderers. Some Prou. 18.
have swords in their lips: raylers, ill tonged persons, blasphemous wretches.
There is a generation whose Prou. 30. 14
teeth are as swords, and their chawes as knyues. Of such the Prophet David
speaks saying: whose teeth are Psalm. 57.
as spears and arrows, and their tongue as a sharp sword. Behold, Psalm. 59.
they speak with their mouth, and swords are in their lips. Proud me^,
covetous men, usurers, drunkards, heretics, blasphemers, slaunderers, are
monsters. The world therefore is full of monsters.

The sea casts out her dead to the shore: the world casts out, and
banisheth those that are dead to the world, and do not the works thereof. S.
Paul says, we are made a 1. Cor. 4. 9.
gasing stock to the world: Truth says: if ye were of the world, the Ioh.
15. 19.
world would love his own: howbeit, because ye are not of the world, but I
have chosen you out of the world: Therefore the world hates you: truth Ioh. 15.
20.
farther says, if they have persequted me, they will also persecute you. The
servant is not greater then the Sap. 2. 10.
Lord. The world says: let us oppress the poor righteous, let us not spare
the widow, nor old man. let us not regard the heads that are graye for age: let
the law of unrighteousness be our strength, for the thing that is feeble is
nothing worth: Therefore let us defraud ye righteous, and why? he is not for
our profit: nay he is clean contrary to our doings, he checketh us for
offending against the law.

Lactantius Firmianus speaking of Lactan. A. cephali cap. 11.
thend of this world says: Si qui erunt boni, praedae, ac ludibrio habebuntur:
If there remain any good men at that time, they shall be counted a pray, a
bootye, and a jesting stock. Can thou not flatter? can thou not lie? can
thou not play the hipocrite? can thou not follow the facion and serve the
stage? no. Then thou art no meet man to live in this world. Choose a few
companions.

The sea is no place to make our continual abode. For no man sayleth on the
sea, to tarry still on the sea, but spedely to pass over. This world is no
place of continual abode: for 1. Pet. 2. 11
we are strangers and pilgrims: Here have we no continuing City, Ebru. 13. 14
but we seek one to come. Yet we build stately, as though it were the tower
of Babel. We ruffile monstrously in apparel, as though our frail bodies
should never turn to dust. We live sensuallye, as though there were no other
heaven: we gather gold and silver gredely as though we should always need to
use the same. By this dealing it should seem we are not strangers and
pilgrims. The kinglye prophet David says. I am a Psalm. 39.
staunger with thee, and a soiourner as all my fathers were. S. August. writing
upon that place, has these August. in Psalm. 39.
words: Non ait sicut omnes homines, sed sicut omnes patres mei: Non omnium
est fides, infideles non possunt dicere se in terra peregrinos: He says not as
all men, but as all my fathers: for all men have not faith. The faythles cannot
say that they are strangers and pilgrims upon earth. Here then is their abode,
they are Citizens of Babylon, not of the heavenly Jerusalem. Notwithstanding,
in another sense, the faythlesse worldlings at the length shall find, that
they were strangers and pilgrims, when with the glotonous cormorant in the
torments of hell they shall cry in vain for mercy. That rich man desired a
drop, which denied a crome. And there are rich men to whom now I speak: they
be all one with the other in name, let them beware that they drink not all of
one cup with him.

In the sea are devouring fishes, and the great fishes devour the little
fishes: In the world great men, mighty men devour and undo poor me^. Here
might often times overcomes right. Here many take their brethren by ye
throat. Here Anacharsis may see Solons laws like to cobwebs, which held fast
the little flees, and let the great flees break through them. Here, Socrates may
laugh to see little thieves trust up at tiburne, and great thieves without any
punishment living still. Here Heraclitus may weep to see virtuous men
despised, and vicious men extolled* Notwithstanding, virtuous men be despised
and devoured of tyra^nes: yet they live as Jonas lived in ye whales bellye. As
dying, and behold we live 2. Cor. 6. 9.
says S. Paul.

You see now how the sea is an Image of the world, you see the sea, you see the
world. To speak all in su^me: The world is the kingdom and court of Satan,
a den of thieves, a shop of lies, a Babylon of sects, a wilderness full of
wild beasts, an Inn full of cuttbrotes, a cage of doltes, a Sodom, an Egypt:
A mother to the evil, a Stepdame to the good. Here is no place for godly men,
here devouring fishes destroy all, here all wicked crimes reign, no religion,
no faith, no charity: or very little. Therefore let us not love the world, nor
worldly things: for he that loves ye world has not the love of God in him:
but let us go with Lot out of Sodom, with Abraham out of Chaldee, with the
Israelites out of Egypt, with Christ from the Jews, and with Paul from the
Pharisees.

Christ taught out of the ship: He performs his office, to the which he was
sent of his father into this world: and because he had not a pulpet on the
land, and the people pressed upon him: he entered into a ship, and taught
upon the sea: for the office of Christ was to teach: He sent me to Esai. 61. 1.
preach good tidinges unto the poor. By his example he teaches us to do the
duties of our vocations faithfully. The type or figure declares, that the
function of them which preach the word of God, is paynefull and full of
peril. The world hates the light of veritye. Woe be unto me says 1. Cor. 9.
16
S. Paul if I preach not the Gospel. It is dangerous to be silent, and
dangerous to speak, if we speak wickedly, or if we be silent foolishly, we
offend God. If we speak truly, and reprove disobedience boldelye, we become
hateful and odious to the most part of men.

Truly if ever the office of preaching has bin subject to oboloquie and evil
report: it is now. The world hates the light of veritye. In so great malice
of the world, partly contemning, and partelye persecuting the word of the
gospel, who can satisfy or content all men? In old time there were but seven
wise men among the Greeks: and now there are not so many fools among us: for
all of us glory of our wisdom: every head is full of wit, every man will
have his own way: Hearers are rather rash judges, than fit and obedient
scholars: and most of them, before they have learned any thing, do rashly
condemn all things. S. August. says: Tutior est discentis, quam doce^tis
conditio: Salfer is the condition of him that learneth, the^ of him that
teaches. I pray you good audience let me hear your judgments. How should a
man make an excellent Sermon, either in matter or form? Some would have the
matter Catholic: Some Gospel like: Some would have altogether common places
of Scripture decided: Some would have us proceed still in the treatises of
faith and justification, with inuectiues against the Mass, Purgatory, and
satisfactions. Other would have us to launch into the deepes of predestination,
original sin, free will, election, and reprobation. Other would have vices
rebuked: but they can not agree how it should be done. Some would have it
generally and coldly: Some directly and hotely: Some the vices of the Clergy
and Magistrates: and some only the vices of the common people and inferiors:
all men, other men's vices: but no man his own vices. These disagree in matter
very ill, and in form much worse. Some would have long texts: some short
textes. Some would have Doctors, Fathers and Councels: some call yt ma^s
doctrine. Some would have it ordered by Logic: some term that man's wisdom.
some would have it polished by Rheotrique: some call yt persuasiblenesse of
words. And again in Rhetoric some would have it holy eloquence, liable to
the Ebrue and Greek phrase: Some would have it proper and fittyng to the
English capacity. Some love study and learning in Sermons: Some allow only a
sudaine motion of the spirit. Some would have all said by heart: some would
have often recourse made to the book. Some love gestures: some no gestures. Some
love long Sermons: some short Sermons. Some are coy and can broke no Sermons at
all. But we be not to feed men's humors, but to follow Christ: we must follow
Christ into ye ship, and the cross must be borne after the example of Christ.
No man Mat. 9.
sought more the glory of God then Christ: and yet for all that, he was called
a blasphemer. He lived without Mat. 11.
spot of vice, and yet he was called a wine bibber. He expressly taught to Mat.
22. Luc. 20. Luc. 23. 2.
render to Caesar the things which belong to Caesar: and yet he was accused to
have taught the contrary. No Mat. 5.
man taught patience more: and yet Mat. 23.
was he condemned as a seditious person. There was never such a one in Israel
as Christ was in works and words: Never any lived so purely: never any taught
so heavenly: and yet many wicked and graces persons said of him: he has a
devil and is mad, Ioh. 8. and. 10
why hear ye him? The scholar is Mat. 10.
not above the master. You see the chair of the master: know the chair of
the scholar.

More safe and sure is the standing of the hearers, which standing on the land
hear the word of salvation. The greatest part of hearers keep them selves out
of peril: for when any sudaine storm of persecution arises for the Gospel
on the sea of this world: either they hide them selves: or else utterly forsaken
the ship, chair, teacher and all. Such is the condition of the most part of
hearers. These things are clearly known. I need not to make long
demonstration. Examples remain fresh in memory.

Touching the ship, the state of the Church militant is here excelle^tly
depainted. The Church of Christ is that ship where against Satan blows out
so many blastes: the woman clothed with the sun, whom ye Apoc. 12.
old Dragon cease not continually to persecute. This ship is like to the Arc
of Noah. Even as a ship on the sea when any stormy tempests arise, is terribly
shaken: right so nothing in the wast and wide world is more shaken with storms
and tempests of all manner evils, then the Church. If you ask me who they are
that shake the ship of Christ, and how the same is shaken: I will give you to
understand: Turks, Jews, Anabaptists, Libertines, Sectaries, Atheistes,
Schismatikes, the Family of love, the Romish rabble, and to be short the
devil and all his members shake this ship: but they shall never be hable to
drown it: For the gates of hell shall not prevail Mat. 16. 18.
against it. Because Christ sits at the stern and has the helm in his
own hand.

For that the Romish Catholics do most shake the true Church of England which
is the Church of Christ: I purpose at this present to prove against them. They
say they shake not the ship, but are in the ship as in the Arc of Noah: and
that we Protestants shake the ship, and are out of the ship, and out of the
Arc. Farther they boldly say, that without the unity of their body, and their
head the Church of Rome, and their holy father the Pope, no man can be saved.
I will clearly prove the contrary: namely, that they shake the ship, that they
are out of the shipp: and they are not the true Church. Their body is a
Sinagogue of Satan: their holy father is not head of the true Church: (happy
were he if he were a member of the same) he has not the keys of heaven, but
rather of ye bottomless pit.

I prove thus: the Romish Church hears not the voice of ye shepherd:
Therefore the Romish Church is not the true Church. I will prosecute this
Argument in treatyng of breakyng the net. Now to prove that they shake the
ship, and how. The Romish Church is a persecutyng Church, therefore it shakes
the ship, and consequently is not ye true church. For persecution is an evident
token of Antichrists Church. Cayn persecuted Abell: the Giantes Noah: the
Sodomites: Loath: Ismaell, Isaac: Esau, Jacob: ye Egyptia^s, the Israelites:
Pharao, Moses: Saul, David: and yet David would not hurt him. Of whom we learn
that Gods Church does suffer, rather than hurt: and pardon rather then
persecute. The false Prophets persecuted the true Prophets. The Priests,
Scribes, Bishops, Annas, Herod, Pilate, and Caiphas, persecuted Christ. The
Jews and Turks, persecute the Christians: And most of all the tyran of Rome,
persecuteth Christ's little flock and congregation. The Church of Christ did
never persecute, but was always persecuted. So Hilarious and Nicephorus in many
places discourse. Lactantius says excellently Lactan. Divine. Institu. Lib. 5.
cap. 19.
to this matter: Defendenda religio est, non occidendo, sed monendo: non
saeuitia, sed patientia: non scelere, sed fide. Na^ si sanguine and torme^tis,
si malo religione^ defendere velis: ia^ non defendetur illa, sed polluetur
atque violabitur: Religion is to be defended, not with murdering, but with
monishing, not with cruelty, but with patience: not with fury, but with
faythfulnesse. For if ye defend Religion with bloodshed and torme^tyng, or with
workyng of mischief: It is not defended, but defiled, and disteined. Chrisost.
says: Quem videris Chrisost. in opere Imperfect. Hom. 19. Tertul. in
Apologetico.
sanguine gaudente^, lupus est. Who^soeuer thou see delight in blood, he is a
wolf. Tertul. says: it is not reason that a spiritual matter should be
tormented with temporal fire. Does not the Pope persecute all Christians? Is
not his arms a rauenyng wolf? his sentence Burn, Burn, Burn? his badge,
let us lay wait for blood? his head, blasphemy? his shield tyranny? his
breast, injury? his eyes, fire? his girdle, fornication? his breath, poison?
his tongue, the styng of death? his feet ready to shed innocent blood? his
sword, violence? his cross, persecution? his pardons iniquity? his triple
crown presumption? his keys, ambition? and all his doyngs abomination. Him
do follow great swarms of Cainites, Gyantes, Sodomites, Egyptians, Bailites,
Se^nacheribbes, Scribes, Phariseis, Herodians, Monks, Friars, Cardinals,
Adulterers, Idolaters, Parasites, Poysoners, Pardoners Bawdes, with all ye
Romish rabble. These are the right Canibals, like to the barbarous people of
America yt eat one an other. Yet they say all this is for love. A gentle kind
of love, like the love of one Philippides, who took a cudgel and did
Aristophanes in vespis.
beat his father, and all for love. But we may say with Tertullian: Crudelitas
vestra nostra gloria est: Your cruelty, is our glory. For Gods Religion, the
more it is preassed, the more it increases.

The congregation of Christ are Ioh. 10.
called sheep. A sheep has neither hoofes, nor sharp teeth, as wolves,
Lions, and Bears have. Christ said to his disciples: Behold, I send you Mat.
10. Luc. 10.
forth as sheep in ye mids of wolves: he says not as wolves in ye mids of
sheep. They are the true Church Psalm. 44. 22
of whom it is said: for thy sake are we slain continually, and counted as
sheep for ye slaughter. The marks of the true Church are these: the vncorrupt
voice of heavenly doctrine: the right use of the sacraments: the cross: and
obedience to the ministry of the word. S. August. says: Crux August. de
tempore. Sermon. 130.
regni insigne est: The cross is the cognizance or bagde of ye Church.
Athanasius says: Caedi, Christianorum proprium est: Caedere autem Christianos,
Pilati Athan ad solit vitam agentes.
and Caiphae officia sunt. To be persecuted, belongs to Christians: but to
persecute the Christians, belongs to the office of Pilate, and Caiphas.

The true Church is still persecuted and never persecuteth. Did the Patriarchs
persecute? did the Prophets persecute? did Christ persecute? did ye Apostles
persecute? when the Samaritanes would not receive Christ, James and John being
as yet Luc. 9. 54.
nouices in Christ's schole, called for fire from heaven, and would have burned
and consumed the Samaritanes: but Christ rebuked them saying: you wot not of
what manner of spirit you are: for the son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. Our weapons (says Ephe. 6. 14. 2. Cor. 10. 4
S. Paul) are not carnal, but spiritual. Whereas it is objected: compel
them to come in: I ask: what is Luc. 14.
the power of the Church to compel? is it ye power of the outward sword, or of
the spiritual word? Is it with the power of fire and faggot? Ought men to be
violently compelled to faith? It is evident and clear, that Christ did not
institute in his kingdom, any forcible or worldly kind of government: for he
said: Regnum meum non Ioh. 18. 36.
est de hoc mundo: My kingdom is not of this world. Has Christ ever broken
Esai. 42. 3.
a bruised reed? has he ever quenched the smoking flax? has he not taught us
to pray for our enemies, Mat. 5. 44.
and for those that persecute us? The Apostles usurped not the sword, to
compel men to the religion of Christ. Can the Pope or any of his Prelates put
faith into a man's heart by violence? was any man compelled against his will, to
the building of the outward Exodus 35.
tabernacle: and shall any man be compelled to the building of the inward
tabernacle? Is not the marriage spiritual, the supper spiritual? Then must men
be compelled with a spiritual weapon, which is with the lively word. Not by
hosts of men, nor by force of worldly strength, but by my spirit, says the
Lord of hosts. Zach. 4. 6.
So Peter compelled many to the faith. It is the word of God, that makes a man
a new creature. Ergo neither sword, nor fire. If the soul of man be a spirit,
then must it be fed with spiritual food, moved to faith by spiritual
instruments, drawn by the word, led by the spirit, and persuaded by the
scriptures, which are the only means which God appoints. If an heretic
hold an opinion, he holds it either of ignorance, or wilfulnes. If of
ignorance: he is to be converted by doctrine, to be convinced by scripture,
reformed by exhortation, reduced by reason, persuaded by the truth: If of
wilfulnes, he is to be menaced by the law, and corrected by excommunication. It
is written in a certain learned treatise against the late of counsel Tride^t:
verissimum est omnes haereses tantum spirituali gladio verbi Dei iugulatas
esse: Most true it is, that all heresies are convinced, only with the
spiritual sword of the word of God. The Gospel (says Damascenus) was
preached Damasc. 3. Sent. cap. 32
throughout all the world, without weapon, armor, or battle: by a few naked,
poor, unlearned, and afflicted men, which confounded the wise of the world.

Christ compelled Paul: If thou be Christ that so obiectest this: I pray thee
compel the Turk, and the Pope, which blaspheme Christ. If thou art not Christ
suffer. We ought to spare me^, and to pray for their salvation. Touching this
matter you may read more in August. Tom. 2. Epist. 107. 158. 160. 204. Tom. 7.
contra Cresco. Grammat. lib. 3. cap. 50. contra literas Petiliani lib. 2. and
cap 83. and cap. vlt. and also in Chrisost. de anathemate. Tom. 5.

Compel the^ to come in: Compel them. Quoad media: as in respect of the
means, to wit, the means aforenamed. Compel Remish Catholics to come to
the Church. So S. August. Tom. 2. Epist. 204.
August. would have the Donatistes compelled. Faith comes by hearing, and
many have bin converted from infidelitye to faith, from Paganism to
Christianisme, from the Romish rabble to the Christian congregation, by that
means. Seeing therefore that persecution is a note of the Church of Antichriste,
and that the Church of Room persecuteth: it is evident that that Church
shakes the ship and is malignant.

Out of the arc of Noah, that is, out of the Church, which is the body of
Christ: no man is saved. That is most certain: but that is not in respect of
the unity of the body in it self: but in respect of the unity of the whole
body with the head, which is Christ. Read Chrisost. upon the Epistle to the
Collos. Homi. 7. It may please those men to think upon these things, which
transfere this necessitye of unity, to the Church of Room, and to their
Bishop the head thereof, the adversary of Christ, and utter enemy to his
cross: boldly braying, and bragging, that out of the unity of this body and
head of theirs, no man can be saved. For these miserable men ought to
understand, that this necessary unity, without which no man can have
salvation, is not that unity whereby members are joined to members, bunches to
bunches, monsters to monsters, and the deceived to Antichrist ye deceiuer: but
that it is that unity whereby the true members of the true body, are conjoined
to the true and only one head Jesus Christ, our mediator and Savior.

The tyranne of Room is not the head of ye true church: I prove thus. He has
not the word of God for his warrant. Ergo, he is not the head of the true
church.

Christ says that he himself is the Ioh. 10.
only universal Shepherd. The prophets have prophesied so of Christ Esai.
40. Ezech. 37. 34. Hierem. 30. Psalm. 33. etc. The Apostle so names Ebru. 13. 20
him. Christ himself not long before Ioh. 14. 16.
he left this world^, said to his disciples: I will pray the father, and he
shall give you another co^forter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
spirit of truth. Here we learn what vicar Christ has substituted: Not the
Pope, but the holy ghost. So writes Tertul. Barnard, and others.

This place of John, I am the good shepherd: S. August. expounds of August.
in Ioh. Tract. 47. Chrisost. in Ioh. Hom. 59.
Christ. So does Chrisost. So does Nicholas Lyra as simple an interpretour as
he was: Fiet vnus pastor, id est Christus: There shall be one shepeheard: that is
to say, not the Pope, but Christ. The Apostles had no knowledge of this
monstrous head. The Nicene Council knew it not. The Council of Carthage
excommunicated and cursed him to the devil, that called him self universal
Bishop or chief Priest. The whole Council of Aphrica condemned the attempt of
this usurped jurisdiction, and called it the smokie pride of the world. The
Romish Prelate does subvert, corrupt, and profane the doctrine of Christ and
his Sacraments, and manifestly maintains Idolatry: Therefore he ca^ not be
the universal Shepherd. He is not worthy to be called a Shepherd. A
Shepherd? nay, a fleasheepe: A Bishop? a Butcher: a Pastor? a Pyrate: a
Prelate? a Pylate: a Vicar of Christ? a Vicar of Venus: a Cephas? Caiphas.
Phocas that execrable murderer, was he that first proclaimed the Bishop of
Rome to be head of the Platin. in vita Bonifacii. 3.
universal Church, about vj. hundred and xiij. years after Christ was borne.
This Phocas being but a common soldier, did by treason and conspiracy lay
hands upon his liege Lord and Master the Emperor Mauritius, and in cruel
sort did him to death: and so by traiterous vilanie, he aspired to the Empire.
The manner of his cruelty was this: First he commanded forth the Emperors
youngest son, and caused him to be slain even in the fight of his father: and
so the second: and then the third: and afterward the Empress. Mauritius
heauely lookyng on lamentyng and saying unto God: Righteous art thou O Lord,
and rightful is thy judgment. Last of all, he used the like tyranny also upon
the Emperor, and laid him, his wife and his iij. children on a heap together.
After that he had thus lived and committed sundry murders and other great
mis^^^^^: the people took him, slew him* (...) ^^ew him in to the fire. Here
you man see ye first promotour, a holy promotour of ye Popes holiness: A
murderer, ^^e finder out of supremacy: And Sup^^^^cie founded and builded
upon murder.

S. Cyprian calls Stephen and Cornelius, Bishops of Rome, brethren and
companions. And whereas certain Schismatickes yielded them selves subject to
the Bishop of Rome, persuading them selves that the Bishops of Aphrica had
less power the^ the Bishops of Rome: Cyprian called them desperate and wicked
persons for so doing. I frame this Argument out of Chrisost: Quicunque
desyderauerit Chrisost. opene imperfect. Ho, 35.
primatu^ in terra: in Coelo inueniet confusionem: Whosoever ambitiouslye
desires supremacy upon earth shall find in heaven confusion. The Bishop of
Room ambitiouslye desires supremacye on earth: Therefore he shall find
confusion in heaven. The Pope is Antichrist: Ergo he is not the head of the
Church. He which auau^ceth 2 Thessalonians. 2.
himself above all that is called God, is Antichrist: The pope does so: Ergo,
the Pope is Antichrist. Irenaeus Irenae. lib. 5 cap. penult.
a most ancient doctor of the Church, who lived almost fiften hundred years
since, disputyng of Antichrist says thus: Antichristus cum sit seruus, tamen
adorari vult vt Deus: Antichrist notwithstanding he be but a slave, yet he will
be worshipped as if he were God. Ioachimus Abbas says Antichristus iam pridem
natus est Romae, and altius extolletur in sede Apostolica: Antichrist is long
since borne in Rome, yet shall he be higher advanced in the Apostolic sea.
Antichrist (says Gregory) is he yt shall claim Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
to himself to be called the universal Bishop, and shall have a guard of
priests to attend upon him. S. August. August. Tom. 5. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 18.
cap. 2. and Lib. 20. cap. 19. Apoc. 17.
says, Babylon is the first Room, and Rome the second Babylon. And to come
nearer the matter, S. John says, Antichrist shall sit in the City that is
built upon seven hills, and so is the City of Room. And Sybilla says that
the greatest terror, and furye of his Empire, and the greatest woe that he
shall work, shall be by the banks of Tyber: and there is Room. He that has
eyes to see, let him see: and he that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Again Christ was humble, the Pope proud: Christ was poor, the Pope rich:
Christ patient, the Pope impatient: Christ merciful, the Pope unmerciful:
Christ used admonition, the Pope imprisonment: Christ communication, the Pope
extirpation: Christ all manner of clemency, the Pope all manner of tyranny:
briefly you shall find the Pope in all virtue severed from Christ: you shall
find him to Christ, Beliall: to light, darcknes: to truth, falshode. Are not
these, and such like, the very fruits of Antichrist? the tree is known by his
fruit.

Whereas these shakers of the ship of Christ urge Antiquity, Vniuersalitye,
and Succession, to make much for them: I answer these things make nothing
for them, but rather against them. Notwithstanding their Vincentius Lirinensis
whom they have in so high price. This is Vincentius precious assertion In ipsa
catholica Vincen. lirinen. pro Catholicae fidei antiquitate in cap. lib^^.
Ecclesia magnopore curandum est, vt id teneamus quod vbique, quod se^per, quod
ab omnibus creditum est: In the Catholic Church we must have especial care,
to hold that which every where, always, and of all men is believed. Yet to
help his credit the Church of Room was not so deformed with heresies at ye
time when he did write, which was a thousand years and more since, as it is
mentioned. Antiquitye does not prejudice or hinder truth. Their antiquity is
no mark of ye Church. Their Antiquity, is iniquitye. Tertull. says, nothing
can Tertull. de virginibus velan.
prescribe against truth, neither time, nor authority of persons, nor
privileges of kingdoms. And a little after he says: Christ is called truth,
and not custom: If Christ be from everlasting, and more ancient than all:
then is also truth more auntie^t than all customs. Heresies have always bin
vanquished by truth, and not by noueltye, and whatsoever is contrary to this
truth, is heresy, though it be neeuer so old a custom. S. August. says,
after that the truth is once found out, let custom give place to the truth:
let no man set custom before truth and reason: for reason and truth evermore
put custom to silence. That sweet martyr S. Cypri. says: Si solus Cyp. lib.
2. Epist. 3. Page 39.
Christus andiendus est: non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum
putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Neque enim
hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem: If Christ be only to
be heard: we must not regard what any other has done before us, but we must
look what Christ has done, which is before al. For we must not follow the
custom of men, but the truth of God.

To be short, Ignatius a disciple to Ignatius ad philadelph. Canon. co^suetud.
did. 1^.
S. John the Evangelist and a most constant martyr of Christ, has these
words: all my Antiquity is Jesus Christ, whom not to hear is manifest
destruction. You see the most ancient send us to learn the truth of him which
is most ancient of all. Symmachus disputyng with S. Ambrose against the
certainty of the Christian Religion, groundeth his chief Argument upon
antiquity: Affirmyng the Religion (in truth the superstition) of the Heathen
to be the truer. Because it had been of more antiquity. In resolution of the
Argument Ambrose seems almost graueled. But the very 1. Pet. 1. 20. Romans 1.
2. Ioh. 5. 46. 1. Ioh. 2. 7. Luc. 24. 27.
answer to be made hereunto is that the Religion of the Heathen is not more
ancient than ours, much less the Religion of the Papists. Our true Christian
Religion was not first published xv. hundred fifty and odd years sithence,
when Christ and his Disciples taught that most plainly in Jury. But from the
first infancy of the world immediately after the creation of the first man the
same has been manifestly revealed, and from that time forward always has
been confirmed by the testimonies of the Prophets, Patriarchs, Apostles, and
faithfully observed and maintained by all the godly of all ages even from Ada^
to this hour.

For all this I will not stick to grant these men antiquity even from
Nemrod, yea to pleasure them from Cain. Their Babylon began by Cain. August. in
Psalm. 64. Tom. 8.
They always turn the beauty of Sion into the confusion of Babylon.

Universality is no true note of ye Church: Christ clearly teaches, that
many more shall be damned than saved: because that few do hear the Mat. 13.
Mar. 4. Luc. 8. Mat. 20. Mat. 7. 13.
word of God, and bring forth fruits through patience. Many are called, and
few are chosen. Enter ye in at the strait gate. For wide is the gate and
broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat: but strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life,
and few there be that find it. Christ says fear not, my little Luc. 12. 23
flock. etc. In the time of the flud, only viij. persons: Noah and his
family Genesis 7.
were preserved in the Arc. At the burning of Sodom and ye other Cities Genesis
19.
adioynyng, Loath, his wife and ij. daughters were saved: and yet after Lothes
wife (because she looked behynd her,) was turned into a pillar of salt. Of the
innumerable multitude Exodus 12.
of the children of Israel, and others which went out of Egypt toward the land
of promise: only Caleb and Iehosua entered into that fruitful land, and all
the other perished miserably in the wilderness. In the days of Elias, 3. Reg.
18. Baal has more prophets then God.
iiij. hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal, and iiij. hundred Prophets of the
groves which did eat at Iezabels table, stood against Elias. Four hundred
false Prophets stood against 3. Reg: 22.
one true Prophet Michaea. The blessed doctrine of Christ him self has not
been received evermore, every where, and of all men. For the Turks receive it
not, the Jews abhor it, the Church of Rome abuses it. The universal
consent of the world, stood against the Disciples of Christ a few poor
Fishermen: and they all (except John the Evangelist) were cruelly done to
death. Consider the time of John Husse a man of exquisite, and excellent
learning, matched with holiness of life. He preached the doctrine of Jesus
Christ sincerely: concerning justification and the true Church. etc. Therefore
the malignant rabble pronounced him an heretic in the Counsel of Constance,
excommunicated him, painted devils on his cap, condemned and burned him, and
being consumed to ashes threw the same in to a river. All this was done by
general consent. After this vilanie, they triumphed for that they had
dispatched him. The saying of Christ is Io. 16. 10.
true: the world shall rejoice. But such spectacles are mournful to the
children of God, and cause them to shed Io. 16. 20.
bitter tears: ye shall weep and lament. The bones of Bucer, and Paulus
Phagius, those learned, godly, and faithful soldiers of Christ, were burned
at Cambridge with Salve festa dies: in a solemn Processio^. Was not this,
Iugulare mortuos? To kill (as they say) God have mercy on his soul? Athanasius
that learned and godly Bishop of Alexandria stood almost against all the world,
being fortified with the truth. Paphnutius alone stood against ye Counsel of
Nice and was heard. Christ mercyfully Luc. 17.
cured x. leapers: and of them, only one returned and gave glory to God. Has
not our Savior prophesied that many false Christ's and false Prophets Mat. 24.
shall arise, and deceive many in the last cast of ye world? How goes the
world now? The holy father in the Council of Trent pronounces thus: Qui docet
fide in Christum nos tantum iustificari absque operibus nostris: item certo^
credendum esse remissionem peccatorum, sit anathema: He that teaches that we
are justified only by faith in Christ, without our own works: and also that
we ought to believe assuredly that our sins are forgiven us: let him be
accursed. O cursed and pestilent Council.

Touching the Catholic church, S. August. writes thus: It is therefore
August. Tom. 3. de Genesis ad lit. cap. 1.
calls Catholica: Quia vniuersaliter perfecta est and in nullo claudicat: and
per totum orbem diffusa est: Because she is universally perfect, and halteth in
nothing (nor is shut up in any one country as was the Church of the Jews,)
but is dispersed throughout the whole world. Epiphanius writes Epiphan. contra
haereses Lib. 2. Tom. 2. 321*
that in the reign of Diocletian and Maximinian (a time of great persecution)
Meletius Bishop of Thebais in Egypt and Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and diverse
other godly men were put in prison in Alexandria the chief City of Egypt. Of
whom, some suffered Martyrdom: and some refused Martyrdom: They that remained
alive in prison: disputed whether they that had revolted through the violent
persecution should be received again into the Church, or no. The chief of
these in the disputation, were Peter and Meletius: Petrus misericordia motus:
says Epiphanius: Peter being moved with pity more than with zeal and truth:
said he would refuse none immediately upon their repentance. Meletius moved
with truth and zeal, affirmed that he would receive none, except they showed
the fruits of true repentance, by long trial and proof of ame^dement.
Epiphanius says farther: Co^tigit Petrum martyrium subire, and decessit beatus
ille: It fell out that Peter suffered Martyrdom and died a blessed man: and
they that held with Peter were called the Catholic Church: they that did
stick to Meletius were called the Church of Martyrs: very few stood with
Peter: the most of the prisoners stood with Meletius, who called his Church the
Church of Martyrs: which were such as would take up Christ's Cross and follow
him. The Church of Rome being moved neither with pity, zeal, truth, reason,
nor honesty, but only with ambition and covetousness refuses none, so they
will show the^ selves to be of that Catholic Church. Traitors, murderers,
thieves, coseners, cutters, adulters, baudes, strumpets and all other
graceless persons may upon the said co^ditio^ have safe access to Rome and be
of that Church.

Whereas these men allege Succession of place, and persons, not being hable to
prove Succession of true doctrine: we may say their Succession is nothing
worth. For that is not a just Succession, which lacks the purity of ye
Apostolic doctrine, and right use of the Sacraments. Succession of doctrine
is the true and infallible mark of the true Church. Irenaeus Iren. lib. 4.
cap: 44.
says: they are not always true Ministers, which seem so to be: but they
which keep the doctrine of the Apostles. S. Paul says: faith Romans 10.
comes, (not by Succession, but) by hearing, and hearing comes (not of
legacy, or inheritance from Bishop to Bishop, but) of the word of God. He
says also: be ye folowers 1. Cor. 11.
of me, as I am a follower of Christ. S. Ambrose says: Non habent haereditatem
Ambros. de Poenitent.
Petri, qui fidem Petri non habent: They have not Peter's inheritance that have
not the faith of Peter. Chrisost. says: The pulpit makes not a Minister, but
a Minister the pulpit. Christ said to the Jews boastyng that they were the
seed of Abraham: you are of your father the Ioh. 8.
devil. They are not always godly, that succeed the godly. For S. Paul says
in the Acts: I know this, that Act. 20. 29.
after my departing grievous wolves shall enter in among you, not sparing the
flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away disciples after them. He spoke this at Miletum to ye bishops of Asia.
Christ says yt by Succession, desolation shall sit in the holy Mat. 24.
place, and Antichrist shall preasse in to ye room of Christ. Manasses
succeeded Ezechias: Hieroboam succeeded David: and at this day, by Succession
the Turk possesses, and holds the four Patriarchall seats or seas of the
Church: Alexandria, Jerusalem, Constantinople, and Antioche. Ioha^nes Saris
buriensis says: In Romana Ecclesia sedent Scribae and Pharisaei: By
Succession, the Scribes and Phariseis sit in the Church of Rome. Thus you see
how Antiquity, Universality, and Succession help the cause of the shakers of
the ship. It follows in the text.

Now when he had left speaking he said unto Simon: launch out into the deep,
and let down your nets to make a draught. Christ having ended his heavenly
Sermon, certifieth us of the truth of the same, and declares himself to be
God, the Lord of heaven, earth, the sea, and all that is in them. He said unto
Simon, launch out into the deep: Christ was able to give fish to Simon
without launching out of his net, and without his labor* but his will was to
have him launch out his net etc.

That which is said to Peter is said to al: Launch out into the deep etc.
Every man (of what estate, and condition soever he be) is commanded paynefully
to follow his vocation with faith. Man forthwith after his creation was set to
labor: The Lord Genesis 2. 15.
took man and set him in the pleasant garden of Eden, to dress it, and to
keep it. It was said to Adam after that he had tasted the forbidden fruit: In
sudore vultus tui vesceris pane: thou shall eat thy bread with the sweat Genesis
3.
of thy face. The same is said to every man. Man is borne unto travail (says
Job) as the sparks fly upward. Job. 5. 7. Psalm. 127. 2.
When thou eatest the labors of thy hands, thou shall be blessed and it shall
be well with thee. Our Savior Christ says, ye kindome of heaven is like to a
man that is an householder, which went out early in the morning to hier
laborers into his vineyard. This housesholder is God the father: The kingdom
of heaven in in this place, is the preaching of the gospel of Christ: The
laborers are all men: The vineyard is ye Church. Why stand you hear all the
day idle? go ye also into the vineyard, apply your vocation with faith in
Christ Jesus. Labor while you have time, when the night comes, no man can
labor. Idleness is the mother and nourisher of all vices: which thing has bin
observed in the Primitive Church, where it was ordained that every one should
live of his own labor. The which also the ancient Romans kept straightly,
as writes, Cicero in his book of laws, wherein he affirms that in time
past, no Roman durst go by the streates, if he bare not a show whereon he did
live: to thend that it might be known, ye he lived of his own labor: and not
by the sweat of others. In consideration thereof the Consul did bear a
battle axe before him: The priest a hat in manner of a Coyfe: The Tribune a
mace: The Cutler a sword: The Smith a hammer: The Tailor a pair of sheares:
The Orator a book. All godly men heretofore have labored, and also have
continued in spiritual exercise. Noha planted a Genesis 9. Psalm. 70. and 88.
vineyard. The kinglye prophet David labored even from his youth. The Apostle
Paul sustained great 1. Cor. 11.
labors. Read of that virtuous and painful woman in the last chapter of
proverbs: she eats not her bread with Idleness. A good lesson for good
huswiues to remember: A good lesson for ill huswifes to follow. But what shall
I say of the holy of all holyes? is it not written: Jesus fatigatus exitinere?
Ioh. 4. 6.
Jesus being weary of his journey etc? Such was his labor: he travailed
sometime among the Jews: sometime among the Samaritanes: he travailed to the
sea side: to ye mountains: Read. 11. Ebru. of the faith, labors, and reward
of the godly.
to the wilderness: so much travailed he, that his hands, feet, and whole
body did sweat drops like blood trickeling down to the ground: and all for
the redemption of miserable man: to destroy ye works of the devil. It is
written to the praise of Cyrus king of Persia, that in time vacant from the
affairs of his realm, he with his own hands, had planted innumerable trees,
which long before he dyed brought forth abounda^ce of fruit. And for the
cunnyng and delectable order in setting of them, it was exceeding marvelous to
all me^ that beheld the princes industrye. Alphonsus that famous king of
Aragonia, being mislyked of one Matthaeus Siculus, a man of great holiness, for
yt he labored with his own hands: answered smilingly: Nunquid Deus and
natura nequidquam Regibus manus dederunt? Has God and nature given hands to
kings for naught?

All creatures labor: the Angels labor: they are said to be the messe^gers
Ebru. 1.
of God, and ministering spirits. The sun labors continually: The stars
are doing: The moon never staieth: The fire can not be without making some
work: The air is never idle, but is doing after his manner: The earth is
never at rest: she brings fourth naturally her plants and other fruits: The
waters, floudes, fountaynes frauaile continually. These little creatures:
Spiders, Bees, Emets, Conies, do painfully labor. And shall man be idle?

Time in this matter must be observed. make have in youth. Aestas non semper
fuerit componite ^^dos: While the sun shines make hay: The tide must be
taken when it comes. Make have in youth, that in old age you may rejoice, In
death have good report, and after burial live for ever. But many give
themselves to sensualitye, and never leave it, till they be come to themselves
a most miserable miserye: to their friends a shame and sorrow: to their enemies
a joy: to the common weal a burden: and to the common people a jesting
stock. The time of youth (especially here) is to be observed. In youth
Alexander banquished India: Scipio Africanus the West and South: Pompee
surnamed the great, Spain: Drusus Germany: Achilles Troy.

Idleness is a mother of trifles, a stepdame of virtue, an image of death, a
nurse of al evil, a pillow of Satan, the ground of all mischief, a
contagious pestilence, a sink of sin, and a foul puddle of all vices.
Clemens Alexandrinus Clem. Alex. Pedago lib. 2.
says: vita oliosa, non vita appellanda: An idle life is not to be called a
life. Seneca complayneth that we lose a great part of our time in doing
nothing: a greater part in doing evil: and the greatest part of all doing
things which nothing concern us. Idleness brings forgetfulness: idleness
corrupts the mind, and causes infamy. Quaeritur Aegisthus quare sit factus
adulter?

In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat: If it be demanded why Egisthus became
an adulterer: the matter is sone answered, forsooth he was idle. Idleness
brings beggary, Proverb: 10. 20. 23. 28. From idleness are many diseases. Eue^
as moderate labor preserves health (as physicians report:) so Idleness
weakeneth ye body, diminishes strength, and brings many infirmities by ill
digestio^. Hence comes loss of time: the day lost, the night comes: the
night when no man can work. The day is but short, our life is soon gone.
Therefore while we have time let us do Galat. 6. 10.
good to all men: espetially to them which are of the household of faith.

Hence comes all mischief: While men slept the enemy came and Mat. 13.
sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way: When men run not forward in
the race of their salvation: when men seek not to know Christ Jesus
crucified: when men have virtue in detestatio^: behold, Satan our ancient
enemy bestyrreth himself, and sows the tares, and darnell, of heresies,
seditions, vice, and vilanye in the heart of man. The Ambros. Hexameron. Lib. 5.
Cap. 8.
Crabbe says S. Ambrose delights very much to eat Oysters: But for that the
Oysters are so strongly fenced with two hard shelles which he can not break by
strength: he waits diligently to bring the Oysters out of the water into the
sun, and by help of the air and wind the Crabbe presenly puts a little
stone into the Oyster as he gapeth: whereby he can not close or bring together
again his shelles. Than afterward the Crabbe without danger puts in his
claws and eats the meat of the Oyster at his pleasuure.

Even so says he: when men are given to idleness, and open their minds unto
sensual pleasures: the devil comes and casts into their minds and hearts
evil cogitations in such sort that their shell which before did defend them:
can not be drawn close together again: and than easily does he utterly devour
them. Idleness makes of men women, of women beasts, and of beasts monsters.
We shall find the causes of all mischief in every common wealth, to spring of
idle persons: they are the firebrandes of sedition: and the causes of all
civil dissension. King David when he gave 2. Sam. 11.
himself to idleness, and slacked to launch his net into ye deep: committed
two horrible sins: adultery, and murder. As long as Sampso^ fought Iudic. 16.
with the Philistines, he could not be taken of his enemies, but after that he
slept in the bosom of a woman, and idly continued with her: by and by he was
taken and made blind by his enemies. King Solomon, after 1. Reg. 19.
he gave him self to ease, was seduced and beguiled of women: but when he was
exercised in building the temple, he was in the state of grace. Watch ye
therefore good Christians. For I know you are not holyer the^ David, stronger
then Samson, nor wiser the^ Solomon.

Idle persons have been plagued and shall be plagued. Terrible is that saying:
Take from him that piece and Luc. 19. 14. Ezech. 16. 4^.
give it to him that has x. pieces. Sodom was destroyed with brimstone and
fire, for pride, fulness of meat, abundance of idleness and vnmercyfulnes. S.
Paul writing to These. says we 2. These. cap. 3. 11.
have heard that there are some which walk among you inordinatly, and work
not at all. etc. If there be any that will not work: let him not eat.

Amasis a noble king of Egypt made a law, that yearly every man should make a
recknyng to the rulers of his Provinces, or countries, how and by what
occupation he lived: and he that either would not do this: or show by what
lawful means he got his living, should dye. The same law Aulus Gel. lib. 12.
cap. 7
had the Areopagites. The same law Solon borrowed from the Egyptians, and made
for the Athenians. I would the same law were made in England. It was provided
by the law of Oraco, that he that was found an idle person should lose his
head. The Gymnosophistes wise men of India, had idleness in so great
detestation, that when meat was set on their tables, they used to demand of
their young men and mayde^s what they had learned or done, since sun rising:
and if any were found to have been idle, they lost their dinner. These wise men
hated extremely all slothful persons: And all such (for that they had done no
good in this life) as though they had never lived, they buried among beasts.
Notable was the custom among the old Indians: for their manner was every night
before supper, to examine every man how he had bestowed that day: and if any
could not prove that he had been about some good exercises, their use was to
expel him out of their company. Which they did by the example of Bees, which
can abide no dranes, but as soon as any begins to be idle, they fall upon
him and kill him. But we suffer dranes in every vocation, most of all in the
holy ministry. Then every man must labor: Every man must lau^ch. Whether?
into the deep: what to do? to make a draught: not to deceive me^, not to seek
temporal profit, but to edify, to seek the profit of the church, and glory
of God.

It follows in the text: and Simo^ answered and said unto him, Master we
have labored all night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy
commandment I will cast forth the net. We have labored all night, and have
not taken so much as one fish. Note here the complaint of Peter, which is the
complaint of many men and there with all note these words: at thy
commandment I will cast forth the net: and last of all the success: that
when they had this done, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes. etc. we
have fished all night and have taken nothing. Many fish in the night: such fish
without the commandment of God, without the presence of God, without prayer,
and esteem more their fishyng then the word of God: therefore their fishyng is
unlucky: many by inspiratio^s of Satan are moved and stirred to evil arts:
to theft, murder, usury and other horrible vices, these labor in the night.
Many preach, no man amendeth: no man comes out of the den of sin, into
the light of faith. What is the cause? men labor in the night. Peter and his
partners labored all night, and took nothing: Many with their partners labor
all night, and take nothing. What is ye cause? they labor in the night: They
have not yet received Christ into their ship: they have not the word of Christ
to cast forth the net. Doctor Luther no tabely says: Quod passim premantur
tanta miseria homines, sola incredulitas in causa est: Only infidelity or
unbelief is the cause that men are afflicted with so great misery.

At thy commandment I will cast forth the net. We learn here an example of
faithful obedience in Peter, who was prompt, and ready to obey the
commandment of Christ, whom he knew not yet to be the son of God. We know
him to be ye son of God, yet we show no such faithful obedience: how then
shall we excuse our selves? Simon declares him self according to his name. For
Simon by interpretation is hearing or obeyng. Obedience is an excellent virtue.
Obedience is better then sacrifice. Noah 1. Reg. 15.
obeyed the word of the Lord, and he Gene. 7.
was preserved from the flood. Abraham obeyed the word of the Lord, and Genesis 22.
it was said unto him: in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. Nahaman obeyed Elisaeus, and was healed of his leprosy. Incomparable
4. Reg. 5.
was the obedience of Christ. Christians Philip. 2. Romans 5.
obey God: subjects obey your Prince: Children obey your parents: servants
obey your masters: wives obey your husbands. Simon did cast forth the net,
but how? at the commandment of Christ. This is a profitable doctrine.
Whatsoever ye do in word Collo. 3. 17
or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giuyng thanks, to the Father
by him. Every man ought to launch out his net in the name of Jesus Christ: The
Prince, ye Preacher, ye Magistrate, ye Householder, the Artificer, ye Plowma^,
etc. For Christ says with out me ye can do nothing. Except Io. 15. Psalm. 127.
ye Lord build the house, their labor is but lost yt build it. Except the Lord
keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. Read the whole Psalm. By
the only free goodness and gift of God, is the house and household maintained:
the City defended: meat ministered: children obtained. Without the word of
Christ, in runnyng it helps not to be swift, in battle it helps not to be
strong, in feedyng the Ecclesi. 9.
flock it helps not to be wise, to Riches it helps not to be a man of much
understanding, to be had in favor it helps not to be cunnyng. Without the
word of Christ, my fishyng, my plantyng, my wateryng, and all my labor is
nothing worth. Gregory says well: Nisi intus sit qui doceat, incassum lingua
docentis laborat: Except he be within that teaches, the tongue of the teacher
labors in vain. Xerxes that great king of Persia, which invaded Greece with
seven hundredth thousand of his own people, and iij. hundred thousand strange
soldiers: was vanquished by a few Greeks. Why? he launched not, he invaded
not in the name of Christ. The Isralites Exodus 14.
in the name of God passed safely through the red sea. At the commandment
Iehos. 6.
of God they compassed Jericho seven times, and all things fell out unto the^
most prosperously. Samson Iudic. 15.
in the name of God, made heaps of his deadly enemies, with the iawe of an
Ass: with ye iawe of an Ass he slew a thousand men. David said to 1. Reg. 17.
proud Goliath, who defied ye host of Israel: Thou come to me with a
sword, a spear, and a shield: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of
hosts, the God of the host of Israel, who^ thou have railed on. By this name
and omnipote^t word (as Chrysostom notes) the stone was directed 1. Reg. 17.
to the forehead of Goliath, into ye which it did sink, and he fell grouelyng
to the earth. And so the armed was slain by ye unarmed: the Giant, by a Dwarf:
and the skillful in martial affairs, by one that could no skill but of keepyng
sheep. The cause was, for that he had his help from above, through the trust
whereof he struck the blasphemer* into the forehead. In the same name,
oftentimes a poor man grows to great wealth, and in favor with God and man.

Whosoever therefore purposes to have good success in his affairs, must of
necessity launche out with Simon into the deep, and that in the name of
Christ: he must become Simon, a hearer, and a Disciple: Of necessity he must
hear, read, learn, and meditate the word of God, according to the
commandment: first seek the Mat. 6,
kingdom of God and his righteousness, etc. He must receive Christ into his
ship: that is, most faithfully and humblely pray him to bless his labors.
That is the way to thrive in this world and in the world to come. There are
many launchers, especially now a days, which launch out into the deep, not in
ye name of Christ, but in the name of Satan: they make draughtes, deuilish
draughtes, by usury, by periuries, by cosenyng, by lying, theft, murder,
flattering, covetousness, and such like vilanie. Is this the way to thrive?

Many object why the endeavors of godly men often times have ill success, and
the endeavors of the wicked have good success. God has appointed this
ordinance, that all things to the godly should prosper and come to good
effect, and to the evil should decay and come to evil effect. But Satan
troubles this ordinance, as it is said: The Serpent shall byte his heel: yt
is Satan shall afflict Christ, Genesis 3.
and his members with all manner of miseries incident to man: notwithstanding
God uses a policy against Satan, and makes that which seems a curse, a
blessing: and that which seems a blessing, to be a curse. Joseph obeyed his
fathers commandment, and went unto his brethren, and his brethren by the
instinct and motion of Satan, sold him: but God turned this into blessing. So
we read of David, so of the Apostles, and of many other, whose curses have been
turned into blessings.

This is the condition and state of men in this world. Generally good men live
in adversity, and wicked men in prosperity. I say generally. For it comes
sometimes to pass, that good men live in prosperity and wicked men in
adversity. But this seldom falls out, and among a hundred good men, scarce
one or two live prosperously in this world. The general sentence therefore
stands firm and infallible: good men are plagued with adversity: evil men
florishe in prosperity: according to ye Proverb: Quo peior, eo fortunatior:
the worser man the better luck. Christ plainly Luc. 16.
shows this condition and estate of men's affairs, in the example of Dives
and Lazarus. You see often times the most wicked me most fortunate, and the
most godly most miserable: But Respice finem: mark the end: and fret Psalm. 37.
not thy self because of the ungodly, neither be thou envious against the
evil doers. For they shall be cut down like the grass, and be withered even as
ye green herb. Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good: dwell in
the land; and verily thou shall be fed. Delight thou in the Lord, and he will
give thee thy hearts desire. Lau^ch thou into the deep, and let down thy not
in the name of the Lord, to make a draught, always remembryng the heavenly
saying of ye Prophet David: Some put their trust in chariots, and Psalm. 20. 7.
and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. So much
for this part.

And when they had this done they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and
their net brake. Here we learn the cause of prosperous suceesse, and blessing
of the Lord which is: if at his commandment we cast down our nets. Here
Christ by a wonderful miracle proves his Godhead. The circumstaunces declare
the miracle to be wonderful: the labor of all the night lost: the breaking of
the net: the sinkyng of the ship: the calling of partners out of the other
ship: the astomeng and great admiration of Peter and others, the sudaine
forsakyng of all their goods, and obedience showed to the word of Christ. The
like miracle we have in John. 21. The use of this wonderful miracle is: that
Christ is yt Messiah, that lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world: That Christ not only is Lord of the land: but also of the sea, and all
that therein is. In an other place touching Mat. 17. 27.
tribute: Christ sent Peter to the sea, saying: go thou to the sea and cast an
hook and take up the fish that first comes up, and when thou have opened his
mouth, thou shall find a piece of xx. pence: that take and give it unto them
for me and thee. If Christ be Lord of the sea, and all things therein: thou
which by faith art made a member of Christ, have no cause to fear the surges,
waves, and dangers of the sea, fear not: that which is subject to Christ thy
head, must of necessity be subject to his members.

What signifies the breaking of the net: who break the net: how the net
is broken: why the net is broken: these things are to be observed. Touching
the first: The kingdom of heaven is like to a net, which Math. 13. 47.
was cast into the sea and gathered of all kind of fishes, which when it was
full, the fishers drew to land, and sat down and gathered the good into
vessels, but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the end of the world. The
angels shall come forth and sever the bad from among the just, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. The
net is broken when the concord of faith in the Church is broken, and men fall
into wicked heresies and errors.

They break the net which fish in the night, wanting the light of holy
scripture, and blinded with the darcknes of errors, and ignorance. Evil men
which break the unity of of the Church, and fall into sects and schisms,
do also break the net, which obey not, but contemn the calling of God.
These are evil fishes which are not taken: or else break the net: that is:
they fall from grace, from faith, and lose the spirit of God. All that were
converted stood not in the net of faith and virtue: for many went forth and
mightily brake the net, perverting faith, virtues, and Sacraments. Such
fishes belong to the kitchen of Satan. Arrius went forth: brake the net, and
began a most pestilent schism, because he could not obtain the Bishopric of
Alexandria. Whose steps many do follow. Sabellius continued not in the net,
but went forth and brake the net. So did Fotinus, Manicheus and other
innumerable. Of such S. Io. speaks, Io. 1. cap. 2. 19.
saying: they went out from us, but they were not of us. For if they had bin of
us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but that it might appear that
they are not all of us. Of such also speaks S. Paul. 1. Tim. 4. 1.
Now the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed unto spirits of errors and doctrines of devils
etc. False Apostles brake the net in ye Primitive Church as Luke writes: Then
rose up certain of Act. 15. 5.
the sect of the Pharisees, which did believe saying, it was needeful to
Circu^cise them, and to command to keep the law of Moses. To these breakers
of the net, S. Paul says: Christ is become but vain to you: as many of
Galat. 5. 4.
you as are justified by the law are fallen from grace. Of this company were
Himenaeus, Samosatenus, Alexander, and many other heretics. Since the
Primitive Church, continually swarms of heretics have broken this net.
Wheresoever God does build his Temple: there by and by Satan adioyneth his
chapel. At this day because the light of the Gospel shyneth clearly:
legions of heretics: (as Anabaptists, Schismatickes, Libertines, Arrians,
Atheistes, Romish Catholics, the Family of Love, and others) break the
net of the Gospel. Woe be unto the Apoc. 12. 12.
inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea. For the Devil is come down unto
you, which has great wrath: because he knows he has but a short time.
Touching the Family of Love: I say this, the devil transformeth him self
into an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great marvel that this family,
being in deed a family of Satan should transform them selves into a family
of light: a family of love. God is light: God is love. Chrisost says:
Haeretici omnia habent in similitudine: Heretics have all things in
resemblance or likeness. This family is not a family of true love. It is a
family of blasphemy: a family of falshode: a family of pride: a family of
idolatry: a family of ignorance and folly: a family of malice: and to be
short a family of all vice and vilanie. That this is true their fruits
declare. The tree is known by the fruit. For proof I refer you to the
books, or rather bables of H. N. whom they name the true Prophet of GOD, where
as he is a false and lying Prophet. I promised to prosecute ye Argument that
the Romish Catholics are not ye true Church: as I have already proved yt they
shake ye ship of Christ: so I infer they break the net of ye gospel. I argue
thus: they commit Idolatrye: Therefore they break ye net. After yt the popish
priest has spoken these v. words: Hoc est enim corpus meu^: Which is one word
more the^ ever Christ left, and is of so great virtue (as they say) that
without that word there can be no perfect consecration: where as
notwithstanding, Christ, his Apostles, the Primitive Church, and the Greeks,
never used this word Enim. It is a superstitious addition of the Papists, most
wickedly leauyng out these most necessary words that Christ himself spoke:
namely, Which is betrayed for you: Do this in remembrance of me.) After ye the
priest I say has spoken ye former words: and has blasted, breathed, and
blowed, upon the bread: he kneeleth down to it and worshyppeth it, saying in
Latin: Agnus Dei qui tollis. etc. O Lamb of God that take away the sins of
the world have mercy upon us. Thrice does he call the bread which he holds in
his hands the lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. This is
abominable Idolatry. The author of this Idolatrous leuation or liftyng up of
the bread above the priests head, was Pope Honorius the third, about the year
of our Lord 1210. He commanded that the host should be lifted up above the
priests head at Mass, and that all the people should fall down and worship
it. Antichrist shows him self. Here all men may see how ancient a thing
their holy sackeryng is, which is counted the best and chiefest part of their
Mass: whereas in deed it is the most wicked and abominable part of the
patched paltrye, of their maskyng Mass. The lying Papists therefore may be
ashamed to brag that their deuilishe Mass came from the Apostles: seeing that
it is proved to be a new and late invention of Antichrist. The word Mass is
not in the Bible. And (as has bin sufficiently proved) there was no tidinges
of any Mass private in any doctor or Counsel by the space of six hundred
years after Christ. Their oblation, they call Sacrificium nouum: A new
sacrifice. Their Mass book has these words: Acceptum sit omnipotenti Deo
hoc sacrificium nouu^: O that this new sacrifice might be thankfully taken of
almightye God. They may truly call it a new sacrifice: for it was never heard
of before, that a wafer cake and a sponeful of wine mingled with water, should
be an oblation and sacrifice for the salvation of the living, and for the rest
and quietness of all the faithful that are dead.

I know they will say they commit not idolatre: for that which they hold up is
the very natural body of Christ, God and man. Therefore may they iustlye
worship it. I ask them how they prove it to be the very body of Christ. They
answer by the virtue of these words: Hoc est enim corpus meum: a goodly
proof. I reply, Christ spoke these words of ye bread as the holy scriptures,
and all ancient writers do witness. It is against the veritye of a natural
body to be in more places then one at once, as he must be in a hundred thousand
places at once, if their doctrine be true. The article of our faith is that
Christ is ascended up into heaven and sits on the right hand of God the
father almighty, and from thence shall come etc. Our savior Christ told his
disciples Ioh. 14. and 16.
often a little before his passion, that he should leave the world and go to his
father. S. Mark says: Christ Mar. 16. Luc. 24.
was taken up into heaven and sits on the right hand of God. We read in
the Acts: This Jesus which is taken Act. 1.
up from you into heaven: shall so come as you have seen him going up into
heaven. Of these words of the angels, we learn that as Christ went up
visiblye, and was seen with the corporal eyes of his disciples: so likewise
when he comes again from thence, he shall come visiblye, and be seen with
the corporal eyes of all men. But never man saw him yet coming down with
his corporal eyes: Therefore never came he down corporal since his
ascension. S. Stephan saw him. Where? not in the popish pixe, nor in their
singing Act. 7.
bread, but in heaven. S. Paul Act. 9.
heard him: from whence? from heaven. S. Peter says that heaven must Act. 3.
hold Jesus Christ, till the time that all things be restored, which god has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began. This time
is, till the day of judgment. If therefore they will have Christ bodily at
their Masses: they must tarry till the day of judgment.

This doctrine that the sacrament of the alter (as they term it) is the true,
natural, real, carnal, corporal, and substantial body of Christ, is a
dream of Antichrist the Bishop of Rome, and cannot be proved, neither by holy
scripture, nor by ancient fathers. You have heard the holy scripture clearly
denies it. The fathers also deny it. Clemens Alexandrinus says: Duplex est
autem sanguis Cum Alex. lib. 2. pedago. cap. 2.
domini alter enim est carnalis, quo redempti sumus ab interitu: alter vero
spiritalis quo scilicet vncti sumus: and hoc est bibere Jesus sanguinem, esse
participe^ incorruptionis domini. verbi autem virtus est spiritus, quemadmodum
sanguis carnis: The blood of Christ truly is of two sorts: the one carnal,
whereby we are redeemed from death, the other spiritual, wherewith we are
anointed. For to drink the blood of Jesus is to be parttaker of ye Lords
immortality. The spirit is the virtue of the word, as blood is of flesh.
Theodoret an ancient father says Theodoret: dialog. 1.
thus: Christus naturam panis non mutat: Christ changes not the nature of the
bread. Gelasius says: Non desinit esse substantia vel natura panis: and vini.
It cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. Origin that old
learned father says: Si Origin. Hom. 7. in Leuit.
secundum literam sequaris id quod dictum est: Nisimanducaueritis carnem filij
hominis non habebitis vitam in vobis: litera illa occidit: If according to the
letter you understand that saying: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you: That letter kills. It Ioh.
6. 53.
is the Spirit that gives life: the flesh profits nothing. For shortness of
time, I must refer you to the places of other ancient Fathers which make the
case clear. Tertul. contra Marcionem Lib. 4. August. Tom. 6. contra adimantum
Manichaei Discipulum cap. 12. and Tom. 8. in Psalm. 3. Tom. 2. Epist. 221. Cyp.
de Coena Domini. Hesichius in Leuit. Lib. 3. cap. 2. Ambros. de Sacramentis
Lib. 1. cap. 5. Chrisost. ad Caesarium August. in Ioh. Tract. 25. and Tract.
26. To conclude, Erasmus a man Eras. in. 1. Cor. 7.
of great learning and judgment says thus: In synaxi Transubstantiationem
sero definiuit ecclesia: In the holy ministration, it was long and very late,
before the church determined the Article of Transubstantiation. Their own
breath blows against them: Doctor Tonstall, says: It was no Tonstallus de
Eucharistia Lib. 1. page 65.
heresy to deny their Transubstantiation before their late Council of
Lateran. Doctor Fisher sometime Fisherus co^tra captiuita. Babylonicam.
Bishop of Rochester says: The very presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Mass, can not be proved by any Scripture.

This deuelish doctrine was never received in the Church, til Pope Leo: Pope
Nicholas: Pope Innocent: Pope Honorius: and Pope Urban Antichristian prelates
through their tyranny brought it in, and compelled the Christians with fire and
faggot (as the manner of the tyra^nicall Papists is) to receive their
abominable doctrine. It is not much more then five hundred years, since their
gross opinion of the Sacrament began first to be attempted, and was thoroughly
received, and agreed upon, about the year of our Lord 1215. in the Council of
Latera^, which was holden in Rome, where were gathered together a monstrous
swarm of Pharisaicall Papists, about the number of thirtene hundred
pildpates, of ye which number eight hundred were monks, channo^s, and friars,
a brood of chicke^s of ye Popes own hatching. Last of all came pope Urban the
monk, in the year of our Lord a thousand two hundred threescore and four,
and he made up all the market: For he ordained a feast called Corpus Christi,
in honor of the Sacrament: so that ever after that time the Sacrament was no
more taken for a sign, figure, and token of Christ's body: but for Christ
himself God and man. And therefore was it reverenced, worshipped, honored,
sensed, and kneeled unto, as they taught the people at their vnsacred
sakeringes.

S. August. says touching the fathers of the old law: Abraham, Moses, Aaron,
and other received the body of Christ truly and effectually long time before
that Christ either had received flesh of the blessed virgin or had ordained
the Sacrament: and that even the self same body that is received now of the
faithful. Of this matter S. Paul speaks: They did all eat of the same
spiritual 1. Cor. 10. 3.
meat: And did all drink of the same spiritual drink: For they drank of
that spiritual rock that followed them: and that rock was Christ. S. August.
also of Christian August. de Symbolo fidei ad Cathecumenos. Tom. ^
children and other faithful that never received the Sacrament writes thus:
nulli est aliquatenus ambigendum, tunc vnumquemque fideliu^ corporis
sauguinisque domini participem fieri quando in Baptismate efficitur membrum
Christi. etc. No man may in any wise doubt but that every faithful man is than
made partaker of the body and blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made a
member of Christ: and that he is not without the fellowship of that bread, and
of that cup, although before he eat of that bread, and drink of that cup he
hepart this world, being in ye unity of Christ's body for he is not made
frustrate of the Communion and benefit of that Sacrament while he finds that
thing which is signified in the Sacrament.

The enemies of the cross of Christ mightfully object: Unless ye eat the
flesh of the son of man and drink his blood ye shall have no life in you. I
answer if there be no other eating of Christ's body whereby we shall live,
but only fleshly eating with mouth, and teath: than what life has Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron and other holy Patriarchs, and Prophets that were
before the coming of Christ: what life have a great number of holy martyrs?
what life have Christian Children that being baptized in the blood of Christ
depart this life before they can receive the Sacrament? Shall we say they have
no life? Or shall we condemn them of everlasting death? Or shall we think
they shall never rise again? And shall we deny Gods election? S. August.
speaking of our fathers says: Visibile^ cibum August. in Ioh. Tract. 26. Tom.
9.
(Manna) spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter esurierunt, spiritualiter
gustauerunt: They understood Manna the visible meat spiritually: they hungered
it spiritually: they tasted it spiritually.

I ask the defenders of transubsta^tiation, what body Christ gave: whether
mortal or immortal. I reason thus: if he gave his body: he gave his mortal
body, or his immortal body: But he gave not his mortal body, neither his
immortal body: Therefore he gave not his body. I prove thus he gave not his
mortal body: accumbebat mensae: for it sat at the table. He gave not his
immortal body: no^ dum resurrexerat: for it was not yet risen. Therefore he
gave not his body. Therefore it is a figurative speech.

I urge their own words against them. By and by after they have confessed
that the bread is the body of Christ essentially, substantially and in deed:
and the wine his natural blood: they add Sed inuisibiliter and ineffabiliter
Aquinas
and non vt in loco non qualitatiue part. 3. quest. 76. Lombardus senten. 4.
distinc. 10.
aut quantitatiue: But inuisiblely, and vnspeakeablely, and not as in a place,
not in quantity or in quality. Note I pray you, how fitly these things
agree: how the one is subverted by the other. For if the true, and natural
body of our Lord, which he took of the virgin Mary, dead, buried, risen, and
ascended into heaven (so they say) be present in the Sacrament: assuredly that
same body must have quantity and quality, and must be contained in a place:
except that body was not natural: or else now being in glory, has put away all
truth of a body. The Angels testify of the glorified body of Christ: Surrexit
no^ est hic, Marc. 16. 6.
ecce locus vbi posuerunt eum: He is risen, he is not here behold the place
where they had put him. Christ him self says: behold my hands and my Luc.
24. 39.
feet, that it is eue^ I my self: handle me and see, for a spirit has not
flesh and bones as ye see me have. If this body have not place, quality, and
quantity: it is not the substantial, natural and true body of our Lord. Read
S. August. Epist. 57. ad Dardanum Tom. 2. Thus much concerning the Lords
Supper.

Also these men teach that we are not justified by faith only. This doctrine
is false: Therefore they break the net.

They call us Solifidia^s: We may call them Nullifidians.

I argue thus: the righteous man Habac. 2. Romans 1.
lives, by his faith: Therefore faith justifies.

Abraham was justified by faith: Therefore other are justified by faith. Abraham
is the father of all beleuers. The antecedent is proved: Abraham Genesis 15. Romans
4.
believed God and it was accounted to him for righteousness.

Abraham was justified by faith. 430. years before Moses gave the law:
Therefore faith justifies and not the law.

That thing only justifies, by which the holy Ghost is given: The holy Ghost
is given by faith, and not by the law: Therefore faith justifies and not the
law. The first reason is proved by experience. The Galatia^s received the holy
Ghost by preaching of the Gospel: and so consequently by faith. The examples
in the Acts of the Apostles, of Cornelius and many others, and also the
example of the Centurion prove the same. Faith only justifies Read. Romans 1.
3. 4. and 9. chap.

Sola fides: Only faith was very well known and used of ancient Fathers long
a go, and the use of the same has been in the Church since the time of the
Apostles: By only faith, freely, without works: without the law. The time
flees away and therefore I will only cote the authors and the places. Origin
in his exposition upon the Romans chap. 3. has Sola fides, faith only. S.
Basil a man of incomparable virtue and learning has Sola fides, in his book
de Humilitate. Athanasius upon the iij. chap. to the Romans has Sola fides.
The eloque^t famous Doctor Chrisost. upon the Ephesians the second chapter
Sermon. 5. Sola fides. And in his Sermon of faith and the law Sola fides. S.
Ambrose upon the iij. iiij. x. xi. chap. to the Romans Sola fides. S. Hierome
upon the four and v. to the Romans Sola fides. Eusebius Lib. 3. cap. 27. Sola
fides.

To conclude S. August. albeit not in express terms as the other, yet in
effect has it as much: After discourse of the merits of Christ: of faith in
Christ: and of the miserable nakedness of man: excellently he thus concludes:
His igitur consyderatis pertractatisque, pro viribus quas Dominus donare
August. Tom. 3. de spiritu and litera ad Marcellinum. 13. cap. in fine.
dignatur: colligimus non iustificari hominem praeceptis bonae vitae, sed fide
in Jesus Christo: hoc est non lege operum, sed lege fidei: non litera sed
spiritu: non factorum meritis, sed gratuita gratia: These things considered
and debated, according to the ability which God has graciously given me: I
conclude that man is not justified by the precepts and rules of good life, but
by faith in Christ Jesus: That is not by the law of works: but by ye law of
faith: not by the letter, but by the spirit: not by merits and deeds, but by
free and mere grace.

The adversary obiecteth thus: It is impiety or wickedness to add any thing
to the holy Scripture: for that it is written Non adds aliquid neque minues:
Thou shall not add any thing Apoc. 22.
nor diminish: S. Paul says, if an angel Gala. 1.
from heaven preach any otherwise, let him be accursed. And Irenaeus geneth
good counsel: De Deo est vtendum verbis Dei: When we speak of God, we ought
to use the words of God. Sola fide: By faith only is not to be read in holy
scripture any where not in Paul him self, out of whose 3. chap. of his Epistle
to the Romans it is alleged: Therefore to use exclusiuely: Iustificamur sola
fide: We are justified by faith only, is impiety, and Luther has depraved,
and corrupted S. Paul.

I answer it is a false kind of argument, setting down that thing, for the
cause which is not the cause in deed. Albeit the word Sola, written with
iiij. letters be not extant in S. Paul: yet notwithstanding words equivalent
are there exta^t, declaryng the same thing, much more effectually and plainly.
As for example: Iustificamur gratis: we are justified freely: Ipsius gratia: by
his grace: Absque operibus: without works: Dei donu^ est: It is the gift of
God: per fidem: By faith. When S. Paul excludes all manner works: what else
leaves he but faith alone?

They teach and maintain Purgatory: Therefore they break ye net. This word
Purgatory is not in ye Bible: but the purgation and remission of our sins, is
made by the abou^dant mercy of God. Luc. 1. Mar. 2. Only by Christ: So says
S. John: The blood 1. Io. 1.
of Jesus Christ ye son of God, purges us and makes us clean from all our
sins. So says S. Mat. 1. and. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. Act. 13. Ephesians. 1.
Hebr. 1. 9. 10. Apoc. 1. etc. Sweet is that saying of S. Cyp. Sanguis tuus
Cyp. de passione Christi.
Domine non quaerit vltionem: sanguis tuus lauat crimina: peccata condonat: Thy
blood O Lord seeks no revenge: thy blood washes our sins, and pardonneth
our trespasses.

The East Church of God which sometime was as great and famous as ye Church of
the Weast, notwithstanding they believed in God and his Christ and knew there
was both Hell and Heaven: yet of Purgatory they had no skill. In the late
Council begun at Ferrar by Pope Eugenius and continued and ended at Florence
An. 1439. Purgatory was concluded and not before in any ancient Counsel:
Notwithstanding the enemies of ye cross of Christ pretend that the same is of
very great antiquity. Not much unlike are they to the old Arcades, who said
in commendation of their Antiquitye that they were a day or two elder then the
Moon. It came from Virgill and Plato and other Heathen writers. If a man ask
them where it is: Some of them say in Ireland: The Purgatory of Patrick: into
the which (they say) they had once a key, and a valiant champion named noble
Nicholas, boldly and valiantly adue^tured in, and there did see wonders: Some
of them say it is in Scicilie in the burning hill Aetna: And some of the^ say:
it is in the Ila^d Thile, which is also called Iseland. Sir Thomas Moore said
and held for certainty that in all Purgatory there is no water: no, not one
drop: and that he would prove out of Zachar. 9. Doctor Fisher sometime Bishop
of Rochester said: There is in Purgatory great store of water, and that he
would prove by the Prophet David. Psalm. 65. Albertus said: The Executioners and
Ministers of Purgatory be holy Angels: Sir Thomas Moore said: out of doubt they
be no Angels but very devils. So ha^dsomely these dreams agree together. It
serves well for their purse and purpose, and is the most profitable monster
that ever was whelped of the Babylonicall strumpet.

They maintain free will: Therefore they break the net. This word free will is
not in all the holy Scripture, but is invented by proud men: which would set
up their own righteousness, and put down the righteousness of Christ. The
free will of man is in falling, and not in rising. Christ only is free: we are
Liberati gratia, but not Liberi natura: freed by grace, but not free by nature:
and so likewise Iustificati gratia, justified by grace, and not just by nature.
S Paul Galla. 5. 17.
says the flesh lusts contrary to the spirit and the spirit contrary to
the flesh: these are contrary one to the other: so that ye can not do what ye
would. Where is then free will. We have here still a clogge. Consider well the
seventh chapter of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, from the fouretenth
Verse, to the end of the chapter: and you shall be able to stop the mouths of
all free will men. His words are these: For we know that the law is
spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin. For yt which I do, I allow not:
for what I would, that do I not: but what I hate, that do I. If I do now
that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good. Now then, it
is not I that do it: but sin that dwells in me. For I know, that in me
(that is to say in my flesh) dwells no good thing. For to will, is present
with me: but I find no means to perform that which is good. For the good
that I would, do I not: but the evil which I would not, that do I. And if I
do that I would not, then is it not I any longer that does it, but sin that
dwells in me. I find then by the law, that when I would do good, evil is
present with me. For I delight in the law of God, after the inward man. But I
see another law in my members, rebellyng against the law of my mind, and
subduyng me unto the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that
I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the mind I my self serve the law of God:
but with the flesh, the law of sin. We shall then be free, when this
mortality has put on immortality: and this corruption has put on
incorruption.

If any man will describe the will of man not regenerate: he may note it thus:
In natural actions he may do somewhat, but not without the general grace of
God: In moral and civil actions likewise he may do somewhat, but not without
the special grace of God: In spiritual matters, before he be borne again,
and has received light of the holy spirit, he can do nothing at all. The
time is spent, even in the entrye of my third part. I will be short. They
invoke creatures, Ergo: they break the net. We must direct our prayers to
God alone our heavenly father in the name of Jesus Christ. For it is written
Dominum Deum tuum adorato, eumque solum Deuteronomy. 6. and 10. Math. 4.
colito: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Albeit Christ is not here expressly mentioned: notwithstanding he is included:
For the faithful praying to God, always think upon Christ. The publican
prayed: God be merciful to me a sinner. He Luc. 18.
thought upon Christ. etc. It is horrible (says D. Luther) to think upon God
without Christ: for that without Christ we have no salvation. He is our only
mediator unto ye father: therefore no Saint is our mediator. Christ says:
Ego sum via, Io. 14.
veritas, and vita, nemo venit ad Patrem, nisi per me: I am the way, the truth,
and the life, no man comes to the father but by me. Which words S. Augu.
noting says: Ambulare vis? Ego August. in Io. tract. 22* Tom. 9. in cap. 5.
sum via. Falli non vis? Ego sum veritas. Mori non vis? Ego sum vita. Hoc dicit
tibi Saluator tuus: Non est quo eas, nisi ad me: Non est qua eas, nisi per me:
Will thou walk? I am the way. Will thou not be deceived? I am the truth. Will thou not dye? I am the life. This says thy Savior unto thee: there is no
place whether thou may go but to me: There is no way for thee to pass, but
by me. No man knows the father but the son, and he to whom the son will
reveal him. S. Paul says: There is one God, and one mediator between 1.
Tim. 2. 5.
God and man, the man Jesus Christ. The kingly Prophet David says in Psalm. 50.
15.
the person of God: Call upon me in the day of trouble: so will I deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me. The Prophet Esaias says also in the person Esa. 43.
25.
of God: I, even I am he only that for mine own sake do away thine offenses,
and forget thy sins, so that I will never think upon them. The scripture
plentifully, and strongly proves this matter. What is more clear, then the
prayer which our Savior Christ has taught us? Our father which art in heaven.
etc.

It is horrible idolatrye to invoke any creature, whether dead or alive. They
are not gods: for there is one only God who is to be inuocated: Therefore
creatures ought not to be inuocated.

Creatures are not omnipotent, neither know they the hearts of me^: here is
none excepted neither Mary, nor Peter, nor any creature esle: Therefore they
ought not to be inuocated, or prayed unto.

Prayer must be made with faith:

But faith only must be reposed in God:

Therefore only God is to be prayed unto.

We have no express commandment, or example in holy scriptures concerning
invocation of creatures: Therefore it cannot be done with faith and good
conscience. God himself does expreslye prohibit it, and the prophets condemn
it. It is a manifest mark and plain note of Antichrist. To believe in other
creatures beside Christ, is not to believe in Christ:

But the Papists believe in other creatures beside Christ: Ergo they beliue not
in Christ. The argument is sure, and the conclusion must needs follow. I speak
of a true and a right belief. These things Paul never planted: Apollo never
watered: Christ never increased. If holy Augustine. were now alive, and heard
such wicked and blaspemous opinions: he would surely say unto these men as he
once said to Iulianus: a Pelagian heretic with his sect: Mira dicitis:
August. co^tra Julian. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 3. Tom. 7.
noua dicitis: falsa dicitis. Mira stupemus: noua cauemus: falsa conuincimus:
Marvelous things you speak, new things you speak, false things you
speak. Your marvelous things we are astonished at, your new sayings we will
beware of, your false sayings we will convince. The more you stir, the
faster you stick: the longer ye strive the weaker ye are: you cannot blind the
Sun beams: will ye nil ye the truth will conquer. There is no wisdom,
there is no policy, there is no counsel against the Lord.

The truth of God will stand: vanitye will fall of it self. Remember Act. 5.
the counsel of Gamaliel: fight not against the spirit of God.

Thus you see how the net is broken by corrupt doctrine: The same is also
broken by ill manners. Of the first you have somewhat heard: Now a word touching
the second. The same breakers of the net: the shakers of the ship still
break the net with their ill manners. They show intolerable disobedience in
refusing to come to the Church: Some of them maintain traiterous persons
beyond the sea: and on this side the sea: and of these, some they make their
Bailifes, some their stewardes: some their Caters: some their Scholemaisters:
and some their seruau^ts of chief trust to wait upon my Lady. This I know.
Some they suborne to utter their dregs, by writings and other lewd
practices. They are not content to be evil themselves, but they endeavor also
as much as in them lies to make other partakers of their evil. If you make
dilligent search: you shall find fat bulls of Basan of this company in
Cathedral Churches: du^me dogs, and hinderers, as far as they dare of the
Gospel of Christ Jesus. They are called Pastores a pascendo: Pastors of
feeding: and feed not at all: and Doctores a docendo: Doctors of teaching, and
teach not at all: as also Mons a mouendo: a hill has his name of moving, and
moves not at all. These truly are Caterpillars devouring the sweet fruit of
ye land. They should be served aright if they were rewarded with Caterpillars.
All these men think that they can walk unespied, as though they had Gyges
ring upon their finger to go invisible by. Non sic (impij,) non sic: not so
(honest men,) not so.

Now they are very bold: They are in their ruff, and look for a day: God I
trust will mercyfully keep us from that day: And yet I can not see if they had
their purpose, but they should feel the smart of that day. They are weary of
their welfare. The clemency of our most clement Queen Elizabeth, has long
time bin abused: Now it stands her Majesty upon, with weapon of Justice to
bridle insolency. The dissease of contempt of laws which now attacheth so
many, can by no means be cured but by the medicine of correction. For all this
we are not to judge and condemn these men to the pit of Hell. Leave judgment,
and condemnation to God. The right hand of God is mightful: he is able of
stones: of hard and Idolatrous hearts to raise up children to Abraham: He is
able to turn the great Turk, and the Cane of Cathai. Lord if it be thy will
enlighten their dim eyes with the influence of thy heavenly grace, that they
may see the truth: open their uncircumcised ears, that they may hear the
truth: mollify their hard hearts, that they may love and embrace the truth:
that thou may be glorified: thy people edified: and Satan confounded. 1.
Cor. 11. 19.


A question is proposed: Why is the net broken? I answer: Oportet haereses
esse: There must be also heresies among you yt they which are approved among
you might be known. Many are called, few are chosen. Math. 20.
This place answers an Argument of adversaries against the true Church.

In the true Church are no sects:

But in your Church are sects:

Ergo, your Church is not the true Church.

I answer: Oportet haereses esse: There must be heresies etc. Also they went
from us but they be not of us. Furthermore tares are among wheat. Secondly I
say this Argument is naught. Heretics are among the elect: Satan among the
children of God. Goats among sheep. Tares among wheat: ill fishes among good:
thorns among lilies: false brethren, false Christians among true Christians:
vessels of dishonor, among vessels of honor. Ergo, heretics are no
heretics: Satan is not Satan: Goats are no goats: tares are no tares: and
so of ye rest. What wise kind of reasonyng is this? Are not hypocrites in the
Church you know ye man which was among the ghestes at the marriage of the kings
son: without a weddyng garment: The marriage was furnished with ghestes good
and bad.

Take a Fox, tie him up with a chain and cherish him with bread and milk and
howsoever you can whole vij. years, and if the chain break the Fox will get
away and run into the wood. A Fox will be a Fox. Many false Christians, two
legged Foxes now tied with the chain of government, and fed with the
sweetness of the land, outwardly show them selves conformable to laws,
loyal and obedient subjects. Such Prince such subjects commonly for the
time: But if the chain of government, and life of Queen Elizabeth (whose
life God long continue) should break: undoubtedly these Foxes: these
hipocrites would run to Rome.

He that does evil, let him do evil Apoc. 22. 11
still: He which is filthy let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous,
let him be righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

Albeit Goats feed with Sheep: they shall not stand on the right hand with
Sheep. Albeit chafe is thresshed with wheat, it shall not be carried into the
barn with wheat. Albeit ill fishes swim with good fishes with in the net of
our Lord: they shall not be put into vessels with good fishes but cast away.
Let no man forsake the wheat of Christ for darnell sake: neither the flooer of
Christ for chafe sake: neither ye great house of Christ for vessels of
dishonor: neither the net of Christ for ill fishes: neither the lillyes for
thorns: neither true Christians for hipocrites: neither the children of God
for Satan's sake.

Preasse upon Christ with this godly people to hear the sweet, and comfortable
word of God. Believe it, love it, do it. Know the true Church: be of the true
Church: continue in the true Church: depart not with the Raven out of the
Arc. With Simon in the name of Christ, launche out into the deep, to make a
draught: Every man follow his vocation with invocation: with prayer. So shall
ye have prosperous success with Simon: so shall ye receive the fruits of
faithful obedience: in this world peace, and quietness of conscience: in the
world to come such passing abou^dant joy: such passing excellent bliss: as no
eye can see, no ear can hear, no tongue can tell, nor heart can think,
purchased by Jesus Christ for all those which follow Simon in faith full
obedience: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all praise glory and
dominion for ever and ever.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate, beneath S. Martines.

An. 1579.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio, Regiae Maiestatis.


