A BVCKLER AGAINST ADVERSITY: OR A TREATISE OF CONSTANCY.

Written in French by the Right Honorable the Lord DV VAIR, Keeper of the
great Seal of FRANCE.

And now done into English by ANDREW COURT.



LONDON, Printed by BERNARD ALSOP, dwelling in Distaffe Lane at the sign of
the Dolphin. 1622.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, I have long been in Quest for some worthy piece to present
unto your view: at last by good Fortune, I have lighted upon one, cut by the
curious hand of France; which in its proper colors deserves all commendations.
If my improper colors have any ways discountenanced it, I hope you will not
blame the piece, though you have color for it. I am confident, those who are
judicious, well know how hard and difficult a thing it is for a Stranger to
attain unto the perfection of the English tongue; and what labor he must
bestow to seek and sift, beg and borrow proper words and phrases to express
himself. Therefore for such errors as I have committed, I presume they will
grant me their pardons, and take nevertheless this little Essay of mine in
good part. Which if I can obtain, I will repriue many an hour from my other
occasions to do them service in this kind.

A. C.

Errata.
PAge 5. line 31. read this age. p. 9. l 26. r: you shall be bound to. p. 10.
l. 30. r. Estimatiue. 14.14. their tears. 14.15. did depend of. 21.9. not the.
27.9. separated. 27.21. we ought not. 28.15. penetrate into our. 29.27. fees.
45.21. their Destiny. 75.27, of so many. 81.4. and infamous. 82.15. almost all
their. 83.7. Bastille. 83.10. City. 86.30. all this is nothing. 87.16. are
eaten. 90.3. you have. 90.27. fall on. 93.3. All good. 96.25 to teach others.
96.32. desire into the soul of those that live in following ages to resemble.
97.10. others are utterly. 98. ill incounters. 101.18. which were so troubled.
102.8. dim fire. 102.23. whether. 102.29. ever. 103.11. Poets. 103.20.
persecuted. 106.5. he does not punish the wicked but by the wicked. 110.21.
evil. 119.5. that this. 123.11. and bringing. 124.26. with it. 127.14. It is
time. 128.1. the loss. 129.5. and unexperienced. 129.9 that it is. 130.14.
rash. 136.5. according. 136.6. rise as early. 136.12. his sisters. 136.27. sent
away. 137.12. Citizens may compose. 137.13. an excellent and perfect. 141.23.
no knowledge thereof but. 145.2. drawn. 148.18. chooses for its. 151.7. I do
not say only. 151.10. and many others after him. 151.27. the very name.
154.15. which is false, is not. 154.25, he embraces all. 155.18 bring it to
pass. 156.2. and all his motions. 15.22. into that celestial.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY singular good Lord and Master, HENRY, Lord
Morley, and Mount-eagle, Baron of Rye.
SInce your Lordship has bin pleased to make me the undeserving Object of many
of your Favors, thereby to demonstrate unto the world the truly Nobleness of
your own disposition, in favoring such weak Deserts, as durst not presume so
much as to challenge the honor of your Lordships favorable aspect; I could do
no less, then in a thankful remembrance thereof, by this poor Testimony of
my bounden service, express the desire I have to manifest unto your Lordship
my thankful heart; and withal, seek for safeguard under your Lordships
Protection: Hoping thereby, that the Beams of your gracious Aspect will
disperse these Gusts of Calumniation, and Gulfes of Envy, which will strive to
swallow this poor strange Bark, adorned in English Rigging. Unto which, if
your Lordship will be pleased but to add the Colors of your own Honor,
thereby to be known to whom she belongs; I make no question, but by that
means she will be securely wafted along through these Tempests, unto the
Haven of Benign Acceptance; And there will remain ever at your Lordships
command, as daily will also

Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, ANDREW COURT.

MVSAEVS, OR THE FIRST BOOK OF CONSTANCY.
ON a day, during the siege that Paris suffered with so much Misery; I walked
alone in my garden, being sad to the very soul for the hard fortune of my
distressed Country. And as a man's passion being too much soothed up, does
increase beyond measure; I began to accuse heaven for pouring down upon us
such cruel influences; and could with a good will have argued with God
himself; had not a secret fear awed my sorrow. Amidst these my perplexed
thoughts, there arrived one of my dearest friends, a man perfectly seen in all
manner of Sciences, especially in the Mathematics, but far more to be
commended for his singular honesty, and faithful integrity (rare virtues in
this Age) his name for this time shall be Musaeus; since his Modesty forbids
me to call him otherwise. After the first salutation, and some familiar
discourse, he seriously eyed me, and beholding the fresh marks of my tears
on my Cheeks, says: I do not ask you, what discourse you entertain your
self withal, I read it in your countenance, good men are little busied, but
with the apprehension of the Public calamity. This wound strikes us so
sharply, that we cannot but point at it: But how is it? Yesterday when I
visited you, I found you in the same case: For the first time I made no show of
any reprehension, but seeing you continue, and suffer your self to be
overrun with passion, I must needs ask you, what you have done with your
Philosophy? I seek you in your self, for I cannot believe, that he, from
whom I received so much comfort, can now be wanting to himself. There is
nothing so just, as for one to receive that which he has prescribed another:
either restore me to the liberty of weeping, that your discourses took from
me, or else obey the law, your self ordained for sorrow. O dear Musaeus, I
learn now by experience, how much easier it is to speak then to do: and how
weak, and sinew-lesse the arguments of Philosophy are in the School of
Fortune. Shall I tell you freely, what I think of it? Our Philosophy does
nothing but brag, and boast; she triumphs in the shadow of a School, with
her foyles in her hand: It is good sport to see her stand on her guard, showing
her several postures, and so nimbly defending her self, that you would think
it were impossible that any worldly cross should come so near as to give her
a hit; but let her come in open Field, with naked Sword, and that Fortune
chance but to strike her one sound clappe, she is quickly daunted and
disarmed. This grief which with words we strive withal, is a feigned thing,
like those wooden men, or Quintanes, set up for Countrey-Boyes disport, which
suffer themselves to be aimed at, and receive the blow defencelesse. True
grief is another thing, it is lively, vigorous, and stirring: it assaulteth,
and surpriseth us, and gripeth us so fast, that it leaves us helpelesse. Has
it once touched us? Let us set as good a face on it as we can, it smarteth
nevertheless: and though for a time we gnash our teeth, obstinately enduring
the pain, for fear we should confess what trouble it is; yet in the end, it
will make it self known, and wrest from forth our breast, those groans, and
sighs, that we refused to grant unto it voluntary. No, believe it, that in
such fits as these, Nature and our Philosophy cannot agree together: You must
choose which of the two you will keep. Had you power to expel Nature, that is
the lawful Mistress of our passions; and which she fearing, that we might
suffer our selves to be beguiled with slye words, and alluring discourses, and
so withdraw us from her obedience, keeps within us a garrison of her
affections, which narrowly observe and watch us, and upon all occasions that
are offered, exact from us the tribute that we owe her? Either tears are no
natural signs and marks of a true grief, or else we ought to yield them to
the Evil wherein Nature is most offended, which is in the ruin and subversion
of our Country; for by that fatal Blow are wounded all those, that are
conjoined to us either in Blood, Friendship, or Alliance: but if we have no
feeling of their pains, and compassion of their miseries; I say, that then we
violate and infringe both Civil Laws and natural Piety, and the Majesty it
self of that great God, whose Spirit rests among us, as a Protector of the
rights of human society. I was already offended with your troublesome
Philosophy, which forbids us tears: but reading to day an ancient Author,
I resolved to drive her away spightfully, so pleasing was a place to me, I
lighted on by chance, wherein he writes, That in the Town of Cumae, there was
a Statue of Apollo, which was seen to weep, and shed forth tears, when the
Romans destroyed the Town from whence it was fetched, as being grieved that its
Country should be ruined, and that not able to assist, because the ruin of it
was fatal, and had been by Apollo long foretold. And shall a Marble Statue
find tears to deplore its Country, and I find none to bemoane mine? Being
removed so far off, it suffered for the calamities of its fellow Citizens;
and shall not I sigh upon the view of mine, and amidst all their miseries? No,
no, I am a true-hearted subject; I am bred and borne in the Town, which I see
now exposed to ruin: believe this, that a man whose eyes are without moisture
at this present, had need to have a heart of Stone; yea, I think, if Piety
were not fled out of the World, we should weep as well as the Cumaan Apollo,
for our reasons (I am sure) are greater. This fair City, the Metropolis of
the most renowned Kingdom of the Earth, the Seat of our Kings, the Throne of
Justice, and Estate, and as a common Temple to all France; to perish in our
view, and even by our hands: the Richesse of her Citizens, the Magnificence of
her Buildings, the Learning of so many famous men, that she has brought up,
could neither save, nor help her. O how fitly did an ancient Author express
the power of God, under the Name of Fortune, when he said, That when she had
resolved upon any thing, she blinded the eyes of man, for fear he should
interrupt her purpose! Consider a little, how we have almost every one of us
unawares given way to our own ruins, and affoorded our helping hands to the
plucking down even of our own houses: for you know Musaeus, what infinite
number of men, even of the wisest amongst us, have combined to set forward this
design, and cast us into this boisterous storm of worst then Civil Wars.
Behold, we are in it, since that it is Gods pleasure, at the Eve of a great
shipwreck, wherein we must fear alike the rage and fury of our zealous
Domestickes, thirsting after the blood of those that wish for the public
welfare, and the violence that may happen from those that are abroad, which
should be inflicted promiscuously against good and bad; and in this Sea of
Miseries, you will forbid me tears. As far as I see, replied he, this time
causes every one to shift sides, which perhaps is the fault of the age: for my
own part, I have ever maintained Nature against your Philosophy, for in my
conceit, you made her too powerful, and would have given her a commission too
violent, and tyrannical. But it falls out commonly, that the wrong that is
done to one, whom we love not, reconcileth us to him, and moves us for pity
sake to undertake his defense. I see you dishonor the day, and disgrace
Philosophy, that has so tenderly, and dearly fostered us, and that you suffer
passions to tread upon her, who dares not so much as to defend her self. You
surnamed her before Queen of this Life, Mistress of our Affections, Tutrix of
our Felicity; and now you only keep her as a Buffoone, to spend your idle
time withal: entertain her at least as one that is descended of noble Stock,
you have no reason to forsake her; if you will divorce your self, restore unto
her the liberty she brought your house, let her retire with safe honor, and
with all her rights and privileges. As for my part, I maintain her free, and
profess my self a protector of her liberty: I dare not give her the power,
to take away from body and soul the sense of pains and grief, for I know it
ought to give way to natural affections: but I hold, it keeps in, and
restrayneth sorrows within their bounds, and banks, which otherwise would
ouerflow the soul, and in time will qualify, and assuage those swelling
evils. I see by your countenance that you are too much incensed, and will agree
to nothing: here come happily two of our best friends, unto whose judgment I
hope you willingly submit, and as for my part, I am content to stand to their
trial. Now these were two famous men: the first, whom for this time we will
name Orpheus, besides the knowledge of Arts and Learning, he has purchased
himself by his long and dangerous travels great experience: Tho other shall be
called Linus, who is known for one of the most learned in Europe, whose
judgment and sincerity is much esteemed. O Musaeus, you have (quoth I) chosen
Judges that I cannot refuse, for indeed they are not chosen, but rather as I
believe, they are sent unto us even as the gods that were let down by device
in Tragedies, to act some great exploite beyond the power of man. For my part,
I hold my opinion to be so sound and true, and so deeply printed in my heart,
that none, but such holy hands as theirs can root it out. Upon this we drew
near and saluted each other. We fear (quoth they) we hinder your discourse,
wherein it seems you are far gone, and by your looks we judge you
disagree. You guess well (quoth Musaeu) and you are seasonably come to
reconcile us, for we have assigned you Judges of our controversy. The precept
of the wise, forbids us to be Judges betwixt our friends, yet we will do our
best to reconcile you: but we must tell you freely, we have come far,
therefore give us leave to sit. Then Linus began to tell, that he heard a
pitiful History of a poor woman, which for want of Bread to give her
Children, hanged her self on a Beam in the top of the house. And I (quoth
Orpheus) did see even now, a poor maid, that fell down stark dead for lack
of food: and a little after, I met some poor folks, feeding upon a dead
Dog, all besmeared with blood, that they had broyled; and as I avoided this
grievous Spectacle, I met with certain Women that cried out and said, That the
Lanskenets had eaten up Children, hard by a place that is called the Temple,
which I cannot believe. Hearing this, we all burst out into sighs: whereupon
I replied, my cause is gained; since none here could forbear, but needs must,
upon recital of this pitiful History, express how sensible they are of the
public misery. I leave it then to your consideration to imagine, how we
ought to quake, and tremble, when we bethink our selves, how many several
sorts of Miseries are spread over this vaste and populous City. Alas, how many
secret Wounds is there that are hidden and covered by shame? then how great and
fearful are the Calamities we foresee, expect, and cannot almost avoid. You
vpbraid me with my tears Musaeus, but you may with better reason object unto
me the hardness of my heart, which is the only impediment that so sharp and
stinging grief does not at one instant end both my life and sorrows. Then
turning toward Orpheus, and Linus, I gave them to understand, what discourses
passed between Musaeus and my self, and upon what points we differred: Which
when they heard, Our good Fortune (quoth Orpheus) has brought us hither in a
very luckie time, to hear so learned Disputations: but Musaeus, since you have
done us the honor to give credit to us, give us also leave to make use of the
authority you have granted us, and in stead of discoursing and demonstrating
your Propositions, apply them, and make trial of their virtue upon us, whereof
you boast, against this irksome disease of the mind, which is the grief that
we all receive from the public misery: you have a fair and large subject,
for I verily believe, there is not one of us, whose mind is free from this
disease. I assure my self, that if Antiquity has invented any medicine for
the curing of a troubled mind, you are the likest to have got the best and
profitablest receipts. But I fear it falls out here, as it does in your
Mathematical demonstrations, wherein you prove by a thousand fair
Propositions, what no Artificer can make use of, either upon Wood or Stone.
Proceed then, and make your account; if you can assuage our mind, and free us
from this grief wherewith we are vexed, then your suit is granted; for deeds
are stronger proofs then words: besides, if you beguile us, you shall do us
but a courtesy to rid us of so great an Evil, and so I am sure our Landlord
will be glad to be overcome, for he shall gain by the loss. I will do my
best endeavor to content you (quoth Musaeus) but let me entreat you, to
remember that we labor in a common piece of work: therefore, if I chance in
rehearsal of this matter, to forget material reasons; that you call to mind,
and supply my wants, since that our strife is only to try Truth out: and to
the end Reason may overcome, you ought the more to favor her side, in respect
the reward of victory is equal to us all.

The chiefest thing to be observed in the curing of a disease, is rightly to
know the cause of it: wherefore, if we be desirous to free our soul from
sorrow, and restore it to a quiet estate, it is needful in my opinion to
examine from whence proceeds the malady which torments it. The nature of man
has not only a great proportion and correspondencie with the whole World, but
also with every part; and especially me thinks, when it resembles the Royal
State, they are both almost of like conditions, and subject to like casualties.
The Sovereign Prince that is to rule a multitude of men, Towns, and
Provinces, appoints subordinate Magistrates: And to direct and instruct them
in the execution of their charge, gives them his Laws to rule their Actions
by: and besides, advises them to refer doubtful and important matters to
him, and attend his censure. Certainly, as long as this Order is observed,
Subjects obey the Magistrates; and Magistrates, the Law and Sovereign Prince:
the State remains in Peace, flourishes, and wonderfully prospers. But
contrary, when those which judge and rule under the Sovereign, suffer
themselves to be ouer-reached by their own softness, or bribed by favor, in
deciding controversies, and that without respect unto their Sovereign; they
make only use of their authority, for the execution of their rash Decrees,
whereby they bring all things to ruin and confusion. In man, the highest and
most sovereign faculty of the Soul, is Understanding: being inthroned in the
highest place, to guide and conduct all his lives Actions, has appointed and
ordained an vnder-facultie, that we call Imaginatiue, to dispose and judge by
the representation of the Senses, the quality and condition of things offered,
with authority to rouse and stir our affections, for execution of its
judgment. And least that Faculty, as it is great and important, might do any
thing rashly, it has proposed unto it as a Law, the light of Nature, which
shines in all objects, and moreover has given it means in all doubtful and
weighty matters, to have recourse to the discourse, reason, and counsel of it
that commands over all. There is no doubt, as long as this Order is kept in
the managing of man's life, but he is in an exceeding happy estate, and that
this great, and generous creature, shows himself worthy to be the
masterpiece of that Sovereign Architect that created him. But I know not what
ill luck is the cause man does not enjoy this happiness: for this Faculty,
that is beneath Understanding, and above the Senses, to whom belongs the
censure of things, suffers it self for the most part to be corrupted and
misled, and so conceiueth rashly; and after it has so conceived, stirs and
moves our affections at randon, and leaves us full of trouble and
unquietness. The Senses, true Sentinels of the Soul, set abroad to view all
Objects, are like soft wax, on which is printed, not the true and internal
Nature, but only the superficial and external form of things: they present
their Idea's unto the Soul with favor, and even with a fore-iudgement of
their quality, according as they appear severally pleasing and graceful to
them; and not as they are profitable and necessary to the universal welfare
of man: and moreover, let in with the Idea's, the fond opinion of the Vulgar;
from whence is framed, that inconsiderate Opinion we have of things, that they
are good or bad, profitable or hurtful, to be imitated, or to be shunned,
which certainly is a dangerous guide, and rash mistress to follow, and justly
such as our Belleau has set it forth.

Opinion that is constant never,
That works in vain, and strives ever:
That builds her self a firm assurance,
Upon the sands of light inconstance.
But whosoever will carefully observe her effects, shall find her far worse
then he describes her: for she is no sooner bred up, but she without respect
or understanding, seizes upon our Imagination, and there, as if she were
within a Citadell, stands out in defiance against true Reason: And like a
Tyrant, that violently has seized on a Town by force, sets up Wheels and
Gibbets for those that will not readily obey, and offers reward to those who
will follow his party. Even so, when she intends to make us fly from any
thing, she sets it forth unto us, with a horride and dreadful visage: but
when she would delight us, she painteth it over, and gives it a smyling
countenance, whereby she slydeth down into our hearts, and stirs our
affections with violent motions of hope and fear, sorrow and pleasure: and
because she would be sure for to disquiet us, she rouzeth up our passions,
which are the true disturbers of our Soul. But amongst all the other, and
above all the rest, this sorrow, wherewith I see you possessed (which is
nothing but a decay of Spirit, and drooping, bred by the opinion we have, that
we are afflicted with great misfortunes) is a dangerous Enemy to our rest: for
it is incredible, how much this rust and mouldinesse, that is gathered in the
Soul by such accidents, is contrary to Nature, and does blemish and disfigure
her workmanship: it marreth her Faculties, dulleth and benummeth her Virtues:
when contrariwise she should rouse up her self, to withstand the mischiefs
that threaten us, and lets into our hearts a deeper cause of our grief. Now
since she is hurtful to us, me thinks we should beware of her; and to the end
she may not deceive us, discover, and diligently view her before she has got
footing in us, and withstand her in the very Frontiers. And whereas she would
insinuate her self under the name of Nature; let us observe that she is an
Enemy to her, who only makes a show, as if she would ease our pain. But let
us take notice how she increases it, as much as she can. She seems to be
devout, and religious, let us bring forth her deceit and impiety: when as she
would slip in by the favor of Error, let us drive her away by the authority
of Reason and Truth. First of all, to show that she cannot be sheltered under
the name of Nature, that she proceeds not from her, and is not a common
Affection, where with all men be tormented alike: do we not see those things
that cause grief and sorrow to some, to breed mirth and delight in others?
That one Province weepeth, for what another laugheth? That such as come near
them that mourn and lament, do exhort them to be of a good resolution, and
leave off their tears? Hear the most part of them that are afflicted, when
you have spoken with them, and they have taken time and leisure to examine
their own passions: they will confess, it is a folly to be vexed, and within
three hours after, will praise them that have manfully withstood Fortune in
their adversities, and incountered their own afflictions with a bold and
generous courage. So that in all this, there is neither equality nor
certainty, as there is in the works of Nature: and thereby it appears, that
men do not frame their moan to their sorrow, but to the opinion of those they
live withal. Remember I pray you that public mourning, the Ancients did so
much affect. What do you say of them that were hired to weep and lament in
Funerals? The tears which came from others eyes, that were shed only to be
seen, and were dried up as soon as they were not looked on: were they
natural, or artificial? What was the intent of those that were hired, and
likewise of those that hired them but only to submit themselves unto that
tyrannical opinion forged in those Countries, that in such accidents it
behooued us to weep: and as for them that had no sorrow of their own, were
bound to buy it of their Neighbors for ready money? Did not such people
betray their own Reason wittingly, and purposely prostitute their manliness?
Shall we deem they did ever learn such bad conditions in the School of
Nature? But rather in the School of Opinion, that teaches how to pervert
Nature to please the Vulgar, and which brings forth nothing but is
counterfeit and painted. For proof of this, will you behold, with how much
vanity, it breeds, feeds, and brings up this sorrow, wherewith we are so
much tormented? I pray observe in your self, and in all those that are
afflicted, whether those things she sets forth unto us, as causes of our
grief, do not vex us either more, or sooner then they ought to do? The
chiefest instrument she has, and wherewithal she most disturbeth us,
consists in evils to come. She has power over us only by fraud, and deceit.
She knows, that the crosses we stood in fear of, prove not so heavy when
they are come, as we did imagine them, and are assuaged by use, and custom.
Therefore she casts her self upon time to come, as into a thick darkness,
and takes her opportunity, even as many choose night to strike men with fear:
upon small occasion, she does then represent calamities unto us, as they do
Robin-good-fellowes unto little Children: They raise, abate, increase, and
lessen them at their pleasure, because they talk unto them of things they
never saw. She tormenteth us with Evils that are not: but in regard we deem
them, or fear them to be so, and which do not so much offend us by their
nature, as by our apprehension; how many have we seen make their calamities
true Evils, with overmuch grief, which for fear to be wretched, are become
so, and have turned their vain timorousness into a certain misery? Some
have been so frighted with poverty, that they have fallen sick upon it: Others
through jealousy of their wives, have been driven into a consumption: And the
like may be said well-neere of all other fears, wherein for the most part, it
serves us in no other stead, but to make us find, what we seek to avoid.
Let us fear no more, we shall have no hurt, at least we shall not have it,
till it comes; and let it come when it will, it will never be so bad as we
thought it. As for me, I believe, that of all Evils, Fear is the most
powerful, and troublesome: for others are Evils no longer then they last, and
the pain cease with the cause. But Fear is, of that which is, of that which
is not, of that which perchance shall never be, yea, many times of that which
cannot be. O tyrannical Passion! which to vex man, goes beyond Nature, and by
our discontents, extracteth a grief out of that which is not, and to satisfy
the opinion of a fained, and imaginary misery, draws from us sharp, and
stinging torments. Like unto the Painter Parrhasius, who the better to express
the fabulous torments of Prometheus, put his Bond-slaues to the Rack. Why
should we be so ambitious to our harm, and in such have meet with our evils?
Let us take a little patience, and suffer it to come near; happily, the time
which we think will bring us afflictions, will afforde us comfort. How many
chances may there fall that may auert the blow we fear? A Thunder bolt is
turned away with the wind of a Hat, and the fortunes of powerful Kingdoms,
are altered in a moment: a turn of a wheel sets up that which was down;
and often from whence we expected ruin, we receive safety. There is nothing
so easy to be beguiled, as humane Prudence: what she hops for, miscarryeth,
and what she fears, comes to pass, and that falls out she looks not for.
God keeps his counsel by himself, what man resolves upon one way, he
determines another. Let us not make our selves unhappy before the time, and
(it may be) we shall not be so at all. Future time that deceives so many,
shall as soon deceive us in our fears, as in our hopes. It is one of the
chiefest Maxims in Physic, That, Predictions are never certain in sharp
diseases. If violent motions of heat, bereaueth the Physician of judgment;
what wise man dare be so bold as to assure any thing of the success of our
Civil dissentions, which are apparently seen to be stirred up, and maintained
by a more then human power? It is a hard matter to warrant the safety of our
State, but it is likewise uncertain to foretell his ruin. How many Cities,
States, and Empires, have been shaken, and tottered with intestine accidents,
and such, that those which beheld them, looked certainly for their fatal
period; and nevertheless, have the better settled themselves, and become more
puissant and flourishing then ever they were?

Against whom in entering, Fortune in hate does burn,
On those she often smiles in their return.
It is his pleasure, those that are cast down, should hope still; and shall
not we, that are but as yet declyning? The Romans, which I willingly challenge
for witnesses in brave and generous Actions, as the renownedst and most
courageous people that ever were in the world, had great cause to despair of
their affairs, after the Gauls had sacked their Town, and with Fire and
Sword rooted out the very Ground-plot of their State. Notwithstanding, they
abated neither in their hopes, nor affections they boar their Country: But
contrary, adversity increased their courage, and were so confident as to bid
another Battle, wherein Fortune was so propitious to them, that they drew
many brave Triumphs from their own ruin. After the loss of so many Battles
against Hannibal, and that they had wasted all the Youth of their City; in so
many incounters, and disasters, had they not cause to be sore troubled?
Contrariwise, there were Citizens found, which bad Money for the Field whereon
Hannibal encamped, being still in good hope of the public welfare.

And to pass to the Civil wars (which are commonly the fatal and deadly
maladies of great States) Who would not have thought the Roman Commonwealth
had been struck dead at the very heart, under Marius and Sylla? And that the
very City herself under Caesar and Pompey, was carried into the Pharsalian
Field, there to be at the common charge and cost of all men, torn and buried
by all the Nations of the World? And nevertheless, she was never so puissant
and tryumphant, as after the time of Marius and Sylla. And the wars of Caesar
and Pompey were but the fits and gripings of bringing forth the greatest,
fairest, and most flourishing Empire of the World.

But to return from strange Nations to our selves: Who could have believed
that our poor State, laid level on the ground, at the coming in of Charles
the seventh, having almost neither pulse nor breath, should have raised it
self again in so short a space, and stretched its Arms over all the
neighboring Provinces, as it did soon after under his next Successors? One
may say of the fortunes of Towns and Kingdoms, as they do of man's diseases,
As long as there is life, there is hope; Hope remains in the body, as long as
the Soul.

But well, let us hope for nothing, let us hold our Evils for certain,
although they be uncertain: let us think them to be present, though they be
to come. Do you think if they did happen, they were so irksome and
intolerable as we imagine them? They would come far short. Banishment,
Poverty, loss of Honors, loss of Children, wherewithal is composed that
Host of Evils which so tormenteth us; their number is not so great, as we
think: yet whosoever will examine them one after another, shall find they are
but rascal striplings, set in battle array, to affright us; if we be armed as
we ought, none of them dare make a shot, our very looks will defeat and
scatter them. Do you deem it nothing (will you say) for a man to lose his
country, and so to be enforced to change his dwelling? What do you make of
that natural love we owe unto our country? I do but the same which Plato did,
when he forsook Athens, to go and dwell in Sicill and Egypt; I do but the
same as you had done your self, if there had been an honorable occasion
offered to you, to go Ambassador into some foreign country for ten or twelve
years: you had not only forsook your city, but (if you will say true) had
it been needful, you would have forsook the land to choose a ship for the
place of your aboade, and tie your life to the tackling of a Bark. Let reason
persuade you to that, which a little Honor would have done: the Commandment
of your Prince, that had charged you with it, would have made you like it well:
Let fate, and necessity, unto whom you owe more obedience, do the same. How
many men is there even at this day, that voluntarily have banished themselves
out of Europe, to make plantations in the extremest parts of Asia? See them,
they praise their Fortune, as safe, and sure, and replenished with all manner
of happiness, and pity ours as altogether wretched, full of poverty and
troubles. It is heaven is the true and common country of man, from whence they
are come, and whither they must return: and that is the reason why it is
seen, and shows it self to every one almost whole, in all parts of the
earth, in one day and night; whereas contrariwise the earth that is but a small
point in comparison of it, and all which she incompasseth with her Seas, and
waters with her Rivers, is not the hundredth and sixtieth part of the
magnitude of the Sun; shows her self to us only in the very place we do
inhabit.

Would we tie the affections of man to so narrow an object, as a corner of the
earth? and enforce him, for to be happy, to dwell still in one place, which
pleases him in no other respect then that he may leave it when he lists?
Confine him to that country wherein he took so much pleasure, it will become
irksome to him in an instant. He that lived all his life time within the
walls of his town, until he was fourscore years of age, died for grief
as soon as he was forbidden to go out of it, and began to hate that he did
enjoy by force, and to love that was forbidden. And that brave Roman Rutilius,
being called home from his banishment by Sylla, would not return, and
preferred the solitariness of his Island, before the greatness and
magnificence of his city. See in how short a time he had learned to make a
small reckoning of his country, he had rather lose the sight of it, then
endure the sight of him that oppressed its liberty: he could brook well
banishment, but hated the Tyrant. But question him, he will not only tell you
that his banishment was tolerable, but will set it out to you to be sweet and
full of pleasure: he will show you that all his virtues followed him, and
moreover had purchased the friendship of Philosophy: and will tell you further
he has lived no longer then he has been banished. It is no other then an
imaginary Love that you bewail, which has no root but in opinion, that a
small thing may pluck out. To a wise man all countries are alike, or at least,
as Pompey said, he ought to esteem that his country where he has his
liberty. All sorts of men are his fellow-citizens, he acknowledges them for
Allies, for Kins-folkes; all come from one maine stock, which is the hand of
that great Father who has created all.

You see that fortune even leads some by the hand out of their country, to
make them great and mighty in a Foreign. Reckon up, I pray you, the Emperors
that reigned in Rome since Traian: how many of them were natives in the city?
will you say, that these men, whereof some had left Spain, some Sclauonia,
some France, some Afric, to attain unto the greatest Empire of the world
have bin sorry, or ought to wish for their own country? yea but our condition
shall not be alike, we shall come from the sacking of a town, naked as from a
shipwreck, and shall lose all our fortunes. It is poverty then we fear:
That's freely spoken. And what is it to fear poverty? but to loose a few fair
moueables that we have gathered, the commodity of a house well furnished, a
soft bed, meat well dressed. Take off the Mask from our complaints, and then
you shall see the true face of our sorrow. We are effeminate, there is our
disease. A man that has his limbs, ought he to complain of poverty? he
that has a trade, ought he to fear it? He that is brought up in learning,
ought he to fly from it? Extreme poverty, that has not wherewithal to suffice
Nature, does seldom happen: Nature deals very justly with us, she has
framed us so, that we stand in need of few things. If we apply our selves to
her desires, we shall be sure of sufficient; if to the opinion of the Vulgar,
something will always seem to be wanting. This other poverty, which is
rather mediocritie and frugalitie, is to be desired, so far it is from being
dreadful: It is that Archesilaus said to be like unto Ithaca, which was rough
and harsh, but did bring forth generous and temperate men. It is virtues
dowry, and especially in these times, where few rich have been virtuous, and
few virtuous have been rich: and where, to speak in a word, nothing has
hindered so much honest men from getting riches and honor, as to merit them.
What strange cares do you think he shall dispoyle us of, that shall bereave
us of our fortunes? he shall make us truly Masters of our selves: of which,
affairs, suits in law, and quarrels, carry away the greatest part: it shall be
then all ours, we may then employ it as we list. O false goods, whosoever
should know you rightly, would deem you to be true Evils! Who makes us
Bond-slaues but you? who causes our injuries but you? who takes away our
liberty but you? who tieth us to the gates of Princes, makes us Slaves to their
servants, to observe their actions, bow at their nods, but you? O Pelf, none
can praise you, but must dispraise liberty; none can get or keep you, that
does not lose himself; and nevertheless you are called Goods. Yes, as
convenient instruments, and sometimes necessary to worthy actions, whereof the
use is so ticklish and hard, that it seldom happens, that you do more good
then harm.

Now I grant it is good to have wealth; yet for all that, it is not ill to have
none: for poverty and richesse are indeed several things, but not contrary;
they are several Goods, several Instruments of Virtue: With the one she
works with more ease; with the other, to more perfection. But howsoever,
Poverty avails more to attain to that sovereign Good, at the which all the
world ought to aim, which is the rest of the Soul, and the tranquillity of
the Mind. How many have we even at this day, which for the selfsame cause do
embrace wilful poverty? How many which think not themselves free, but since
the day they made themselves poor? that deem they only live, since they died
to the world? Since that our life is so short, and we must depart from hence
without carrying any thing with us, is it not for our ease to be as lightly
laden and encumbered with luggage as we can? The life of a poor man is like
unto them, who sail close by the shore; and that of the rich, unto those that
are in the main. These cannot land would they never so feign, but must wait
for Wind, and Tide; those come near when they please, it is but casting a
small rope, and their Bark is brought instantly into the Harbor. O poverty,
how many things art thou fit for! he that should know thee, would not censure
thee! Alas, if we did see as plainly the iealousies, fears, suspicions,
terrors, and desires of great men, as we see the roofes of their houses, and
forefronts of their Palaces, the brightness of their household furniture, the
glittering of their clothes, we would not envy their fortunes. If one should
say to us, Lo you there, you must take all, or leave all, bethink your selves
whether you will enjoy his fortunes with all his incommodities; we would go
back, and never go through with our bargain, and deem our selves happy in
our poverty. If it were as bad as they make it, we should not so highly praise
the Fabritii, Serrani, Curii, for that frugalitie, when they refused Gold and
Silver to till the ground, delights and pleasures to embrace labor, and
dsinties to feed upon Bread and Onions. What was it else, but a voluntary
Poverty? It is a wonderful thing, when we judge of Poverty in strangers,
she gains her cause; she goes away with praise and reputation: what is that,
but to declare that our private interest does corrupt and hinder us from
judging right when as it concerns our selves? Certainly amongst impartial
persons it is commendable, but amongst any it is tolerable.

Now if we can endure Poverty, how much easier the loss of our dignities and
honors, that are but a voluntary servitude, by which we are deprived of our
selves to be bestowed upon the Commonwealth? Honors, that always have
brought unto great men, that have worthily managed them, banishment and
poverty? Remember the Histories of the Ancients, and when you find a
Magistrate, who boar any great sway with either Prince or Commonwealth, and
that desired to carry himself worthily, and speak freely. I will hold you a
wager, that this man was banished* that was killed, another poisoned. At
Athens, Aristides, Themistocles, and Phocion; at Rome infinite, whose names I
spare, for fear of filling Paper, contenting my self with Camillus, Scipio,
and Cicero for antiquity; Papinianus for the time of the Roman Emperors; and
Boethius under the Goths. But why should we fetch them so far off? whom have
we seen in our time keep the great Seal of France, that has not been
preferred to this place, with an intent he should be thrust from it with
disgrace? he that had seen my Lord Chancellor Oliver, or my Lord Chancellor
de l'Hospital, go from the Court to retire themselves into their own houses,
questionless would say, that such honors are but as so many rocks and
shelues of sand, whereon Virtue may split her self. Present unto your memory
those brave and venerable Ancients, in whom all manner of virtues did shine; in
whom, amongst an infinite number of exquisite parts you could not tell what to
choose, endowed with learning, exceedingly well experienced in all affairs,
lovers of their country, and truly worthy of such places, if the time had not
been unworthy of them. After they had a long time tired out themselves in the
commonwealth, they picked idle and slight quarrels, and false accusations to
put them from affairs of state, or rather deprive the state as a tossed ship,
of the directions of so wise and experienced Pilotes, whereupon she might the
sooner suffer wrack. It is ambition at all times to desire public offices;
and faint-heartednesse to moan for them when they are gone; in this time it is
madness, in this I say, wherein the Magistrates authority does humbly, yea
shamefully serve the passions of those, that have the power in their hands, in
a time where Freedom is capital, and Truth offensive, where public Misery
imploreth your help, and the violence of the wicked stops your mouth.

It was not counsel Cato gave unto his son, but an oracle he uttered to men
of our times, when he advised him not to meddle with affairs of state: Because
(quoth he) the liberty of the time will not afford thee to do any thing worthy
the name of Cato, nor Catoes name to do any thing unworthy his generositie. As
for me, I accuse them that keep yet public offices, and believe that if there
be any thing wherein threatening Fortune may favor us, it is to discharge good
men of that burden, that presses their shoulders so sore. So it is, that
whosoever will reckon his honors among his losses, like unto those that are to
be lamented, and which may be alleged for a just cause of sorrow, like unto
these we fear; I esteem him to be ouer-nice, and censure him from this
present, unworthy of the dignity he fears to lose.

But, some one will say, what will you answer concerning the loss of our
friends, our kins-folkes, our children, whereof we are threatened by such
accidents as we fear? I will answer you, that although it were come to pass,
that the ruin of our town had overwhelmed the^, we should have wherewithal
to comfort our selves, for death would be very welcome unto the^; we are not
discontented, in my opinion, for that they are borne mortal, and therefore they
must die one day, but only that they die at this time: we are not to learn that
since they be borne men, they must be respected from us, they must either go
before, or follow us, and even as well in peace, as in war, as soon by
sickness, as by sword: howsoever it be, they cannot avoid the stroke of death,
but either sooner or later, a little before, or a little after is the matter
troubles us so much. Can death come to them in a fitter time, then when as
life is irksome? if they were to wish for it, or we for the^; what more
convenient season could they choose? is not a harbor most to be desired, when
we are extremely weather-beaten? The true end of death, is to put a period to
our miseries; if God had made life happier, he had also made it longer. We
ought the^ to bewail their death for their sake, and to do it for our own were
unseemly: for it is a kind of injury, to be grieved at the quiet of those we
love, because we are disturbed thereby, specially concerning the loss of our
friends: there is a remedy left to us still, which Fortune how harsh and cruel
soever she be, cannot take from us; for if we survive them, we have means to
get others. As friendship is one of the greatest blessings of life, so it is
one of the easiest to be obtained: God makes man, and man makes friends, he
that wants no Virtue, shall never want friends. It is the instrument
wherewith they be made, and wherewith when the old ones are lost, new-ones are
procured. If Phidias had lost any of his famous Statues, what means had he to
repair that loss? none but to make up again such another: Has Fortune taken
away our friends from us? Let us make new-ones, and so we shall not lose them,
but multiply them. Those shall go before, and stay for us in the place prepared
for fair and pure souls, and the others shall make the rest of our way more
delightsome by their company.

Perhaps (you will say) we may take patiently those adversities you told us
of; for, to speak truly, that strikes but upon the gown, and touches only
what is about us, goods, honors, friends and children; but if the evil comes
any further, and does penetrate our person, how shall we do that we may not
feel it? or feeling it, we may not torment our selves for it? Forasmuch as you
foresee, that if the fury of our seditious citizens be turned once upon us,
which they suspect already, they will cast us into prison, put us to the rack,
and rage against us as they have done against so many others, from whom we have
not been otherwise distinguished, then by our good Fortune; or else as we are
near upon it, if the town be taken or surprised, and is sacked, and spoiled,
we shall fall into the hands of barbarous and inhuman soldiers, the more for
that they are strangers, which after they have beaten and tormented us, will
keep us in a woeful thraldom, where perhaps we shall remain sick, and
languishing without relief; it may be they will add torture to sickness: And
in the end we shall see our selves dying in this misery, and for a surcharge, we
shall have about us a company of poor little children, void of al comfort, and
to whose compassion we shall afford nothing but sighs. What mind so well
settled will be able to endure such fits? and finding himself in such a
remediless agony, does not curse a hundred times a day, and abhor the hour
of his birth, wishing rather to have been abortiue, then seasonably borne in
such a dangerous time. I confess this to be the hardest, and most irksome, of
all that may befall us; but I deny it intolerable, and maintain that Virtue
may bravely withstand this assault, get the victory, and keep our mind safe
under her Buckler, full of quiet and content. But if we must come to fight, let
us not give our enemies more advantage then they have already; let us not make
them bigger then they are, let us not suffer them to come in a throng against
us; let us compel them to come one by one to the breach.

The first that appears to fright us, is a number of long and tedious
diseases. Why rather now then 20. years a go? Do we think diseases to be
more frequent and troublesome in want then in wealth, in frugalitie then in
prodigality? Good God, how blind we are! Did we ever find in Cottages the
Gout, the Stone, the Winde-collicke, or the Megrim in the head? I confess I
never saw any there, and yet I have diligently observed it. All such evils
which are sharp and stinging diseases, are most commonly in cities, in great
men's Palaces: they are the Sees of Bankets, Feasts, Watchings, and of nights
passed in pleasing sports. So that the miseries we endure, amongst other
commodities they bring unto us, they take a way the cause of those great
maladies, and root them, out cutting off the Fibers and Branches of pleasures,
which fed and maintained them. But admit they were to happen, where may they be
better cured then in Poverty? What do you think there is in the Books of
Galen and Hippocrates, wholsomer to all, or at least to most diseases, then
Sobriety? All those other remedies Physic has invented with so much Art and
industry, are almost only for Effeminate people, which would be cured with
delight, and abate nothing of their pleasures, choosing rather Art then Nature
for their Physician. But yet I will grant we may want remedies: should we want
courage for all that? Shall we suffer our selves to be subdued by pain, and
submit that which is absolute and sovereign in us, unto that strange power? It
were too great a weakness, seeing the means Reason and Discourse afford us
to withstand it. Either the Diseases that befall us, bring with them a violent,
or a moderate pain: if it be moderate, it is easy to be endured: We that are
used to suffer, ought not to complain of small twitches: and being that we
look for greater, we ought to give thanks unto our Destiny, for quitting us
at so easy a rate, and making us less wretched, then we made account to have
been. Briefly, who can endure the plaints of him, that moaneth for a touch,
specially in a season where no body is free from Evil? If the Evil be
violent, it shall be short; Nature does not suffer great Evils to be lasting,
and has given them that comfort, that their quickness does almost take away
the sense of them. That goes like a stream, in an instant you see it dried
up, and know not what is become of it: so short an Evil gives you no time to
complain; it is past, before you have taken notice of it: if you escape it, it
leaves you with a kind of pleasure to be out of it; if it bears you away,
it carries with you the sense of the pain. But whatsoever it is, the evil
can never be so great, but reason and discourse ought to overcome it.

I could rehearse unto you the examples of the Ancients, not of men, but even
of women, which have endured long and sharp diseases with so much constancy,
that pain has bereaved them sooner of life, then of courage. But why should I
go seek them so far off for you, that have a domesticke-one of your own,
far worthier then any Antiquity can afford? I mean of your virtuous and
dear sister, which in that raging Collicke of six months, that in the end
carried her away, has showed so constant a mind, so invincible a courage,
that her speech, which never failed her until the very end, was a comfort unto
them that saw her, and praises, and thanksgiving unto God, from whose hand
she received consolation and strength to endure the evil. But less us pass
lightly over this skarre: I fear in stead of healing a new wound, I fester an
old one, that has so lively and deeply touched you. As for the torments we
are to fear from them, into whose hands we might fall; we ought not to doubt,
that if we can take the resolution, unto the which both the reasons and
examples heretofore by me related, inuit us, but we shall easily overrule
them, for they are not harder to be borne then great and painful diseases: it
seems rather, that having body and health to resist them, Nature does second
us in this fight, and to put the victory into our hands. It is incredible,
what power Reason and Discourse have in this place, nor only to make us
constant, but even to make pain appear to us sweet and pleasant. It were an
infinite thing to allege the examples of those, which have not only with an
undaunted courage waited for torments, but persuaded by Reason, have sought and
endured them with a kind of pleasure.

You know, how that in Lacedaemonia, young Children whipped one another, when
one could not perceive in their face any token or apprehension of pain: What
then? were they insensible? No certainly, but in those tender years they had
so fully persuaded themselves, that it was a great glory, to suffer and endure,
to do their Country service, that by their courage they easily overcame
pain, and grief, and laughed at that, others were wont to weep for. Cannot
we for the honor of Virtue do the like as they did for the honor of their
Country? And for the quietness of our Mind, that which they did for the good
of their Common wealth? Alexanders Page suffered himself to be burned with a
Cole, and made no show to be moved at it, least he should commit any unseemly
thing in his Masters presence, and trouble the Ceremony of the Sacrifice. And
shall not we in the presence of Men, Angels, Nature, and of God himself,
endure somewhat that may show we can accommodate our selves unto the Laws of
the World, and to the Will of our Sovereign? Pompey being Ambassador for the
Romans, was surprised by King Gentius, that indeauoured to wrest from him
Public affairs: but to show him, there was no torture that could draw it
from him, he put his own Finger in the Fire, and suffered it to burn, until
that Gentius himself plucked it away. He sought torment to make show of the
strength of his fidelity: And shall we betray our Soul, if torments befall
us? And forget the duty we owe unto that, that is Divine in us? Shall we then
bear a dejected mind, and inthrall it to our body, to condole and suffer
pains equal with it? Far more generous was that brave Anaxarchus, that
half bruized in the Tyrants Mortar, would never confess his mind to be
touched with pain: Stamp on (quoth he) the case of Anaxarchus, for as for him
you cannot hurt. Hence came that fair resolution. Hence as from a quick-spring
did flow that Constancy, whereby he had learned to despise the body, as a
thing that is not our own, nor in our power, and use it as a borrowed garment,
to make show for a time of our mind, upon this low and transitory Theater.

Now, were not he ouer-nice that should howl and cry out, because his Gown
were spoiled, or a Hook had grapled it, or some one going by, had torn it?
some base Broker, that would make gains of such Ware, would complain of it. A
Prince, a great Man, a wealthy Citizen, would laugh at it, and in comparison of
the rest of his wealth, would make no reckoning of it. Let us value our selves
as we ought to do, let us be curious of our Honor and quietness, and we
shall make little account of all our body can suffer in this World. Yea, but
the pain will be so great, we shall lose our Life by it, and shall see the
Thread of our years cut off in the very middle: Who can free himself from
the Fear of this blow, that even Nature her self does abhor? for though
Death comes in due time, yet it is dreadful: How much worse will it be when it
is hastened, and gathers us up fresh and green, in the very prime of our
Youth? We deceive our selves, our Death has nothing dreadful of her self
more then our Birth, Nature has nothing that is strange and terrible, Death is
amongst us every day, and does not scare us, We dye every day, and every
hour of our Life that is past, is dead. It is not the last drop comes out of
the Bottle emptieth it, but finisheth it; and the last moment of our Life does
not cause Death, but only shows it. The chiefest part of Death consists in
that we have lived; the more we desire to live, the more we desire Death
should gain by us: but from whence comes this desire? Even from the Opinion of
the Vulgar, that measures all by the Yard, and deemes nothing precious that is
not great; whereas exquisite and excellent things are commonly thin and
slender. It is the part of a skillful workman to enclose much in a little
space; and we may say, that it is almost fatal to illustrious men to dye
quickly: great Virtue and long Life seldom meets together. Life is measured
by the End; so that it be good, all the rest has its proportion; quantity
avails nothing, to make it more or less happy; a little Circle is as round
as a great, it is Figure does all. Yet you will say, one would wish to die
quietly in his bed, amongst his own people, comforting them, and receiving
comfort from them again. It is a pitiful thing to be killed in a Corner,
and be deprived of decent Funerals. So many men that go to the wars, and take
Post to be present at a Battle, are not of this Opinion. They are going to
die all alive, and bury themselves among their enemies. Little children fear
masked men; uncover their faces, they fear them no more: Even so believe me,
Sword and the flames of Fire terrify us in the manner as we imagine them; take
off the mask, the Death wherewith they threaten us, is the very same whereof
women and little children die. But I shall leave behind little children
without help or assistance: as if those children belonged more unto you, then
unto God; as if you loved them more then he, which is the first and truest
Father, or as if you had more means to keep them safe then he. No, no, they
shall have the common Father of all the world, that shall watch over them, and
preserve them under the wings of his favor, as he does all his creatures from
the greatest to the least.

Evils then are never so great, as our Ambitious Opinion sets them forth
unto us; she does fright us by her guile: But she does altogether mar and
corrupt us, when as she strives to persuade us, that in such occasions we must
grieve and pine our selves. Certainly, if the sorrow it brings had nothing
worse then the deformity wherewithal it is accompanied, we ought to fly
from it with might and maine. Observe it, as soon as she gets into us,
she fills us with such a shame, we dare not show our selves openly, nor so
much as in private to our friends; after we are once seized on by this passion,
we seek nothing but an odd corner to lie dreaming in, and shun the sight of
men: we will have no witnesses to our actions, the sight of our friends is
troublesome to us; what is the meaning of this, but only that she condemns
her self, and does acknowledge how uncomely she is? would not you think she
were a woman that had been caught in the act, that hides and concealeth her
self, and is afraid to be known? or Terentius his Chaerea, that having
attired himself like an Eunuch, to perform a piece of knauerie, is ouertake^
in the midst of the street, or in a strange house? It is indeed to apparel men
like Eunuchs; yea, geld the^ altogether, as to suffer them to fall into that
sorrow which bereaueth them of whatsoever they have manly and generous, and
gives us all the countenances and infirmities of women. So the Thracians put
men that mourned into women's apparel, either to make them ashamed of
themselves, or to cause them to give over quickly such uncomely and effeminate
behauior. But what need was there of such clothes for that? for it seems to me
their countenances and their actions might have been a sufficient token to show
they were no more men. It was in my opinion a public disgrace, the Laws
inflicted upon them for their pusillanimitie, a summons to remember themselves,
and put on again their manly courage. The Roman Laws, that were more
generous, have not sought remedies by disgrace against these effeminate
lamentations: for they have utterly prohibited them, by their first and purest
ordinances. They deemed not the death of either father, mother, children,
kinsmen, or friends, a sufficient cause that we should vnnaturalize our selves,
and commit any thing against manliness. They have tolerated the first tears,
that are wrested by a new and fresh sorrow: Those tears, I say, that may fall
even from the eyes of Philosophers; and which with humanity maintain
dignity; which may fall from our eyes, without Virtue falling from our hearts.
Such were those, as I think, trickled along the cheeks of fair Panthea, when
as Araspes fell in love with her, because he had seen her to his great liking
weep very tenderly and pitifully for her husbands death. For the first
violent brunt of sorrow, raises in us such lively passions, that they slip
easily into the mind of those that look upon us, and fill them with a like
ardour. But this inueterate sorrow, that has pierced unto the very Marrow of
our Bones, withers our face, and disturbeth our Soul, so that there
remains nothing in us, that is lovely and graceful. And if Nature has
disposed of any thing comely in either our Body or in our Soul, it is faded by
this bitter passion, as the beauty of a Pearl is dissolved in Vinegar.

It is great pity then to see us, we walk with our head hanging down, and
our eyes fixed on the ground, our mouth without ever a word, our limbs without
motion, and our eyes are in no stead but to weep: you would deem us to be but
sweating statues; it is not without cause the Poets have recorded, Niobe was
turned into an image of stone with overmuch weeping. Their intention was not
only thereby, as an Ancient has thought, to represent to us the silence she
kept in her mourning; but also teach us, she had lost all manner of feeling, by
giving her self over to sorrow. We ought then to avoid it, were it but for
that it is so unbeseeming and dishonorable.

Furthermore, it is strangely hurtful, and so much the more infects us under
color of doing good; she makes, as if she did hasten to help us, and
contrariwise she does offend us; she seems to pull the Iron from the wound,
and she drives it into the very heart; she does promise us Physic, and she
gives us Poison; her Blows are so much the harder to put by, and her Attempts
too cross, because she is an enemy fed and brought up with us, so that we have
bred our selves to our own mischief. It was she, in my opinion, the Comicall
Greek spoke of, when as he cried out against men: O poor people, how many
evils do you wittingly endure besides those needful Nature sends unto you?
for who can we complain of, but of our selves, when after the feeling of
evils past, we retain still their grief, and opinionate our selves to
ruminate and continually bring them into our memory; or that for fear of time
to come, we faint for want of spirit and courage? Does not this evil befall to
us from our selves? whereof we ought not to wonder, that it is so lasting,
seeing it is like Rivers which come from the Sea, and return into it, and
fetching their spring from the same place they run into, are never dried up.
Poor fools! why do we so carefully water this plant, that bears such bitter
fruit? Can we find any good taste in these moanes, griefs, sorrows, sighs,
wherewithal she pestereth our life, and poysoneth all our actions? for as long
as she dwells with us, what do we do worthy the name of men? when do we
think of doing service to our country, or performing the duty of good
Subjects, to oppose our selves against the factions of the wicked, to defend
the Laws from the assaults of Ambition and Covetousness, to protect our
friends from the oppression of the malicious? what respite have we from this
importunate passion, to lift up our eyes to heaven, and with a pure spirit give
thanks unto that great and sovereign God, that has placed us here in this
world, and bestowed upon us so many blessings and favors, that if we had
nothing else to do but to give him praise, yet we should not have half time
enough to give him his due? Truly she cannot be excused: she is either very
indiscreet, or very malicious; either her end is bad, or else she erreth and
strayeth from her end.

If it be her drift to increase our evils, and that the more she seizes on us,
the heavier and more distastful she makes our life: why do not we put her back
at her first entrance? why do not we shut her out of doors? or at least, why
do not we drive her away by the head and shoulders, as soon as we know her
design? we are traitors to our own rest, if being acquainted with its
enemies, if having notice of those do disturb it, we receive them, and uphold
them, and cherish them. If it be her end to ease our sorrow, to qualify and
soake it in our tears, Why should we employ so long, so bad and rash an
Officer that does what is clean contrary to her intent? Who did ever see her
attain unto it? What Mind did she ever enter, that she has comforted? But
contrariwise, if she found it quaking, has she not quite overthrown it? If
upon falling, overwhelmed it? There comes not one out of her Claws, but
spoiled, maimed, and bruized. When she has gone over it, she leaves behind
neither strength, nor resistance, and becomes like unto a deep and hollow
place, which is not only defiled with the filth that grows in it, but on all
sides, Sinckes and Gutters run into it, so that pure Water is corrupted
therein. For a man possessed with Sorrow, is offended with his own Evils and
other men's both, with public and private: even good fortunes befalling him,
do displease him. All things wax tart in his Mind, as meat does in a deboshed
Stomach. But besides all this, I say that Sorrow coming upon such an occasion,
as it does to you, is very unjust, and I dare almost call it impious. For what
is it, but a rash and outrageous complaint against Nature and the Common Law of
the World?

The first voice which is pronounced by Nature, is that all things which are
under the Circle of the Moon must perish, and as they have had a beginning, so
shall they have an end. You would free your City from it as by a Privilege,
and make it Immortal. Kingdoms, States, and Towns are of the same condition
the other parts of the World are of, nay, their being is more uncertain and
weaker. For most other things have their form, which unites their members so
strait and so strong with one only knot, that they can hardly be severed: but
States and Cities are composed of so many different things one from another,
which are knit and gathered together only by the will and consent of men,
moved to a communion and society, by some Celestial inclination. And that
will and consent being subject to waver, the ruin of Towns is still at hand,
and almost present: for from the stirring and motion of that consent, springs
wars, and seditions, which bring them to their end. But though no diseases
do befall them, that is to say, violent mischances, wherewithal most commonly
they perish; yet age must make an end of them by the Common Law of the World,
for they have their Youth, their virility, their Old age, like men; and though
all the rest of their age has been strong and sound, yet Age must consume
them. Now if we have foreseen this, why are we vexed at it? If we have not
foreseen it, what do we complain of, but of our imprudencie? The condition
of Nature is very hard and wretched, if she must bear the blame and wrong of
all such things as are unknown to us, when they come to pass. Is it her fault
we know them not? Has she concealed it from us? Is there ever a nooke in the
World where she has not set it in writing? It is wonderful that we are more
just and righteous to every one then to Nature, which nevertheless is more
gracious and favorable to us then all the rest. If we had hired a House, and
the Owner were in mind to pull it down because it were old, and must build it
up again, or that he would apply it to his own use: we would go forth
willingly, and seek for another without any more ado. Why? it is the Common
Law that suffers him to make use of his own in this fashion. Would you know
who be those which do grieve when they must remove, that complain, and vex
themselves? They be the Children of such as have Leases for many years,
because they have seen their Fathers enjoy them still, they never troubled
themselves to look into the Titles of their House, they made account the Fee
simple was theirs, and sed themselves with that opinion. They passed their
youth and never learned any Trade, never used to work, when as they are grown
in years, the Lease is expired, they must provide themselves elsewhere. This
unexpected blow astonisheth them, they weep, they lament, and in stead of
giving the Owner thanks for suffering them to enjoy it so long at so good a
rate, they rail on him. But we are yet far vnwiser, and more unjust toward
Nature, then they are toward their Landlords: For they perchance have a
chargeable Lease on it, they have perhaps paid a great In-come: we are here
but Tenants at Will, what we have, we hold it by entreaty, and only for a
while. They have forborne to give them warning until such a time the Lease was
expired: but Nature does declare to us every day the Conditions we live here
upon.

I pray you tell me, when we come into the World, do we enter it, or are we
brought into it? Do we come into it to command, or to serve, to give the Law,
or to receive it? I think, you will answer me in a word, that we come into it,
to obey, and follow what we find already established. We must accommodate our
selves to Seasons, Days, and Nights, to the temperature of countries; briefly
unto all that happens in the government of the world. Now this Law is mild,
kind, gracious, all that is in it, if we consider it well, is meant for our
good and favor. And nevertheless if there were any hard thing in it, the
only way to mitigate necessary servitude were to obey voluntary. Ought not we
to think, that when we come into the world, we do bargain with Nature, and
bind our selves to observe the laws she has given and published so many ages
since in Cities, Commonwealths, and Kingdoms? As she is wise, provident, and
desirous to preserve the beauty of her work, she has given to every thing as
long a continuance as she can; but the vice, and imperfection of the matter,
whereof things are created, has been the cause, that of earthly things, there
can be none immortal: and even of those that are mortal, many last not so
long as their nature requires, the vice of the matter preventing the grace of
Nature. The remedy she has provided for this inconvenience, is a lasting by
succession she has given unto things, so that loosing one form, they receive
another, nothing at all being lost but only altered: she keeps the earth in
her hands like soft Clay, which she kneadeth and mouldeth over again in
sundry fashions giving it a new face, covering the old figure with a fresh one,
and by those means does imitate in this world immortality, which she could
not altogether afford it.

From thence it is, that Towns, Kingdoms, and Empires, change in this manner,
and grow out of one another ruins. The Play is altered still, and nothing
remains sure and firm but the Stage. What is there more just, seeing that
she is a common Mother to all men, then for her to desire to grace all parts of
the Earth with a turn of greatness and magnificence, which she has caused to
pass from place to place? This turn at last is come to us, and we have seen
in our days, our Country so plentifully stored with Riches, Glory, Wealth,
Pleasure, that we could wish for no more. We are now upon our return, our good
Fortune is fled from us, as out of a house cracked and crazed on all sides; we
have stayed behind looking for its fall: some cry out, some gaze upon it, some
run away. What is there so much to wonder at? An old man dies, an old house
falls, what should you cry out for? What is there in it, but what you see
every day, and every where? Fruit does blossom, knot, increase, ripen, rot:
Herbs spring up, spread forth, wither away: Trees grow, stand a while, and
afterward are dried up: All living Creatures are brought forth, live, and at
last dye. Time it-selfe, that wrappeth all the World, is in the end wrapped in
its own ruin: As it slippeth away, so it is consumed; it rowleth softly
seasons one upon another, and all those that are past, are lost. Of all those
changeable things, what would you make constant? Of all those mortal things,
what would you make immortal? Will you make me wonder? Let me see something
permanent in this World.

But I do you wrong to entertain you with such gross reasons, you, I say,
whose laborious study is as the mirror of Nature, and which may represent to
your selves in an instant, and draw from the treasure of your memory the face
of the world, as it has bin ever since its creation. Run, I pray you, over it
again, and consider what is become of those great and admirable Cities,
builded up with so many years labor, beautified with so many toils, enriched
with so many troubles. Each of them has had many ages that have not been
otherwise employed, but to dispoile the rest of the world, to furnish and
bedecke them. Asia shows you Troy the great, proud Babylon, stately
Jerusalem; Afric sets forth Thebes with a hundred gates, mighty Carthage,
wealthy Alexandria; Europe represents unto you learned Athens, triumphing
Constantinople, and Rome, the miracle of all Cities, and of all the world.
What reason do you think it were all these fair Cities have so flourished,
but only to be overthrown? And why have they been overthrown so often,
saving that the Destiny seemed to stand out against Nature, and uphold the
frailty of humane things? How many times has every one of them seen their
enemies overthrow their walls, sack their houses, kill their citizens, and
burn their Churches? Their necessity to perish has been so great, that when
they have wanted foreign enemies to work their overthrow, they have armed
their own Inhabitants, to execute what was ordained about their end. There is
no remedy, that is the Law, you cannot go against it: when we see, or hear
of others ruins, that is a fore-iudgement for us, when our time is come: what
happens to one, may happen to all; the blow that hitteth the foremost,
threatens him that follows.

Scipio he that overthrew Carthage, seeing fire in it, which devoured such
infinite richesse and stately buildings, and consumed the mightiest City of
Africa; moved with compassion for the frailty of humane affairs, fell a
weeping for the mischief he did, and uttered two verses of Homer to this sense.

A fatal day will come wherein Troy so doughty,
With Priam and his subjects shall all be made a booty.
Meaning of Rome what the Poet had spoke of Troy, but he was far deceived in
his Prophecy, for how many days, and not one alone has she been made a
booty? how many times sacked? how many times destroyed? how many times burnt?
and yet she has raised her self out of her ashes; and being obstinately bent
to withstand her own mischiese, seems to have tired her ill fortune, that she
would not work her ruin any more. Notwithstanding the common Law teaches us,
she must suffer as others have done, and though she did escape some ages, yet
shall she not escape the end of all, and the firing of the world. Plato had
much troubled his brains to lay the foundation of his Commonwealth so fast,
that she might be permanent and everlasting: and notwithstanding after you have
granted him all his dreams for true, and you ask him, whether this fair
Commonwealth can be made immortal with all his precepts? he has freely
acknowledged it could not: he, I say, which maintained the world to be
immortal. But being desirous to grace his works, and flatter his own
conceits, he brings in the Muses, discoursing of the continuance of states,
and proposes certain proportions of numbers, by the observation whereof, they
might be kept up flourishing a long time, and yet avouches plainly, that as
all States have their birth, and beginning, so they must have their end. It is
the common Law of Nature to which we must bow, and follow willingly, least it
should dragge us away with violence: obedience unto it is sweet, violence full
of pain and shame.

In the mean time I understand well enough what you would say, it is as it
seems we hasten our selves our own destruction, and with our hands push
forward the end of this poor Kingdom and do not stay until old age carries
it away, that it may sweetly, and without striving, pass from life to death.
You deceive your self, those creatures never die otherwise, they never have an
easy end: for as those which die of diseases, whose causes lay in the sinews
and brains, are troubled with great conuulsions before they give up the Ghost;
the like have Commonwealths, which commonly come to ruin, because their
Laws, that are as their sinews, are broken and violated. Now if it be as
they usually say, that foreseen blows amaze not so much, we have, as it
seems to me, great occasion to bear more patiently, and with more resolution
the fall of our State, seeing how long it is since it began to shake, and the
great tokens, and apparent marks we have had heretofore of its ruin.

First, it is very old, and so old, that there was never any one seen to last
so long. To wax old is to be accustomed to die. They use to ask commonly of
such as are exceeding old, whether they be yet alive? we ought rather to wonder
at their life, then at their death; when they are dead, they say, He is gone at
last, as if they would say, He has held out longer the^ one would have
thought. Besides his age he has had two hundred years since, great and
irksome diseases. The quarrels of Orleans and Burgundy have brought him to the
brimme of his grave. Being recovered of this great fall, and grown healthy
again, he has lived very loosely under Francis and Henry the second: in this
disordered and lewd life, he has gathered many ill humors, and far worse
conditions. Under the youth of our last Kings, he is returned to his infancy,
and has wholly altered his complexion; for since the fashions of strangers
began to please us, ours have been so depraved and corrupted, that we may say
long ago we are no more Frenchmen. There is no part of this State that has
not been only spoiled, but even made infamous with excess and superfluity:
for as touching our Nobility, which is the chiefest pillar of our Kingdom,
and that has raised it unto the greatness we have seen it, and ever
maintained the same, and unto which is truly due the glory the French name has
among foreign Nations; they have omitted no craft and guile to spoil and
drive it out of heart, and drown in luxury, sensuality, and covetousness that
ancient generofitie they had hereditary from their fathers, and cause them to
lose the love they owed to the safety of their state. As for the church, which
ought to have bin the mother of piety, the pattern of good manners, the bond of
alother orders; they have dishonored and defamed her as much as they can,
making the greatest charges, and prelacies to be the reward of the vilest, yea
fowlest services of the Court. So that impiety and ignorance have in many
places sat them down upon the throne of holiness and truth, and made the order
odious by the lewdnes of such as were preferred thereto. The officers of
Justice, who alone might in some sort have kept the rest in their duty, if
they had bin honest and true, as they ought to have bin, have suffered a
marvelous change; their principal authority has bin withdrawn toward the
soueraign, not to be administered, but perverted by courtiers, at their pleasure
that were in favor. And to crown so many disorders, and heap up mischief on
us over and over, are fallen out the quarrels about Religion, upon which
occasion have been raised parties and factions by whomsoever it has pleased,
which were easily entertained by the facility and lightness of our people,
and by the devices of our neighbors, which sought to shelter themselves under
our ruins. With these sparks has bin kindled the fire that has almost
consumed us; every one has run to it, not to quench it, but to carry away his
share, as out of a general firing.

Must we wonder if an old state dies of such a disease? we ought rather to
admire if it should recover it. Add unto this old Prophesies which long ago
were made touching its destruction, which to our great grief have proved so
true, that they have got glory unto the Art, and credit unto such people as
have ever been held for Cheaters: Which teaches us, that reuolutions of great
States come from above and are delared even before they come to pass. I say
then, when as that which you fear should happen, it were but an ordinary
thing, natural, and foreseen; and therefore we ought to bear it patiently,
as we do the vicissitude of seasons, the alteration of elements, and other
changes we daily see in all parts of the world. And notwithstanding, I do not
say it is a thing must come to pass upon necessity, and despair not yet of
the welfare of my poor France, nor of my poor Paris; yea I persuade my
self, that if her end and ruin cannot be avoided, God will put it off till
some other season: for although the signs of this disease, not only
contagious, but also pestilent and infectious, that has seized on this State,
are deadly for the most part; nevertheless it seems Nature now begins to
help her self, and the noble parts show yet some strength and liveliness to
endure the remedies.

The people which suffered themselves to be carried away with this ruinous
commotion, and by the winds of Fear and Hope; Fear to lose their Religion,
and Hope of some ease and relief: see plainly they have by their mad counsels
drawn on the mischiefs they shunned, and put back the good they expected.
Let us suffer the humors to ripen, and you shall see Nature will work of her
self, and bring forth wholesome effects; moreover the leaders of the people,
begin to lose the hope that moved them to this project: that beam of popular
favor, which had rowzed their spirits, is past like a lightning, and Fortune
has showed she did not favor them so much for their good, as for our
mischief. They see more, and see it evidently, that strangers, with whom they
made account to vnder-proppe their greatness, wish for nothing so earnestly, as
for their ruin, and borrow their arms, only to make use of them, to do
their work, having resolved not to do them any other favor, but what the
Cyclope of Homer promised to Ulysses, which was to eat him up last of all. Do
you think them so unwise to their own good, and so unnatural to their own
country, so ungrateful to the people, who have loved them so well, that
seeing things in this case, they choose not rather to make France beholden to
them, restoring peace, and rest unto her, and keeping still those great and
honorable titles, which they may have; then to make their name and memory
odious for ever, casting themselves under the shameful bondage of an ambitious
Spaniard, and tumble down headlong with them such as have put their life and
safety in trust upon their fidelity? No, I will never believe they intend to
stain their reputation with so base an action, and therefore I hope they will
bend themselves unto the wishes of the people, that inuit them to quietness:
if they do it, what should not we hope for? and when they do it, what should
we despair of? seeing that God has brought forth in our days, and just
upon the nicke of this fatal commotion, a Prince to succeed this crown, only
in the world able to raise up, either by peace or war, the burden of this
decaying State. For peace he has the name of that Great and Royal family of
Saint Jews, which calls back to his obedience all the Subjects of this
Kingdom, which cannot hope to be governed by a happier auspice, then of the
Race of that great King, that has raised up to heaven our French Scepter, and
has lifted himself on high by his piety, to be as the Guardian and
Tutelarie Saint of this State. He has a natural goodness and clemency, that
reaches even to extremity, and would make him to be suspected of negligence,
if his valor and generositie, which appears in all the parts of his life,
did not blot out this suspicion. For though his Fortune, more crossed then any
Princes of his time, has brought him forth amidst civil arms, and amongst
injuries, you cannot mark one only example of Revenge; being so far from
doing it, that he has not so much as sought for it, thinking himself to be
sufficiently revenged, in despising his enemies, and taking away from them the
means to do harm: so that he has made it doubtful, whether it be more
happy for him to overcome his enemies, or for them to be vanquished by him.

Now, if with all this, God that keeps the hearts of Kings in his hand, do
dispose his, to that which is yet necessary for the perfect union of his
Subjects, and to that end conuerteth him to the Catholic Faith, and Religion
of the Kings his predecessors; who can hinder our happiness and repose? Now
we have great reason to hope well of it, as they report of the nature of this
Prince, who is very capable of reason, and easy to be persuaded unto that,
which they make appear to him to be fit to be done. We know what he has
promised about it to all his Nobility, he has bin ever commended to be a
faithful Prince, and who never breaks his word; I assure my self, in the end
we shall have what we ought to desire at his hands in this respect, and by
those means shall beat down the arms of such, who protest to have taken
them only for this occasion. If notwithstanding the obstinacy of those, who
seek their greatness in public ruins, does enforce him to try out by the
edge of the sword, what the edge of reason ought to decide; who could succeed
to this State more sufficient to settle the Kingdom anew again, and cover
under the shadow of his buckler this poor crown, assaulted on all sides? God
has given him a heart full of valor, and invincible courage in adversity;
and least his courage should be slackened with overmuch rest, he has
exercised him from his childe-hood in continual travels and dangers, with such
Fortune, that so many hazardous passages have been to him in stead of a
School of Virtue, and a Harvest of Glory, and seems certainly, seeing the
progress of his Fortune, that she has on purpose raised this war, and
called to it so many several nations, to behold the spectacle of an extreme
valor, and an extreme good fortune. No, no, believe it, you never observed in
the succession of times and course of ages, that States are overthrown, when
God sends such Princes to command them. They have perhaps been shrewdly
shaken and tossed, but afterward, they have settled themselves again by the
virtue of such Commanders; so that I presume, that the motion and change we
feel, is not for the extirpation of the State, but only an incision that is
made with a painful and rough instrument; and in lieu of the branch God has
cut off, he will put on a graft upon the royal stock. And therefore I hope
God will find, when we look least for it, some convenient means to save us
all, and specially this fair and famous City, wherein there is a number of
men, which call upon him with a pure heart.

Nevertheless, if it should fall out otherwise, we must take it patiently:
for such great accidents happening by the eternal providence, it is no more
lawful then possible to oppose our selves against the^, and say further, that
it is neither just, nor profitable to be vexed for them; being most certain,
that whatsoever is ordained by that sovereign Hand, is for our good and his
glory. But since it is supper time, and that this discourse may be better
continued by those that hearken to me, then by my self, I will leave it to
them, seeing our misery is common, that they may afford something to our
common comfort.

There Musaeus ended, and we rose with a more settled mind then we sat down.
This is not all, quoth I, Musaeus: seeing you discharge your self from
prosecuting the discourse you have began, you must choose some one that will
finish it. Whereupon he kissing a withered posie that he held in his hand,
presented it to Orpheus, I give it you, quoth he, against to morrow: I accept,
answered Orpheus, the posie, but not the charge to come upon the stage after
Roscius as the Proverb is. And so we parted with a mutual promise to meet
there again the next day at the same hour.

The end of the first Book.
ORPHEUS: OR THE SECOND BOOK OF CONSTANCY.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND All-praise-worthy, the Lord BARCKLEY.
YOur Lordships very name (were there nothing else that did induce me) might he
argument enough to make me dedicate this, and with it my own self also to
your Lordships service: but when by the world (which seldom gives Virtue her
due) is added to your Lordship such perfections, as made the Heroes in former
times so far surmount the rank of ordinary men; ever knowing Virtue to be
truly Noble: I could not choose but also inuest your Lordship in these titles,
from whence those famous men thought themselves to have reapt no small honor:
and that was in patronizing studious endeavors. Which interest in you if it may
seemerather to be by me usurped, then justly challeaged, or rightly deserved;
blame therein not my presumption, but rather your Lordships virtuous fame, that
imboldened me so far as to present so small a thing unto your view: which if
you vouchsafe to look upon with a gracious eye, I shall think my self bound
for ever to remain

Your Lordships most humble servant, ANDREW COURT.

OR PHEVS, OR THE SECOND BOOK OF CONSTANCY.
THE next Day, presently after dinner, there was an Allarum beaten in the
town, and because we were all four of one quarter, we met together in the
Court of Guard: there we gazed one upon another speaking with our eyes and
faces, and saying to our selves; what pity is this, we must stand armed
against our own good, and drive in a manner our good fortune from us? for what
good man is there, who does not wish, even with the sacking of the town,
rather to get out of this extreme misery, and deliver the kingdom from it,
then to sacrifice our lives thus to the rage and fury of a small number of
seditious, who desire to satisfy their cruelty and covetousness, with our
anguish and poverty? What fatal sluggishnesse is this, that all this people,
or at least, most of those we see armed here, know their evils, and wish for
its remedy, and may have it if they will, and notwithstanding have not the
heart so much as to complain, and maintain those who show them the way how to
save themselves? so far has this poison of sedition severed their wills, and
the fear which the wicked have printed in the hearts of simple people, has
frozen their blood, and stifled their spirits. Now being come near one to
another: Well quoth I, our meeting is put off, as far as I see we are like to
want such a sweet afternoon as we had yesterday. Nevertheless, this shall not
excuse you of that you owe us, rather the forbearance shall increase the debt,
for as you see our evils wax great, so your reasons must be stronger. I fear
much, quoth he this day will scatter us, and deprive us perhaps for ever of so
sweet and delightsome a fellowship. I can assure you that if death had taken me
away yesterday when I came from you, she had found me very content, and had
finished my life to my liking. For I confess that the discourse of Musaeus so
assuaged my grief, and so settled my mind by the weight of his reasons, and by
the sweetness of his words, that I could wish to be sad every day, if I were
sure to be always so well cheered up.

It is a happy disease that is cured with pleasure: oh how earnestly did I
desire he should have continued his speech, yea upon condition I had lost my
supper, nay upon condition that I had not supped all the year. Such discourses
are nothing else but Nectar and Ambrosia: it is meat more necessary this day to
the mind, then bread and wine to the body; it is both nourishment and physic.
I swear to you, when I heard him me thought that the fair Helena of Homer,
with the same hand wherewithal she stole the hearts of the Greeks and
Trojans, powered into my mouth that sweet and gracious Nepenthes, which lulled
asleep the sorrow of the afflicted, and restored the^ their courage. He has,
quoth I, turned over his charge into a good hand: I hope what he has began
well, you will finish it far better. Thereupon it was told us that the noise
was past, and we might retire. Then I took them all three by the cloak: you
must come, said I, where you promised yesterday; it is lawful for armed men to
right themselves: if the Roman law permitted to draw into Judgment those who
refused to go; how much more the right of arms? We will not go only, quoth
Linus, we will run thither. After we were come in, and had put off our
arms, and walked a turn in the garden, to gather our spirits; I pray you
quoth I, let us take our places again, and let us provide for rest, and
quietness, for in my opinion we shall have time enough to stand. And since
that it belongs to you, Signior Orpheus, to continue this discourse, look for
no more entreaties, and use no excuses, for in a word we will not receive them;
after some such summons Orpheus began thus:

It is indeed the greatest, and surest comfort man can receive, and take in
public, and private calamities, to persuade himself, that whatsoever
befalls him is ordained by that eternal power, distributed by that infinite
wisdom, which governs the world with the same goodness and Justice
wherewithal he created it. When this opinion is once rooted in the heart of
man, I do not see what winds can shake his constancy: For as much as we
ought to believe, there comes nothing from that kind, and gracious hand, but
what is intended for our good. Now although this Providence (which we may
define to be the perpetual care God has in the government of all that He
has created) does shine continually in all the parts of the world, and
appears in wonderful effects; nevertheless, most men turn their eyes, and
look awrie upon it, striving to deceive themselves, to the end they may not
be beholden unto that wise mistress, who rules the birth, and conserueth
whatsoever is seen in this Universe. There has bin truly very few, that
durst be so impious as flatly to deny it; but if there has bin any, I will
forget their names, and being so unworthy, I will suppose they never were.
There are a number indeed, whose opinions I have heard, but always rejected,
which acknowledging divine wisdom, and power in the first creation of the
world, have taken the government thereof from it, after it has bin created;
some attributing it unto that order, which they call Nature; some to a fatal
necessity, some others unto Chance, and Fortune, wherein they seem rather to
have changed the name, then the power of divine providence: for in expounding
their opinion, they plainly declare, that in all worldly accidents, they
acknowledge some Entitie, that is great, and divine, the nature whereof is
incomprehensible; and nevertheless, by I know not what careless presumption,
they would have that little which they understand of it, to pass current for
sound doctrine, and a part for the whole, choosing rather to mistake
Providence, then acknowledge their ignorance.

It falls out with them, as it might do with three several persons, which
coming three several ways, should see a far off, a great pyramide of
Marble, such a one as you might imagine that of the kings of Egypt, carved on
three sides with many Characters and hieroglyphicall letters; every one marking
at first that face which is on his side, and coming no nearer judges there is
no more but that, and goes back with an opinion he has seen all; so all of
them report sundry tales of one and the self same thing, each of them
maintaining it to be as he had seen it on his side. But had they approached
nearer, and walked round about it, then every one of them should have seen all
the three faces, and have known that all three make but one body; would have
been well informed of the thing, and would agree all together in it. When
these men are come to contemplate that Sovereign power, which conducteth and
governs this Universe, and that they have considered it in its effects, every
one of them has had enough to behold it a far off, and apprehend as much as
the first sight affoorded him.

He that observed an order and continual course of regular causes, which are
brought forth one of another, has called it Nature, and has believed this
Nature did all. He that had seen many things come to pass, which had been
foreseen and foretold, and nevertheless could not be avoided, has called
the power that produced them Destiny, and fatal necessity, and deemed all to
depend from thence. The other that had seen an infinite number of casualties,
whereof they could give him no reason, and which seemed to happen without
cause, has named the power from whence such events did proceed Fortune, and
has esteemed all things to be managed on this fashion. But if every one of
them had taken the pains to approach nearer unto truth, and report publicly
what he had seen in private, perhaps they might have known truly, what was
the figure of that first and sovereign power, from whence are derived all the
things, and all the accidents of the world, and understand, that in this
Nature, in this Destiny, in this Fortune, gathered all together, shines
through humane ignorance, that wise and excellent divine Providence, known
nevertheless more according to the proportion of our weak understanding, then
according to her incomprehensible greatness and Majesty.

For I doubt not, but in the Creation of this Universe, God has established a
rule and a certain Law, whereby all things must be produced, disposed of, and
maintained, which if any one will call Nature, I will not gainesay, so that he
makes not of it an Essence separated from God: unto the which he should think
he had committed the government of things created to set himself on rest.
Contrariwise, this Nature can be nothing else but the first Power and Virtue,
which from the beginning, without any separation from him, has printed it
felse in the matter, and has given unto it that regular motion by the which
things are maintained in their being, and bring forth their effects besides.
Which Power and Faculty is by him from day to day, and hour to hour, and
moment to moment inspired in the world: which as it preserves it, so it does
create it anew again, and repair it still, and every day makes it up as it
was made in the beginning. In such sort that it seems, God has built it
only as a shop for him to work in perpetually, and keep still in action his
infinite goodness, which cannot endure but it must communicate it self unto
men. True it is, that like a great Architect he has many workefolks under him,
which he does employ about this great government, not so much for any need he
has thereof, as for the ornament of this stately worke-house, the gracing of
its brightness and magnificence, to impart unto his creatures one of his most
high, and sovereign faculties, and cause them to produce, and create in a
manner something as well as he. And therefore through an admirable wisdom, he
has left some part of these low and terrestrial things imperfect in some
kind, to serve unto man as matter and subject to work upon, and has forthwith
given him the art to adapt and apply them. He has given him stones, and has
not given him buildings, but the art to make them; he has given him mines,
and has not given him money, but the art to make it: he has given him corn,
and has not given him bread, but the art to make it: he has given him wool,
and has not given him cloth, but the art to make it.

To be short, it seems that after he had created man unto his likeness, he
has shared with him the honor of the Creation of things, yea even of the
Creation of man himself, his will and pleasure being he should cooperate with
him in the generation of his posterity: and that as he, Sovereign and
chiefest Creator, had made the soul in his image; so man as an associate to
his glory, should make in the generation another body like unto his: And though
God has kept to himself the creation of the soul of man, as of a great
Master piece, which cannot be wrought but with his own hand; yet in that he
has also called man even as to his help, having granted him the institution,
discipline, and polishing of it, that he might brag in a manner to have
affoorded something to his own perfection. But you must neither say nor think,
that the authority he has given unto creatures, does lessen his in any thing:
he does not rely upon their care, neither does he rest upon their vigilancie:
contrariwise, the greater power he has given them, so much the greater need
has he to watch over them; and the more laborers he has at work, so much
more necessary it is he should have, not only the Eye, but also the Hand over
them, to amend what they do amiss, and contrary to the perfect pattern he
has proposed unto them, and to guide and direct them in their works, which
cannot any ways stand nor last without his help and assistance. This will I
then say, that what great faculties soever we observe in second causes, we
ought not to think for all this that the first is idle, and that the others
do any thing but by his direction: and far less believe, that this order
and continuance we see in all things, is the chiefest and universal cause
thereof, seeing it is but the effect; no more then in Music the melody is
not the cause, but the effect of concords, produced by the Musician his skill
and art, who gathers the sounds, and orders them into good consonance.

Now as it is Providence, which by this regularorder that is called Nature,
brings forth and maintains every particular thing, according to the
general Law that is appointed for every one of the same kind; so it is she
which besides this regular order called Nature, gives sometimes unto worldly
things qualities, and intermingleth accidents, which one while are different,
another while contrary to their nature, and then does bring about the meeting
of things amongst them, to make them bring forth the effect she has ordained:
so that knitting and gathering up many different causes, she draws from the
connection and weauing thereof, not the end that is natural, or propounded to
every one of them, but an event prescribed by her self. Insomuch, that as
Nature is seen, especially in the creation, production, and maintenance of
every thing in it self, according to its kind, and condition, and by an
ordinary rule, and ever alike: Destiny contrariwise appears in events which
proceed from the meeting of these things already created; which being ordered
by a rule unknown to men, produce fore-ordaind effects which seem incuitable,
and do not concern, nor acco^modate themselves so much to the nature of every
particular thing as unto that of the Universe.

Certainly it should seem that this Law had not bin needful in the world, if
every thing had kept the first motion God had given unto it at its creation:
for having infused in every one the most perfect form and principle of working
that could be desired; it followed, that if they had continued in that
condition, their own Nature had of her self directed their actions to good
effects one toward another, and consequently to the good of all the world, and
glory of the Creator. But either through the vice and imbecility of the matter,
or through the te^dernes of their form, which could not subsist, without they
should adhere perpetually unto their Creator, they have been disfigured, and
strayed from the way which Nature had traced out unto them.

For example, Angels and men were created as the most perfect and absolute
pieces of the world, and God in the Creation had infused in them a lively and
pure light, to direct their actions to make good use of worldly things: and
consequently to bring forth works to his glory. But as it falls out usually
in great Buildings, that a rich Wainescot, or an artificial winding Staire
wrought with great skill, will soonest decay; because that the more excellent a
piece of work is, so much the weaker it is: so those most perfect creatures
have first of all declined from the right way, perverted and violated the end
of their Creation. Which disorder did not remain only in them, but for the
great power wherewithal they were created, they have caused it to slip into
the things they had abused. And moreover it seems, that by their fault other
things that were created for them, were presently changed, either by a secret
consent, or by a secret judgment to serve for their punishment. Therefore it
has been needful that this All-seeingeye, which pierces through ages as the
Sun through the Air, having from the beginning foreseen this confusion,
should even from that time appoint a remedy, to stay the presumption both of
me^ and Angels, and let them, least they should stretch their ill actions as
far as their ill wills.

The remedy has been this inviolable Law, by the which he has provided for
all events, and has ordained that things should happen as we see them fall
out; not altogether after the ordinary power of causes, but as it pleases God
to make them work, sometimes increasing, sometimes lessening their strength:
and now and then causes them to work against their nature; and brings back
to his will what men think to do at theirs. But some one will say, that this
Law seems to be contrary to the first; God being immutable in his essence,
should be so likewise in his determinations. Ought we to think, that he, who
knows all things from all Eternity, takes new resolutions? The alteration
that is in this, is not in God, but in his works; which being separated from
him, who is unchangeable alone, could not be like unto him, but subject to
decay, and waste away by the defect of the matter whereof they are made. And
the remedy God has brought unto the evil, is not a new advice, though it be
put in use since the corruption of Nature, nevertheless it was resolved upon
even before her creation.

For as a work man that sets a Clock to go four and twenty hours, before
he takes up the weights, and sets it on going, can foresee, that either
rust will stay its course, or that some idle fellow will stir the needle,
touch the wheels, or remove the balance; and even then prouides whatsoever is
necessary to set it in order again, and restore it to the first point: so God,
that has foreseen even before the Creation of the world, what would fall out
in the government and maintenance thereof, did in the same instant appoint
remedies for it: which though they come not to our sight but after a long time
and succession of ages, yet they were prepared from all eternity. For as the
Poet must have his Play in a readiness before any body comes upon the Stage;
and that as soon as the Prologue begins, he that is to play the last Act must
know well his Quew: even so fares it with all the things that are come to
pass, and that shall happen hereafter during so many years in this world;
whereof the last that must finish the age of the world, was known, and
ordained by the Creator, before the first began to be. It is that, as I think,
Diarchas in Philostratus would intimate, when he said God had begot the world
all at once, as the Beasts do their young ones: notwithstanding that he has
brought it forth by little and little as they do, causing one part to come out
first, and the other after. It is not Time that is the father and author of
things, he is but their Steward, and as Tatian showed unto the Greeks, the
Dispencer that brings them upon the Stage.

Yea but some will say, If things were ordained from all eternity; and that
this decree cannot be violated: what will become of the liberty of our Will?
must it not be a Bond-slaue unto this Law, and be such, or such, good or bad,
according as it has appointed? No: for this Destiny that has foreordained
all things, has decreed that our Will shall be free; so that if there be any
necessity in our will, it is this, that it is necessarily free. And as for
that our Wills have been foreseen such as they shall be, they have been
foreseen, because they shall be so: and are not so, because they have been
foreseen. But another will say: What avails our will, seeing that of such
things as we would have to be done, there comes nothing to pass but what God
has ordained, and there is almost nothing in our power? We cannot almost
desire any thing, how easy soever it be, if it were but in a manner to carry
our hand to our mouth, that may not be hindered by an infinite number of
chances: it is that which the Proverb says, There falls out many things
between the Belly and the Lips: Though we can do many things that we will, and
will many things that we can do, yet we cannot say that any event how little
soever it be, depends wholly upon us.

Notwithstanding, out Will remains free, because it is not the action, but
the motion unto action, and serves us nevertheless: because that although it
be not the only cause, yet it co-operates with the rest, which are gathered
and bound by Destiny into the same knot, to bring forth one only effect. When
it aims at the end which it ought, it is backed by Destiny, and favored by
the meeting of other causes, and so doing it is conducted unto its own
purpose, or at least to another end, that Providence judges to be good for
it. When contrariwise it is bent to an ill end, it is by the concurrence of
other causes, and force of Destiny, carried away to a clean contrary end
from its own, but still for one purpose; from the which in spite of it, God
draws his glory, and the good of the Universe. For although Destiny most
commonly changes nothing in the nature of causes; and suffers those that are
voluntary, to work voluntarily; and those that are necessary, necessarily; and
those that are natural, naturally: nevertheless, from the mingling and
gathering of them altogether in the point and form wherein he causes them to
meet, he brings forth such effects as he lists, drawing oftentimes from
the self same causes clean contrary effects, as by the transposition of the
self same letters we compose words altogether different. He is so cunning a
worker, that he can apply any thing to do his pleasure: yea many times when as
we think to withstand his counsels, suffering us to have our will, he carries
us where he pleases: just like unto that great Circle in heaven, that
inuelopeth all the others; though he lets not their natural course from
West to East, nevertheless he draggeth them all every day along with him from
East to West. Whether we run or go, hasten or stay, go right or wrong, we
come still to our lodging with Destiny: we cannot avoid it, we fall upon it in
recoyling from it, we find it when as we fly from it, we run upon it thinking
to over run it. This Destiny comes from too wise a power, and too powerful a
wisdom, to be resisted either by force or craft.

Now such, and how great soever it be, it is but even as Nature, one of the
effects of that wise Providence, which fills and governs all things, and
that is spread over all the parts of the world, being even as its soul. She
rules all the parts of it with wife and infallible counsels, and most certain
reasons; which often we do not apprehend but very late, and sometimes not at
al: either for that her wisdom is so deep and inscrutable, that we cannot
penetrate into it; or that our negligence and stupidity is so great, we do not
vouchsafe to open our eyes to consider it: from whence it coms, that men
attribute unto Fortune the accidents whose causes they comprehend not. And from
thence it is come, that some being grown so brutish, as they observed no causes
of the effects which they saw, they deemed all did happen by chance. So out of
their ignorance and brutalitie, they have made themselves a Goddess, which
they call Fortune, and paint her out blindfold, turning with a wheel worldly
affairs, casting al at random, and throwing her presents, and favors by
chance, as they do new money at the first entrance of Kings into a town,
according as they stand near, so every one takes up, what falls upon him. But
I could wish that those which would make the world to be governed so many ages,
by this rash, and blind fool, would but suffer her to govern their houses for
one year: they should see fine oeconomie. Silly people! they perceive well
enough that a small family cannot subsist a year without great prudence: and
they would have this great Universe, composed of many different parts, to
subsist so many thousand years, under the conduct of Chance. They would not
have given a flock of sheep unto a Shepherd that were ill sighted: and they
would commit unto a blind Temeritie, the government of so many legions, both
of Angels and men. O ungrateful kind of people! why do you set up Altars to
your gods, if your sacrilegious opinions worship nothing but Fortune? Why do
you offer sacrifices after your victories, to give thanks unto her, that saw
you not when she saved you, and sees you not, when you give her thanks? you
think perhaps that this Hobgoblin has better ears then eyes. That which
filled men with this error, and compelled them to snatch the Rule and the
Compass from the hands of Providence, to make all things to rush at random
one against another, and happen by hazard: it has been, in my opinion, for
that they would accommodate the greatness and power of God unto their
infirmity, and that they would acknowledge no higher and deeper Divinity, but
what the first object of things offered unto their senses.

Divine Providence is an abysme of light, unto whose bottom the wit of man
cannot reach, but only in keeping his eyes fixed upon it a long time, and yet
they must gather their sight into some little hole, and guide it as by a
level, for fear this infinite brightness should dazzle it, and put it out.
Nevertheless, for to know simply that she is, and that there is no Fortune;
the least and weakest wit of the world may suffice. For let us observe never so
little the government of the world, and of the parts thereof, we judge
presently, that there is nothing in it rash and aduenturous, except our
ignorance and indiscretion: and yet it is so only to our selves, because that
even our temeritie and inconstancy is certain unto Providence. There is
nothing in the world, how little soever it be, that can escape her: she manageth
and guides all things, she holds them, and keeps them in the very place where
they ought to be, as well for their particular, as for the good of the
Universe. Now amongst all others, there is none in my opinion, over which she
watches so carefully, as over Empires, and Kingdoms: whereof she is the true
mother and protectrix. We see ever their offspring and beginning marked in
heaven and let down into the world by the reuolutio^ of the Stars. We see them
come to pass with so strange commotions among nations, that you would say,
that Earth is in labor, and travel to bring them forth. They increase with
such wonderful accidents, with such memorable ioults, and happy chances, that
Divinity is not seen in any other place to further and advance more evidently
the success of affairs, then in the establishing of new States.

Call to mind, I pray you, the coming of the Jews into Palestine, and
consider how miraculously a company of poor wandering people has subdued so
many Nations, overthrown so many Provinces, destroyed so many Cities, to build
up that great and stately Jerusalem, and set up that rich and magnificent
Temple, wherein alone God would be served and worshipped for a time.

Come afterward unto that observation of Titus Liuius, upon the increase of
the Roman Empire, comparing unto Rome the Nations wherewith she was compassed
about in her minority, which were al more potent then she in richesse, men, and
arms, and in all commodities: he wondereth she was not stifled a hundred
times in her cradle, and that she was suffered to grow into that greatness,
as much envied as admired. But God seemed to lend her his helping hand to
overcome her enemies, and put (as the Statue of Fortune did unto Demetrius)
towns ready taken into her Fist. Surely God had chosen that part of the Earth
as fatal, to be the chiefest place of the world, to gather under this head,
Europe, Asia, Africa, as the members of that Empire. When I consider also the
establishing of this heretofore so brave and flourishing kingdom of France,
whose honor and fame has been spread from East to West; and that I observe
with what number of wonderful chances it has been founded, raised, and
maintained by the space of near twelve hundred years, and how often it has
been threatened, and saved from great and imminent ruins: I think it cannot be
denied, but that it is divine Providence which has kept it, and maintained it
until now. And to speak truly: Wherein can she more delight, then to see a
great number of men assembled together, live religiously under just laws, as
usually do new-setled nations: and observe in their order, Politic government,
and obedience, the same harmony that shines in all the world? Now as this wise
Providence does dispose of the beginning of Cities and Kingdoms, so does she
dispose of their end: she ordains nothing but what is just, how can we then
complain of her? Consider, I pray you, the destruction of all the Monarchies,
and of all great Cities: confer their beginning with their end, and you will
deem their first actions worthy to be favored for their virtue, furthered in
their enterprises by that holy Providence; and afterward you will confess
that their end was just, and that their wickedness had even as it were
enforced divine Iastice to destroy them.

I omit the first Monarchies of the Persians, and Assyrians, which plunged and
drowned themselves at last in delights and pleasures; the Commonwealth of the
Greeks, that have bin choked by ambition and covetousness: and will desire you
only to turn your eyes toward the ruins of that woeful Jerusalem: and
consider whether in the time of her destruction, she was not a burden unto
Earth, and a blemish unto Heaven; as well for that she was the Theater, whereon
impiety did strive against the Son of God, as that she was then a sink full
of Villainy and wickedness. Was not Providence seen to proceed by degrees
unto the punishment of this people, whose wicked actions were long before
prophesied; and after they were done, were threatened, and the punishment
preached that waited for them? And when the time was come, did not all things
dispose themselves unto it? and have not they themselves wrought their own
ruin in such sort, that it was not in the power of their enemy to save them?
All things were more merciful to them then themselves, and of all the
mischiefs they endured, there was none more cruel then such as they did with
their own hands. Wickedness is just in this, she usually punishes her self,
carries her self in spite of all the world to the Gallows, and is often her
own executioner.

Let us pass unto the destruction of the city of Rome, and let us see when it
happened, and in what manner. It was not when their conditions were pure and
godly, that Justice, Faithfulness, and Magnanimity flourished therein,
insomuch as it made Tertullian to say, that their Laws came very near unto
Innocence; but it was after they had dispoyled all the earth of her Riches, and
that together with the Gold and Silver of their Provinces, they had drawn their
vices and corruptions. It was after Truth had been a long time preached unto
them, and that they could not be recalled from an incestuous and profane
idolatry, to the pure service of God. And how came it to pass? Even by
miraculous means, and wherein Providence showed her self continually. There
were seen unknown Nations, moved by secret motions, and hidden inspirations,
having scarcely any intelligence one with another, rise whole from their seat,
to ouerflow one after another this Monarchy. And in the same time the Emperors
and the subjects, which had in times past kept by the only fame of their
virtue all the nations of the world under their obedience, so faint-hearted, so
divided into factions, and so ill advised, that you would have said, that
Providence had sent Mowers unto a ripe Harvest ready to be cut down.

But we need not to look after foreign examples; let us but examine what
estate our France was in when the storm came upon us, and the manner how we
have been beaten. I will no more then you, have so bad a conceit of the
welfare of my country, nor despair so much of the mercy of God, that I
think her utter destruction to be at hand. Nevertheless, what way soever
things fall out, it must needs breed an exceeding great alteration, full of
misery and calamity. Can we deny but that this calamity is justly come upon
us, and that we were grown then into such a disorder, an infamous corruption,
that we were ashamed of our selves, and served as an argument unto Impiety? to
conclude that God who forbore so long to punish us, had no care of humane
affairs. I will not offend your ears with a new rehearsal of the abominable
vices that reigned amongst us, and be alleged by posterity, for a witness
of the shame of my nation, and of the infamy of this age. I will content my
self with that which Musaeus has touched of it in general, and very
sparingly: and with that which you all know in particular, to your great
grief, as I believe. I desire only to enter into consideration with you of
the manner which Providence has used to punish us all one by another: leading
and guiding our actions to an end altogether different from our own intent, and
turning all our counsels against our selves for our punishment. We are here
amongst our faithful friends, I believe that whatsoever we shall speak, shall
not go over the threshold of the door, we may speak freely.

If humane means and policy might serve against the decree of Providence;
questionless it seemed that the late King might easily have avoided the
mischief that overwhelmed him. For first, there was no likelihood to use
against him the pretext of Religion: seeing that he was not only a Catholic,
but even excessive in show of devotion, leading the life rather of a Friar,
then of a King: so that whatsoever the opinion of religion may work in a
State, it was on his favor, and seemed to do much for his conservation.
Amongst his subjects, the Princes of his blood were of his party: as well for
the duty they owed unto his dignity, as for that they were persuaded, that
the new faction which was raised in the State, was to suppress them. The
Nobility was almost all at his command; as well for the same reasons, as for
that they knew full well, that if the people made an insurrection against their
Prince, they would pull down all that were high and lofty. The poor country
people were so wearied with the last wars, that they sought for nothing so
much as rest; those of towns, and cities had almost their wealth in the
Princes hands, either by reason of the Rents or Offices that every one had
bought of him, he having bestowed the places that belonged to war, and the
execution of Justice upon them, that enjoyed them at that time. Among
Churchmen, the Prelates were all made by his hand, and whosoever looked for any
preferment, could not expect it but from him: and for the meaner sort, he
graced and favored them as much as he could. Who would ever have thought, that
a King strengthened with such means, should have feared any thing? specially a
commotion that was the certain overthrow of all such as should put their hands
unto it? And at least, who would ever have mistrusted, he could have received
such an affront as he suffered that fatal day of the Barricadoes, that birth
day of our misery? Me thinks I dream whenever I call it to mind, and
cannot believe what my memory represents unto me: so far this accident
seems to me to go beyond all sense and reason.

The King was in his capital City, attended by a very great number of brave
Princes, Lords and Gentlemen; his Parliament was there, and his officers of
Justice, he held the battle, and had in his power all the strong places of the
town, the Ordenance and Munitions of War, the Mayor and Sheriffs, Coronels
and Captains of the Citrie were all his Officers and obliged Servants, and
much affected to his service: he had moreover near six thousand men of war
strangers, disposed of abroad as he pleased himself. Notwithstanding all
this, a popular commotion raised upon a false report, made him to behold his
people armed against him, and his own person besieged in a manner within his
own house. It was a wonderful thing for a man to consider the humor of the
people in their mutinous fits; for among so many armed men that came forth,
the better sort judged well enough the end of this action, and even the most
part of the rest, were kept back by the respect due unto the Sovereign. So
that if they had bin questioned every one by himself, there had bin few or
none that had not wished this stir had never fallen out, or that it had been
already appeased. Nevertheless, the fury that moved these people, did so
incense their courages, that those which feared at first to come forth into the
street with weapons in their hands, were ready the next day to go and besiege
their soueraign Prince even within his Castle. So that he was enforced for to
save himself, to retire as if he had fled away; and yet these people were so
mad that they would willingly have pursued him. A strange thing! that those
people whom he had so much cherished, and fed with the spoils of the rest of
his subjects, with whom he had made himself familiar and inward: yea far
beyond all decency, which had more interest then any other in the conservation
of the public quiet, should lose in an instant the respect of royal Majesty,
the remembrance of his bounty, the fear of the Law, the reverence of his
Magistrate: to cast themselves headlong by such an insolency and rashness,
into a bottomless pit of woe and misery.

What means all this, but that there was a higher power, which stirred those
spirits, and gave life unto this sedition, that it might be the beginning of
the punishment, that God had prepared for the King and all the kingdom. For I
hold, that even from that day the crown fell from his head, and to our great
mischief and his too, began to be broken. And since that, all things were
turned to our ruin, and all the counsels that could be taken for our
recovery, have been turned into our misery and calamity, and into theirs
that were the authors thereof. But that which is the most admirable in the
continual course of our evils, is that, since God suffered this poor state to
be torn into those two great factions: he used them in such sort, that you
would have said, they had been set and disposed to give one another by turns
each of them a blow, as if they had been wagered by divine Justice to punish
one another. The first blow was that which the king received; great certainly
to see himself driven out of the chiefest city of his kingdom by his own
subjects: to see himself banished in the midst of his estate: to see himself
deprived of his authority and of his commodities. To be revenged he made the
second stroke at Blois, which was a great wound to his enemies, but was no cure
to his. He thought by this deed to have blown up all the contrary party, and
smothered in the blood of those two Princes, the firebrands of civil war; but
it fell out far otherwise, for he kindled them by it, and did let out by this
wound the torrents of blood, which have since overflowed all France. For you
know how that presently after this, almost all the great towns of this
kingdom rebelled, combined themselves and conspired together: you remember how
that soon after he was besieged and almost taken in Tours. Truly all things
were so bent against him, and Fortune seemed to be so favorable to the league,
that those which were on that side thought they had won all, and behaved
themselves very insolently in their Fortune. But the battle of Senlis cooled
them, and plucked down the pride and the hope of those that were gone from
hence, to buy the pillage of that town, which we accounted already even as
taken. Afterward followed the siege of this City, which brought us within
two fingers of our destruction; and truly there was no means to avoid it,
when the Chance began to turn, and that the king was treacherously killed with
that fearful blow that ended his life pitifully, and put all his into a
great confusion. The heart of the League began then to increase, and new hopes
appeared unto their leaders; specially when as the King that now is, was
besieged in Diepe, and that they reported in the market place he should be
brought forthwith prisoner to Paris. That good time lasted not long, for every
one wondered to see him, and feel him in the Suburbs of Paris, and almost
within the city it self. Certainly that amazed us much, but we grew never the
wiser for all that. The League had presently after a mighty Army, and took
Vincennes and Pontoise, they promised themselves no less in Paris then that
the King should be instantly taken: for they think here, that to give a
battle, and win it is all one. They were taught full well, they are two
sundry things; for the League gave the battle, but it was terribly beaten.
This loss was seconded with others, to wit, that of Mante, Corbeil, and
Melune: nevertheless, the Fortune of the vanquisher was not such, but that he
found a thorn at Sens, that stayed his course. Now behold Paris is beleagred,
suffering all the calamities that one may, not only say, but imagine: they
look at this present for the succor of strangers, that will come and spoil
the country, and seize upon France if they can.

What is all that, but an Ebb and Tide of misery, a turn and return of
calamity, that will swallow us up in the end, if God has no more pity of
us, then we have our selves? who is so blind, either of body or
understanding, that sees not, that all is nothing else, but the hand of God,
which whippeth us one after another by turns, with the rods of wars,
without any body be able to exempt himself from it? who judges not plainly,
that he makes use of our malice and wickedness, to punish us one by another.
Kings, Princes and Nobility are chastised by the insurrection of the people,
which shake off the yoke of obedience, seize upon their houses, cause them to
wander up and down with their desolate and ruined families: they are chastised
by the wounds unto the which they are exposed every day, by the effusion of
their blood, wherewithal the field is stained almost all over. The people on
the other side are chastised by the soldiers that rob, spoil, and ransacke
them: towns are taken again and again: and those that may be kept and eaten
up with Garrisons, surcharged with Watching, harried with Toils, afflicted
with Poverty and Famine, and which is worst the Inhabitants Rob, Sack, and
Eat up one another. As for the Churchmen, whose Vices have as much as any
thing else inflamed the wrath of God against us, and kindled this war, which
they maintain still as much as they can: they are the common play-game of all
the rest, and as the subject of the insolences and injuries both of the
Nobility and Commons. I forbear to say, that the service of God is forsaken
every where, that impiety and blasphemies increase, that all manner of
sacrilege and pollution is committed in holy places, and whereas that should
be the most grievous and and sensible sorrow, yet it is that we do less
complain of.

But as for their wealth, and temporal goods, for the which we have been so
tormented; and to say truly, raised for their cause all these Tragedies: how
are they dealt with all? Their Benefices, their Lands and Rents are seized on,
overthrown, and burnt in the country: and their bodies imprisoned, ransommed
and wronged in the Cities, the greater dignity and honor they have, so much
the more are they vexed and tormented. And which is more remarkable, they are
yet worst used by those of the faction they have raised, then by those which
they deem their enemies: No title, no quality, no order, no holiness can
protect them from the insolency of the seditions of towns and cities, or
soldiers of armies, or country Gentlemen.

Now behold how God overthrows the designs of men, and how he can punish them
at his pleasure one by another: what is lacking to give contentment and
satisfaction unto those that have made any question of divine Justice, but
only to see a few lewd villains, that live in peace, and practice their
wickedness upon innocent people, punished in their turn. We are not yet in the
end of this Tragical play, let us have patience but until the last Act, we
shall see what we expect: we shall see, I say, that the same people which they
have stirred against good men, shall purchase their own ruin. For people in
commotion are like unto the Sea, which in a storm and tempest raises to the
top of the water all the filth that is in the bottom, but by little and little
it casts it on shore. We have seen the example of some already, whose
ambition and covetousness has bin requited by the disdainful contempt and
injury of the base multitude. We must hope the rest shall have their turn too,
and shall participate unto the afflictions they have procured to so many honest
me^. That which is most to be feared, is, that God will wrap us altogether in
one, and the selfsame ruin, as we are much threatened; and exterminate all
at once so many evil consciences that are amongst us, being no otherwise able
to amend them. The surest remedy we have left, is, to prostrate our selves
devoutly before his divine Majesty, and by the humility of our prayers, bend
unto Mercy the rigor of his Justice, and obtain of him, that he will be
more merciful unto us, then we are our selves; and that seeing we have found
our own mischief, in what we desired most: he will be pleased by his grace, to
let us find our good, in that which we have most feared. Nevertheless, if
his wrath does continue against us, what Fortune soever falls upon us, we
must bear it patiently, and with great reverence, as proceeding from that
great and just Providence, whose balance is never stirred, but by the weight
of Reason, unto which therefore we must submit our will.

I apprehend well enough what offends you in this discourse, it is the same
thorn which galled me in times past upon this very same way. You cannot
comprehend, why good men in such accidents should suffer together with the
wicked, the innocent with the guilty. If there be Providence, she is just: if
she be just, she ought to reward the good, and punish the wicked, and not wrap
them altogether in the selfsame affliction. But to clear this doubt of
yours, I would ask you, in what part of the earth, have have found this
innocence you bemoane so much, and by what tokens you can know it. Our faults
and sins are committed by our members, and visible parts of our body: but
they are bred inwardly within our soul, that is the womb wherein they are
conceived, which they pollute no less for being not brought forth, then if
they had really come to light: for yet, an ill action which we do, is usually
followed with grief and repentance, that does somewhat purge it. but as for ill
intentions, which we foster in our mind, as burning coals under ashes, we
think because they are not known, they are not ill, and do not abstain from
them. If the seat of sin be in our soul, and that we cannot penetrate into
it; how should we have notice of another man's innocence, seeing we know how
often we have offended God our selves, without others could be able to perceive
it? But that goes beyond our reach; let us suffer him to take notice of it,
that is the only Judge of the heart, and voluptuousness of men: and if we
may presume any thing in this, let us follow that conjecture which is most
reasonable: let us presume for his judgment, and believe that he is just. As
truly it is very hard in so corrupted an age, that his thunder should fall out
on any place where there were not some guilty. Fishes have that property
indeed, that they are bred and nourished in the Sea, without any taste of the
saltness of it: but, that men may be nourished and brought up in the filth and
infection of the earth, and never be defiled with it; if it be not impossible,
it is very difficult and hard. But I grant you may find amongst us a good
number of godly and innocent people, that are most of all afflicted by the
public calamity; I will maintain notwithstanding, that they have no cause to
complain, rather they are bound to give thanks to God for it, as for a great
favor: and reckon those accidents amongst the greatest benefits they receive
from him. This medicine seems bitter unto you, seeing the manner how you
taste it: but take it down, and you will feel it sweet and wholesome, and
will more settle your mind then any remedy you can use: yea I say, that that
which we call miseries and calamities, are gifts of God most precious and
profitable. To persuade you thereto; it might suffice I have showed you that
they happen for a good cause, and proceed from a hand that is perfectly good:
from whence, as from a quick spring, are derived all the veins of our goods.
But if they have a good cause, they have yet a better end, and that will I
prove easily. Nevertheless before I take it in hand, I will answer some
objections, that as I read in your face, you have a mind to allege against
me concerning the means that are used to attain unto this end.

You will say, Are not wars, murders, sackings, rauishings, and other
plagues wherewith we are afflicted bad things of themselves? those that commit
them, have they not an intent to hurt us? do not they desire our harm, do
they not endeavor themselves to undo us? Can you call our miseries, evils,
but you must accuse the vices of those, that are the instruments thereof? and
defile their hands with so many sacriledges and wicked deeds? To clear this
doubt, I desire you to make a distinction between the afflictions that happen
to us. Some proceed but from natural causes, as Famine, Dearth, Earthquakes,
Plagues, Floods, Mortalities, and such like: in others the Will of man does
cooperate; as Tyrannies, Wars, Murders, Sackings. Those questionless, have
no other intent but our good, for they have no other end, then his that
ordains them: these undoubtedly have an ill intent, for they are managed by
the will of the wicked: but it is an evil, which God turns to good. For
though private men which God does use in such actions, are bent to an ill end:
nevertheless, the last end where he causes them to meet together, is our
good and welfare. Even as the Archer shoots the Arrow at a mark which the
Arrow sees not; so does he conduct them to an effect, that they neither
desire, nor understand. Which we ought not to think strange in the actions of
this All-wise Providence, seeing that even in humane affairs, to attain unto
a thing, we use oftentimes that which is intended for another, either
different or contrary.

Behold an Army of Soldiers going furiously to a Battle some are incited to
it by quarrels, others induced by a desire of glory, others moved by spleen
others by hope of booty: but they do all conform themselves in the end, to
the intent of the General, that is the victory. Good and bad are in this
world entertained under Gods pay, and fight for his glory; some are chosen and
instructed, others are as bondmen and slaves. Why (will you say) should he use
the wicked, he that is still All-good, and All-mightie, has he no other means
to work his will? He has not made the wicked such, they are become so of
themselves, but seeing they are so, he must make use of the^ in something. A
great worke-man ought not to have any thing unprofitable in his shop. Art can
draw from the worst things that are, very good and wholesome effects. I will
tell you more, that there are many things very beneficial, which could not
subsist if there were not some ill thing in the^. That famous medicament called
Treacle, an invention truly divine against poison; has for its chiefest
ingredient the viper, that is one of the most venomous of all serpents. Would
you argue with God, for that in the afflictions he sends to us, as a
medicament as needful, as wholesome for the purgation of our souls: he
mingleth a little of that humane viper, to wit, the perverse will of the
wicked, which he does so qualify with many other Juices he adds unto it, and
by the fire of the holy Charity, wherewith he loves us, that there is nothing
can be ill to us but the taste, which we think a little bitter, as are all
medicaments of great strength and virtue. The effect of it questionless is
ever good, and the end is never otherwise then for our good and profit, whether
we be virtuous, whether we be vicious, whether we be innocent, whether we be
guilty.

And as for the first, what can a father do more for his children, that are to
live in a country vexed with war, then to bring them up to labor and toil,
teach them to endure heat and cold, hunger and thirst, train them up to
arms, accustom them to fear nothing, go to the blows as to a wedding.
Those that have bin brought up in this manner, live at liberty, preserve their
goods, purchase honor and glory, and are deemed happy. Contrariwise, those
that have been kept daintily, and have bastardized their souls with delights
and pleasures, are made a booty to others, serve humbly to the stronger, endure
all manner of injuries, live and die without honor. Man coms into the world as
into a pitched field, wherein all sorts of evils beset him round about, even from
his birth to his death he has no other exercise but fighting. Do you wonder
if this good and wise father will often exercise us, to harden us to labor?
No, no, he does not flatter us like a fond mother, that spoyleth her children:
but reproves us like a wise father that uses them severely. He keeps us in
awe continually, and does exercise us not only till we sweat, but even till
we bleed. He knows very well that a soldier does not become a Captain but
by working, suffering, bearing, abiding, enduring day and night, hot and cold,
the rain and the Sun. The Sailor grows to be a Pilote amongst tempests and
storms: and man becomes not a man indeed, that is, constant and courageous,
but in adversity. It is affliction makes him know his strength, it is she
which as the steel from the flint draws from man that spark of divine fire
he has in his heart, and makes his virtue shine and appear.

There is nothing so worthy of man, as to overcome adversity; nor means to
overcome it, but to strive with it; nor means to strive with it, but to meet
it. There is the first benefit affliction brings to a good man, which is not
small. As that has some labor joined with it, so this which follows has
very much comfort. It consists in this, that calamity lets him know what
reckoning God makes of him: for we ought to think he does not set us out to
perils and dangers, but for a good opinion he has of our virtue, and for the
earnest desire he has to see us behave our selves well. A Captain does not
pick out a mean soldier to try a painful and dangerous enterprise: he
chooses the most valiant and courageous; and whom he respects above all the
rest, he sets them foremost. It is an honorable judgment is made of a man,
when a hard and troublesome place is committed to his charge. Even the heathen
themselves made the like judgment of adversities, and deemed them to whom they
happened, to be most beloved of their gods: by such degrees they made Hercules
clime up to heaven. And as for us that are better taught then they, we have our
lesson in writing, that tells us, we shall not be crowned if we do not fight.
Ought not we to think, that when we are invited to the fight, we are invited
to the glory? What voice do you esteem to have been more pleasant unto those,
that presented themselves unto the Olympicke games, then that of the trumpets
which called them into the lists? Do not you believe, that even in the heat
of the fight, the desire they had to please the people, and get an honorable
judgment, took away from them the feeling of the pain, and made their wounds
seem unto them gentle and easy.

Now besides the pleasure we receive in our soul, whilst that we are employed
about brave, and generous actions, and that constancy works in a manner, and
wrastleth with adversity, there remains afterward unto us a greater taste of
it, when as we are delivered, and are come into a safe harbor. For there is
nothing more pleasant in the world, nor that gives a greater contentment to our
souls, then the testimony our conscience bears unto virtue, and the
remembrance that is left to us, how we have undaunted ly withstood ill Fortune.
We are filled then with an unspeakable pleasure, and the splendor of a true
and sound glory seems to shine about us, and give us some preeminence amongst
men. There is another benefit proceeds from our patience, that ought not to
comfort us less then the precedent. It is the benefit which those that come
after us reap by our good example; that is unto them in stead of a Torch, to
lighten them to fair and glorious actions. We owe unto posterity most part of
our best actions, and me think those, that are borne to honor, have not any
more earnest, and more usual wishes, then to sacrifise their lives for the
public good. Insomuch that it seems unto me, that the occasions which afford
us means to each others to do well by our imitation, and make us illustrious
in time to come, by the commendation of our virtue, should please us
exceedingly, because they make us very honorable and profitable unto
posterity. The sweating and bleeding of those that behave themselves
virtuously in their calamities, are so many fountains that are never dried up:
from whence runs a generous desire to resemble them. There is no doubt then,
but good men get profit by the calamities, that happen unto them, and the
public also reap by them many great commodities.

Let us see whether those that fall upon guilty people, that are far greater
in number then the others, be of the same nature. Yes certainly. There is two
sorts of those that have strayed from the way of virtue, and the obedience they
owe unto God (which is the true and only innocence.) Some do but begin to
swerve, the others utterly lost; affliction is to both of them a wholesome and
a needful remedy. It is to the first in stead of a gentle and fatherly
correction; it is as the rod wherewithal God brings that man back again to
his duty that is swarued from it, using toward us the office of a wise
father, that chastises his children so much the more carefully, as he loves
them dearly: he corrects them for small and light faults, least being
neglected, they turn into custom, custom into crime and imputation, and fall
into the hands of the public Magistrate, in regard they have not suffered
domestical reprehension; and endure a cruel and shameful punishment for
their stubbornness, in not receiving a fatherly and charitable correction. I
will tell you more, that as God is infinitely wise, and yet better toward us,
does often prevent our faults; and as he sees our will inclined to do ill,
he does redress and correct us by adversities, as with a bit, that he
puts in our mouths, to stop out ill inclination, and tame our affections by
our afflictions. Let us tell the truth, how many times in our life has
Providence caught us in ill thoughts, and with a knock upon our fingers has
forced us to let go our hold? How many ill members have we had, that have
spoke to our conscience, pulled down our pride, and advertised us that we were
men.

It is reported, that the Great King Francis (truly great, for he was endowed
with great virtues and great vices) being taken prisoner in the battle of
Pauie, was carried into a Monastery; where the first thing that was offered to
his eyes, was an inscription over a gate, containing this verse of a Psalm; It
is well O Lord that thou have humbled me, to let me know the power of thy
Justice. Another will impute this to a Chance: as for me, I think it a
singular work of divine Providence, that carried this Prince to that place,
after such a misfortune, that he might see his Lesson in writing, and
comprehend the warning God gave him, to make use of his calamity; and moderate
that vanity wherewithal he marred, and corrupted many rare virtues that were
in him. The mightier Princes are, so much the more are they watched by that
Sovereign Governor, who knowing the importance of their actions to the ruin,
or conservation of their people, slackneth and bends their heart and their
hand, according as he thinks fit for our good and his glory. There is no body
can express it better then the Scripture. The Kings heart is in the hand of
God. They are his Attorneys and Administratours, that he sends hither with a
full and large commission, which nevertheless he can recall or moderate when
he pleases. Seeing that this discourse has made me to light on this
example; I will add another to it, of a young French Gentleman, who in our
days had caused these words to be engraven in a Dagger; I strike without
respect. It happened that dancing a Curranto, his Dagger slipped out of the
Scabbard, and wounded him so sore in the Thigh, that he was like to die upon
it. Judge you whether this blow did not speak to him, and vpbraid him for his
temeritie. Now if we consider the afflictions that happen to us, either before
we commit any fault, or after our first and lightest faults; we shall find,
that God uses us still very meekely and kindly. They are commonly but gentle
corrections, like unto those of the Persians, that whipped the Clothes in
stead of those that had done the fault. He medleth only with our goods, our
honors, and some such rags: he takes them away from us now and then for a
time, as they do Knives, and Daggers from little children, least they should
hurt themselves with them. Thus much for the first.

Now for the others that are past al hopes of amendment, who^ fatherly
correction could not turn, and against who^ God is constrained to show himself
a just Judge, and appoint a severe punishment; it cannot be said, but their
calamity is very good, and very profitable. If we consider the person of him
that sends it; the unchangeable Law of his eternal Justice requires, that
whatsoever cannot be amended, be taken away, and cut off from this world. If
we consider the general interest of humane society, it is certain it could
not subsist, if the wicked were not chastised, and kept under for fear of
punishment, seeing the love of virtue is not able to restrain them. Those that
govern Towns and Borroughes, think necessary for their conservation, to
punish Cut purses and private Thieves: and you would not have him that rules
all the world, to chastise Kings, Princes, Commonwealths, and whole Cities,
whose power and authority is above the civil Law, and has nothing over it to
punish it, but divine Justice: without whose help the Evil would seize upon
all, and stretch its corruption over all the parts of the world? Now who can
disallow of that which is beneficial to all the world, and complain of it for
his private interest? We call that ours, which is common to us and others too;
and a good that belongs to all the Universe, shall not we call it our Good?
Does it not concern us all, that divine Justice should show examples to teach
men, that there is an All seeing eye that judges and examineth all things,
that we may hear the wicked amiddest their torments cry out, and give warning
to all men, To love Justice, and still remember God.

It is a thing too plain and too easy to persuade men, that it is needful
the wicked should be punished. But perhaps it will be harder to persuade them,
that the deserved calamity, which befalls them for correction, is for their
good and profit. It should be indeed the chiefest desire of man, not to deserve
punishment, but having deserved it, the next is to acquit it with speed. For
that which God sends to men in this world to chastize them, proceeds not
from one that has a mind to hurt them, but only to stop the course of their
wickedness, and by the same means the course of their misery. For so much as
divine Justice, being to appoint the severity of correction, according to the
greatness of offenses; the more she should forbear the wicked, so much the
more should she increase the measure of their torment. Will you see how
punishment is for the good of the wicked? Remember those you have seen at
public execution, which praised the Justice and the Laws that caused them to
die. O how godly are those thunders, that even such as are struck with them
do worship! I say more to you; there were some seen that had committed
heinous offenses, were so troubled in mind, that after they had been hidden a
long time, came of their own accord to accuse and submit themselves unto
punishment: deeming the torment ordained by the laws, far easier then that
of their own conscience. If there be guilty men that receive death
thankefully, ordained by civil laws for their offenses, and find some
comfort in it; how much the more are they bound, to take patiently the
calamity appointed by divine Justice; which being received with an humble and
meek spirit, if they are to live any longer in this world, purifieth their
soul, and sets their conscience at rest? and if they die, delivers them
from eternal torment? If we have a rotten limme, we go to the Surgeon; and if
we cannot go, we send to entreat him to come and cut it off, for fear it
should infect and spoil the rest; and are not we willing that our soul to be
kept from the filth and pollution, wherewithal our body staineth it, should
be stripped by that Sovereign Physician, that comes of himself to us, and
does nothing but for our good?

I perceive by your countenances, that out of the divine fire of this
Discourse, there arises a smoke that makes your eyes to smart. It is in my
opinion a great inequality of proportion, that is seen in punishment of the
wicked, that lesseneth the credit of that which we have already said concerning
Providence. For we see daily, that amongst the wicked, some are punished, and
some are not: some that have committed many grievous offenses endure much
pain, and others to the contrary. That which I have said heretofore might
suffice me to answer this objection, to wit, that the will of God is the
supreme Justice, that sithence he will have it so, it is well. The same reason
wherefore he does all things, requires also, that no body should ask him the
reason of them. His counsels are deep, unsearchable, and bottomless depths;
and when our eyes, that hardly can see that which lies at our feet, cannot
reach: and nevertheless, if we will follow his footsteps, we find it so
just, yea so tolerable, that it will give us a reason even of such things, for
which it is not bound to yield any: and shall find his Justice in most part of
the things that torment us, even like unto himself. And though for a time it
hides it self, it comes forth at last, and appears of the same color in
one place as well as in the other: imitating therein diverse rivers that are
lost under ground in some places, but nevertheless spring up again, and run
when they come near the Sea.

First, in regard you esteem there are some wicked unpunished; you are
deceived: wickedness and punishment are twins that are borne together, and
forsake not one another. The sharp and stinging remorese of conscience, heavy
and mournful sorrows, bitter repentance are his domestical executioners,
that are never wanting. Do not think them Fables, that the parts represented
by the Furies, with firebrands in their hands, coming to terrify the guilty.
It is a lively picture, expressing naturally the passion endured by the wicked,
that are tormented by their own conscience. Esteem not the pains of a
Wheel, or of Fire, or any other humane torture, to approach any ways unto the
cruelty of Furies, vexing the mind of the impious. What torment could be
invented so great, and that could have racked so much that same Catulus, which
presented the Jews, as his own conscience, representing unto him in his
dreams, a great multitude of men by him massacred; whose dreadful and bloody
shapes uncovered their wounds, and challenged him for their children, whom he
murdered; for their goods that he ransacked; and in the end threatened and
foretold him horrible calamities. What torture do you think it was to Herod
to hear night and day the Ghosts of his Wife and Children, that reviled and
vpbrayded him with his cruelty, in regard he had most barbarously and
wickedly slain them? What richesse? what magnificence? what pleasure can
cheer up those that are troubled with such thoughts? Is not all their life a
continual torture? But I grant there be some that escape those torments in
this world; what nation was there ever so barbarous, that made any question but
there was a hell, that waited for them after their death, and where their pain
should be the more horrible and fearful, that it was put off until that
time, to be discharged and acquitted, when as they shall be most sensible of
it? Their torment does not begin in this life, least it should end with life:
it stays for them, till they are come to that place, where they shall keep
it for ever. And this may be observed in the wicked, whereof also they give
tokens enough: for how many do we see, that seemed before, to live in great
tranquillity and quietness of mind, that approaching near their end, began to
despair, and tumble, and toss strangely up and down, foretelling the
miseries that attended them in hell? The wicked then cannot fly from the hands
of divine Justice.

But some say, they are punished too late, and that Providence is too blame to
forbear them so long: for if they were chastised for the first faults, they
would not commit the second afterward? It is a very easy matter to answer
this curious objection. For though Providence had no other occasion to be so
slow in punishing, but to give us an example not to be too hasty, when we are
to Judge of the life of men, she had reason enough. Would to God we might make
good use of the instruction she give us in this place. If she that knows all,
that searches the bottom of our thoughts, proceeds very slowly and by
degrees to judgment; what should we do, we that in the cleerest things can
see nothing, and are commonly deceived in those we esteem most certain? If
we took as much leisure and care to judge of Providence, as Providence does
to judge us, we should be better informed then we are, and should find she
does nothing, but with very great justice and wisdom. But she has yet
another evident occasion of this slownesse: she will make those that are
incorrigible, inexcusable, and take from them all reason to say, they had no
time to amend; and give leisure to the flexible and tractable to remember
themselves, and come back to salvation. There has been many men seen in the
world, whose first offenses if God had strictly punished, he had smothered
great, yea admirable virtues, that have since flourished in them. The first
boiling heat of Youth, does sometimes cast out the scum of it, that makes even
old age more pure and moderate. Which the Greek Poet would signify when he
represented Ulysses, that with a naked sword in his hand forced Circe to give
him his companions again, and restore them to their first shapes: for he
says, she rendered them to him again fairer and purer then ever they were.
Meaning to let us understand, that when Reason, that is signified by the sword,
forces Voluptuousness, that is signified by Circe, to restore men to their
true nature, and put them again into their first perfection; they become
fairer, then if they had never been defiled by pleasures, and are even as
scoured with the gravel and dregs of the world, wherewith they had bemired
themselves.

Would you have another reason yet of the slow execution of Gods judgments
against offenders? It is because his executioners are not always ready. He
does not punish the wicked: he forbeareth sometimes to chastise a tyrant,
until that a cruel and bold murderer be found, that will undertake to kill
him. Sometimes he stays for a more fitting season, to have the more beholders
of his justice, and that the example may be the more observed. Sometimes he
will keep in it solemnities and ceremonies, to make the action more famous: so
it was his will and pleasure Caesar should be slain in the Senate house, whose
authority he had usurped; and before the Statue of Pompeius his son in law,
whose ruin he did so ambitiously pursue. So it was his pleasure since, Brutus
and Cassius should kill themselves with the same daggers wherewith they had
killed Caesar.

But above all the objections that are made against Providence, the hardest and
most difficult in my opinion to answer, is this; that we see often some commit
the fault, and others to bear the blame and punishment: and as the verse of
Solon says; Often for one wicked, God does destroy a town.

The father offends, and the son or the grandchild are wretched for it. He
that shall be as curious to sift and search out the effects of Providence to
defend it, as they do to overthrow it, this difficulty shall be very easy
to resolve: where they argue much iniquity, they shall find much wisdom and
justice. For by these means God gives warning unto all men, to watch and be
careful to hinder evil, and punish it when it is done, for fear that if they
stay till he takes it in hand, he will tax those that permitted it, as well
as those that committed it. How much do you think, the costome that was
observed amongst the Romans, to decimate and tithe every Legion; nay, whole
Armies, did encourage and hearten good soldiers to fight manfully, and die
rather with honor and glory by the hand of the enemy, then shamefully by the
hand of the Executioner? Who praises not the law that is in Turkey, by the
which the inhabitants of a Town or Borrough, are bound to answer for any
robbery that is committed within their liberties? That makes them so careful
and diligent to look to it, that there is no speech of any. At our coming
into the World, and inhabiting of Towns and Countries, we contract a secret
society, and are bound to God one for another. He is the true and first Lord
of the Earth, and of all it contains; he gives it unto us, to enjoy it in
common: but he sets in the condition; that we be good men, upon pain of
his high displeasure if we be otherwise. Why should not we be liable to the
whole of the conditions, whereupon he has bestowed so many blessings on us?
If we have dealt with a Merchant of a company, the whole company is answerable
for it: if a town or a corporation owes us any thing, we distraine private
men's goods.

If we had called this often to mind since the beginning of our Broils, and
that we had considered, we were to bear indifferently the punishment for the
insolences, robberies, and villainies we have seen committed, and that we
have fostered and maintained by our weakness, or to speak freely by our
slacknesse, when as we might easily have smothered them in their beginning, we
had kept our selves, or I am deceived, from so many evils that torment us; and
our country from the ruin and destruction whereof it is threatened. But
whilst that every one has endeavored himself to save his own, the public
has been left and abandoned unto all them that would ransacke it. We are now
engaged under its fall, and learn too late the saying of Solon to be true;
that, There was never either Lock, or Bolt that could hinder pubike evil from
coming into private houses. In vain does he think to save his house that
suffers the State to go to wrack. It is truly well said. He that betrayeth
his country, yields up himself.

Let us answer a word unto those that complain, that the children bear the
punishment of their fathers sins. I do not know why they find it so strange,
seeing that civil laws extend unto the children, the punishment of those that
are attainted of high treason. Do you esteem the Majesty of God less then
that of worldly Kings and Princes? And do not you think God has the same
consideration which Lawmakers have: and desires to restrain the wicked by the
fear of such things as can move them soonest? Some one cannot be stayed back
by his own evil, that is kept in by that which is proposed to his children.
We are far more afflicted with their misery, then with our own. How can
that fatherly charity of the father toward his children be better bestowed
then to bind him more strictly unto the obedience of the service of God; and
conjure him by the good and fortune of his posterity, not to move him to
anger? Now sithence all the afflictions we endure come from the hand of
Providence; they happen to us justly, they happen to us wholsomely, though
oftentimes we do not apprehend the cause, and foresee not the end.
Nevertheless, we are bound to submit our selves gently to it; and honor by
our patience, and humble silence, this holy judgment that has ordained it so.

For as in the sacrifices of Eleusine, as reports Clemens Alex. the Nouices,
and such as were initiated, lay all a long upon the ground till the service was
ended: even so in this great Temple of the world, during the sacrifice, we are
bound to do perpetually unto eternal wisdom, in the contemplation of his
works: we have no countenance that is so comely as humility, the cognizance
of his greatness and our baseness; of his might and power, and of our
infirmity and weakness; of his wisdom and our temerie; of his goodness,
and of our peruersitie. Let us obey then his ordinance, whether our City, for
her old age and frail feebleness be to fall down on the ground, and obey the
common law of created things: whether that by the revolution and vicissitude of
humane affairs, the honor and magnificence she has enjoyed so long, be to
pass into another place, and be transferred elsewhere: whither the end of
all ages does approach, and that the common ruin that is to ouer-whelme all
the parts of the earth does shake us first, and begin by us, what she is to
spread over all: or whether (and this is it which I fear most) that God will
punish all at once, so many treasons, falsehoods, murders, poysonings,
adulteries, incests, blasphemies, and hypocrisies, that our City has hatched
a while since, and specially within this thirty years: Let us submit our
selves to his will; let us follow cheerfully so wise a Captain, and that
loves us so much. If he leads us to blows, he leads us to glory: if it
be only by wounds, they shall be honorable: if by death, it shall be happy,
so that we undergo it in his service. Let us therefore embrace constancy, and
let us stand upright on the steps of our duty, making head still against
adversity. Our overthrow shall be our victory, the blows that shall light
upon us, shall settle and strengthen us the more: we shall weary and astonish
the civil by our confidence, like unto that most renowned Callimachus, in the
battle of Marathon; which being shot through with an infinite number of
Arrows, stood upright, sustained, and vpheld by the same Darts which had
killed him: and even stark dead frighted the Barbarians, that deemed him
immortal, in regard so many blows and hurts could not make him fall.

The afflictions that are borne constantly, and with the counterpoyse of
reason, do maintain us straight and strong: and whereas without them, we
should bow too much to the earth, they set us up again, and lift us up to
heaven. For we have nothing that gives us so sure a testimony of the
immortality of our souls, and a glance more evidently of the hope of eternal
life, then the courage that is infused into us by constancy; which exhorting
us to brave and generous actions, and unto patience, seems forthwith to
propose unto us the reward, and give us a secret feeling of the place, where we
ought to expect it. Which is not in this wretched and mortal world, wherein
all is full of misery and poverty: and wherein (as the Greek Poet says)
Calamity walks continually over men's heads. But above in heaven in a
permanent City, that is the true and natural dwelling place of the soul,
and the harbor, where after the raging waves and storms of this world she is
to enter, and rest eternally, full of joy, pleasure, and contentment, such as
may afford her the infinitely happy object, and the blessed fruition of all
beauties and bounties, drawn out of their first and purest Original.

There ended Orpheus his Discourse: but though he held his peace, we hearkened
to him still, thinking that our silence should inuit him to continue; for we
could not forgo the great desire we had to hear him. He rose first, and we
after, sore against our will.

Then Musaeus said; I expected, when you began to touch this last consolation,
of the hope we ought to have in the life to come, that you would rehearse unto
us some thing, out of the Discourse I have heard you tell in times past, that
that godly ancient man, who held the first place in our Senate of France, in
whose behavior shined French loyalty and sincerity, so dearly beloved and
honored of us all, used unto them that visited him the day before he
deceased. It is almost eight years since he dyed, and the good fortune of
France with him. I took so great pleasure in that little which you told us
then, that I have been desirous to entreat you, to rehearse it unto me all
over. I told you, answered he, as much as as I knew of it, for I came but at
the end of his discourse, but here is Linus, that was all that day long with
him, who can satisfy your desire. It is worthy of another afternoones
discourse, keep it till to morrow.

The end of the second Book.
LINVS: OR THE THIRD BOOK OF CONSTANCY.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND GENEROUS SIR OWN SMITH KNIGHT.
Virtue is an object that every man looks upon and admires: whence it comes,
that those which are endowed with it, are most sought after by all manner of
people, as being the maine pillars of civil life and humane society. Which
only occasion enduced me to tender unto your acceptance this little Pamphlet,
as to one upon whom Nature has prodigally bestowed many rare gifts, which with
a sparing hand she keeps from other men. Wherein if I may be so happy as to
get your approbation, and that you will be pleased to receive it with your
accustomed humanity and courtesy, it will obliege me to continue all my life
time, as I am,

Your humble servant ANDREW COURT.

LINVS, OR THE THIRD BOOK OF CONSTANCY.
I Have heretofore held no better then an old wives Tale that which Homer
writes, of those that sail to wards the Lotophages; that they are so taken
with the Loton, that is a pleasant and delicious fruit, that they care no more
for their country, and lose the desire to return unto it. But amusing upon it
a while ago, I began to conjecture, that the Author by this Fable would, as
by mystery of ancient wisdom, give to understand, that the Philosophers
which dwelt in those parts, entertained men that came thither, with such sweet
and pleasant discourses, that they caused them to forget their proper and
particular affections, by the contemplation of divine and celestial things.
Which I judged by example easy to be performed: for I have found my mind so
allured, and eased by the two last afternoones, that I had no other care nor
desire, but to entertain those honest men, and enjoy at full their sweet
company and delightful consolation. I vow to you, after I had heard them, me
thought my Fortune was altered, and even as Cenens of a Girl was turned to a
boy; so of fainthearted, I was become constant and courageous, and of
miserable, almost happy. So powerful is an eloquent discourse, with good
reasons, to change our opinions, and with our opinions, our passions. I believe
that even as in Music, those that sing have as much, or more pleasure, then
those that hearken unto it: so these wise men received as much contentment by
this conference, as my self: for they came all again the next day, even
before the hour; so that using no ceremonies, we placed our selves as we were
before. Then quoth I to Linus, Orpheus engaged you yesterday to rehearse unto
us now the last words that were uttered by that famous man, (whom we loved so
much during his lise, and bemoaned after his death,) unto his friends before
his decease. I see that you are disposed to do it; but me thinks you should
escape at too easy a rate if you affoorded this company nothing but your
memory alone: We deserve for the friendships sake, wherewithal you are
pleased to honor us, that you bestow upon us something of your own invention.
It is true indeed, that the discourse which Orpheus has promised we should
have from you, is a fair piece, that might be very fitly joined unto that he
told us of Providence. Nevertheless, seeing I am here, like a sick man among
Physicians, bear a little with me in this; and before you take this matter in
hand, I pray you let me have your opinion in some things, that are come into
my mind since I heard Orpheus, and then you shall go on with that as it shall
please you, which we desired of you yesterday.

The discourse that you bring is so fair, that I assure my self, it will be
fit for any place where you will apply it; and perhaps you shall find it will
serve to resolve the question I mean to propound now unto you. I am forced
indeed to confess, that that wise Providence governs all in this world; that
from her ordinance proceed happy and unhappy events of affairs, and that
there falls out nothing but justly, even in the conversion of States, and
ruin of Cities and Kingdoms. But on the other side, it seems unto me from
thence one might infer, that seeing we cannot hinder, or stop any thing that
is ordained above, in vain do we strive against the stream: and when we
see our State tottering, it is in vain we offer to proppe it up, it is in
vain we endeavor our selves to resist them that undermine the foundations of
it, it is in vain that we are troubled to know what side we should follow.
Is it not the surest and wisest to take the party of Destiny, and follow
Providence, when we know her inclination? or howsoever, were it not better for
us to lie still and rest, then to roll this stone over and over again, that
will fall at last do what we can. I have seen certainly the wisest of our age
much troubled about it, seeing the iuster overthrown by the stronger party.
Some have with an undaunted courage, withstood whatsoever seemed iniust unto
them, and even as of purpose wrought their own ruin by it. Some others like
unto Mariners have tacked about, when they could not go straight forward; and
going aside, avoided the dangers which they thought impossible to shun without
shipwreck.

I would desire to know of you, which of the two we ought rather to imitate:
and if we see the striving of Virtue against Violence, to prove unprofitable to
the public, and hurtful to our selves; whether we ought to forsake all
public actions, and withdraw us wholly from business; or whether Virtue ought
even amidst the greatest storms keep on her course, and rather suffer her
self to be overwhelmed then to go back; or whether there be ever a a
middle path between an obstinate austeritie, and a shameful servitude, by the
which an innocent prudence may be saved harmless from these civil broils,
and craged cliffes, wherewith we are on all sides environed. To the end that
doing the Commonwealth service as far as we are able, we may pass away this
mortal life, waiting for the hour wherein we shall be called to the next that
is immortal. As I see, quoth Linus, it will be in this, as it is in Princes
feasts; those that entertain first, do it best cheap; the charge and
magnificence is ever greater for the last. But since you come as unbidden
guests, and that you take me unprovided, I shall give you but course Fare,
which I would not do at all, were it not rather to give you satisfaction and
entertainment, then for any hope I have to handle worthily so troublesome a
subject, being no manner of ways prepared for it. I have been in the like
opinion my self heretofore, as you are now; and it seemed wiser and safer to
me in the beginning to yield unto Violence, and give way, as you say, to
Destiny. Because it is labor lost to be vexed for a thing you despair to
obtain. It is hope only that gives life and heart to our travel. He were
not only a fool but worst then mad, that should hope to prevail against
Providence. But as it falls out commonly, that those objects we see a far
off, appear otherwise then they are when we come near: even so searching
narrowly into this proposition, which at the first sight seemed wise unto me,
yea, godly and religious; I found it unadvised, nay impious, and perceived it
was nothing else but a faintheartednesse, that seeks to withdraw us from the
Sun, and labor to set us in the shadow and at rest. Which she does with
such pretenses, as are easy to be discovered by any one that will boldly draw
the Curtain, and behold the plain and naked truth. Why should we say, we
ought to be idle in the time of public calamity, lest we should oppose our
selves against Providence and Destiny? There is a Providence; it is true:
there is a Destiny; I believe it, and we cannot hinder their effects. But I
pray you, how do we know what Providence is minded to do? How can we guess
at the intent of her counsels? By how much she is certain and unchangeable in
her will; by so much are we uncertain and ignorant what is her will. God has
covered Time to come with a thick cloud, that cannot be pierced with the eyes
of our weak understanding. Wisely indeed, and happily for us. For if man had
been sure of the good fortunes that are to befall him, it would have made him
so unquiet, and he would have carried so high a mind, that he could not have
been kept within the bounds of his obedience. And on the other side, the
certainty of future evils, would have driven him into such a perplexity, and
brought him down so low, that he could not have been cheered up by any
means possible.

Seeing then that future things are so uncertain, and that our hopes and
fears beguile us alike; what assurance can we take to resolve our selves, for
fear of time to come, to forsake our present duty? God is resolved, will we
say, to ruin our Town, we see many signs of it. There is a number of
ambitious and wicked men, that turn vpside down all Order, Laws, and
politic Government; I will let them alone, for I cannot withstand them. O
faint and cowardly speech! who made you so wise in a little time, and
acquainted you with Gods counsels to understand his designs? Has not the
uncertainty of humane things taught us yet, how those we esteem surest, are
soonest overthrown; and those we think ready to fall, are set up again, and
strengthened on a sudden? And though we were sure that we were not able to
save our country, should we forsake it for all that? We do not forsake
those that are stricken with incurable diseases. It is no small smatter, in my
opinion, to make death gentle and easy to them which cannot avoid it, and
give them lenitiue remedies, when others can do no good. There is a kind of
comeliness in dying handsomely, and they esteem it a friendly office to close
up their friends eyes, and lay all the parts of their body in a decent and
orderly posture at their death. Though we were not able to do any more; why
should not we yield this last office unto our country? And far less ought
we to forsake it in great commotions, seditions, and public calamities; the
malady can never be so desperate that we ought to despair of recovery. But
the difficultest thing to be resolved on in such a case, is, whether we be
bound necessarily to take the better and iuster party, and follow it; or keep
our selves quiet in that wherein we are engaged, expecting opportunity of
working the reconciliation of both; and bring those that have strayed from
their duty, to the acknowledgement of their fault. For it is not a question to
be asked; whether we ought to further and help the party we know to be
unjust, but only by those that have neither Virtue nor Conscience. The Law of
Solon seems unto me very prudent and wise; which ordained, that in civil
divisions every one should presently choose his side; because of two factions,
the one being still in the wrong, and that offers injury to the other: the
subject is inexcusable, that forsakes the party of the laws and public
welfare, to become a spectatour of the ruin of his country.

But me thinks that should be understood of the beginning of troubles, which
are easy to be appeased at their first birth. Now if the Prince, or he that
governs under his authority, suffers this venom of sedition to ranckle so
far; that the faction becomes so powerful, that it seizes upon the State or
City we are in; and that going forth we can do no other good, but only
give a testimony of our good will to the Prince, or the public. I think in
such a case, there are many reasons can excuse us for staying behind, though we
should deem the faction unjust that governs. The first is Necessity, when we
are kept in by force; for that has no Law. The second is a common Law of the
affairs of the world, that wishes us to yield unto force when it is once
established. As Virtue commands us to wish for good things: so it gives us
counsel to bear those which happen against our will, and even abate some
thing of the love we owe to the State, and of our duty to the Laws, lest we
should rashly cast away our selves. And who can think this strange, since that
severe and incorruptible Cato judged, it should be so; when as departing from
Siracuse to go to Pompey, he wished the Sicillians to be obedient to Caesar,
who had made himself master of Italy.

The third, when our goods and means are in the place of our abode, and that
going forth, we should fall into an extreme poverty. For though poverty is not
a sufficient excuse to cause us to commit an ill deed: yet the fear of it
ought to excuse us in some kind, if we do not perform whatsoever the rigor
of the Law can expect at our hands. And specially in this season, where good
men can get neither relief nor favor, but from their purse: and wherein
poverty, and those that are molested with that disease, are shunned of all the
world, as if they were infected with the plague. But the most lawful excuse in
such accidents, is for those which find themselves tied and bound near to
their old or sickely parents, or near unto a wife, and a number of children.
Piety, and natural affection releaseth us of many things against the rigor
of the Law.

And though the Law says; That for the quarrel of our Country, we must spare
neither Parents nor Children, and that it seems it would purposely infringe
the right of Nature; yet it must be understood, when as forsaking those that we
are nearly bound unto by Charity; we may do some service, and perform some
thing that counteruaileth so much unto public piety, as it offends the
Domestical.

These considerations have kept, as you see, amongst us many honest men, that
are sore grieved to see this miserable confusion; and which had wished rather
then any thing in the world, to have been out of it, if they had thought the
public would have reaped any commodity thereby. But they deemed it not
fitting for them to forsake their friends, unto whom their presence was very
necessary here, to go and be chargeable to the Prince that called them
away. Now being embarked in this ship, as some of us are, bearing public
offices to their great mischief, we have been forced (to speak truly) to
dissemble, and let pass many pitiful things against the Laws of the State,
and the duty of our places. I have often reasoned with my self, whether we
ought not upon such occasions, to withstand the evil with an undaunted
courage, and even in ieopardie of our lives, plead the cause of Justice. After
I had seen some to undo themselves by it; I found truet he saying of an
Ancient, That Prudence is the beginning of all Virtues, that she ought to go
before as an Usher, and make way for the others: and where she is wanting,
they are no better then blind; and the more they hasten and endeavor
themselves, so much the sooner do they stumble, and hurt not only themselves,
but those also they fall upon. Therefore whatsoever we undertake, after we
have considered, whether the end of it be just and lawful; we must examine
what means we have to bring it to pass, and not undo our selves to no
purpose. And when we have not the means to perform whatsoever the public
welfare does expect at our hands, strive industriously to do the best we can.

Now I believe that in this pitiful case wherein we are fallen, good men
could do no more to acquit themselves of their duty: but divert by gentle and
fair means, many cruel and dangerous practices, and retard and slacken
cunningly the course of Violence, which they could not altogether stop. For as
those which have given over themselves unto Novelties, and prostituted their
wits to serve other men's passions, are inexcusable before God and men: So I do
not account them worthy of praise, who seeing Force and Violence settled, have
been undone by their own seeking. Into what case soever our country falls,
it avails much there should be virtuous men, who so preserve their
reputation as not to be esteemed auerse from the common people, to the end that
occasions being offered to give good counsel, they may perform it: and with a
gracious and dreadlesse hand search and heal the wounds of civil dissentions.
Sometimes a Castle that holds out, affoordeth means to recover a whole
Province: and a wise and discreet Citizen maintaining his credit in his
City, may often occasion the common tranquillity. For as health is restored
to asicke body by the means of his sounnd parts, which keep whole and sound
the principles of life: even so in a town, Peace and Concord is reestablished
by the modest, and impartial carriage of a good Citizen. It is incredible how
many admirable and wholesome effects the very aspects of those which had the
name to be just and honest, and loving the public good, have brought forth
among people; but it must be in a fit occasion. It Time that seasoneth
Councels. There is a certain moment in business, which if you take not
opportunely, all the labors you bestow about them are in vain. Which is
observed specially in them, that have the managing of the spirits of people in
commotion. Marcus Aurelius the Philosopher, says, in a place of the book ill
entitled, His life; that bad opinions are impostumes in the mind of man. If
they be impostumes, we must of necessity let them ripen before we open them:
otherwise the Iron will cause an imflammation, and in stead of curing the
malady by the cutting, we shall inflame it. We must speak the truth; A
multitude of people is a strange beast: it is a hazardous Trade to undertake to
rule them after they have once shaken off the Yoke of the Laws; and taken
upon them the custom of liberty, or rather licentiousness. Those that have
made once trial of it, will esteem nothing the less of their goods, to shun
such an inconsiderate madness. But there be certain things in the world, that
are learned only by experience, which is a dear and dangerous Mistress.
Therefore, he that upon necessity, or through an honest intent of succouring
his country, shall suffer himself to be engaged in an unlawful faction; can
do no more but watch and observe all occasions, to dispose the wills of his
fellow Citizens, to know their own good, and desire it. Which he may easily
do, if he behaueth himself moderately, and shows he seeks for nothing
else but their profit, making their minds capable of reason by fair words; and
bringing them back by discourse, to that which is right and just. Wherein he
must immitate wine, which in the beginning by a dainty and delicious taste,
allureth men to drink it; then being mingled with their blood, heateth by
little and little all their body, and so it intoxicateth and overcomes them.
For in a word, you must believe, that all great affairs are never brought to a
good end, otherwise then by gentleness and patience. Whereof Nature gives us
a fair instruction, producing all things, how great and excellent soever they
be, by an insensible motion. And this must he practice specially toward
those, that are in greater credit and authority; because they are as public
fountains, from whence are drawn the counsels that lose or save States; the
good opinion they conceive of it, is soon spread over all the others. It
avails much also, when it is used toward those that speak ordinarily to the
people, because they are the Lymbecke pipes through which are distilled the
affections, wherewithal the vulgar are possessed, which induce them afterward
to good, or bad actions.

But two things have hindered good men from coming near, and having access
unto them. The first, that being new and raw men, and experienced in affairs,
they were led and carried away by the opinions of those that had prevented
them: and fed commonly upon vain hopes, whereon they built Castles in the
Air. The other, that is fallen out with the^, as they say ordinarily; that
those that err by art, err most dangerously; for they err most obstinately,
and defend themselves with Science against Reason. They endeavored to bring
politic government, which consists in a particular prudence, under
general rules, and make an universal Science of it. And so applying the
rules, where they should have applied their exceptions, they perverted the
judgment of all things. It was good sport to hear them talk, they did just
like unto bad Mathematicians, who supposing a right angle, or some Geometrical
figure, to be otherwise then in truth it is, make thereupon seeming
demonstrations of things that are not, and cannot be at all. For after you
have once granted in arguing any thing that is false, they infer from it
strange absurdities. The form of arguing of this Time has been thus: Such a
thing avails for the conservation of Religion; therefore it must be done.
Now the first part of the argument which was subject to be denied and proved,
and most commonly was not only doubtful, but apparently false, was ever held
for most certain; nay, sometimes made an Article of faith. The propositions
that were moved, were of such a kind, as ought to have been examined with
great and mature judgment, by the example of the effects brought forth by
like affairs, and wherein they should have consired the times, moments,
dispositions of men, and a thousand other circumstances.

Nevertheless, those that had neither the experience of things past, nor the
knowledge of the present, have taken upon them the authority to judge of them.
Unto all the inconveniences that were set forth unto them, unto all the ill
successes that were foretold them should happen of their wrath and headie
counsels; they had no other answer, but that God would provide for it. As if
God had been set above only to second their passions, and frame the rest of
the World to their designs; and not they placed here to observe the will of
God by the disposition of things, and issue of affairs, to apply themselves
thereto, and attain unto their end; or come as near as they could by
effectual and ordinary means. As soon as they perceived a way somewhat long
and tedious, they made themselves wings of wax, and flew in the Air, to reach
unto the place where Fear and Desire drew them. And it accordingly happened,
that their wings melted in the Sun, and they are fallen; and falling, have
pulled after them their fellow-Cittizens into a Sea of woe and misery.

I would not indeed tax the intent of all, in regard I have known some
amongst them, that were carried away with the zeal of their Religion. But I
doubt, whether before God, their meaning shall serve them for a lawful excuse,
to have undertaken so important a charge, whereof they were incapable. For if
civil Laws condemn one that takes upon him a Trade he understands not, and
make him answer for all the hurt is done by his unskillfulness; shall not those
who even as by force, have undertaken the Government, and by their fault cast
us into so many dangers, be answerable for so many Deaths, Burnings,
Pillages, Rauishments, so many Sacriledges, so many Blasphemies that proceeded
from their bad and giddy counsels. I beseech God to forgive them for it: but
they are the cause of many evils and mischiefs, and give us just occasion to
speak of our State, as an Ancient did of his; The Commonwealth was lost rather
by the remedies that were applied unto her, then by her Malady. But what? You
will say; Did good men hold their peace then? why did they not stoutly declare
their opinion for the good of the Commonwealth? Why did not they withstand all
those idle tricks? Alas there are none troubled in such things, but those that
are engaged in them. Oftentimes seeing this miserable government, and the
perplexity good men were in; I called to mind a History, that happened in
our days in this City.

It fell out in an honest house, that an Ape which was kept for sport, went and
took a little child out of the Cradle, and carried it to the top of the house:
as soon as it was spyed, the father and mother ran all amazed, weeping, and
not knowing what to do; for if they had cried out, and ran after the Ape, it
would have let the child fall down, which had certainly broke his neck. They
stood still then without ever a word, looking pitifully all in tears, and
quaking for fear what should be the end of it. It happened, and it was a
great gift of God, that the Ape came down again softly, and brought the child
to the same place where it had taken it.

We have been, and are still frighted in the like manner, and have seen, and
see yet our Religion, and our poor State in the hands of strange men, and
wonderfully rash and heedlesse, which play with them, and hold them up hanging
in the Air at their fingers end, ready to hurl them down upon the first
occasion of amazement. Would to God at least, but I dare not hope for it, they
would do with us, as the Ape did with the child, and set us in the same place
again where they took us first up. I think certainly good men may very well
be excused, if seeing such dear gages in their hands, and the down right
pitch where they had carried them, they looked upon them a while, and said
nothing.

The first fault was committed by such as suffered them to seize and take hold
on the State. The second which is imputed to us, was but the necessary
consequence of the other, as much to be excused, as the first is to be blamed.
Not that I would thereby defend those, which in the strength of the evil, even
through overmuch fear, did ever lean on that side where they saw Force and
Violence prevail; for they are partly cause, that our Evils are grown
incurable; and may, with good reason, be compared to reeling Burdens in a
Ship, which rolling still on that side the Ship leans to, when a Storm
comes, cause her to be ouer-turned. There is a mean between too much, and
too little; there is difference between bending, and breaking. As you may do
amiss through obstinacy, and troublesome severity; so you may dangerously
offend by overmuch slacknesse, and conniuence, and by a kind of fetching a
Wind-lesse about, whereby you forsake altogether Justice, under color of
following Prudence. And to speak freely to you, I have seen very many, that
cast themselves away out of that Window; and going about still, found
themselves in the end as far from the duty of a good Citizen, as those that
ran all at once into the mischief; and are fallen as low, step by step,
as the others that leaped with a full carriere into confusion. It is very
dangerous for them* which have not the strength and skill to stay themselves
when they list, to venture down a steep Hill: it is needful, that those
which forsake the Highway, betaking themselves to by-Lanes, should know the
Country well, otherwise they may be bewildered very easily.

Nevertheless, because this Prudence, that yields gently unto that which
she cannot overcome, may serve in many such chances, as those that are
befallen us, when she is used with judgment, and moderation, I will tell you
what bounds I would set her. First, never to dissemble in the beginning of
Commotions, nor consent to any thing unjust, or against the Laws, how little
soever it might be. Contrariwise, I would withstand, even by maine force, as
long as it were possible, as long as the chance is common, and that there is
hope, and likelihood, that by venturing, Reason may have the upper hand. It is
a great error wherewith many men are besotted, to think, that one must
venture nothing in a State. Often, for not hazarding while we are strong, we
are brought to that push, we must hazard when we are weak; and make that
afterward very doubtful, which was but a little hazardous in the beginning.
Fortune (if we may speak so) will not have us think, we can settle all
things by Prudence; there are many things where she will have a share, and
have the thanks of the issue to be due unto her. But the chiefest thing, is to
have the right on your side: Which being done, with all the considerations and
advantages that may be taken, put it to a trial, and commit all unto the
Sovereign Power of God, which gives such issue to affairs as he pleases. If
things are so far gone, and stand upon so bad terms, that Violence
overthrows the Laws, and Force carries it away from Justice; I would never
for all that, consent to an unjust thing, except it were to avoid a far
worse, and more unjust, that should otherwise happen thereby.

Now the Rule that I would wish to be kept in this case, is, That in this
comparison of Evils, and fear of worse, we should never reckon our own
particular interest, to compare it with the public: For he which for fear of
the private Evil wherewith he is threatened, makes himself Author, or
Instrument of the public calamity, has nothing that can excuse him. But we
must examine with care, and prudence, whether this greater Evil we fear
should befall the public, cannot be avoided otherwise. If it cannot, in that
case we must compound with Violence, that is, do the same which they do at
Sea in a storm, cast away part of the Wares, to save the rest. It is very
seldom, that those which govern disturbed States, are troubled to choose of
two goods the best; but often to pick out of two Evils the least, Good is not
judged to be so, but in comparison of the worse. Therefore an extreme severity
were not fit for such occasions, and would rather kindle then smother the fury
of unruly people. We may then (perhaps) imitate the Sun, which indeed goes
always from East to West; but winding about, sometimes toward the North,
sometimes toward the South, lest if he kept still under the same line, he
should dry up and burn, what he must but comfort and gently warm. The good
subject ought indeed to have for his end the public welfare, and the Justice
whereon it depends: but when the ordinary way cannot bring them to it, he must
betake himself to the easiest and most commodious. He should undertake the
conservation of his country in vain, if he were to cast it away by the
remedies, wherewith he means to save it: for affairs and counsels are
measured specially by the end. There is, in my opinion, as much as a good
subject may do in public.

In private, the season affoordeth him many fair occasions of doing well. He
must first comfort his kinnsfolkes, his friends, his neighbors, and thereafter
as the degrees of affection bind him most to every one; assist and encourage
them, advise them in their business, keep them from being wronged by other
men, succor them in their necessities accorto his means. Let him rise early,
and go to bed as late as he will, the day will never be long enough to fulfill
all the offices, unto the which other men's misery shall call him. Let him lay
his hand in any place where he pleases, he shall find a wound to dress;
this pitiful and miserable time leaves nothing whole and sound. It is his
sisters widdowshood will call him one way, his brothers loss of children
another; the robbery done to his friend shall put him on this side, the
imprisonment of his kinsman, or the danger of his neighbor on the other: he
shall sooner find a place void of air here then of calamity. But he shall
have employment enough for his Virtue within his own house, wherein he may
perform the duty of a good Citizen. For who is he so happy, that has not
been touched during this time with a thousand sorts of afflictions? who has
not felt the venomous teeth of detraction? or whom have not the squinting eyes
of envy looked upon? or that that the public robbery has not hit; and that
howsoever has not been bereaved of his goods by the desolation of the
country, and sent way naked, as a man escaped from a shipwreck? It is here
where one must show himself a man, and make appear, that Virtue does not
consist in words, but in brave and generous resolutions. It is needful first
for the good Citizen to bear patiently his afflictions, judging well and
religiously of divine Providence, without the which, as you heard, nothing
happens in this world, acknowledging his misfortune to be his just share and
portion of humane society: unto whose common evil he ought to participate, as
he has done, and should also have his share of the good if it happened.

Secondly, I desire that this patience should not be settled only in his heart,
but even it should shine on his forehead; as well to bear an honorable
testimony unto Virtue, and show what she can do against misfortune; as to be
in stead of a fair and clear mirror, on which his fellow Citizens compose
and dress their actions, as by an excellent perfect pattern. It is at all
times a thing worthy of praise, to serve his for an example of doing well: but
it is a thing very beneficial and profitable in a time full of trouble and
calamity, to be an example unto them of patience. As the first happiness is
to avoid evil; so the second is to bear it constantly. But I will not
undertake here to set forth the reasons which move us to this constancy, that
persuade us, yea that enforce us to it, if we will continue to be men. That
which Musaeus and Orpheus have spoke of it before me, is more then sufficient.
Nevertheless, if all reasons were to be weighed, I should think that which
remained behind, and which Orpheus did but point at should carry it away before
all the others. For those which are once fully persuaded, that death is but a
passage to a better life, should never fear it. Now if death, beyond which
reach neither the Empire of Fortune, nor the threats of the Laws, frighteth
them not; what shall the injuries and threats of men do, that are but the
hands of Fortune, and the instruments of the Laws? And contrariwise, those
which believe it not, what precepts may one give them? or what reasons allege
that may comfort them in their calamities? for though you show them that
afflictions befall us by a common right, by the Law of Nature, and not by the
injury of that supposed Fortune; and that nothing happens but by the
ordinance of divine Providence; that heals not the wound they receive in
their hearts, to see that innocence is a subject of misery and torment. If you
make them see nothing, but that space that is enclosed between their birth and
their death, as within two bounds; I do not see why they should forsake the
pleasures of the world, to disturb their life with that harsh and bitter
Virtue. I see no reason why man should not be offended with Nature, for making
him the most woeful and wretched creature of all those the Sun beholds; and
laugh Virtue to scorn, that sets forth so many toils and labors without
any reward.

We have (says Plato) two great Demons, which put us forward and backward in
our actions; Reward and Punishment. Now I do not see how we can find them in
this world, wherein for the most part, the good are afflicted, and the wicked
are comforted. We must then set our hopes further, and cause them to pass
beyond the bounds of this short and wretched life; and know that death is the
first of all our true goods, and the beginning of our happiness and felicity.
Man is not only mortal as one says, to the end there might be an end for his
misery, and that the good may be praised without envy, and the wicked blamed
without fear; that riches may be despised, as unprofitable after it: but
specially to this end, that the good may be eternally happy, and the wicked
unhappy. That is the consolation which does allay our labors, and feeds our
patience with the hope, or rather assurance of a life eternal, and without
bound, that waits for us at our departure from hence. Whereupon would to God
we could meditate every day, every hour, and every moment: we should find
in this meditation a sufficient comfort to our adversity, and a comely
moderation in our prosperities. But alas! We keep back our thoughts from it
as much as we can; and which is worst, many believe it not at all, and could
wish willingly to be no more after death, lest they should be as they deserve.
They do what they can, to cause their soul to die with their body, and go
and borrow reasons of ancient Philosophers, to deny and overthrow the only
scope, the only reward, and the last end of Philosophy. As for me, I think
they are punished enough with their malicious opinion; that takes out of their
hands, the chiefest hope that asswageth and seasoneth this tart and bitter
life; and could willingly say, they should even suffer them to be so miserable,
since they are willing to be so.

But it seems that you have laid a charge upon me, to vpbraid them with their
error, and condemn them by their own reasons. For you could not prescribe
unto me upon any other occasion to finish this discourse, with the recital of
the last words of that good ancient man, but only thereby to convict them of
their blindness by the light of so rare a wisdom. As for you, I know you
desire neither proof nor explanation of this point; you, I say, that believe
it not only, affirm, and publish it; but even make it the Preface and
conclusion of all your speeches, and of all your actions. So that the discourse
of it would be but unprofitable, and troublesome to you, without you be
accustomed to use it, as the Egyptians did their Sceletos; and that you cannot
rise from the table without you hear some talk of the immortality of the
soul, no more then they of the death of the body. Of perhaps as the memory of
this man is very dear unto you, you desire to renew it with the remembrance of
so fair an end. I will rehearse then, as near as I can, what he told us upon
this subject, the day before God took him from hence, as from under the ruin
of this State.

This goodly ancient man had spent all his life in the Palace, being then
threescore and fifteen years old. He had seen many co^motions in this
kingdom that had disturbed the quiet of it: but he had seen none yet that
threatened the ruin and dissipation of the State. The king having sent for him
from his house of Celi, upon weighty and and important affairs, and which
concerned the broils that have so much vexed us since: and he having by the
consideration of this business foreseen the miseries that were like to come
upon us, conceived great melancholy thereby; insomuch that this sorrow
ouercomming his health, weakened already by age, he fell sick upon it. During
the time of his sickness, he was visited by the most famous men of the Town;
and because I was his neighbor, and that I loved and honored him much, I went
thither often. The day before he died, a great number of Learned men being
about him, and finding himself more at quiet then he was wont to be, many
discourses and questions were moved, specially about the condition of good
men, that were called to great Places; which is almost ever wretched, their
Virtue being rewarded with Rage and Envy, for the sweetest Recompenses; and
Injuries and Wrongs for the most usual. Some one chanced to say, That yet the
Religion we were brought up in, gave us much advantage upon the Ancients,
proposing to us the remuneration of our Labors in the life to come, and
letting us know, that the best part of us out-liueth our Body; nay, that even
our Body does rot, and putrify, to spring out and be renewed one day in a
happier life, wherein Virtue shall receive the Crown she has deserved.
Whether the others, which had no knowledge but by the gloomie light of Nature,
could not reach, nor stretch their hopes any further then Death; nor
consequently, have any other comfort but that of this World, which certainly
is very small. This good Lord raising his head from the Pillow, and leaning on
his Elbow: I did (quoth he) entertain my self some part of the Night with
this Subject, and after long musing upon it, I concluded, That the strongest
and most certain comfort we can take, is the assurance of a second, and more
happy Life. And though our Faith gives it us, and that the Spirit of God has
specially revealed it unto us; yet I do not believe, the ancient Philosophers
have been ignorant of it, and that so much Virtue as they had, did want this
consolation; unless they have rejected it, when as Nature with her own hand
has offered it them. And I think, if I could rehearse unto you all that ran
in my mind this Night about it, you would confess it to be so. Then framing
his countenance, and speech, according as he was wont to do, when he
intended to continue a Discourse, we prepared our selves also with a great
silence to hear him, and he proceeded much after this manner.

Amongst all the things of the World, in the knowledge of whom we may err,
there is none whose ignorance is more pernicious, and hurtful, then that of
the estate of our Souls, after this frail and mortal life; for thence is
derived a perplexed anxietie, and miserable unquietness: which is the cause,
that men finding nothing happy in this world, and looking for no certainty
after it, think they are sent hither as to a fatal Torment, wherein they must
live, and die in grief and calamity. They hate Life, and fear Death; and
least they should fall into what they fear, they take what they despise. As
Ulysses did in Homer, who to save himself from drowning, embraced a wild
Fig Tree; not for any love he bore unto it, but for fear, that forsaking
it, he should fall into Charybdis, which he saw under him. Contrariwise,
those which are fully persuaded, that the Soul is here but in Pilgrimage, on
the way to a more happy place, trifle not away the time, in complaining of
Thorns and Brambles, that scratch them as they go by; nor in gathering and
making Nose-gayes with the Flowers they find: but being carried away with a
lively ardour, to find such a resting place, they rush through, and neglect
whatsoever they meet; so much excepted, as is needful for their Voyage.

Now I will never believe, that this ordinary power of God, which is commonly
called Nature, which in all other things has been so propitious to men, has
denied them at any time the knowledge of that which was most necessary for
their good, and to get the perfection of their being. Rather I will think,
that those which denied this immortality, be of that number, which the Word
of God, pronounced by Saint Paul, declares inexcusable, in regard they had the
degrees of things visible, sufficient, and able to reach to the invisible, if
they had not employed them rather to descend, then to ascend. Ambitious people
to their own ruin! which have taken away force from the discourse, which
might have made them happy, to give it unto that which will make them unhappy.
It seems unto me it were enough to confound them, to bring forth against them
the common opinion of all the Nations of the World; which, what Age soever they
lived in, what part of the Earth soever they did inhabit, what Manners and
Customs soever they observed, have laid this Belief for a foundation of all
their Actions, Civil Governments, and Societies, That their Soul suruiued
their Bodies, and was not subject to death. Otherwise, why should they have
Deified the most famous men amongst them, and ordained so many honorable
Ceremonies to their Memories? The Indians and Draides were esteemed the wisest
of all the ancient Heathens, which more deeply searched into the Bosom of
Nature, and purchased the highest Secrets of Wisdom. They had so certain a
knowledge of this Immortality, that they ran headlong unto this corporal
Death, that is the entrance thereof, and did chearefully embrace all honorable
occasions that could bring them to it.

This Opinion has wrought diverse effects in diverse Nations; but every one
has had it. And if any may be excepted, which believed the contrary; when as
they came to frequent and resort unto others, they held again the same
Opinion. Which shows plainly, that this Belief is bred with man, and
therefore it is natural, right, and true. For the Universal Nature, that is
not corrupted by our particular Vice, does not put in our mind any other, but
sound and pure Opinions. As she guides our Appetite, and that of other
Creatures, only to such Meats as are fit to nourish them; so she does not
incline our Understanding to any thing else, but to comprehend the Truth, and
to consent and yield unto it, as to his true Object, and Food; which being
represented to it, accommodates it self presently, even as an Image is fitted
to the Mould it was first cast upon. But for as much as those men despise for
the most part Popular Judgments, and think Truth dwells not amongst the
Vulgar, and believe rather that Nature has buried it very deep in the ground,
where it must be found with the Divine Rod of Philosophy, and draw it out with
the labor of a great and painful Meditation; let us put back whole Nations,
and bring forth only such as have got the glory in all Ages to be the wisest
and most learned: Pythagoras, Solon, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and such a
number of others, that to name them all, one had need to have as much time, as
it is since they lived; have not only left us a testimony of their Belief in
the memory of men, but even delivered it in writing. Yea, they have set this
Maxim of the Immortality of the Soul, as the Center of Philosophy, where
met and ended all other Rules, and whatsoever else could be introduced honest
and wholesome for the conservation of Civil Life; and specially for that part
they have so much labored about, which they call the Tranquillity of the
Soul.

If there were any doubt in that matter, yet the testimony of such men, so
well agreeing in it, should have cleared it, and ought to reduce unto this
Opinion those that esteem them so much; which ought to suffer themselves to
be overcome by the authority of those great Naturallists, seeing that even
doing so, they better their condition. But industrious to their own Evil, to
make void the authority of those great men, they say, they regard nothing but
Reason, which they will separate from the persons, to the end they may weigh
them all pure, and that Truth be not in this Question balanced, or suppressed
by the weight of the Name or Fame of any one. Therefore they would bind this
Discourse to Schoole-Rules, and desire we should prove by demonstration, what
we would have them to believe. They would willingly beeled, even by the
Senses, unto the knowledge of that which is propunded them; or, at least,
gather our Conclusions, for that which we will persuade them, out of the
Maxims that are collected from the Senses: Too unjust and partial in that,
and little considering the nature of the matter that is handled. There must be
discoursing, and discussing, to know the things, whose forms are drowned in
the matter. We must use the Senses then, and by the means of what we touch,
and see, ascend as by degrees, unto the intelligence of that which is further
from us. But for one to think to understand the nature of our Soul in this
fashion; it is as much, as not to be willing to know it: for being simple, as
she is, she must come in all naked into our Understanding, being to fill all
the place, whatsoever she should bring along with her, should hinder her: Even
the feeling of things sensible, whose sense is very sharp, is done so
suddenly, that we cannot tell how it is made.

Likewise, of things intelligible, those that are altogether pure, seize upon
our Understanding so speedily, that you can say only they are, but you are not
able to tell how: For they do not seek for borrowed Testimonies, to make
themselves known; they open, and manifest themselves better, then any thing
else that would commend them.

Therefore, the true way how to know the nature of our Soul, is, to raise her
up above the Body, and draw her back unto her self; to the end, that by her
own reflection, she may know her self by her self. Nevertheless, if there
be any so opinionate, that they will not see her, but drowned in the Flesh;
and judge of her Greatness by the shadow of her effects, as they do of the
Moon by the shadow of the Earth: yet through this dull and heavy Mass,
wherewithal she is wrapped, she casts sparks, nay flames, so lively of
her Immortality, that those which behold her, must needs confess, either
they see her, or else they are blind.

They perceive, that this Beam of Divine Nature, wrapped in this little Cloud
of Flesh, casts its Light from one end of the World to the other. After it
has measured that which is limited, it reaches to the Infinite, comprehends
the forms of all things, and transformeth it self into them; receives
Contraries, Fire and Water, Heat and Cold, without alteration or corruption.
How then can they suppose any matter in her, that has such Actions, seeing
that all matters is limited and bounded by certain Dimensions; receives
nothing bigger then it self, is capable but of one only substantial form,
and cannot contain at one time contrary things? If it be not material, how
can it be mortal? Seeing that Death, by their own saying, is nothing else
but the separation of the matter from the form. And if, like unto others, they
define it the end of motion; where shall they find it in the Soul? For we
see, that Will, which is her principal part, being free, as they acknowledge
it themselves, and having consequently in it self the Principle of its Motion,
who can take it away from her? Seeing that nothing gives an end unto it self
voluntarily, that which is moved after its own will, shall ever move; and
consequently, shall have no end of Lasting, but only of Desire, and Intention,
which is limited only by Infinity.

And as for Understanding, which is the other chiefest part, or rather Virtue
of the Soul; Do not we see it go out of it self, embrace all things, and
then come into it self again; and by this continual reflection, as by a
Circular Motion, testify that it has no end? Which it does make appear yet
as plainly, by the nature of the Objects it chooses its ordinary exercise, and
in a manner for its food and nourishment. For it feeds and entertaineth its
self only with the knowledge of universal things, of Ideaes and species,
which Philosophers deem unchangeable and immortal.

The senses which are corporal instruments mingled amongst corruptible matter,
stand indeed upon particular things, and consider every object according to the
weak and momentarie qualities of it: but understanding which contemplateth the
true Nature and Essence of things, comprehends that which is general and
equally diffused in all the particulars and indiuiduals, as a firm, permanent,
and immutable Being. Now it is needful that all things which are borne to
opeperate and effect, be proportioned unto their object. In vain should a
workman labor on a matter harder then his tool; in vain should you make
things mortal and corruptible, to digest and understand things that are
incorruptible and immortal. And what? that insatiate desire of learning, which
is natural to our understanding, does it not testify the same? Who has ever
seen, known, or learned so much, in whom Science has not kindled again, and
increased the desire of knowledge, in stead of quenching and appeasing it? If I
had, says an Ancient, a foot in the grave, yet I would learn still. What
means that? It is, that the appetite of our stomach may be filled, because
Nature has proportioned it to a limited thing, that is the necessary meat
for nourishment: but that of our soul shows it self insatiable in this
world, because she has proportioned it unto the eternal Truth; which (being
hindered by the body) she cannot enjoy freely in this life, having nothing
else given her to gather it but the Danaides vessel, that cannot receive much
at once; and yet is pierced in the bottom, with that wretched hole of
Forgetfulness, through which runs out most part of that she receives.

So that a man's whole life, if you consider exactly the actions of those which
govern themselves by true Reason, is nothing else, but a striving and
contention of the Soul: which labors as much as she can, to repair that
weak mortality of the body, by the participation of eternal things, unto
whose fruition she draws him as much as she can. She would willingly eternize
his life, being not able to perform it by Nature; she imployeth Art and
Industry therein, and procures him by Glory and Fame, a continuation of life
in the memory of men. And therefore we see her usually bent, and turned upon
time to come, preventing with thoughts the time that shall be after the death
of the body, as we do here the next day to that we live in; and providing her
self of Praise and glory, as of convenient store for a happy and glorious
life, unto which she aspireth. It is too easy to judge, that if our Soul did
not foresee certainly her future being, she would not trouble her self with
any designs, that aimed further then this corporal life; and would not
howsoever to obtain them, venture so freely this temporal life, after which
she could expect nothing.

Certainly, those which lost their lives in such occasions (and there has
been infinite in all ages which have in a manner sacrificed themselves upon
the Altar of Glory) did in so despising death, give an excellent testimony of
the immortality of the Soul. Neither can any one imagine, they have so
shortened their life, to increase their honor; without they were sure to enjoy
it after their death: nor that they have so cheerfully forsaken the pleasures
of this world, without they had some good token of the recompense they expected
in the other. When the Soul comes to raise her self upon the wings of a
generous desire, and she passes from this dark and cloudie region that
compasses the Earth, unto that higher, purer, and cleerer, that approaches
unto heaven; she does observe in her self many fair marks of her being, and
streakes of her great Workman, which created her according to his Image; and
has imprinted therein the figure of his Divine Essence. Which I do say only,
in regard I learned it from the Oracle of Truth; but say it after them which
learned it only out of the book of Nature her self. For Plato, and many
before him, and many others, discoursing of the creation of the World, and of
his parts, have said indeed, that other creatures were created by the lesser
gods; that is, in my opinion, the Angels, as by second causes; which being
something remote already from the first being, could not perfectly communicate
it unto them. Because this communication is but a loan of their Virtue,
separated and dis-vnited from the first Mass, and consequently somewhat
imperfect. But as for the Soul of man, they confess, God alone created her:
and therefore depending without a mean from the perfect Being, she is partaker
of his perfection, and is free from corruption in her substance, and
consequently from death. And certainly it was very reasonable, and convenient
for that great Architect, that after he had built this fair piece of work of
the world, worthy to bear the the name of Beauty; seeing he withdrew
himself from the sight of his creatures, he should leave behind him his
Image, as a living Statue, to conserve and exact from those that saw her, the
honor and reverence due unto that sovereign Architect and Lord of the
Universe.

Now it is needful, that an Image wrought by a good workman, should have some
relation unto all the parts of the subject it imitateth. Wherein could she
imitate the Eternity of God, but in the immortality of her Soul? Seeing she
cannot be altogether like; that is, to have had no beginning: how can she
resemble him, but only in having no end, that is being immortal? For sithence
God made the World with two several parts, the one Intelligible, the other,
Sensible; the one Corruptible, the other Incorruptible; there needed a middle
piece to knit and gather them together, which should be partaking of the nature
of them both. Man by an excellent art has been made the middle piece; and
therefore the perfections of both parts Intelligible and Sensible concur in
him. He has by the means of the body the excellentest qualities that are in
things Sensible and Corruptible; and by the means of the Soul, the
excellentest conditions that are in the Incorruptible and Intelligible. And
though by this mixture, that which is Celestial in him is depressed, and even
as kneaded with earth, and weighed down, nay sunk by the burden of the
flesh; nevertheless, he shows by a continual striving, and endeavor of his
nature, the place of his beginning, his inclination, and the end of his desire;
which is bent certainly evermore toward divine Essence, and to possess even
from this present life the happiness we observe in God. Assuredly, he should
never desire this divine Being, and should not aspire to it, if he did not
comprehend it; and should never comprehend it, if that wherewithal he
apprehended it were mortal and perishable. For what proportion should there be
from Immortality to Mortality? Now let us see a little how much man's
Understanding comprehends of it, how much of it his Will desires; and then any
one whatsoever he be must needs confess they are immortal.

Let us consider a little, I say, from this low and thick darkness of the
World with our Owleseyes the light of divine Nature. Let us consider the
perfections wherewithal she is endowed, and by the which as by her garments
we know her and observe her. Shall not we see presently, they are all things
which man runs after naturally, and works continually to get them, and
has no pleasure but in the possession and fruition thereof? God is the
sovereign goodness: What desires man? what does he labor for, but for that
which is good? If ever his affections be misled, and apply themselves to evil,
they give unto it the name good: and protest they seek it not, but in regard
they deem it to be good. Take away from a thing the name of good, he will
make no reckoning of it; so well he knows himself to be borne for that is
good. So that whatsoever will entice him, must have it either real or in
appearance.

God is the sovereign wisdom. Who is the man that desires not to be held
wise, that shunneth not the reputation of a fool? who governs not himself
with as much prudence as he can? Who seeks not for order and disposition in
all things, that rejoices not in himself when he can find it? that praises
not, esteems, and admireth not those which are plentifully endowed with this
wisdom, as approaching nearest to the excellent end for the which man is
borne? God is the sovereign power: What does man desire more then authority
and command? Every one aspireth naturally unto it, and those which can do it
well, are honored amongst men as a kind of Demigods, sent hither for the
conservation and direction of the inferior world. God is the sovereign Truth:
What is the understanding of man bent to, but to Truth? What does he delight
in? what does he yield unto? but to the knowledge of that which is indeed,
even that which is not received but under the name of Truth. And there is not
one so ill conditioned in the world, that is not grieved to err, to be
ignorant, to be deceived; and contrariwise, that feels not pleasure and
contentment by knowledge and learning. And truly we may say, that truth is the
form of our understanding, for he does neither understand, nor know, but as
long as she is in him.

God is all, and all is in God. Man desires to be every where; if he cannot
carry his body, he carries his mind to it. As far as he can, embraces
all, and fills himself with the forms and Ideaes of all things. God is the
author of all, and delights in doing all. Man has no greater pleasure in
this World, then to bring forth many things; and there is nothing delights
him so much, as that which is produced by him, be it children, works, or
inventions. God is ever, and man fears nothing so much as to end; and
desires nothing so earnestly as to perpetuate his being. He seeks to do it
by the conservation of his life; being not able to perform it that way, he
endeavors to compass it by the continuation of his posterity; and judging
that to be too weak, he tries to do it by the purchasing of a great and
glorious fame. God does govern all things justly. Man loves, honors, and
seeks for Justice, as the sole and sure bond of life and civil society. It
is wonderful, how the love of it is natural to man; even those which being
corrupted, will not receive it for themselves, honor it in others. God in his
government continues still in the selfsame design; and whatsoever man
undertakes, he desires to bring to pass; he will not suffer himself to
be overcome by any difficulty or labor. It is strange to see what men endure
to execute their enterprises.

God lives a plentiful, opulent, and pleasant life; Wealth and pleasure are
the ordinary wishes of man. God does contemplate, and admire himself: Man
considers himself, wondereth at his own excellency, valueth himself above
all other creatures, and all his study aymeth to trim and honor himself,
and make that appear which is excellent in him. Briefly you can imagine
nothing in that great and sovereign Creator, whereof you not do perceive man
to be strangely desirous, and all motions bent to get it, and unite and
conform himself as much as he can, to that eldest and incomprehensible
Divine Essence. Which caused the Ancient Zoroaster to cry out in amazement, O
mortal man, thy boldness is extreme.

As being not able to comprehend that its this low and mortal World, amongst
Filth and Dirt; there could be found so strong a nature, that should raise her
self above the Heavens, and by the knowledge of so many things, and imitation
of divine actions, should almost Deifie her self in this life. But he should
have learned of an ancienter then he, that that which is so wonderful in man,
is not a thing that comes from Earth or this low or corruptible place. It is a
Divine Essence even as banished and exiled for a time from Heaven, her true
place of aboade, which wandereth and erreth here in our body, endeavors her
self continually to reach to her own and true dwelling, and enter into
celestial and happy Habitation, unto the which the nearer she comes, so much
the more divine does she appear.

Why should you think, I pray you, that in the latter days of our Life, in
that agony and wrestling between the Soul and the Body, our Mind has more
Strength and Virtue, disposes of all things more wisely, and holyly,
fore-seeth more certainly Time to come, foretells, and prophecyeth it; but
only for that he begins to approach unto his Offspring, join himself
again with that immortal Being, and participate of Eternal Life? Do not
you observe, that Stones falling from high, the nearer they come unto the
Earth, the greater speed they make down? Fire contrariwise that ascends up
toward Heaven, the higher it is, the more it hasteneth to fly; because every
thing naturally, the nearer it feels it self unto its rest, and that which
it desires, the more it strives to come at it. Even so our Soul, being just
upon the point to enter again into her own Sphere, and reioyne her self unto
that Supreme Divine Nature, shows her self more vigorous and active, and
doubleth her Virtue. Now, who shall make any doubt, but things immortal, which
is so Divine, and tends perpetually unto the Original of Divine being?
Therefore the Immortality of the Soul shines in all her Actions.

But though nothing else should bear testimony unto it, Divine Providence
would show it plainly: For seeing there is Providence (whereof I believe, that
those which have Eyes, though they had neither Wit, nor Understanding, cannot
doubt) there must needs be Justice in the World; if there be Justice, the Good
must be rewarded, and the Wicked punished. They are not ever so in this Life:
where we see often, Good men live in Poverty, and die in Trouble; and
contrariwise, the Wicked live in pleasure, and die at quiet. Souls must needs
then live after the Body, to receive the Reward or Punishment for their good or
bad Actions. The Wicked desire to smother by reasoning, the feeling which Man
has of the Immortality of his Soul; but they cannot indeed. It is a Beam
of Light, which Nature has kindled in our heart, that is in stead of a Guide
unto Virtue, to direct her amidst this Mortal Darkness; and of a Furie-like
Torch unto Wickedness, to anticipate her deserved Torments. We Christians are
truly in this specially far happier then the Heathen; That God has not
contented himself with that which we could learn of the Immortality of our
Souls, by the common Book of Nature, and by the help of our weak Reason:
but would himself confirm the Testimony of it unto us by his own Word, and
kindle into a clear and full Light, the first Spark of this Natural Hope. O
Divine Goodness! which presented Truth unto others, as veyled and covered; but
brought it down from Heaven all naked for us, and powered it into our Minds by
the means of thy holy Word. Blessed and admirable Word, which affoordeth us in
a moment all the best and fairest of that, which in so many years Labors
could not be gathered in the Minds of the most Learned Philosophers. Perfect
Science, which leaves no manner of Doubt after her Precepts! Excellent
Discipline, whose Rules are all Principles, which persuade themselves. We
learn from her, That our Souls are created, and produced by thy hands, and
infused into our Bodies, to conduct and govern them: That we are placed
here, as in a Magnificent Temple, to contemplate therein thy Omnipotency,
Worship, thy infinite Goodness, hearken to thy sacred Will, and obey it: That
this Life is but the Apprenticeship of our Souls, which after the Time, and
Labors that are prescribed unto them, shall be relieved from their Watching,
set at Liberty, and restored to Eternal Rest; which will afford them
wherewithal to satisfy that desire of Divine being, whereof they have cast
forth the first Sparks, through this heavy and cumbersome Flesh. From her we
learn furthermore, that after this Life, our Souls do not only find
another more happy, but even our Bodies rotting here, as Seed in the Ground,
shall spring into a new Fruit, and shall be raised unto an Estate of Glory and
Perfection.

Therefore Divinity descending from Heaven, mingled her self again with
Flesh, to mould and kneade again our Humanity, disfigured and defaced by
Sin; joined her self to us, that she might draw us to her; humbled her
self, to exalt us; quickened her Humanity after death, to make us live in the
hope of that glorious Resurrection, whereof she was pleased to be the First
Fruits; and by the which we shall be brought into the Inheritance of Glory,
receiving in Body and Soul the incomprehensible Splendor of Eternal Light.
But the passage to arrive thereunto, is Death: Desirable Death, seeing it makes
us change Lives with so much profit. Death, not Death, seeing it is the
beginning of true Life; and that we are in this Body only, as the Chicken in
the Shell, which must be broken, ere it can be hatched; or like the Child in
his Mothers Womb, which must be left ere we can see the Day. Let us suffer
them to fear it, who think, that all perishes with the Body; or them, which
expect after it, the punishment of their Wickedness. And seeing we have so
many Testimonies, and so certain Tokens of our future Life, and being sure,
that dying here in the fear of God, in the Faith of his beloved Son, and
trust in his Goodness, we shall live again above, and enter into Glory with
him, in the Throne of his Divine Majesty: Let us pass chearefully, and lay
down the Burden that hinders and stays us, as we would do profane
Garments at the entrance of a holy Temple.

As for me, my Friends, I feel my self almost in the Harbor, with a great
comfort of my Afflictions past; and immediately, for the Felicity I expect. I
have floated in the World, in great and dangerous Storms: They tossed my
Soul, but they could not (thanks be to God) overthrow it. I know very well,
that the Condition of Humane Infirmity has put me back, as she does all
others, from the perfection God requires in us: but howsoever, it never made
me loose the certain and constant desire to advance his Honor, and Glory,
nor abate any thing of the good affection a good Subject owes unto his
Country. My Conscience bears me this Witness, and this Witness makes
Death sweet and pleasant unto me. I could wish, even at the last Gasp, I
might do the Public some Service: but having no other means for it, I will
return unto you, which are my best Friends, and its too; and for the last
Office I can do unto this so holy Friendship, I will conjure you, that since
you remain here, to shut up the end of a most Wretched Age; you settle your
Minds, by brave and constant Resolutions, to withstand undauntedly the
Violence of the Tempest that threateneth this State, and your particular
Fortunes: For all the Ages past, have seen few Miseries, and Calamities, but
that you are like to see in your days.

The inside, the outside of the kingdom great and small are like unto mad men,
bent to its ruin and desolation. You shall be amazed one of these days, when
as you shall see the Laws overthrown, the Government altered, all put into
confusion: those that shall have the Government, bear the intent to loose
both themselves, and their own Country; and good men shall not be suffered
to open their Mouth, and give good and wholesome Counsel.

Remember then you are men, and true hearted subjects unto this crown. Let not
your courage run away from you with your good Fortune. Stand fast upon Right
and Reason, and if the Waves and Billows must carry you away, let them
ouerwhelme you with the Rudder in your hand still. Behold the the time, that
you must present your breast against Fortune for the defense of the State, and
cover your countries body with your own. Certainly this ruin cannot be
avoided without a great and generous courage, of such as shall oppose
themselves against it, which all good men in my opinion are bound to do.
Nevertheless, you must qualify by Prudence what an obstinate austeritie would
but exasperate, and make worse; and follow Destiny. without forsaking Virtue.
Doing well, you shall shall run into great hazards, and shall suffer many
injuries: but what can there happen so strange and horrible, that the hope of
the sovereign good, wherein I shall prevent you does not aswage?

There is, well-neere the same words that were uttered unto us by that great
and wise Personage. I rehearsed them unto you against my Will, knowing full
well that the weakness of my Memory, and harshnesse of my Tongue, would
loose much of the weight of his Reasons, and of the grace of his Discourse. But
if you had heard him himself, with his sweet and pleasing fashion, he had
kindled in your souls so lively and ardent a desire of eternal felicity,
that there is no affliction in the world, the sense whereof he had not taken
away from you.

There Linus ended his speech, and I being heartened and cheered up, said;
Certainly this was a very fine Discourse, seeing that you, who in all other
things give me such satisfaction, seemed unto me in the recital of this to
go beyond your self. I believe the Idea and remembrance of that great
personage, that is yet fresh and present in your Memory, for the honor and
love you bore unto him, quickened your tongue, and inspired into you some thing
more then humane. Would to God this speech might continue as long as our
miseries; I am sure I should have my Ears full of such Discourses, and my
Mind free from Sorrows. I swear unto you, that since the time this Calamity
fell upon us, I found nothing that made this Life more tolerable unto me, then
what I heard from you three these three last days, but specially to day.

It is reported, That Ptolomaus was forced to forbid Egesias the Cyrenian to
discourse any more in public of the Immortality of the Soul, because the
most part of those which heard him, hastened their death with their own hands.
That makes me believe, he was ill acquainted with the Subject he handled.
For I believe, there is nothing in the World gives us more courage, to endure
patiently our Miseries, then the Reasons I learned even now from you; which in
few words represented unto us, what is the cause and the end of our
Afflictions, and what recompense our Patience finds, when we can persevere in
it unto the end. Wherefore I could wish, for the comfort of my poor distressed
Country, contrary to that which was done to Egesias, you should be
constrained all three to continue in public such a Discourse. But for as much
as it is a thing I cannot hope for, I am resolved to preserve carefully in my
Memory all that I learned from you about it; and at my first leisure (if our
fortunate Studyes can get any) set it down in Writing, to leave it unto
Posterity, for to instruct in like occasions those that shall come after us;
and let them know, that in a most corrupted Age, and amongst men strangely
deprived of all Natural Affection, we have lived with a great compassion of
the public Misery, and yet with a far greater desire to be able to help
it.

FINIS.

