TWO TREATISES.

THE ONE, A most fruitful Exposition upon PHILEMON: THE OTHER, The School of
Affliction.

Both penned, By the late faithful Minister of Gods Word, DANIEL DYKE,
Bachelor in Divinity: Published since his death by his Brother, I. D. Minister
of Gods Word.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Robert Mylbourne.

1618.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the Lady LVCIE, Countess of
BEDFORD.
Right Honorable:
Never did any time afford so great a multitude of Books, so great a throng of
Writers, as these present days wherein we live: So that no less wisdom
seems to be required of a Reader in the choice of his Author, then of a Writer
in the choice of his matter. I would not be so construed as if I taxed any for
their writing: for what if all the Lords people could prophecy? And how were
it to be wished, that many worthy ones, who confine their gifts within their
parochial bounds, would give their labors the liberty of the air, and walk
of the whole Church? But if in this great variety any should be puzzeld, and at
a set where to bestow his time, and reading, if my poor counsel were worth
the giving, I should advise such, whose callings and conditions gives them not
the leisure to turn over every man's leaves, to make choice of such who may
help and direct them in the understanding of the Book of God. Like to that of
our Savior to Martha, it may be said to many, both Writers, and Readers, They
trouble them selves about many books, but One book is necessary: that Book
which is able to make us wise to salvation. If Luthers love to this book, and
the reading of it, made him hate his own Ego odi meos libros, et saepe opto cos
interne, quod metuo ^e morentur lect^^es a lectione ipsius Scripturae, quae
sola onmis sapientiae sons est: Luther in Genes. 19.
books, and wish them lost, which yet were of so excellent use, and for which
the Church stands so much bound to God, then how much more would he not only
have hated, but accursed, not only those bald, and base pamphlets, the scurse
of scald and scabby heads, but even a number of Authors, who though they have
happily their use, yet their huge voluminous compositions swallow and drink up,
either all, or too much of that time which were to be redeemed for the
Scriptures use, and search. Surely, if the Scripture be that only book upon
which our day and nights*studies must be spent, Josh. 1. 8. then should such
Authors as unclasp the same, be most welcome to us, and have the precedence in
our choice. Of this nature is this book wherewithal I am bold to present your
Honor, presuming in that respect upon so much the greater acceptance. In the
perusal whereof, as you shall meet with diverse passages not unprofitable, so
amongst others with one short one, the tedder of the text not giving larger
liberty, concerning the right, and religious government of a family. A point of
great consequence, and use for all, but for none more then great persons, whom
God has betrusted with the government of great families. Philemons house is
here honored with the title of a Church. To the Church that is in thine house.
Most great houses have the ornaments of Chapels, but few the honor of
Churches. So irreligious and irregular are the followers of many great
personages, that they seem to metamorphose their Masters houses, as the Jews
did the Lords House, which should have been an house of prayer, into a den of
thieues. Yea so prodigiously inordinate are the courses, and carriages of some
families, that a man in regard of their retinue, may judge the Prophets curse
to be fallen upon them. Namely: That Ziim do lodge there, and that their
houses are full of Ochim, or of doleful creatures, Ostriches dwell there, and
Satyrs dance there, Iim and Dragons are in their pleasant Palaces, Esaias 13.
21, 22. And this plague, that great houses are haunted with such unclean
spirits, whence comes it, but from a double neglect in Governors, either in
the choosing, or ordering their servants? In the choice of servants, what is
less regarded then the Truth and Power of Religion? Most choose as Solomon did
Jeroboam, 1. King. 11. 28. he saw that the young man was meet for the work,
and therefore entertained him into his service. But with what issue? He wrought
a mischief to and against his house. It had been happy for Salomons house,
that a man of more conscience, though of less skill, had been retained. How
many scruple not to entertain very Ieroboams, so be it they be meet for their
work, though otherwise their religion be either a Popish, puppet and
calfe-worship, or a flat irreligion? The world is not so empty and barren, but
it is possible if care were had, to find Skill, and Conscience, Ability and
Honesty, matched in one and the same scruant. But in the ordering of families
is as foul a neglect, whilst most masters are of Sallioes faith, that matters
of faith and religion belong not to their cure. Hence is it that they neither
constrain them to the true service of God, nor restrain them from Popery,
profaneness, dissolute and disordered life. Ioshuaes resolution, I and my
house will serve the Lord, is grown out of credit with the world. Let a
servant fail in the careless performance of his place, in the neglect of his
Masters profit; nay, if but a paltry dog, or hawke be unfed, or misdieted, oh
the tragedies, oh the blusters, and terrible thunder-cracks of fierce and
furious language that ensue! But let a servant be ignorant, a neglecter or
despiser of Gods worship, a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a drunkard, an unclean
person, yet, I will not say against such there is no law, but against such
there is no anger, no rebuke, no censure, no making the family Church-like in
the excommunication, and eiection of these Satyrs, and Ostriches. All such
Governors are as far from the honor, as the practice of Philemon. Whose
example if happily any great Ones should conceit to be too low for their
imitation (though the meanest of the Scripture-Saints are patterns for the
greatest) may they be pleased to remember not only those ancient Precedents,
Abraham, Joshua, and David, all three honorable in this particular, but to
look a little nearer their own days, to a man of their own rank, I mean,
that right religious, and worthy Prince of Anhalt, of whom Melancthon reports,
That his Chamber Cubiculu^ eius erat Templum, Academia, Curia. Nam ibi haec
fiebant quotidie, pre^^^io, lectio, scriptio, et deliberationes de
gubernatione. Melanct. de Georgio Principe Anhaltino, in praefat. 5. Tomi oper.
Lutheri.
was a Church, an University, and a Court. Besides the dispatch of civil
businesses, there was daily praying, reading, writing, yea, and Preaching too.
For so Scultetus reports of him. I do not think that this noble Earl, having
a Church for God in his Chamber, suffered a Temple to Bacchus in his Celler. In
too many families Venus has her Altars in the Chambers, and Bacchus his
Sacrifices in the Butteries: which two, having made their diuident in the
family, and shared their Deuotoes, alas, what poor thirds will be left for God?
Whatsoever disorders are in public, they will never be redressed, so long as
families, especially great Ones, are unreformed.

The Family, the Commonwealth, the Church, are Sunt igitur tres coelestes
Hierarchiae, de quibus Asini Sophistae tam multa nuga^tur, aliud nihil quam
vita Oeconomica, politica, Ecclesiastica. Luther in Gene.
the three heavenly Hierarchies, as Luther terms them. But surely, the first
is not heavenly, unless the last be in it. If the church be not in it, it will
prove but an hellish Hierarchy, yea and will poison both the other. If families
were Churches, and religiously governed, what great ease would Governors of
the Church, and Commonwealth find? The way to heal the naughty waters, is
with Elisha, 2. King. 2. 21. to go to the spring, and to cast in the salt
there. It is but a folly to complain of misorders elsewhere, while our own
families are misordred.

Now R. H. as you graced, and gave countenance to the first of this Authors
works, printed since his death, so may you be pleased to accept this last as a
testimony of all thankful acknowledgement, of your great, and undeserved
favors. As it was the Authors desire in the handling of this holy Scripture
(the first fruits of his constant ministerial labors) to perfect that noble,
and honorable family of your Fathers, where it was opened, as in many other
points of Christianity, so in the knowledge of family duties, that it might be
brought to greater perfection: so is it my desire by publishing the same, to
further the common good of all good Christians, in awakening, and stirring them
up to the conscionable discharge of teaching, and right ordering their
families, to the honor of God, their own, and the endless good of many
souls: And that by your diligent reading hereof, you would be pleased to
observe and practice all such rules, and directions, as may any way tend to the
bettering of your judgment and family. For it is with Families as with
Churches on earth, none completely perfect, during our pilgrimage here. The
which while you shall do, you shall bring upon your self Abraham's blessing,
promised for his wel-ordered house, and Philemons honor of a Church in your
family, and in the end, peace and happiness to your own soul. The which
unfeignedly wishing you from the God of peace, I humbly take my leave, and rest,

Epping in Essex, August 15. 1618. Your Honors to be commanded in all service
in the Lord, IER. DYKE.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE EPISTLE TO PHILEMON.
VERSE. 1. 2. PAVL, a prisoner of JESUS CHRIST, and our brother TIMOTHY, unto
our beloved PHILEMON and fellow-worker,

And to our beloved APPHIA, and to ARCHIPPVS, our fellow-Souldier, and to the
Church that is in thy house.


BEfore we come to The Argument of the Epistle.
the words, we will a little consider of the argument of this Epistle, and of
some general instructions there arising. ONESIMVS, a naughty servant, running
away from his master PHILEMON, lights upon PAVL, by whose means and ministry
he being converted, is returned back to his Master, with this letter of PAVL,
in his behalf written to his Master, for pardoning him his former
misdemeanour, and receiving him into favor again.

This Epistle is of another nature then any other written either by PAVL, or
any of the other Apostles, for though sometimes they write to some one
particular person, as this our Apostle to TIMOTHY and TITUS, and JOHN, to GAIVS
and the elect LADY: yet even then they write of matters concerning the whole
Church and the common salvation, as IVDE speaks, Jude 3.

But here as the person is but a particular man, so the matter is a personal
matter proper to PHILEMON and his family, concerning the entertaynement of a
fugitive servant into his family and favor again. One would think this were
too low and mean an argument for the Spirit of GOD to handle. But yet
questionless, PAVL was as well moved by the instinct, and assisted with the
powerful presence of the Holy Ghost, in the writing of this, as any other of
his Epistles, as (besides the common consent of the Church) by the holy,
heavenly, and gracious Character of speech, agreeable to his other Epistles may
easily appear. Observe therefore,

How hereby the Lord would confirm our faith 1. The Scriptures written by
divine inspiration.
in the truth and certainty of other parts of Scripture; for if even this
Epistle written to one man of a private matter, respecting his own family,
were yet written by the inspiration of the Spirit of Truth, how much more may we
ascertaine our selves, that other books, treating of higher matters, were not
penned by the will of man, but indicted by the Spirit of God himself. If when
PAVL writes to PHILEMON of the receiving of a poor slave, the Spirit of God
leads his hand in writing, how much more when he writes to whole Churches of
Christ and our Redemption by him, of Faith, Repentance, Justification, and such
like mysteries.

Secondly. As hereby our assurance of the infallible 2. Gods providence in the
preservation of the Books of Scripture.
Truth of the Scriptures is confirmed, so likewise of Gods Providence, and
watchful care in the preservation of them whole, without any loss to this
present day. Some are of opinion that whole Books of Scripture are lost; and
among the rest some of S. PAVLS Epistles, written to whole Churches, as to
Corinth, Laodicea, etc. But this little Epistle rises up as a great witness
against them: for if the providence of God has extended it self to the
lesser, how much more to the greater? It is the argument of our Savior, Matthew.
6. God, by his providence clotheth the grass of the field, how much more will
he do the like to men, to his own Elect? Are not they of much greater value
then Lillies? So here by like proportion, was not the Epistle to the
Corinthians, if there ever were such a one lost, of greater worth then this to
PHILEMON? Whereof yet, not the least jot, or tittle, has miscarryed, though in
regard of the object, and comparatively in respect of others, it may seem a
mean Epistle, (for otherwise indeed nothing of the Spirits inditing is to be
counted mean.) How much more then would the Lord by the eye of his providence
have watched over other Epistles and Books, handling matters of greater moment
and consequence? If any part of the Canon should be lost, one would think, in
regard of that special care which God has of his Churches good, it should be
that which might best be spared, as not being of so necessary use as the rest.
Now, howsoever every parcel of the Canon, and so this Epistle be of singular
use, yet we cannot imagine how an Epistle or Book of a more inferior
argument, less respecting the whole body of the Church, should have been
framed by the motion of Gods Spirit. What a folly then is it for us to imagine
that Gods eye, being vigilant and watchful in looking to Books of less use,
should be so heavy and drowsy, when Books of greater use should have been
preserved? As though he that is careful for the safe custody of common pieces
of silver, would be negligent in looking to some rare or rich Jewel, or
precious stone. We may then by this small Epistle, written of so small a
matter and yet remaining, more then probably gather, that either there were no
such Books ever written, as they say are lost, or else if there were, that
they were not Canonical.

This doctrine of the Canon entirely preserved, S. PAVL plainly confirms,
Romans 15. saying, Whatsoever was written, was written for our learning. Now if
some of the Canon be lost, what learning can we possibly gather out of it?
Besides, in these Books we have, we want nothing, as in many books of the
Heathen, which are maimed and imperfect, sometimes without head, sometimes
without tail, the iniquity of the times dealing with them as the King of
Ammon with DAVID'S Ambassadors. But here is no such clipping or curtayling of
the Scriptures, here be no libri (...). Here comes in no Desunt per pauca.
Desiderantur nonnulla. Those books we have, we have whole and entire, no one
sentence, no one piece of a sentence is wanting. Now how is it likely that that
God who would not suffer the least tittle to be blotted out of these Books we
have, would yet suffer whole Books to be razed out at once out of the number
of the Canon? What, has the providence of GOD less respected his own Books
then the Paynims? whereof though many be gone, yet not without some relics
and fragments still remaining. But here, Time which was more favorable to
their books, nibbling upon them, and as a Moth consuming them by little and
little, here a piece, and there a piece, deals far more unmercifully with
the Scriptures, as a Lion crushing them in pieces at the first, with a wide
gaping throat, as an open sepulcher devouring and swallowing down in great
gobs, whole books at once: In so much that the least footsteps of them are not
to be seen. I dwell the longer in this point, because it is of such singular
use and comfort.

For first, this care of God in preserving his Word, and maintained by this
Word. Wherefore so long as we see Gods providence so carefully watching over
the Scriptures, we may put our selves in assured hope that he will never fail
nor forsake his Church. If he meant to do so, to what end should the Scripture
serve? There is no use of them out of the Church, for the benefit of the
Church, doubtless, are they kept, not for Turks and Canibals. As long then as
we see the Word of GOD continuing, so long may we assure our selves, that God
will still continue a remnant at the least of his Church, and a holy Seed,
which shall be fed and fatted with this wholesome food, whereof at the first it
was made.

And as this doctrine is comfortable to the whole a wonderful and
extraordinary manner, printed and stamped in the fleshly tables of our hearts,
retain there his form and figure for ever, as being written with an indeleble
Character.

Thirdly, The holy Ghost, both first of all exciting, 3. The honor that God
does repenting sinners.
and stirring PAVL to the writing of this Epistle for ONESIMVS, as also guiding
and governing of him in the writing of it, we may observe the great honor that
was done to this poor servant now repenting and becoming the servant, yea the
freeman of Christ. The holy Ghost himself writes a letter in his behalf to
his Master, for it was not so much PAVLS doing as the Spirits. PAVL wrote, but
the Spirit indicted. If we can get the Kings letter to some that may do us
good, we think it a great favor, and our selves much honored. What a honor
was this then for ONESIMVS, to have the great King of Heaven and Earth to set
his holy Secretary, PAVL, on work in writing, and his own Majesty in
inditing this letter for him? This teaches us that the Lord is no respecter of
persons, but that according to his promise he will honor them that honor him,
be they never so base and dishonorable in the world, even bond-slaues, as this
ONESIMVS was.

As on the contrary, he will bring shame and reproach upon them, who fear not
to dishonor him, though never so honorable outwardly in the Word. What then,
though thou art small and despised, though thou have but the low degree of a
servant, be not discomfited, even so was ONESIMVS, yet honoring the Lord by
his unfeigned repentance, see how the Lord honors him, taking the pains
himself to write this Epistle for him, and thereby eternizing his memory to
all posterities. Many great and mighty Monarchs are dead and rotten, and their
names are dead with them; it is not so much as known, whether there were such
men on the earth; in whom is verified that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37. 35, 36.
But ONESIMVS, a base slave, has a name of eternal, and that most happy
memory, given him: So that wheresoever this Epistle shall come, this which the
Holy Ghost has done for him, shall be spoken of, for a memorial of him.

The like, through Gods gracious providence, has befalne many other poor ones
in this world: as, the Woman that powered the Ointment on Christ, RAHAB, SIMON
of Cyrene, and diverse others; who though otherwise ignoble and obscure, yet are
now true Canonized Saints indeed, having their names registered and recorded in
Gods own holy Canon. Whereas, according to that of the Psalmist, Princes
themselves have had contempt powered upon them, contemning God, and have been
quite forgotten, forgetting the Lord. Thus the Lord knows how to depresse and
debase the lofty and lordly, yea, even to dis-robe and vnthrone Kings, and to
cast them down upon the dunghill; and on the contrary, to exalt and advance
base beggars and bondslaues, and that even from the Dungeon and dunghill of
Darkness and Obscurity, to the Scepter oftentimes, and Chair of Estate, as
HANNA sweetly sings, 1. Sam. 2. 8. that so the righteous seeing these so just
and righteous, so wise and merciful works of Gods providence, might rejoice,
and all iniquity might stop her mouth.

Fourthly, in this example of PAVL, writing by 4. A Christian may show a
sanctified heart in speaking of the meanest things.
divine inspiration of this so mean and abject an object, we may further
learn, That there is no matter so base, or vile, in the speaking or writing
whereof, a Christian man may not bewray the inward grace and sanctification of
his heart. For so here PAVL writing to PHILEMON, not of Justification, not of
Predestination, or any such profound mystery, but only of a poor vassal and
bondslaue, yet see how presently he mounteth up into the very Heavens! So,
that howsoever this Epistle, in regard of the matter, seem to creep on the
ground, yet in regard of the manner of handling it, it may seem with the wings
of the Eagle, to soar up aloft, almost attaining the height, the might, and
majesty of his other Epistles. Though we now are not to look for such a
measure of the Spirit, as PAVL had in writing and speaking, yet we in our
measure must labor, according to this president given us in this place, to
speak and write holily and graciously even of common and triuiall matters. For
they are deceived, who think, that it is for Preachers only in their
preaching, thus to speak; or if it belong to others, only then, when they are
occasioned to speak of matters of Religion. No; gracious speech is not to be
pent up in so narrow a room, as the Pulpit, it is not to be confined within
so strait bounds, as matters of salvation. But the Precept of the Apostle is
general, Let your speech (of what matter soever it treats) be always
seasoned with the salt of Grace, Col. 4. 6. Yea, as in meats, the more subject
they be to putrefaction, the more need they have of powdering; so in the
matters of speech, the readier we be in vulgar and ordinary matters to forget
our selves, the more need have we the more thoroughly to season them with this
holy Salt. And as in the members of our body, those parts which are most
uncomely, have the greater comeliness of apparel put upon them, 1. Cor. 12.
23. So in the objects of our speech, the meaner, the baser they be, the more
need have they, that this their nakedness should be covered with the glorious
garment of gracious speech. Why then should we be ashamed of the Language of
Canaan in our common talk? Why should not the good man, out of the good
treasury of his heart, bring forth sweet and sauourie speech, even then when
he communeth of common and ordinary matters? Does not every one, of what
Nation soever he is, Dutch, French, or English, by his Dialect bewray his
Country, always alike, whatsoever the subject of his speech be? Why then
should not we as well approve the celestial Canaan to be our Country, by the
spiritual propriety of speech which that Country has? They then that are
ashamed of this Language in their communication, of this style in their
writing, show plainly, that they are not Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem.
But if PAVLS letter, written of a domestical business, be Scripture, why
should any be ashamed to grace and garnish their letters of the same kind with
the holy phrases of the Scripture? Yet many are so far from this, that even
then, when they speak or write of points of Religion, they do it so
vnsauourily and so ungraciously, as that the unsoundness of their rotten
hearts is thereby manifestly laid open. PAVL sets a grace and a gloze upon
base matters, by his holy character of speech; these men pollute and profane
things, in themselves glorious and excellent, touching them with the base
language of their uncircumcised lips, of their impure and myrie mouths.

Fifthly, by S. PAVLS divine handling this so low The Epistles of Paul to Seneca
forged.
this our Apostle to SENECA. The truth is, they are bastards and counterfeits,
S. PAVL will not own them for his: They have his name indeed, but not the
least dram or drop of his Spirit; they savor not of his Apostolical gravity
and majesty, which shines even in this, the least of all his Epistles. In
those forged Epistles, far higher matters are spoken of; but alas, how
coldly, how dryly, and poorly! yet here behold a poor petty matter set forth
with that pithinesse and powerfulness of speech, as is admirable. Now, is
there any likelihood, that PAVL should be so far unlike himself, in a low
matter to fly aloft, and in high and lofty ones to creep on the ground? To
put life into things almost dead in themselves, quickening them with the warmth
and spirits of his speech, and to take life from things in themselves full of
life, cooling them with an ycie and frozen manner of handling?

Sixthly, observe in this Epistle, occasioned by ONESIMVS 6. God turns men's
sins to the Churches advantage.
his running away from his Master, the wonderful wisdom, power, and mercy
of GOD, drawing light out of darkness, turning the sins of men to the
advantage of his Church. The whole Church of GOD reapeth benefit by ONESIMVS
his flight; for unless he had run away, she had never enjoyed this
excellent Epistle, containing so many singular instructions. As therefore that
Father called ADAMS fall a happy fall, in regard of the happy consequences
thereof to the elect, so in the same respect may we call this flight of
ONESIMVS, a happy flight.

Thus much in general from the occasion and argument of this Epistle, being a
part of the holy Canon.

Now to the words in particular. In this first Verse is contained the
inscription of the Epistle: In which are set down, First, the persons writing,
which are two: first, the principal, PAVL, etc. secondly, less principal,
and TIMOTHY, etc. Secondly, the persons written unto, which also are two:
first, those whom this Epistle more specially concerns, PHILEMON and APPHIA,
Governors of the Family: secondly, those whom it less concerned; first,
ARCHIPPVS, a Soiourner, as it is probable, in the House; secondly, the rest of
the Family.

To begin with the first Verse; The persons writing: first, the principal
Writer is described, first, by his proper Name, PAVL, secondly, by his
Condition, A Prisoner; and this his condition of restraint from the cause of
it, A Prisoner of JESUS CHRIST.

First, for his Name, PAVL, see CALVIN on Romans 1. to whose opinion, thinking it
was given him upon his infranchisement into the City of Rome, I willingly
subscribe. Secondly, his Condition, wherein now he was when he wrote this
Epistle. A prisoner of Jesus Christ; not that Christ cast him into prison: no,
in this sense he was NEROES prisoner, and not Christ's. But his meaning is, that
for Christ's sake, that is, for preaching and maintayning of his Gospel he was
imprisoned. This imprisonment is that which LVKE mentioned, Acts 20.

First then observe, that this Epistle came out of Gods Spirit cannot be
imprisoned.
and streightning the Spirit and Word of God in the hearts of his children,
that rather it enlarges them. See what an excellent Epistle PAVL writes in the
prison. So likewise did he many others besides this, as to the Galathians,
Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, two to TIMOTHY, all most sweet and heavenly
Epistles, written by the inspiration of the Spirit.

The Spirit therefore was PAVLS Companion in the prison, and so is he to all
Gods children that are prisoners of Jesus Christ, then renewing his former
acquaintance with them, and in more special sort communicating himself unto
them, whereby it comes to pass, that at such times, and in such estates,
they are more fit for holy duties then in any other. Then pray they more
feelingly and fervently, Romans 8. then also as here we see writ, they exhort
more powerfully and passionately, as me thinks, in those Epistles, which PAVL
wrote in the prison, there seems a greater measure of holy zeal and fervent
affections then in any other. So that though in none of these Epistles, he had
made any mention of his imprisonment, yet the observing Reader might easily
have said, These Epistles smell of the prison, as he said of the elaborate
Oration of the Orator, that it smelled of the candle. O happy prison, that
brought forth such Epistles! Let us not then be afraid of the prison, for there
the Spirit will meet us. Let us not be afraid of those which can indeed
imprison the body and bind it: but the Word of God they cannot bind, that came
to JEREMY again and again in the prisonhouse, Iere. 33. 1. The holy Spirit
of God they cannot shut up; nay, by this means they make more room for it in
our hearts, as appears by this and many other Epistles, for all which we are
in some sort beholding to the prison. So likewise may we thank the prison for
many sweet Meditations and Monuments, which of late days the holy Martyrs
wrote: who for their lives could not have done the like, before they came into
the prison, as not feeling that sweet presence of the Comforter, who profited
his strength in their weakness. Whereupon some of them have said, the prison
has been to them as a heavenly Palace, and sweet Paradise of pleasure. So
ALGERIVS, an Italian Martyr, dates his Epistle, From the delectable Hortyard of
the Leonine prison, FOX Martyrolog. So fit a time is our affliction for
familiarity with the Spirit; so fit a place is the prison to be the Study and
Closet for those in whom the Spirit dwells, to hatch, and bring forth holy
and heavenly Meditations.

But now PAVL writing this Epistle in the prison, Gods providence toward his
children in prison.
good providence of God: first, in that even in the time of this his restraint,
he had yet liberty of pen, ink, and paper, yea and of a Scribe too sometimes,
and those which did minister unto him. See Acts 28. 16. When he was brought
prisoner to Rome, he found at the first this favor, that whereas other
prisoners that came over with him, were delivered to the general Captain, he
was suffered to dwell in a house by himself, having only a Soldier attending
on him. In so much as many resorted daily unto him, to whom without any let he
preached the Gospel two years together. So likewise JEREMY in his
imprisonment, had the benefit of his Scribe BARVCH. And our Martyrs of late,
though nothing so favorably dealt withal, (That bloody BONNER exceeding even
that monster of men, NERO, in cruelty) yet such was the good hand of their
good God toward them, that sometimes by favor which he gave them with the
Keepers, sometimes by stealth, and secretly, sometimes by one means, sometimes
by another, they gate pen and ink, notwithstanding the strait and severe
commandment of the bloody Butchers to the contrary. Secondly, Gods
providence also herein did show it self, that would not suffer PAVL, so
skillful a workman, to be idle, and do nothing in the business of the Lord,
but would have a supply of his Apostolical preaching made by his writing. The
consideration of this should confirm our faith in Gods providence, in our
greatest dangers, and difficulties, even in the Mountain, even in the prison,
nay, out of the prison it self, the Lord will make most excellent provision
for his Church.

Again, it is to be observed that S. PAVL does of Jesus Christ. The title of a
prisoner in it self is ignominious; but when he adds of Jesus Christ, all
stayne of ignominy is clean wiped away. Here hence then we learn, that it is
not the Not the punishment, but the cause, makes a Martyr.
punishment, but the cause that makes a Martyr. Let no man, says PETER,
suffer as an evil doer, for then what comfort have we in our suffering? but
let us be sure our cause be good, that we may be able to call our selves the
prisoners of Christ, and then have we matter of great rejoicing, in as much as
we are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, as PETER speaks: for he that is
the prisoner of Christ, has not only his Fellow Christians, Heb. 13. 3. but
even his Lord Christ, fellow prisoner with him. Acts 9. SAVL, SAVL, why
persecutest thou me? So that now that Christ who was imprisoned and persecuted
by SAVL, is now imprisoned and persecuted in SAVL.

But here is not all that we must look to in our A good cause must be
suffered for in a good manner.
suffer for a good cause, in a good manner. The which point is further
commended unto us in PAVLS example, who was not only a prisoner of Jesus
Christ, but also a cheerful, and courageous prisoner of Jesus Christ: for so
far was he from being ashamed of his chain, wherewithal for the hope of
ISREAL'S sake he was bound, that he even gloryeth and boasts in it, accounting
it far more honorable, then a chain of gold about his neck. For whereas
PAVL had many titles (a Catalogue of the most of them we may see, Phil. 3. 5.)
yet he leaves them all for this. He styles not himself Citizen of Rome, a
Beniaminite, a Pharise, a Disciple of learned GAMALIEL, no nor yet which of all
other is most honorable, the Apostle of Jesus Christ; but rejoices rather in
this style of the prisoner of Jesus Christ, preferring it before the title of
his Apostleship, not only by this mention of his imprisonment, to raise up
pity in the mind of PHILEMON, and so to make a way for his suit that
follows, but also hereby to show that he judges it a far greater matter, and
more praiseworthy, to suffer for the Truth, then to preach the Truth; for the
gift of suffering is preferred before the gift of believing, Philip. 1. 23.
much more is it then, above the gift of preaching, which being a gift incident
to cast-awayes, as to IVDAS, must needs give place to the gift of believing,
proper and peculiar to the Elect. Good cause have we therefore with the Apostle
to rejoice in our sufferings, as being not only the cognizance and liueries of
true Christians, but also of strong and tall Christians. Infants and Babes in
Christ, have no strength in their backs to bear the burden of Christ's Cross.
When therefore we are called forth into the field, it is a sign of some
strength and Christian manhood, wherewith the Lord has endued us. Those
Christians therefore which have rest given them, when many of their Brethren
are exercised under the Cross, must be so far from censuring, and condemning
them, in regard of their afflictions, that rather they are to conceive a more
honorable opinion of them, as being such to whom the Lord has given more
strength of grace then to themselves.

Again, in our sufferings for Christ, here is further matter of joy: That the
Lord does us a special credit in them, in that he makes us witnesses of his
glorious Truth to the whole world. In this regard, Acts 5. the Apostles being
scourged, rejoiced, in that they were counted worthy to suffer any thing for
Christ.

In these and many other respects, having so great cause of cheerfulness in
the Cross: let us according to PAVLS example in this place, in a holy kind and
manner, brag and boast of them, thinking the marks of our Lord Jesus, which
we bear about in our bodies, Gal. 6. 17. to be no greater deformities to us
then wounds, and a disfigured face with the loss of eye, or nose, are to the
valiant Soldier, who having gotten them, fighting in defense of his Country,
accounts them special ornaments, witnesses of his valor and manhood.

Lastly, we are to observe in PAVLS example the Ministers must be ready to make
good their preaching by the prison.
their preaching by the prison, if need be, their sayings by their sufferings.
O base is that liberty, yea baser then the basest bondage, which is got by
flinching from that Truth, which we have preached and professed.

True it is, that all Christians, by virtue of their calling, are called to
suffering. Matthew. 16. 24* and 1. Pet. 2. 21. Unto this are ye called, for
Christ has suffered for you: he was our prisoner and captive for our sakes:
why then should any think much to be his prisoner, who suffered for us the
loss of liberty, and life too? But the Ministers in more special sort, even
by virtue of their ministry, are called to these sufferings. Coloss. 1. 24.
PAVL having said, that he suffered afflictions for the Churches sake, in the
25. Verse adds, as giving a reason thereof, Whereof I am the Minister. So, 2.
Tim. 2. 3. Thou therefore, as a good Soldier, a good Minister, suffer
affliction.

The reason hereof is plain; Every Minister is the Churches servant, and the
end of his ministry is to build up the Church in the truth of the Gospel,
which he cannot do, unless being called thereto, he be ready to seal the
Truth, even with his blood. If he will not thus abet and justify his own
Doctrine, he gives cause to the Church to doubt, whether that be the Truth
which he has taught; yea, in truth he destroys that which he has built, and
undoes all that he had done formerly. But of this point more afterward.

Thus much of the first person writing, the principal writer, PAVL. The
second, and inferior writer is TIMOTHEVS, described by the title of PAVLS
brother. We are not to think that TIMOTHY had any hand at all in the writing
of this same Epistle; but only because a force united is the stronger, PAVL
takes him into the society of this Petition to PHILEMON, together with
himself. So that TIMOTHY did only consent to this Petition of PAVL, he did
not help him in the penning of it, nor no man else, only the holy Ghost. This
example of TIMOTHY, willingly joining with PAVL in this so Christian a
business, must teach us without any sticking, freely and frankly to lend our
help to any that shall demand it for the furtherance of any good, and honest
cause.

TIMOTHYES style here, is PAVLS brother. Elsewhere he calls him his son, as
having converted him: here his brother, in regard of the communion of the same
office with himself in preaching the Word.

Thereby teaching us, how lovingly affected each to others the Ministers of the
Word should be, whereof more afterward.

These be the persons writing. The persons written to follow.

First, the principal, whom this letter more specially concerns, the
Governors of ONESIMVS. First, his Master PHILEMON. Secondly, his Mistress
APPHIA.

PHILEMON is described, first, by the adiunct of PAVLS love, our beloved:
secondly, by his calling, our fellow-worker.

First, he is called beloved, an argument that he was one that loved God.
Otherwise that of IEHV spoken to IEHOSAPHAT, might have been applied to PAVL,
Would thou love them that hate the Lord?

Let us learn by PAVLS example, to have our hearts enlarged in all true
Christian love toward the children of God.

Secondly, he is called PAVLS fellow-worker. Whence it may probably be
gathered, that this PHILEMON was a Minister of the Word. Though it cannot be
denied but that this title may be given, not only to men, but even to women
themselves, as to PRISCILLA, Romans 16. 3. for all Christians are
fellow laborers in seeking GODS glory and the common good of the Church.
Though yet in that place PAVL seems to respect in that title some special
service, which AQVILA and PRISCILLA had done for him. Therefore BEZA well
translates it, My helpers, for so the word joined with a Genitive case, is
oftentimes taken. But yet most properly this title belongs to those that are
of the same special calling with our selves. I will not stand here to show
that the office of a Minister is a work, and that the Minister must be a
labourer, not a loyterer, though (I fear) there be a number of idle bellies
now adays, who may well call one another fellow-loyterers, but rather I
observe,

First, the humility of PAVL, who though an Apostle Ephesians. Cor. 12 28. yet
disdayneth not to mate and yoke Humility of Ministers.
himself, not only with the Evangelist TIMOTHY, an inferior degree, but even
with an ordinary Pastor PHILEMON, who was yet of a lower place then TIMOTHY.
How sweetly does he practice his own precept, Romans 12. Make your selves
equal with them of the lower sort? whereas now many are so far from this,
that they even scorn and disdain their equals, making an inequality where God
has made a paritie; well is it if those that are a great deal their betters,
may have the account of equals. The Apostle says, When I was as a child, I
spoke as a child, and every way behaved my self thereafter, familiarly
conuersing with my fellows. But many nowadayes, though in truth but children,
yet disdaynfully cast off the company and familiarity of children, climbing
higher, and indecently placing themselves in the rank of tall and perfect men.

Art thou a Pastor? speak and do as a Pastor to thy fellow-Pastors, and not
as though thou were an Apostle, or Evangelist. PAVL, an Apostle, equals with
himself an ordinary Pastor; and now, behold, a great difference. Ordinary
Pastors do not only equal themselves with, but even advance themselves above
Apostles and Evangelists, taking more upon them then even they did.

Secondly, I observe the cause of PAVLS love to beloved and fellow-worker. The
latter is the cause of the former, therefore was PHILEMON beloved of PAVL,
because his fellow-worker in the ministry.

Note then, that those that are joined together Those that are joined in
vocation, should be joined in affection.
dearly to love one another. True it is, that the general calling of a
Christian should be a sufficient bond, to knit together in true love the hearts
of all Christians. But when to this bond there comes a second of our special
callings, our hearts should be more firmly and fastly knit together, that so
it might appear, that when our hearts shall be linked together by the bond of
nature, or Christian and special calling, that a threefold cord is not easily
broken. But where shall we find this sweet conjunction of beloved, and
fellow-worker? In the most men the Proverb is verified, Figulus figulo
inuidet; One Potter enuies another. But far be this envy from al Christians
of what calling soever, specially of the Ministry. The Ministers must love
together as Brethren, and with one heart and hand give themselves to the Lords
business. Far be from them the mind of the Monopolists, that they should
go about to ingrosse the Word of God to themselves: nay rather, with MOSES let
them wish that all Gods people were Prophets. Christ taught his Disciples, who
themselves were Laborers in his Harvest, to pray the Lord to send forth
Laborers into his Harvest, Matthew. 9.

The second principal party, to whom PAVL more specially writes, is the other
head of the Family, APPHIA, PHILEMONS wife, who has the same title of beloved
given her with her husband.

VERSE. 2. And to our beloved APPHIA, etc.
HEre first observe, that the wife is the The wife is the husbands companion in
the government of the Family.
of the Family, and for the ordering of domestical affairs.

Therefore PAVL writes not only to PHILEMON, but also to APPHIA, judging her
consent necessary for the entertainment of ONESIMVS into the Family.

PAVL did not think it fit for the husband to take a servant into the family,
against his wives consent. And this is the reason why APPHIA, though a woman,
is set before ARCHIPPVS, not only a man, but a Minister, because she had more
to do in this matter, being a Mistress in the family, then he, who, (as it may
not improbably be coniectured) boorded only with them. Whereas if he had only
put in her name for remembrance sake, or for salutation, then doubtless, he
would have set ARCHIPPVS before her.

Howsoever then, the husband has the highest place of authority in the house,
yet he must acknowledge his wife given him of God an assistant and
fellow-helper in government, and therefore not deny her that privilege and
right, which God has given her. See Proverbs 31. verse. 27. 1. Tim. 5. 14.

PAVL calling APPHIA beloved, as well as PHILEMON, Who shall find a virtuous
woman? If then PHILEMON and APPHIA meet together, let them both bless God
each for other.

Lastly, let us learn by PAVLS example to love

Thus much of those parties, to whom principally PAVL writes.

Those whom these his Letters less respect, follow:

First, ARCHIPPVS, of whom mention is made, Col. 4. He was one of the Ministers
of that Church, and as it seems, dwelt with PHILEMON. Therefore PAVL writes
also unto him concerning this private business, as being next to the
Governors of the House; a principal member therein, in regard of his calling.
He therefore, by that credit and authority which he had with PHILEMON and
APPHIA, might much further this cause.

This ARCHIPPVS is set forth by the title of PAVLS Fellow-souldier, that is, by
a Metaphor, a fellow-Minister.

Here then we see, that Ministers are compared Soldiers. Let us see then
wherein this resemblance Ministers are Soldiers.
stands.

A Minister therefore is a Soldier, 1. in the Field, 1. in the Field.
2. in the Garrison; first, in the Field, two ways, 1. in Conflict, 2. in
Victory.

First, in Warring and Conflicting, and that specially 1. in Conflict. with 3.
enemies. 1. Satan's temptations.
with three enemies: first, with Satan's Temptations, Matthew. 4. 1. As soon as
ever Christ was installed into the Office of his Doctorship, he was led by the
Spirit into the Wilderness, to encounter hand to hand with this enemy: For
how shall he be able to relieve the tempted, who himself is wholly
unexperienced in temptations? It is therefore worthily said, That Prayer,
Reading, Meditation, and Temptations, make a Divine. Therefore PAVL, 2. Cor.
12. 7. was buffeted by this enemy.

Secondly, With Persecutions, 2. TIM. 2. 3. Suffer 2. Persecutions.
Affliction, as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. The Ministers being principal
Soldiers, even the Standerd-bearers in this Spiritual Army, Satan will most
fiercely rage against them, not only in his own person, but in his wicked
Imps, enraging their malicious affections and setting them on fire with the
fire of Hell. As then the good Captain must not fly when the enemy comes,
but stand to it, and fight it out, otherwise he betrays the Army; so must the
faithful Shepherd keep his ground, and not stir anynch, for fear of this
enemy. O, say some Ministers, if we do so, we shall receive dangerous
wounds, our mouths shall be stopped, we shall be imprisoned, etc. What of all
this? know they not, that they are Soldiers, and therefore, that it is a part
of their Office to suffer Affliction, as well as to preach the Gospel, though
in truth their very suffering is a real preaching to all that hear of it?
Therefore S. PAVL says of himself, Ephesians. 6 20. That he was the Ambassador of
Christ, even in his bonds. Hence it is, that LVKE calls his History the Acts
of the Apostles, though it be specially of their sufferings, because even their
passions were actions, they enlarged the Kingdom of Christ by their sufferings.

Thirdly, with the perverse understanding, will and 3. The corrupt nature of
Man.
affections of sinful man: of this Conflict, the Apostle speaks, 2. Cor. 10.
4. Our wills being so contrary to the will of God, will not so easily yield,
but will hold out as long as they can, kicking and spurning against the
Ministers. But the Minister like a good Soldier must plant the great Ordnance
of legal menaces against these high walls, and though it be long ere he
overcome, yet, which is a property of a good Soldier, and so of this
Spiritual Soldier too, 2. Tim. 2. 24, 25. he must patiently hold out his
siege, and not break up, if they yield not at the first.

This is the Conflict of this Spiritual Soldier. Now his Victory; which is
excellently described, 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6. consisting of two parts.

First, the Victory over the Elect, who are taken 2. in Victory, and that 1.
over the Elect.
captive, and made willingly to subject themselves to Jesus Christ, against
whom formerly they fought under Satan's banner. We cast down (says the
Apostle, 2. Cor. 10.) Holds and every high thing that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. O, this is a noble Victory, and these are noble Warriors indeed, who
can subdue the rebellious wills of men, and tame their affections. Other
Warriors may subdue the outward man, but they cannot overcome the stout heart,
that will rebel still inwardly, even then when the outward man perforce is
constrained to obedience. Now if he be a valiant Soldier that can get victory
over his own affections, yea, far more valiant then he that wins a City,
as SOLOMON witnesses, Proverb. 16. 32. How valiant a Soldier is he then, who
can obtain this victory over other men's affections? CAESAR'S and ALEXANDERS
victories are nothing comparable to this glorious conquest, which the Ministers
get in the hearts of men, when they convert them.

Secondly, part of the Victory is over the reprobate, 2. Over the Reprobate.
who are quite killed with the spiritual Sword, and because they will not bend,
are broken to pieces. Of this the Apostle speaks in the same place, Having
vengeance ready against all disobedience. Thus does the Minister play the
Soldier in the Field.

He resembles also the Garrison Soldier: For 2. In the Garrison.
after that he is returned home victorious from the Field with his Captives,
now become sworn Soldiers of Jesus Christ, the Devil and the World not
enduring the least feather to be plucked from off their wing, will be sure to
make assaults upon them, for the regaining and recovering out of his hands
those men which he has taken Captives. As therefore before, he was armed with
offensive Weapons in the Field, wherewith he oppugned Satan and his Army; so
now, though returned home glorious in victory, yet must not sit down and rest
him, as though all were now dispatched, but on with his defensive Weapons, that
he may be able to maintain and hold his own. Hence it is, that the Minister
is compared to a Watchman standing on the top of a Tower, to see if he can
descrie any enemies coming against the City, Hab. 2.

And herein first of all consists the second part of the Ministers
Souldiership at home, namely, in having a wakefull eye, to discern even the
clouds of danger even arising a far off; and thereupon to give warning.
Secondly, having so done, which is the halfe-arming of his people, according to
the Proverb (forewarned, fore-armed) he must fortify and make them strong
against the power of the Adversaries: first, by instructing them how to carry
themselves, how both to wear and how to use that complete Harness of the
Christian Soldier. Thus like a good Captain does he train his Soldiers,
teaching their hands to fight, and fitting their fingers for the Battle.
Secondly, by praying for them; wherein he plays the valiant Soldier
indeed, combating and conflicting with the Lord God himself. This is called
standing in the Gappe, and making up of the Hedge, Ezech. 22. 30. Look as the
wise and provident Martiallist will see where the City is weakest, when the
Walls are any thing decayed, and will bend his Forces most of all to fortify
that place, knowing the Enemy will be sure to take the advantage of that
place, for his more easy entering upon them: so likewise does the faithful
Minister consider with himself, where the sins of the people have most
weakened them, and made any breaches in their Walls, any gappes in their Fence,
for Gods judgments to run in upon them, and there does he make up the Breach,
and stand up in the Gappe; as the Magistrate by executing Justice and
Judgment, in the example of PHINEES, Psalm. 106. 30. so he, by earnest
praying, and calling upon the Name of the Lord, in the example of AARON, Numb.
16. 47.

And thus we see wherein the Souldiership of the Minister consists. Let us
now see the use of this Doctrine. The uses are two; first, to the Minister;
secondly, to the People.

The uses, respecting the Ministers, are first general, secondly, special.
General are these.

The first use is that, which PAVL makes to TIMOTHY, Tim. 2. 4. who having
compared the Ministry to a Warfare in the third Verse, infers in the
fourth, No man that warreth, intangleth himself with the things of this life,
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. A man that is
pressed out for a Soldier, must take his leave of all other his affairs and
businesses, and give his attendance upon his General. Then is it no time for
him to go make Bargains, to exercise Trade and Traffic. So must it be with
the Ministers; They must attend upon this Spiritual Warfare wholly; this will
altogether take them up: They cannot be troubling and busying their hands with
Civil Affairs, and fighting the Battles of the Lord, at once. The Soldier
being pressed out, accounts himself as it were no man of this World, he will
make his Will, set his House in order, and takes his farewell of Friends, Wife,
and Children, and all, as not knowing whether ever he shall see them again, or
no: So should the minds of all Christians, but specially of Ministers, be
abstracted from the World, and wholly devoted to heavenly Meditations.

Secondly, Since every Minister is a Spiritual Weapons which PAVL speaks of,
able to cast down mighty Holds, and that they be able skilfully to handle
those Weapons, both for offense and defense. This gives a shrewd check to
many in the Ministry, whose hands the Lord never taught to fight his
Battles. Are not these men guilty of the blood of the Lords people, who take
upon them to be their Captains and Conductors, and yet have no skill at all in
managing of Martial affairs?

Again, other there be, who come not naked and wholly unarmed into the
Battle; nay, they come clad with very glorious and glittering Harness to the
outward eye, but in truth they were as good almost, if not altogether, be
wholly vnharnessed: Those I mean, who come to this Spiritual Warfare with
carnal Weapons; who come to encounter with GOLIATH with SAVLS Harness, and not
with DAVID'S Sling; with the blunt Sword of mere humane eloquence of the words
of men, Philosophers, and Fathers only, and not with the sharp two-edged
Sword of the Word of GOD. Well, our Weapons must be proportioned to our
Warfare; our Warfare is Spiritual, our Weapons therefore must be Spiritual.

Thirdly, Since the life of a Minister is the life of withal, he carries his
Soul continually in his hand. Many think, the lives of Ministers are fair
and easy; they get their living with speaking a few words. So true is the
Proverb, War is sweet to the unexperienced. But, if being in the room of
some faithful Minister, they had felt but the half of their burden, they
would sing another song. Let none therefore dream of an easy and pleasant
life in this Vocation, so be it he mean to be conscionable in discharge of
his duty: no; let him beforehand cast the worse, and examine himself,
whether he be able to go through the brunts and agonies of this Spiritual
Warfare; let him say to himself as Christ said to the sons of ZEBEDEVS, Am I
able to be baptized with that Baptism a Minister must be baptized with; to
drink of that Cup he must drink of? Assure thy self, that it is far
harder with the Ministers, the chief Soldier, then with common Christians,
the inferior: Though in our Wars, the common Soldier commonly goes by the
worse; but the case is otherwise here. The Ministers standing in the forefront
of the Battle are in great danger; withal, Satan bends his force most
against them, through their sides striking indeed at the whole Church; for when
once the Shepherds shall be smitten, the Sheep easily will be scattered.
Therefore Satan says to all of his host, as once the King of Aram to his men;
Fight (says he) neither against great nor small, but only against the King of
Israel. So Satan; Regard not so much common Christians, fight specially
against their Guides and Captains.

These be the general Uses. Now also from this Doctrine, That the Calling of a
Minister is a Spiritual Warfare, arise many special Uses, respecting the
Ministers. We saw the specialls wherein the Ministers are to show themselves
Soldiers; thence then Ministers must take notice of sundry special Duties.

First then, since they are Soldiers, they must not think it strange, or take
any discouragement, if sometimes Satan be let loose upon them, to beat them
black and blue with his temptations; if the World also raise up persecution
against them: for they are Soldiers, and therefore they must look to have
enemies to fight withal. If then we be disgraced and irrespectiuely used at
the worlds hands, let us not like cowardly Soldiers leave our station, and
yield to these enemies. Nay, we must know, it is a part of our Calling, as
well to wrestle with Persecutions, in suffering, as with the wills and
affections of men, in Preaching. And when we shall be hindered from discharge
of the latter, by being called to do the former, we must know for our
comforts, we are in a most proper work of our Calling, which is, to be
Spiritual Martiallists.

2. One special part of our War being with the stubborn and stiff-necked
wills and affections of sinners, if so be, that after long warring with them,
still they remain iarring and snarling at the Word preached, so that with the
Prophet we may say, All the day long have I stretched forth my hands to a
rebellious and gainsaying people; let us not faint in our spirits, and despair
wholly of victory; for why? we are Soldiers. And will an Army of Soldiers
leave a besieged City, if they conquer it not presently? No; but they will
stay a long time, enduring much hardness, as some have done ten years
together, and will not give over their Siege, till they have subdued it. We
the Spiritual Soldiers in like manner laying siege to the blind
understanding, the way ward will, and crooked affections of sinful men, though
at the first they hold out, making their parts good against us, yet must we
not hereupon break up our Siege; but since the issue of the Battle is in the
Lords hands, we must therefore, as PAVL wills, patiently expect, if the Lord
will at any time give them repentance, and cause them to yield themselves as
Captives to us his men of War. Even as the Fisherman, to whom also we are
resembled, though he has caught no fishes all this day, will yet for all that
come again to morrow, and see if he can have better success.

3. The end of all the Soldiers Warring, being Victory over his enemies, the
Minister of the Word must here take notice of the time and right end which they
must propound to themselves in their Ministry, namely, Victory. But what
Victory? Not thine own; that thou might win the Garland, and carry away
the praise of a fine Preacher. If we propound this end to our selves, we are
not faithful Soldiers to our General and grand Captain, CHRIST JESUS. As
those Soldiers who seek the enrichment of themselves with spoil, and not the
common good of the Country, are unfaithful to their Country. As he then is
a good Soldier, who seeks the victory of his King, to bring those against
whom he fights, to subjection unto his own King* and so to make them
fellow-subiects as himself: So likewise here that Minister is a good Soldier
of JESUS CHRIST, who aims only at this, that CHRIST JESUS may get the
victory, and reign in the hearts and consciences of his enemies. His victory,
and not our own, must be the end of our Ministry, even if it may be, that
quiet and peaceable victory, which is obtained without bloodshed, the enemies
submitting and resigning themselves into the hands of the Conqueror: for the
end of other War, specially this Spiritual War, is Peace, even the
peaceable and flourishing Kingdom of CHRIST, established in the Conscience.
But if this peaceable Victory cannot be obtained, then the bloody Victory
must be the end of our War: According to that, LVKE 19. Those mine enemies
which would not have me reign over them, bring them and slay them before me.

Ministers therefore must not be afraid to execute the Vengeance PAVL speaks
of, upon the obstinate, and to stab them at the very heart with the threatenings
of the Law; knowing, that the end of their Ministry is as well this violent
Victory over the Reprobate, in crushing them to pieces as a Potters Vessel,
as the peaceable Victory over the Elect, in captiuating them unto CHRIST.

In both these victories does the Lord equally account them his faithful
Soldiers; unto him they are always a sweet savor, as well when they are a
savor of death unto death unto the wicked, as when they are a savor of life
unto life unto the godly, 2. Cor. 2. 15.

4. The part of a good Soldier, being as well to defend and keep that which
they have won from their enemies, as to win it, the Ministers must here take
notice of another duty, carefully to fence and fortify those Holds and
Castles, which they have won from Satan, for though he be dispossessed, yet, as
it is in the Gospel, he will labor to reenter. And oftentimes it falls out,
by the negligence of many Ministers, that they quickly lose that which they
were long in getting. Have we then gained any unto the Lord? O how careful an
eye should we have over such, that Satan steal them not from us? how we
should ply them with continual instructions and exhortations? As the Apostles
did, writing to those Churches, that they had planted. How earnestly should
they strive in their prayers for them, that so they may be able to say the
words of our Savior? John 17. Father, I have kept those that thou have given
me, not one of them is lost. Thus much for the Ministers. The use of this
Doctrine to the people is:

First, to let them see what estate they are in naturally, far are they from
having any disposition of themselves, to come and subject themselves to Christ,
that they resist and rebel against him and his Ministers. Therefore are the
Ministers called Soldiers, because they wage war with us, laboring to
subdue us to Christ: of thy self therefore thou come not to Christ, but the
Father, by the hands of his Ministers his Soldiers, as it were by force of
arms, must draw thee. This striving and struggling of the Ministers with us,
must cause us to see and lament our own natural opposition against God. If we
were willing of our selves, what needed they so Souldierlike to fight with us?

Secondly, since the Ministers are Gods Soldiers, Acts 7. continue resisting
the holy Ghost, we shall find that the Spirit of the Lord will not always
strive with us, but in the fury of his anger will even grind us to powder. If
we will not suffer them to obtain a peaceable victory, they will get a
bloody victory: for these Soldiers always return with the victory, if*
not peaceable, then bloody; if not in converting, in confounding us; if not
taking us alive, and making us the subjects of Christ, in slaying us, and
making us the footstool of Christ. If the sword of the Spirit prick not thy
heart, as those men, Acts 2. and cause thee in compunction to come and fall
down at the feet of these spiritual Soldiers; it shall be sheathed in thy
bowels, and made drunken with the blood of thy soul, and the venomous darts of
the Almighty shall stick in thy ribs for ever. This is the second death, this
is the vengeance which Gods Ministers have ready against disobedience.

If thou be wise, therefore hold out no longer, open the door of thy heart,
besieged by these spiritual Soldiers, and entertayne into the same the King
of glory, for he is mighty in battle; and if thou yield not willingly,
while peace is offered, and his Ambassadors beseech thee to be reconciled,
he will hew and hacke thee in pieces, and make thee fuel fit to feed the
flames of that eternal fire: He will quash thee with his iron rod, as it is in
the second Psalm. And therefore as it is in the words following: Be wise now,
O ye Kings, etc. Kiss the Son, subject your selves to him, lest he tear
you in pieces. If Jerusalem will not be gathered under Christ's wing, her
habitation shall be left desolate. O thou graceless man, who have held out in
opposition against the Ministry, besieging the Castle of thy heart a long
time, and have not yet resigned and given it up, behold thy fearful danger,
hear the Lord, saying, as once in the old world, Genes. 6. My spirit shall not
always strive with this Rebel. Yea see him proportioning his wedge to the
timber, and because thou will not yield, ready prepared to blow thee up with
the Gunpowder of his fearful indignation.

Thirdly, see how much we are bound and beholding Esa. 3. If they go,
farewell all. Who then shall fight the battles of the Lord? who then shall
go in and out before the Lords people? who shall stand up in the gap in the
evil day? Then may we cry after them, as once ELISHA after ELIAS, Our Fathers,
Our Fathers, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. Thus much of the first
person, whom this Epistle less concerns, viz. ARCHIPPVS. The second follows
in these words.

And the Church that is in thy house.
HEre some understand that Company of the Christians, that upon the Sabbath met
together, for divine service, in PHILEMONS house; for in those times they had
not the liberty of public meetings: but, I like their interpretation better,
who think that in these words, PAVL more specially meant PHILEMONS own Family.

But why should PAVL write to them? what had

First, PAVL knew well enough, that whatsoever Colossians, that that Epistle
which he wrote to them, should be read in the Church of the Laodiceans. And
PETER tells the Jews, 2. Pet. 3. that that which PAVL had written to the
Romans, Romans 2. concerning the long suffering of God, he wrote to them, As
our beloved brother PAVL wrote to you.

Secondly, another cause may be this. PAVL knew that it was a matter of no
small moment, for fellow-seruants to be well affected each to other. If
therefore that former evil opinion, which they had justly conceived of
ONESIMVS, did still continue in their minds, this Epistle read of them, would
make them to be of another mind. Otherwise, the other servants seeing ONESIMVS,
a thief and fugitive, in favor with their Master, as well, if not more then
themselves, might take it indignely, as the prodigals elder brother did the
intertaynment, which his father gave him, Luke 16. What says he? Thou never
did half so much for me that have lived honestly with thee at home, as thou
have done now for this riotous Spend-thrift, that has consumed thy goods upon
whores So. in like manner might the mouths of PHILEMONS other servants be
opened against him: We have been faithful servants unto thee thus long, and
never broke out into any misdemeanour, and yet, lo, thou preferrest before us
this pilfering Purloyner, that has stolen thy goods, and run away from thee.
But this Letter of PAVL would not only stop their mouths, thus opening
themselves against PHILEMON, but also open both their hearts and mouths to
entertayne and embrace ONESIMVS, with all courtesy and kindness, and to
perform mutual duties toward him, as to their fellow-seruant: hereby it may
appear how careful PAVL was, that the peace should not be broken in one
Family. How much more studious ought we to be of the public peace of the whole
Church, even pursuing after it, in case it fly from us!

But here chiefly we are to observe, that PHILEMONS* Family has this honorable
name of the Church given unto it. Which argues as the commendable care of
PHILEMON, in the government of his Family, so likewise the Religion and
godliness of the whole Family.

Hence then we learn what kind of Families little kind of Churches, in the
which there should Christians Families should be little Churches.
be that sweet order and comeliness, that in them we may see a lively image
and representation of the Church.

How may a Family come to deserve this title?

For this purpose many things are required, common to all in the Family,
others, proper to some.

Common to all, are these two points. First, if we 1. A platform of household
government.
would have our Families Churches, then we that are members in Families, must
labor to become true members of the Church: for a company of profane men is
not the house of God, but a Den and Dungeon of Thieves, Adulterers, Atheists,
conspiring together against God. The which yet is not so to be understood, as
if the name of a Church could not be attributed to a Family, in which there are
some not members of the Church, for even in the Church it self there are some
in it that are not of it. ADAMS house, Genes. 4. is called the face of God, in
which CAIN, a castaway, was borne and brought up: for every denomination is
from the worthier part. We call the commixtion of Water and Wine, by the name
of Wine, though happily there be more Water. Wherefore, if there shall be but two
righteous persons found in a Family, we will afford it the honor of this name.
But how much more then may that Family challenge the name of a Church, in the
which there shall not be so much as one Canaanite, and uncircumcised person? In
which all the members of the Family shine most brightly, as Gemmes and
Diamonds, to the great grace of the whole Family. Let therefore every one of a
Family be desirous, the house he dwells in, should be Bethel, Gods house, bring
one stone to the making of this spiritual house, that so he may be able to
say, This house is a holy edifice, and I am one of the living stones that help
to the making of it so.

This is that which DAVID prays for, in the behalf of the posterity of the
Israelites, that they might be Corner-stones, polished and graven to make a
Princely Palace: for howsoever that houses may be Gods Temple, in which there
are many unpolished stones, unfit for the making of GODS Temple, yet they, as
much as in them is, deprave it of this honorable style. Neither does any part
of this holy praise of the Church of God, in a Family, belong to thee, who
being in the Family, art a member of the Church malignant. A spot thou art, and
blot in the Family, and being an vngrauen and vncarued stone, marrest the grace
of the whole building: for the grace of a building is a sweet uniformity and
agreeableness of one part with another. But this uniformity is quite spoiled
by this deformity; who being no other kind of stone then thou wast in the
quarry, can not sort, nor suit with those stones, which the art and skillful
finger of the holy Ghost has formed and fashioned aright, has fined and
fitted to be living stones to make a spiritual Temple. It is a goodly sight to
see a long train of men, all in one livery; but one among them of another
livery, dashes all the sightlinesse. So the goodly sight that otherwise would
be in this building, is exceedingly disgraced, when these misshapen and
unfashioned stones, are joined with the most artificial stones, whereon God
himself has bestowed his most exquisite workmanship. If then every soul in
the Family will be one of these stones, the Family will not only be a Temple,
but a most glorious and beautiful Temple. Now though this duty be common to
all, yet in more special sort it belongs to the Heads of the Family, who
are, as it were, the corner stone of this little Temple, in their own Family.

Secondly, that a Family may obtain the commendation of being a Church, this
is another thing that we require generally of al in the Family namely, that
look what kind of men they are, or at least would seem to be in the Church,
and public Congregation, the same they would show themselves to be in the
Family, and private conuersement one with another. Now all make show of
Religion in the Church: therefore if that the marks and footsteps thereof
shall be seen also, as well within the private walls of the Family, then shall
those walls be the walls also of Gods Temple. If our Families should be
straightly examined by this rule, in many of them, yea, most of them, sooner
should we find Satan's Court, then Gods House. For he that ere-while in the
Temple sounded forth with a loud voice, the praises of God, in the Church, is
scarce at the Church door, but he belcheth forth most beastly and bloody
blasphemies. O how much changed from that man, which even now he was in the
Church! Thus, out of the same Fountain, comes both sour and sweet; sweet in
the Church, sour in the house; blessing in the Church, cursing and cursed
swearing in the Family. In the Church also, what show of humility make we,
casting down our selves at Gods footstool, and confessing our own
vileness? In the Family, as though we had left all matter of humiliation
behind us in the Church, how proudly, and insolently, how scornefully and
disdaynfully carry we our selves one to another? In the Church also, what
semblance make we of brotherly love, friendly coming together into one place,
and with one consent joining together as one body in Gods service? But in the
Family by daily contentions and brawlings, how do we rend and tear our
selves one from another. In the Church, by our very coming thither, we make
fair pretense of performing obedience to all the Doctrines shall be delivered,
but in our private life we even tread and trample them under our feet. Thus
are they Devils incarnate in their own houses, which will needs seem Saints,
yea, petty gods in Gods house. When then there is such a discord and jarring
betwixt our Church-life and Family-life, how can we look our Families should
be called or counted Churches?

These be things common to all: now follow peculiar to some: first, to the
chief: secondly, the inferior. Those things which respect the chief, are
specially these: first, As much as in them lies, let them entertayne none into
their Family, whom God has not first entertained into his. Let them take none
into their house, which is not of the household of Faith; herein shall our
Families notably resemble the Church. The Church does not indifferently receive
all, and admit into her society by the Sacrament of Baptism, the children of
Turks and Canibals, strangers from the Covenant, but only such ordinarily as
are of a holy Seed, the offspring of religious Parents. So likewise must our
Families, if we would have them like Churches, be something dainty who^ they
receive. They must not be common receptacles for every one that will offer
themselves: for we showed before, that if we would have our Families enjoy this
name and praise of a Church fully and without spot, that all the members
thereof, for ought we know, be true members of the Church. Therefore Masters of
Families must provide them of servants, not only such as may be serviceable
unto them, and fit for their domestical employments, which is that, which most
do only regard, but especially such as do truly fear God. Otherwise thy
house is a cage of unclean birds, yea, a Stye and Stable of Swine, rather then
Gods Temple, wherein an Altar is erected to him. Therefore DAVID'S example is to
be imitated, Psalm. 101. whose eyes were unto the faithful of the Land, that he
might pick even the choicest of them for his service, and that so much the
rather, because far more easily may we keep out, then cast such ghests out
of our houses.

Secondly, The chief in the Family must resemble the chief in the Church,
namely, the Pastors, etc. thereof; and that not only in those things which
concern Gods Service, but outward Discipline also.

For the first. There are two special Duties of the Pastor, respecting Gods
Service, Preaching and

First therefore, they must instruct the whole Family in that Doctrine which is
according to Godliness.

This they must do, first, in Words; which PAVL commands, Ephesians. 6. and
which God himself commends in ABRAHAM, Genesis 18. And lest any should say,
ABRAHAM was a Prophet, and that his Practice may not be exemplarie to private
men, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. all Masters of Families are charged with the same duty. Where
also, lest they should pretend for excuse, the dullness of their children and
servants, to conceive the instructions; they are commanded to set an edge upon
them, and to deliver them piercingly. Married wives also are bound to the same
duty, in the example of BATHSHEBA, Prou 31. nurturing young SOLOMON; and EVNICE
training up TIMOTHY from a child in the Scriptures. For in that excellent
character and description of the good Huswife, Prou. 31. this is one thing,
That she opens her mouth wisely, and the Law of Grace is under her lips.

Here then is censured that government of the Family, which is only Civil,
not Religious. When Masters give charges to their servants for their household
businesses, they can set edges upon them, by often repetitions, and
threatenings: with their children also they can sport and play; but not one word
of Gods Word. They refer them wholly for that to the Ministry; the which
profits little, unless this preparation of private instruction go before.
So we read, that IAAKOB sanctified his Family, before they went to Bethel,
Genesis 32. and JOB his sons, before the Sacrifices. Therefore PAVL sends
Women to their Husbands at home, to learn, whom happily their careless Husbands
had referred over to the Minister. Assuredly, if the Word of God sound not in
thy house, as in the Church, it is unworthy the name of a Church?

Secondly, they must teach likewise by example: With DAVID, walking in the
uprightness of their hearts in the midst of their house: for the eye of the
whole Family is upon the Governors thereof, as is the eye of the Church upon
their Pastors.

Secondly, As in Preaching, so likewise in Praying, for the House of God is
called the House of Prayer. If therefore this principal part of Gods service
be wanting in any house, how can it be called Gods House? These things are not
yet so tied to the Heads of the Family, but in greater Families, the multitude
of businesses, concurring with the multitude of persons therein, they may, as
ABRAHAM, Genesis 24. have their Deputies.

Thus must they be like the Pastors in things concerning Gods service.

Secondly, they must resemble them in their Discipline, causing their household
Discipline to be answerable to the Church Discipline.

That this thing may be done, these things are required:

First, That which is the ground of all good Discipline, they must have a very
watchful and attentive eye over every soul in the Family; so that they may
know the several natures, conditions, and dispositions of all, and so
proportion their government accordingly. This is rightly to play the Bishop;
who has that name, from his careful ouerseeing of the Flock, Acts 20. 20.
For the good Pastor will not rest in a general care of his Flock, but he
will heedfully mark and observe every particular Sheep, and so know of what
humor and spirit they be, and so likewise take notice of those which are
diseased. Therefore Ioh. 10. 3. the good Shepherd is able to call all his
Sheep by their names.

If then thou would have thy Family like a Church, thou that art Chief
therein, must be like those that are Chief in the Church, in having this
prying and observing Episcopal eye; so that every ones manners, speeches,
actions, and whole course and carriage may be thoroughly marked.

This JOB practiced notably; insomuch, that his sons, though men grown, and
dwelling apart from him, could not yet banquet among themselves, but such was
his vigilant eye over them, he knew of it presently, and withal used means to
understand what was done and spoken at the Feasts; which those his words argue,
It may be my sons have blasphemed; that is, Albeit I can find out nothing
done amiss, yet it may be, they have done some evil which I know not of,
neither yet could possibly come to the knowledge of, for all my observation.

But now adays, Children and Servants may feast, and run about hither and
thither, if not without the priuitie and knowledge of their Parents and
Masters, yet without their observing of them, and their demeanor, at such
times. This is the Fountain and Original of most Disorder in Families. This
vigilant Eye is wanting, which should walk through all the corners of the
House, and ferret out Naughtie-packes, going about mischief. Too much trust is
given to other men's eyes. They will see and hear all with other men's eyes and
ears; forgetting the Proverb, The eye of the Master fatteth the Horse. It is
this diligent and circumspect eye of the Master that fatteth the House too, and
makes it have the goodly face of a Church. Therefore it is SALOMONS Precept,
Prou. 27. 23. Take heed to thy Herds, and know the estate of thy Flock.

If SOLOMON would have men thus carefully, with their own eyes, look to their
own Sheep; brutish creatures; how much more to the souls of their servants,
the Sheep of Jesus Christ, bought with his blood? Are they not much more worth
then Sheep?

Secondly, After that the Eye has laid these foundations, the Hand must build
thereon.

First, As soon as it has received warning from the Eye of some evil that is
in brewing, in stretching forth it self, and arming it self to hinder it, and
keep the authors thereof within their bounds. For this purpose, both
Admonitions and Threatenings must be used, but especially, wholesome Laws must
be enacted, for the prohibiting and preventing of things unlawful. For so, in
times past, the Apostles, and now, the faithful Pastors, do still meet with
those evils which are approaching toward the Church. Wherefore, as in the
Church and Commonweal, so likewise in the Family, evil manners must occasion
good Laws.

By the which, the way being hedged up against all Wickedness and Disorder, a
sweet Order and comely Conuenience, the very life of every Society, may
flourish, and so cause an image of the Church to be seen in the Family. For it
is the Precept of the Apostle, concerning the Church, That all things should be
done there in Order and Comeliness; for God is the God of Order, and not of
Confusion.

O the sweet and fair face of that Family, wherein by virtue of good order,
every member shall be kept in tune and temper. Certainly, no Harmony so
melodious and pleasant to the ear, as this sight is acceptable to the eye. The
Queen of Shebaes ear was not so much affected with the wisdom of SOLOMON,
as a lively Oracle sounding in his Family, but her eye was as much ravished
with the beholding of that seemly order and method observed of all in his
house. And this latter is noted to be the cause of that her admiration and
exclamation, as well as the former. And surely, unless there be a resemblance
of Church Discipline in the government of the Family, as of Doctrine in the
instruction thereof, though there may be an Image of the Church, yet a very
dark and obscure one, much deformed and defaced, not able to delight the eye
of the Queen of Sheba.

In such Families therefore, where the Guides have no care to maintain this
order, that every man may know his place, and do that which is required of
him by virtue thereof, but the reins are let loose to every man, to do as he
will, there is an image rather of Hell, and of that confused Chaos at the
beginning of the Creation, of that Cyclopicall Ataxie, of that Israeliticall
Anarchie, Judge. 17. when every man did that which was good in his own eyes;
of any, or all of these, rather then of a well-gouerned Church. In the which,
as there be diverse Officers; some superior, some inferior; some, Pastors and
Teachers; some, Elders and Deacons; some, that are under the care and
government of these Officers: so, they all carry themselves according to their
places, for the good of the whole Body. And thus, not the least string being
out of tune, what an heavenly Harmony will this be?

According to this frame let our Families be fashioned, that there be a due
Decorum kept and observed of all; a comeliness of subjection, as PAVL
requires, 1. Tim. 3. in the inferiors; a comeliness also of commanding and
ruling in the superiors: And what then shall let, but such a Family may be
baptized with the Name of CHRIST'S CHVRCH?

Secondly, The same hand which made the Sword of good Laws, for the prevention
of evil to come, must draw it out, for the punishment of evil past, and not
suffer it to lie rusting in the sheath. If then any shall break those good
Laws which the Governors of the Families have made, let the punishments
threatened be inflicted; that so, those who would not obey the Precepts of the
Law, may perforce be constrained to obey the threatenings thereof.

Now herein must there be an imitation of Church Discipline. Look then, as in
the Church the offender is first admonished diverse times, and at length not
profiting by those admonitions, is excommunicated and dis-synagogued: so
likewise in thy Family finding wicked and ungodly ones, first must thou deal
with them by admonition, reprehension, castigation; and if for all these
means, they still remain incorrigible, then cast them out of thy house, and
think their room better then their company. If ISMAEL and HAGAR become
Scoffers, out of doors with them, send them packing presently; off with the
rotten members, lest the sound ones be infected with their contagion: for how
shall thy house be Gods Garden, when such roots of bitterness grow in it; in
the which, not so much as barren Trees may be suffered to cumber the ground?
Till thy Family be purged of such, it is more like a Wood and Wilderness, full
of brambles and briars, then the fair and pleasant Eden of the Lord. Therefore
DAVID, Psalm. 101. solemnly vowed, before he came to be King, to the intent,
that his own Court might be Gods Court, That he would displace and move out
of it all wicked ones, even those who only did but give suspicion by their
looks and countenance of wickedness.

If then, contrary to that which once ELIPHAZ advised JOB, we should grant
unto Iniquity harbor and habitation in our house, think we, that God would
cohabitate? No; he is of pure eyes, and cannot behold iniquity. How can we
think our houses, being full of Hogs and Dogs, to be fit for the
entertainment of that great and mighty King of Kings? First, drive these out
of doors; otherwise, God will not vouchsafe thy house the honor of casting
his eye upon, much less of entering into and dwelling in it; God and
wickedness are insociable, they will not abide under the same Roof together.

If the King were to come to thy house, and there were some in it he could not
abide, would thou not discharge them thine house, if so be thou were
desirous of the Kings presence? And entertaining Traitors in thy house,
Traitors against God, think thou, that he will come and pitch his Tent, and
take up his Lodging with thee?

These be the things proper to the Chief. Now follow those which belong to the
inferiors; in the which, as in the former, their Governors resembled the
Pastors of the Church, they must resemble the rest of the Body of the Church.

First, In matter of Doctrine. As the Church acknowledges These. 5. Heb. 13.
so must those that are under government, carry themselves reverently and
respectively toward their Governors, cheerfully and conscionably obeying as
all other of their lawful commands, so especially those which concern Gods
worship. And as by the example of the Pastors, the rest of the Church are
stirred up to godliness, Phil. 4. 9. so must the inferiors in the Family be
encouraged, and inflamed to virtue, when they shall see their superiors going
before them.

Secondly, they must resemble the Church in

First, Enduring those Chastisements, either Verbull or Real, which for their
deserts are inflicted, and freely acknowledging the equity of them.

Secondly, If at any time they see any of their fellows mis-behauing himself,
first let them try what they can do themselves by admonition: but if that way
they prevail not, then according to the example of the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Matthew. 18. let them acquaint their Governors therewithal. Thus
JOSEPH told his Father of his brethrens wickedness, Genesis 37. and some of
ISAAKS household, as it seems, told REBECCA of ESAV, Genesis 27. 42. I, but by
this means we shall get our selves ill will, and be called but pick-thanks
and tell-tales for our labor. What then? if by the same means the Family may
be called the Church of God?

The use of this Doctrine is threefold.

The first concerns your Honors, who I doubt To the Lord and Lady Hairington.
not, but according to that wisdom God has given you, do account the name of
a Church the fairest style of your House. Certainly, the outward magnificence
and sumptuousness of the Building, the pleasantness of Situation, the costly
Hangings on the Walls, the rich furniture of Household stuff, the goodly show
of tall and proper personable Men attending; nay, outward Civil Order is
nothing, if the name of the Church be wanting. The smoakie Country Cottage of
a poor man being godly, shadoweth and obscureth the stately and proud Palaces
of profane Princes. Maintain then this Title that still your House may be
Bethel, and not Bethauen.

The second concerns you, whom their Honors have betrusted with the
government of the Family, and have made in stead of their own Eyes and Hands.
Be not then blind, sleepie, or wilfully winking with the Eyes, be not palsy
and trembling Hands, or like the Sluggard hands laid up in his bosom.

Thirdly, and lastly, you whose it is only to obey, are to be admonished in
your places, to have a special respect of the credit and good name of this
House, doing nothing that may bring disgrace, or in any sort deprive it of the
name of a Church; neither rejoice so much that you live in the House of a
Nobleman, as in the House of God. For in his House, the Porters place is far
to be preferred above the place of the Steward, yea of the Master of the House
himself, in the Houses of Princes, being Tabernacles, for the most part, of
iniquity, Psalm. 84.

VERSE. 3. Grace be unto you and Peace from God the Father, etc.
HEre begins the second part of the Christianity teaches humanity.
Preface of this Epistle; which is a Salutation, set down in the form of a
Prayer: in the which, before we consider the particulars of it, we may
observe these points in general:

First, The Civility and Humanity of PAVL, in this and all other of his
Epistles, using such kind and courteous greetings. Christianity therefore is
not severe: neither yet clownish nor rusticall, that it should neglect these
duties of civil courtesy in saluting our Friends and Brethren, either in
writing or speaking. We see how precise PAVL is in the observing of this point
in all his Epistles, and how carefully he sets down the salutations of
others also sometimes. The Christians, in the Primitive Church, had a custom in
their meetings in the public Assemblies, to whetten their salutations, as it
were, with a kiss; which the Apostle calls a holy kiss, not only allowing
it, but also commanding it. Ruth. 2. 4. BOAZ and his Reapers salute each other,
he saying to them; The Lord be with you: they to him; The Lord bless thee. The
Angels themselves have used our forms of salutations, Luke 1. Let no man
therefore account of them as matters of ceremony and fashion, but as of a
Christian duty, necessarily to be performed, unless it be in some cases, as
when the performance of this duty of salutation, may be a hinderance to other
far more necessary duties, Luke 10. 4. 2. King. 4. 29.

Secondly, in this example of PAVLS salutations, Salutations must be holy, and
wherein we crave the greatest blessings that are, at the Lords hands, for the
persons saluted: here then are many kinds of salutations censured.

First, the profane salutation of swearing Swaggerers Not profane,
and rude Ruffians, which is not any holy form or prayer unto God, but a most
fearful tearing and rending of the name of God in pieces, by most horrible
Oaths.

Secondly, the perfidious salvation, such a one Not perfidious,
as IVDAS his was, who betrayed his Master with a kiss: and IOABS, who cloking
his inward malice with sweet and sugared salutations, most villanously murdered
valiant ABNER, even in the act of saluting.

Thirdly, the formal and customarie, and with Not formal.
all nice, curious, and affected kind of saluting, when men are so full of
their ceremonies and complements, that they make themselves foolish and
ridiculous. And herein consists all their grace of their greetings, in
courting, and congeying, and ducking, and such other gestures: but that which
is the very pith and marrow of a Christian salutation, the lifting up of the
heart to God, in desiring the welfare of those they salute, is wholly wanting.
Gestures in saluting are good and commendable, so they may stand with
comeliness, and the simplicity of Christianity. But this is a fault, even in
many, who yet are not so fond and so full of affectation in their salutations
as others, that in saluting their Brethren, with those good and holy forms in
common use, as, God be with you, God save you, etc. they take the holy Name of
God in vain, not having their hearts lifted up to God, whose name they call
upon, but only speaking of custom, and so not minding what they say: A fault
in most; and it ought to be a matter of humiliation unto us, as being an
argument both of the want of fear to God, and love to our Neighbor.
Salutations are Prayers to the Lord, and therefore the name of the Lord must
with all reverence be thought upon, when they are used. Some hence take
occasion to neglect this duty, because they are Prayers, and they think it
not lawful to wish well in Prayer to every one we meet, who sometimes may
happily be going about some wicked enterprise.

But besides, that Charity bids us to think and hope the best in matters
of uncertainty, they should have remembered that of our Savior, Luke 10. Into
whatsoever house ye go, say, Peace be unto this house, and if the Son of
peace be in the house, your peace shall come upon it, if not, your peace shall
return upon you. So then, there is no hurt done whomsoever we salute, so it be
not a notorious Heretic, or some such offender, not much unlike, 2. Ioh. but
if we salute the children of God, we do good to them, our salutations are
effectual means through the blessing of God, to bring upon them the good
desired. If others, we do good to our selves, that good we desire to them,
shall be granted to our selves. The sum then of this whole point of
salutation, in a word, is thus much: first, that we conscionably perform this
duty both by word and writing, Superiors to their Inferiors, as well as on
the contrary, even Kings to their Subjects, to strangers as well as to those of
our acquaintance, Luke 10. 2. that we do it in a holy manner, feeling our
hearts with reverence, both affected to God, and enlarged in love to our
Brethren. Thus much in general.

In this salutation more particularly, we are to consider these two points:

1. The things that PAVL wishes, 1. Grace, 2. Peace.
2. From whom he wishes them, 1. From God the Father, 2. From Jesus Christ
our Lord.

First, for the things desired. The former of them is Grace.

This word Grace, often is taken for the gifts of the Spirit, by a Metonymie of
the efficient, because they come unto us by the grace and free favor of God,
as John 1. 16. And of his fullness have we all received Grace, how taken.
grace upon grace: and Verse 17. Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: and 2.
Cor. 12. My grace is sufficient for thee. But this grace is not here
principally meant by the Apostle in this place.

Therefore, there is a second, and that more proper signification of this word
Grace, for the favor and good will of God, as Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace are
ye saved through faith. And this is that which here the Apostle wishes to
PHILEMON.

Now, this Grace and Favor of GOD is twofold.

First* that favor of God whereby he purposes Two degrees of Gods love.
to make us capable of his favor, and fit to be favored of him, when as in
our selves there was no matter of favor, but only of displeasure. The giving
of Christ unto us, and all the benefits which we receive in Christ, are made
fruits and effects of this favor, Rom 5. 15. Much more the grace of God, and
the gift by grace, has abounded to many. The gift by grace is justification
and reconciliation with God. A man would think we could not be in the love
and favor of God, till Christ had reconciled us. I, but that Christ is given
unto us to be our Reconciler. Whence comes this but of the favor of God,
namely, this first kind of favor, whereby God goes about to fit and prepare
us for his favor? So the Apostle directly affirms, Romans 5. God sets out
his love unto us, that when we were sinners, Christ dyed for us; and Christ
himself, Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten
Son: which is to be understood of such a kind of love and favor, whereby he
is willing, as it were, and desirous to favor us, and not otherwise. For how
then could we be said to be reconciled to God by Christ, if before we were
actually in the love and favor of God? And of this grace our election is made
a fruit, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Who has predestined us to the glory of his grace,
whereby he has freely made us accepted in his Beloved, that is, whereby he
has predestined us.

Secondly, there is another degree of Gods favor, when having a desire to
favor us, and a free disposition to do us good, and because it would not
stand with his Justice to favor the vile and abominable, having further of his
own good pleasure in Christ, fitted us for his favor, he does now take a
singular pleasure and delight in us. So then there is a favor, whereby God
makes us, as I may say, favorable, such as may be favored, and it is the
description of the Apostle himself, Ephesians. 1. 6. By the which grace he has
made us accepted. And there is a further favor whereby having made us
accepted, that is, such as may be accepted, he does indeed accept us, and is
exceedingly well pleased with us. This may be called the favor of complacency.
And this is that favor which so often in the Psalms is called the light of
Gods countenance. The consideration of these distinct, not kinds, but degrees
of Gods favor, is very necessary. For hereby we shall see how the death of
Christ is both the cause and the effect of the favor of God. A cause of this
latter favor, an effect of the former: hereby also we see, how both the favor
of God is merited by Christ for us, and yet free, because it was of the free
favor of God, to vouchsafe unto us the merits of Christ, for the procuring of
his favor. Now in this place both these favors are meant. So that the full
meaning of the Apostle, saying, Grace be unto you from God, is this: The Lord
grant unto you his favor, both that favor whereby you may be made capable of
his favor in being justified through Christ, as also that sweet acceptance of
you being thus fitted for his favor.

What need the Apostle wish unto them the first Election in Christ, and in time
the other fruits thereof, their ingrafting into Christ, Justification and
Adoption?

Though God had vouchsafed them this favor writes, that God would lift up the
light of his countenance upon them; and secondly, for that purpose, because the
pure eyes of God cannot behold iniquity, such as they were in themselves, that
he would of his free favor work and continue that in them, which might draw
his sweet eye toward them, and cause him to cast a gracious and amiable aspect
upon them.

First, from hence let us observe the chiefest and The cause of Gods favor.
his own free will and gracious disposition to favor us. For though, indeed,
Christ's obedience do merit the favor of God for us, yet there was nothing in
us, to merit at Gods hand that so precious a Treasure, but it is a free gift of
Gods grace; as the Apostle notably shows, Romans 8. Who having given us his
own Son; the word signifies to give gratis, and freely. So then, Gods grace
being the cause of Christ his being given, it is also the cause of that
acceptance which we find with him, through Christ: for that which is the cause
of the cause, is the cause of the thing caused. And therefore Grace is the
cause of Grace, that is to say, Gods own gracious inclination of his Will
toward us, to do good to us, is the cause of that so great grace which we
find in his eyes. And herein differs Gods favor from man's; Man's favor,
though it make him do good to the party favored, yet first of all it
presupposes some good in the man favored; an attractiue, and drawer of this
his favor. Now Gods favor, as it is the cause of all other mercies we daily
receive, so is it also the cause of it self, as we showed; and therefore it
does not presuppose any good thing in us before, but brings with it that good
thing, namely, CHRIST JESUS, which must uphold and maintain this his favor.

The use of this Doctrine, is to humble us in our selves, as having not the
least spark of goodness in our selves, and to make us ascribe all praise and
glory in every thing to God, whose Grace is the fountain and foundation of
all good things whatsoever. Let no man then talk of Christ's merits, and
therefore in this regard claim the favor of God, and life eternal, as his
due. From whence is it, that we have Christ's merits imputed unto us, and the
imputation of them daily continued, but of the free mercy of God? And so for
all this, the Apostle, Romans 3. says, We are justified freely by his Grace.
Though we are clothed with Bracelets, Jewels, and Ornaments, where withal
Gods holy Eye is affected, Ezech. 16. yet have we no cause to be proud, for it
was God that put upon us these Robes, when we were in our rags and filthy
nastinesse; and so he does but love his own beauty in us.

Secondly, in the example of PAVL, in all his Salutations The grace and favor
of God to be desired above all things.
of God, we learn what it is that we should chiefly and principally desire,
either for our selves, or others, our children, wives, kindred, fathers and
mothers, acquaintance, etc. viz. this Grace of S. PAVL. Psalm. 4. 6. Many say,
Who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance. And
ABRAHAM'S wish for ISMAEL was, Oh that ISMAEL might live in thy sight! ABRAHAM
had goods enough to leave ISMAEL, but that contented him not; he desired
better things for him, That he might be ioint-heire of the gracious Promise
together with ISAAC.

The reason why we should thus desire this Blessing, is specially in these two
regards:

First, Gods favor is the ground of all other Mercies whatsoever: It is the
maine and Mother-Blessing, 2. Reasons.
the very Seed of all other Mercies whatsoever; so that in desiring it, we
desire all other; and getting it, we get other. This is the reason men seek, as
SOLOMON speaks, after the face of the Ruler, to get into favor with him,
because his favor is as the latter Rain, and promises a fruitful Harvest of
many benefits. Hereupon it is, that those who are in favor with Princes,
presume so far, and make themselves sure of any thing. As HAMAN being asked
by the King, What should be done to the man whom the King in special favor
would honor? could answer readily, presuming himself to be the man, by
reason of his ingraftment in the Kings heart; Let them bring for him Royal
Apparel, the Kings Horse, and Crown, and proclaim, Thus shall it be done,
etc. How much more then, upon this ground, should we seek for the favor and
face of God? For what may we not promise to our selves upon his favor? What
not shall be done to the man whom this great King favors? Ps. 149. This honor
shall be done to his favorites. For Kings are not able to do all things as
they would, to gratify those they love; but God is able to do for his, even
more then he will do; his Power exceeds his Will. But the will even of the
mightiest Monarchs oftentimes goes beyond their power. They want occasions and
oportunities to pleasure those whom they favor; yea further, many times they
are prevented, before those occasions fall out, by sudden death: therefore most
excellently the Psalmist, Psalm. 146. Trust not in mortal Princes, that is, in
their favor and grace, for their breath is in their nostrils, and their
thoughts perish. They have many thoughts and purposes to advance such and such:
but even whiles they are in these thoughts, comes the voice, Thou fool, this
night shall they take away thy soul from thee; and then what shall become of
thy thoughts; or what good shall thou, poor man, have, that trustedst in those
thoughts? But he that relyes upon Gods favor, shall never be deceived, nor
disappointed. Therefore, in the forenamed place, the Prophet adds, Blessed
is the man that trusts in God, Why so? who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea,
and all that therein is, which keeps fidelity for ever. Where, besides the
infinite power of God, able to do all things, a further reason is added, to
make us bold to build upon Gods favor, viz. the faithfulness and constancy of
this his love: Whom he loves, he loves to the end; whereas a man's love is
often a lying love, like a deceitful Bow, Job. 9. It gives the slip to those
that are most of all interessed in it.

Let us therefore give over our too too greedy desire of the favor of men,
specially great Ones: Let us labor for Gods grace, and this will bring with
it, man's. As it is said of our Savior, Luke 2. That he grew in favor, first,
with God, secondly, with man. Therefore DAVID in the fourth Psalm, though in
disgrace with SAVL, yet prays not for the light, of SAVLS countenance, but
only of Gods. And so PAVL in all his Epistles, though the Churches he writes
unto, were in the disgrace of the Heathen Emperors, yet still he wishes unto
them Grace, not from graceless NERO, but from God the Father, and our Lord
Jesus Christ; this being the means to attain, as all other benefits, so
likewise this of grace with men. Prou. 17. When a man's ways please the Lord,
(and so the Lord will be well pleased with him) his very enemies shall become
his friends.

Secondly, Gods grace is in stead of all other blessings, in case they be
wanting. As ELKANAH said to his wife, complaining for want of children; Am not
I in stead of ten Sons to thee? Does not my love and husband-like
affection, wherewithal I embrace thee, make amends for children? So speaks
Gods favor to all those that have their part in it; Am not I unto thee in
stead of Riches, Friends, Grace and Glory, and Greatness in the World? Though
indeed Gods favor shall not be so perfectly and fully all in all, till the
life to come, 1. Cor. 15. yet even in this life, in some measure, it is all in
all unto them so, that they cry out with DAVID, Psalm. 73. Whom have we in
Heaven, etc? As Manna was to the Israelites that Meat which they desired,
whether Flesh or Fish; in this regard are we further to hunger and thirst after
this Grace, and in a holy kind of ambition, strive for this favor. It will
bring exceeding comfort and contentment in all our wants; yea, it will make a
through supply of all our wants. As God answered PAVL, complaining of the
prick of the flesh, My Grace is sufficient for thee: Which though we expound
of the gifts of Grace and Sanctification; yet we are to know, that these were
no otherwise sufficient for him, then as they were fruits, and so testimonies
of Gods favor.

Thirdly, Since whatsoever we desire, we are Paul witnesses, 2. Tim. 1. 9.
yet we are not actually possessed of it, till we be called and justified. And
though they procure not themselves (for we maintain against the Papists, that
the grace which makes us graceful, is not any inherent grace in our selves,
but it is the free gift of God in Christ) yet at that very time he bestows
this Jewel upon them, he stirs up in them an earnest desire, and a
proportionable endeavor after it. It is Jesus Christ, indeed, that brings us
into favor with God: yet withal, when the Father gives us this gift, he
makes us also use means not so much, indeed, for the attainment of it, as for
our own assurance of the attainment thereof.

What then are those things which we must do

First, taking thorow-notice of that disgrace and Three means whereby we may
attain to the favor of God.
as BENHADADS Servants came to AHAB, even, with a Halter about thy neck,
creeping and crouching before the Throne of Grace; abasing and abiecting thy
self at his Footstool, in the humble and penitent confession of thy sins.
We see man being justly offended with us for some injury offered him, will not
vouchsafe us his favor, till we have humbled our selves before him, and
confessed our fault, witnessing our unfeigned grief for the same. And think
we to have God favorable unto us, who never yet were touched with any sorrow
for displeasing him, nor in this sorrow have prostrated our selves at his
feet, with bleeding hearts lamenting and bewayling our offenses?

Thou then that desire the favor of GOD, come unto him with this sacrifice
of a bruised and broken spirit, and thou shall be accepted, Psalm. 51. Thou
shall find the saying of the Apostle most true, God resists the proud, and
gives grace to the humble. This must terrify the impenitent, whose hearts
will not relent, who sin freely and merrily, Drinking in iniquity, as the
fish drinks in water: never saying so much, as, What have I done?

Assuredly, they are out of the favor of God. An humbled heart for sin is
the first step to the favor of God.

Secondly, thou must shroud thy self under Christ's wings. Clothe thy self
with his righteousness and the precious Robes thereof, that so thou may
appear amiable and lovely in the eyes of the Lord, for in Christ only is the
Father well pleased: and so if thou would have him well pleased with thee,
thou must become a member of him, bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.
This thou do, when by Faith thou layest hold upon Christ's righteousness,
and gripest the promises of the Gospel. And this act of Faith shows it self
most of all in earnest Prayer and Deprecation, when thou cryest with strong
cries, Forgive me my trespasses. According to the multitude of thy mercies,
blot out my offenses. These be the wrestlings of JACOB, who would not let the
Lord go till he had blessed him. If thou would find grace, thou must come,
and in this manner knock at the gate of Grace, and it shall be opened unto
thee. How can we look to have grace with God, when he offering us his Son as
a means thereof, we will not reach forth the hand of our Faith to take him?

Thirdly, by Faith having clad thy self with the Robes of Christ's imputed
righteousness, thou must be clothed upon with the garment of thy own
righteousness and obedience, which, howsoever being in it self a menstruous
cloth as it comes from us, yet being of the Spirits own weauing, in that
regard is acceptable to God, and causes him to take a further delight in us.
Pro. 3. 3. Let not Mercy and Truth depart from thee, so shall thou have favor
with God and man. Pro. 11. 20. They that are upright in their way, are his
delight. If then we would be Gods Favored and Beloved, we must put on that
party-colored Coat of the Apostle, Col. 3. 12. consisting of many parts, Of
Humbleness, Mercy, Kindness, and long Suffering, etc. then shall that be
verified, Psalm. 45. 11. The King shall delight in thy beauty: and that Cant.
4. 9. My fair One, thou have wounded my heart with one of thine eyes, and with
a chain about thy neck. Look how the Spouse, that being beautiful of her
self, is withal set forth and decked with precious ornaments, is gracious in
the eyes of her Lover: so shall thou be in Gods, when thou appearest before him
in the beautiful face and pleasant raiment of a new creature in Christ Jesus,
for then thou art made partaker of the divine Nature. And God in thee seeing
himself, an Image of his own Holiness and Righteousness, thou being with
DAVID a man after his own heart: how can he but take great pleasure in thee,
if so be he take pleasure in himself? Thou then, who have not this pleasant
raiment of the new man, but the torn rags of the old man, thou that lie
wallowing in the mire of sin, a forlorn nasty creature, thou that still
retaynest the old Ethiopian hide and Black-mores skin, these foul Leopard
spots, how think thou, that the pure and clear eyes of the Lord can abide
the sight of so filthy and deformed an object? He that can perform these
three duties, may assure himself of Gods favor. Thus much for the first thing
desired, namely, Grace.

The second follows, and Peace. I do willingly assent to those, who by Peace
do understand all prosperity and felicity, both earthly and heavenly in this
life, and that to come. In the ordinary salutation among the Jews, wherein
they wished peace to the saluted, Luke 10. I think only outward prosperity
was meant by peace. But as the Apostles augmented the ordinary form of
salutation, by adding Grace to Peace, because they preached in the Gospel the
free Grace of God for our salvation, so by the same reason may it well be
thought, that they enlarged the signification of this word Peace, even to
inward peace, as well as to outward, specially their Gospel, being the Gospel
and glad tidings of that Peace. Extending therefore the signification Four
things comprehended under Peace.
of this word, in this Apostolical salutation further, then it was taken in
the common greetings of the Jews, it may comprehend all these things within
his circuit.

First, the inward peace of Conscience with God, which springs out of the
grace and favor of God, Rom 51. A man's conscience will never be at quiet
within him, till it feel this grace. There will be nothing there, but the
uncomfortable darkness of terrors and astonishments, till the light of Gods
countenance arise and shine upon it.

Secondly, The peace of Charity among our selves, of which the Apostle: Be at
peace among your selves: Let the peace of God rule in your hearts. This also is
an effect of Gods grace, which as it makes a man at peace with himself and
God, so with his Brethren.

The love of God shed into our hearts, will make us love our Brethren also:
There can be no true love then among those that are not in favor with God, but
they live together like Wolves and Bears. But when our God has vouchsafed us
his grace, he changes our Woluish and Tygrish natures, accomplishing that which
is prophesied, Esai. 11.

Thirdly, The peace of Amity, and a holy kind of League with all Gods
creatures. Job 5. The stones of the field shall be at peace with thee. This
also is an effect of grace: for when we have his favor, who is the Lord, we
have the good will also of his servants the creatures. Romans 8. If he be with
us, who can be against us? for all things are at his command, who is the Lord
of Hosts. Nay, who shall not be for us? On the contrary, Oh the miseries of
the man in disgrace with God! all the creatures are at enmity and at variance
with us, being out of Gods favor. The senseless creatures themselves in their
kind rise up against us, to fight the Lords battails against us, as the heavens
did fight against SISERA, Judge. 5.

Fourthly, Outward Prosperity and good success in our ways; so it is
commonly taken in all their salutations, as 1. Chron. 12. 18. Peace be unto
thee, O son of ISHAI. And, 2. King. 9. Is it peace? the salutation of IEHORAM
to IEHV. Hence it is, even from this manner of saluting, all kind and good
dealing is set out in the Scripture by this phrase of speaking peace, as Psalm.
85. God says, I will speak peace to my people.

Now, the reason why outward prosperity is signified by this name of peace,
is, first, because to the godly they are Pawnes and Pledges of that sweet Peace
they have with God. Secondly, they are notable Maintayners of the peace and
quietness of our affections; for in the want of outward things how are we
disquieted and unsettled!

But Peace, in this fourth signification, is so taken for outward prosperity,
that which all this outward Prosperity has Security annexed unto it, and is
a forerunner and beginning of that eternal Prosperity and Felicity in Gods
Kingdom; for both these things are understood by the name of Peace. Security,
Psalm. 4. 9. I will lay me down and sleep in peace: first, securely, and the
perfection of all prosperity, in the life to come. Psalm. 37. Mark the just
man, the end of that man is peace.

First, from hence observe, that as we may lawfully We may lawfully desire
outward blessings, and how.
and the blessing of this life, Give us our daily bread, Petit. 4. Food
convenient, Pro. 30. so how and in what manner we must desire them.

First, having desired grace in the first place. Mat. 6. First seek the
Kingdom of God: and then in the second place we may seek temporal things:
but now men are all for peace: Who will show us any good? few or none for
grace: peaceable men, as I may call them, enough, very few gracious men that
do first of all seek Gods grace, and then in the second place peace.

Secondly, in desiring of outward things, we must moderate our desires, that
they go not beyond their bounds, to desire abundance and superfluity of them;
for we desire them by the name of Peace: therefore no more must we desire, but
that which will serve us, to attend the works of our Calling with free and
quiet minds, without disturbance or distraction. Thus AGAR prayed against
poverty, and for a competency of outward things, lest otherwise falling into
Satan's snare, he should take the name of God in vain. Thus far may our
desires go. And our heavenly Father knows we stand in need of these things,
namely, of a competency of them, as a very necessary help for Gods service.

Secondly, again, PAVL first desiring Grace, and Peace is a fruit of Grace.
prosperity, is a fruit of Grace, and so, that the nearest and most
compendious way to get peace, is first to get grace and favor with God. JOSEPH
and DAVID had wonderful success in all their ways, and the reason the holy
Ghost yields thereof, is this; The Lord was with them, Genes. 39. 1. Sam. 18.
The way of man, first, of the just man, of whom he had formerly spoken, is
directed by the Lord: but what is the reason hereof? Because the Lord loves
his way: that is, is well pleased with him and his course of life, Psalm. 37.
23. therefore he had showed before, how the wicked man borrowes, and pays not
again, though rich and wealthy, whereas the godly, though poor, is able to
lend. And all this, because as he adds, Verse. 22. The blessed of the Lord
shall inherit the Land. It is the grace and blessing of God that is all in all.
And as it is the cause of good success in the general course of our lives, so
likewise in every particular action. Psalm. 44. The Israelites victory over the
Canaanites, is ascribed, not to Sword or Bow, but to the light of Gods
countenance, because he did favor them. NOAH'S preservation in the Flood;
MARY'S honor to be Christ's Mother, given to this cause, they found favor
with God. Would we then enjoy the comforts of this life? would we prosper and
thrive in our endeavors, and works of our Calling? Labor then for Gods grace
and favor. Grace is the only means to draw on Peace. When we have got
Christ's righteousness, it is that Grace which makes us graceful to God:
Matthew. 6. then outward things come voluntary, as it were, and of their own
accord, without our seeking or desiring: no marvel then if oftentimes things
go cross with us, we by our sins having drawn down the curse of God upon
all our enterprises. This is the reason why Gods children live better, even
with greater credit and reputation in the world with a little, then many times
the wicked do, which have far more. Gods blessing sets forward the one, and
his curse blows upon the other.

But we oftentimes see those that are not in greatest Psalm. 17. The men of this
world, whose bellies thou fillest and fattest with the hid treasures of the
earth. And on the contrary, those that have greatest store of Grace, to have a
very small pittance of Peace.

First, For the godly, who having their part in first, The end of all his
afflictions, whereto they are disposed, is peace. Psalm. 37. The end of the just
man is peace.

Secondly, He has the peace of Security in his greatest distresses. Psalm. 3.
6. I laid me down and slept, and rose again, because thou, Lord, sustaynedst
me: and Psalm. 4. 9. I will sleep in peace.

Thirdly, He has the peace of Contentation, Grace supplying and sweetning the
want of Peace, and turning very War it self into Peace, darkness into light
to the godly, his heart is at rest and at peace within it self.

There is no warring of the affections against God, whatsoever his outward
estate is. Therefore, Psalm. 37. A little to the righteous, is more then great
riches to the wicked: for, godliness is great gain, bringing contentation.

Secondly, For the wicked. It is far otherwise with them in their peace,
which being a graceless peace, a peace not founded on grace, is in truth a
peacelesse peace, for in the midst of their peace they want the peace of
Security, their hearts tremble like an Aspen lease, in fear of change; or if
they have security, it is a presumptuous and false security; for when they
cry, Peace, Peace, then is their destruction at hand, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. And let
their Peace be never so flourishing, yet still want they the Peace of
Contentation; they think all too little: if they had the whole World, with
ALEXANDER, they would grieve there were no more for them to get. Again, as the
end of the godly man's Warfare is Peace, so the end of the wicked man's Peace, is
Warfare, even an eternal Warfare, and wrestling with the anger of God in Hell.
Therefore a sound and safe Peace arises only from the Grace of God. The Peace
of the wicked deserves not the name of Peace: There is no Peace, says my God,
to the wicked, Esa. 57.

Thus much for the things desired. Now let us see from whom they are desired:
first, from God the Father; secondly, Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Holy Ghost is not here excluded, though not named. But in all actions of
God, respecting the creatures, when one Person is named, the rest are to be
included.

By God, being here opposed to Jesus Christ, we are to understand the first
Person; who is called our Father, not only in regard of Creation, Luke 3. ADAM
the son of God, Heb. 12. the Father of Spirits; but also, and especially, of
adoption in Christ: And that to this end, that as we might hence assure our
selves, that God will every way carry himself as a Father to us, so we
should teach our selves the behauior and dutiful disposition of good sons
toward him.

But here more specially mark, what is the cause

The second Author of this Grace and Peace, is JESUS CHRIST.

First, He is the Author of Grace, of both degrees: of the first degree of
Grace, as God; of the second, only as God-man, as Mediator.

Some of the Papists, who teach, That the Grace making us graceful, is the
gift of Regeneration in us, do yet acknowledge the first degree of Gods favor
to be of himself, who of his own free favor gives us this gift, whereby
according to them he makes us worthy of his favor. But here we learn, that
as the first degree of Gods favor, so likewise the second, is not of our
selves. First, the Apostle says, Grace be to you from God. I, but they might
say, How should we come to be gracious in Gods eyes? PAVL therefore adds, as
showing the meritorious cause of Gods favor, and from Jesus Christ: He says
not, and from the habit of Regeneration.

CHRIST JESUS then is the Grace that makes us graceful: He has all the Grace
of God; He is even full of it, and of his fullness we receive our share of
it. The favor of God lights upon Christ, and then from him it is derived to
us. It is not any thing in thy self, that can draw the gracious eye of God
toward thee. Saint PETER commands us to trust perfectly in that grace which
commends us to God, 1. Pet. 1. but we may not trust in a creature, as is any
infused habit of grace. Therefore we must abandon all other things, and cleave
only to Christ, by whom only we have access to the Throne of Grace.

Secondly, he is the Author of Peace. Even outward things themselves come to us
by Christ, we lost our right unto them in ADAM, and we recover it not but in
Christ.

First then we learn, that the true Christian is the True Christians only true
owners
only right owner of Peace. All others are but usurpers, for these outward
things are appendances of Christ's righteousness, and are entayled thereto,
Matthew. 6. 33.

Secondly, we are taught to use all the blessings of How outward blessings must
be used.
this life, Christianly, moderately, and thankfully, for they are purchased for
us with no less price then the blood of Christ. And when we exceed in the use
of any outward comfort, meat, drink, sport, etc. we are injurious to the
blood of Christ, as though, by it, were purchased for us a lawless liberty,
for licentiousness, wantonness, and drunkenness, etc. Christ's blood has
bought us right to the moderate use of all comforts: if we go further, we go
beyond our right, and usurp upon the creature. This checketh those that use
unlawful recreations, or lawful, unlawfully: for our outward peace is to be
received from Christ, as the Author thereof.

Oh that we could think of this, when the creatures present themselves unto
us, though not to keep our selves wholly from the use of them, as DAVID did,
from drinking that Water which his three Worthies brought him, because it was
the Water of Blood; yet from the abuse of them, in Gluttony, Surfeiting, and
Drunkenness, because they are the blood of Jesus Christ! and by the eye of
faith we must behold the blood of Christ swimming in every dish that comes to
the table. This is the only sauce to sweeten our meat, and all other outward
comforts whatsoever: for we may with good consciences use them, when we can
receive them as fruits of the bloodshed of Christ. And this is, of all others,
the most effectual retentiue from immoderate excess and intemperancie, in the
use of any creature, to consider the dearness of the price wherewith it was
bought for us.

Thirdly, being in Christ, we must comfort and content our selves in all
estates; for he is a Storehouse and Treasury of all Grace and Peace to all
that are his: Peace I leave with you; my Peace I give unto you, not as the
world gives it; let not your heart be troubled, nor fear, John 14.

Christ Jesus is described by the Title of his Lordship; Our Lord.

Where we are to learn, that Christ is a Jesus to none, a dispencer of Grace
and Peace to none, but to those to whom he is a Lord. The world would have him
a JESUS, a Savior, but in no case a Lord. They will not bear the burden of
his yoke, yet they will needs have him bear the burden of their sins. But
till Christ be become our Lord, we can have no assurance he is our Savior.

This I note the rather, because even at this time, when we celebrate the
memory of our Saviors Incarnation, we most of all deny him the right of his
Lordship, taking liberty to break out into all outrage of sin.

VERSE. 4, 5. I give thanks to my God, always making mention of you in my
prayers,

Hearing of thy love and faith, etc.


HEre begins the third part of the Preface of this Epistle, namely, an
Insinuation; whereby PAVL, in godly wisdom, to make a more easy way for his
Petition, does labor to possess PHILEMON with an opinion and conceit of his
own love and affection toward him; and this he does, by letting him
understand two effects of his love toward him: first, his congratulation and
rejoicing with him for his good, namely, those Graces God had bestowed upon
him; the which gratulation is propounded in a Thanksgiving, I give thanks to my
God: secondly, his continual praying for him; both these, viz. both
Thanksgiving and Prayer, set forth by the causes which caused him to pray and
give thanks, VERSE. 5. Hearing of thy love, etc. More specially the Prayer is
set forth by the matter thereof, VERSE. 6. And then the Thanksgiving, by the
special and proper cause thereof, VERSE. 7. Of all which in their places.

First, For his Gratulation, or rejoicing with The manner of true
congratulation.
form of Thanksgiving, I thank my God. Where observe, first, the manner of
true Christian congratulating and rejoicing with our friends, for any good
thing they have; namely, to rejoice in the Lord; giving him first of all his
due, the praise of all that good they have. The rejoicing of the world is
carnal and profane. God is never so much as thought upon. The parties whom
we congratulate, they are dignified and almost deified. O, I admire your
Wisdom, Eloquence, Learning, etc. will the Flatterer, or the inordinate lover
of his friend, say. But PAVL would say, I admire the goodness and mercy of
God toward you, in enriching you with these gifts, I thank God for your
wisdom, etc. so all the praise is given wholly to God, whereas before it was
wholly derived from God to man, and so God was defrauded and defeated of his
right. Not that it is unlawful to praise men, endued with the graces and gifts
of Gods Spirit; nay, it is a duty we owe unto them; but it must be performed
in that wise sort, that God in the first place be praised: for by this means
we shall both in our selves take away suspicion of flattery, and in our
brother commended, suspicion of pride. And this is the special difference
betwixt Christian encouragement and flattery. The former has respect to Gods
glory, and the good of the party encouraged; who hearing God praised for his
gifts, is taught not to swell in a conceit of his own worthiness, but to
refer all to the glory of God. The latter regards neither; but as it
robs God of his glory, and transferreth it to the instrument, so it drives
the man flattered upon the Rocks of Pride, Ambition, Vainglory, and there
often to make shipwreck of a good conscience.

Secondly, The Title that PAVL gives God in this his Thanksgiving, My God.
Here observe these two points.

First, The privilege of every true Christian. The privilege of a true
Christian.
God; That look as a man may say of his Inheritance, his House and Lands,
These be mine; so he may as truly say of God, God is mine; I am righted and
interessed in him. This privilege is conferred upon us in the Covenant of
Grace, which runs in this tenor, I will be thy God, and thou shall be one of
my people. We assenting to the Condition of this Covenant, to become Gods, God
forthwith becomes ours, so that we may now lay claim to him as our own, he
having made over himself to us by Covenant. Hence it is, that the Apostle
says, Romans 5. 11. We glory or boast of God, namely, as of our own, being
bound to us, as the Husband to the Wife, by the Covenant of Marriage. Look
then, as the Husband is not his own, but the proper possession of his Wife; so
God is now no longer his own, as it were, but the peculiar possession of his
Saints.

This is a Doctrine of great comfort, That though thou have not House, Lands,
Money, Friends, to call thine, yet there is a God in Heaven, whom thou may
call thine; who being thy portion and possession, thou may joyfully sing
with DAVID, Psalm. 16. The lines are fallen to me in a goodly ground, I have a
fair Heritage. But this belongs not to the wicked, because the Covenant is
not made with them, by reason they agree not to the Condition of becoming Gods
people. Therefore Psalm. 50. God says to the wicked, What have thou to do to
take my Name in thy mouth? to brag of me as thy God, since thou hate to be
reformed?

Secondly, The nature of true justifying faith, My God. And Christ on the
Cross, My Lord, My God. Christ presently answered THOMAS, Because thou have
seen, thou have believed. Here then is true faith, when with PAVL, Galat. 2.
2. we can say, Christ has loved me, has given himself for me. This is more
then an hypocrite and a temporary professor can do.

The second effect whereby PAVL declares his love toward them, is his daily
praying for them, Making mention of you always in my prayers. First, in my
private prayers.

First, even in our private, and solitary prayers, In our Prayers we must be
mindful of others.
are that in private Prayer not at all. Others, though they do sometime pray
privately by themselves, yet then only they pray for themselves. And so their
private Prayers are too too private, private not only in regard of the place
where, but also in regard of the Spirit by which they are conceived, they come
from a private spirit, regarding themselves only, and not touched with a
feeling of the want of others. Saint PAVL writes not to any Church or
particular man, but he tells them, he made mention of them in his Prayers.
And we are to think, that he did no less for many others, that he never
wrote to. Had he not the Spirit of love, it would have been tedious unto him,
to have rehearsed so many names. For we are not to imagine that this mention
was only in general, under the name of Gods Church, for so he prayed for
those whose faith he never heard of. But most commonly he makes this to be the
cause of those prayers, which, he says, he daily offered for those he writes
unto, The hearing of their faith and love, as here in this place.

Let us therefore, according to this example of Saint PAVL, even by name
remember our Christian friends in our prayers, knowing that the performance of
this duty is one special part of the communion of Saints.

Secondly, observe, That PAVL did pray even for those for whom he gave thanks:
from whence

Unto thanksgiving therefore for our selves or Thanksgiving and Petition must
go together.
others, Petition must be annexed both for the continuance and increase of that
good we give thanks for. And to speak the truth, thanksgiving does
necessarily carry us to Petition, for in that we give thanks to God for any
blessing, we acknowledge him to be the Author thereof, then also the Continuer
and Encreaser, and therefore to have power to decrease, and take it away. When
therefore we consider of those good things, which we or others have, and
thereby in the joy of our souls are provoked to the praising of Gods name; we
must then withal consider and meditate thus with our selves: This or that
grace God has begun in me, and I am wholly beholding to him for it. But
unless his grace follow me to preserve that which he has begun, I shall
lose all, for he it is that works both to will and to do. Thus must we
rejoice with trembling, and give thanks with prayer, tempering the joy of our
thanksgiving, with the Christian fear of Prayer. And most true it is, that he
which feels most joy in the fruition of any blessing, is most fearful of
losing it. And therefore in his fear of losing it, unto that thanksgiving
which his joy caused, he will adioyne earnest Prayer for the continuance of
it. We must not then be like the Pharise in the Gospel, who only gives
thanks, but thinking himself full and perfect, and complete, asks nothing.
But as the feeling of Gods goodness must stir us to thanksgiving; so the
feeling of our wants and weaknesses, mixed always with those things wherein
Gods goodness shows it self, must drive us to prayer.

Thirdly, we may observe, that PHILEMON

Many there are that we have cause to pray for, and that with great grief that
they are so bad. But there is small matter for thanksgiving in them. But we
should be such, that our friends may pray for us, not with grief, but joy, and
giving of thanks unto God for us.

VERSE. 5. Hearing of thy love and faith which thou have toward the Lord Jesus,
and toward all Saints.
BOth the effects of PAVLS love to PHILEMON, Thanksgiving and Prayer, are here
both set forth by the cause moving him both to give thanks, and pray for
them: for so I understand, that in them the Apostle sets down as well the
cause of his Prayer, as of his Thanksgiving, the which is more evident, by
comparing this place with Coloss. 1. 3, 4. where the same words almost are
used that are here, that Epistle (as some not improbably think) written at the
same time, as it was sent by the same Messengers that this was.

First then observe, That the greater graces we Pray for those most, whose
graces are greatest.
Prayers ought we to power out for them unto the Lord, as appears in that
place, Coloss. 1. 3, 4. We give thanks to God, praying always for you,
since, or after that we once heard of your faith. The more grace there is in
any, the greater must our love be. And the greater our love is, the greater
will our desire be for his good. Again, the greater grace there is, the
greater will be Satan's spite and malice, laboring even out of that grace, to
work disgrace to GOD and his Gospel. And therefore the greater cause have we
to double the feruencie of our Prayers for the resisting of Satan.

Secondly, Mark what it is either in others, or The cause of Joy and
Thanksgiving.
and give thanks, namely, saving, and sanctifying Grace, Faith, Love, etc.
Many rejoice to see their Children prove wise, witty, wealthy, when yet they
be poor enough in Faith and love. But yet there is no matter of joy in common
gifts severed from sanctification, nay, there is matter of great grief, for
they are not matters of ornament, but of deformity rather. Wit, Wisdom,
Eloquence, etc. do nothing become a wicked man, nay, they disgrace him rather;
for that which SOLOMON speaks of beauty in a wicked woman, may truly be
said of all other common gifts, in all, both men and women that are ungodly:
They are in them, as the golden Ring in the snowt of a Swine. If then we would
have true matter of rejoicing and thanksgiving, let us not rest contented with
common gifts of Nature, but let us put upon the Earings of Nature the Jewel of
Grace: then may we have joy of our selves, and cause to bless the Name of the
Lord. Not but that we should give thanks for other common graces, but yet
first as fruit of these, and secondly, specially, and principally for these,
accounting one dram of Faith, one grain of Grace, far above many pounds of
natural parts, thinking our selves more beholding to GOD, for that small
measure of sanctification which we have, then for all the ornaments of Nature
whatsoever.

Therefore spiritual blessings in Christ should so affect us, and so possess
and take up our minds and meditations, that we may seem in a holy kind of
forgetfulness to pass by the petty inferior blessings of this life, as
having no leisure almost to think of them.

Thirdly, In that PAVL makes PHILEMONS faith

Fourthly, Mark the occasion of PAVLS thanksgiving Hearing of thy faith and
love: Here many things are to be noted.

First, See in PAVLS example, what is the effect that men suck in their own
praises with very greedy and thirsty ears, but they cannot with patience
endure the praises of others, thinking, that the praises of others, is a close
kind of dispraysing themselves, and that so much is taken from them, as is
given unto another. Hence it is, that the speech of those that are much in the
commendations of others, is so tedious and troublesome to us, in that thereby
we feel our selves stirred up to wrath, fretting, envy, and such like
distemper of corrupt affections. But it is far The godly hear the good
report of their brethren with joy.
otherwise with the children of God, who have the circumcised ears of PAVL,
that not only with patience, but with great joy, can hear the commendations of
their brethren, and upon the hearing of them, break forth, not into fretting
and fuming, but into a holy lauding of the Name of the Lord. As those Jews
did, Gal. 1. 22, 23. Away then with that uncircumcised Ear of Envy, that is
offended with another man's praise, as an unpleasing and distasteful object.
Christ called Envy by the name of an evil Eye; Surely, we may as well give it
the name of an evil Ear, which is no less unwilling to hear, then the Eye
to see, the good of our brother.

Secondly, Observe, that thanks are due to God, Thanks must be given for
others.
us our selves, but on our brethren also. And therefore if we pay him not this
debt, he may justly charge us with ingratitude: for shall we confess it our
duty, to pray for our brethren, that they may be enriched with these graces;
and shall we not think our selves equally bound to give thanks to God, when he
has heard our prayers?

This is a rule: Whatsoever we pray for, the same when it shall be granted, are
we to give thanks for, Psalm. 50. 15. Again, in the diverse dispensation of
graces, Gods glory, which we are bound to redeem, even with our own lives,
is exceedingly set forth. And how can I, the son of God, behold the glory of
my heavenly Father, and not have my heart resolving and melting it self with
joy? Moreover, we are to know, that the blessing of our Brethren, by virtue of
that near conjunction we are knit together in, are ours, we have a special
right and interest in them. This is that Communion, in the which those words,
mine and thine, must not be heard. My gifts are thine, and thine are mine, in
regard of the profit and emolument of them. The eye in the natural body sees
not for it self, but for the whole body. Hence PAVL, 1. Cor. 3. says to the
Corinthians, All things are yours, even the most excellent gifts of the
Apostles. They might lay claim to them, as being by God appointed for their
benefit. When then we behold a more plentiful blessing in another then in our
selves, let us then think with our selves, how we have our part therein, how
God therein has provided for our good. And therefore in envying thy Brother
Gods bounty and liberality, thou do withal unnaturally envy thy self,
thine own good that is enclosed in those gifts of thy Brother. So much PAVL by
his practice here shows. This is the most special ground of driving away
envy, and stirring up joy in us, in the beholding of any good thing in our
Brother, namely, to consider, that we have our part therein. Is there any man
so foolish, to envy his neighbor a more plentiful Crop of Corn, then he
himself has in his own Field, if so be that he shall have a share in his
neighbors Crop? Nay, rather he would be glad, because the more his neighbor
has, the greater will his profit be. And surely, it is very strange: Who is
it, that would take it heavily, that a piece of Money should be put into
another man's hands, so he shall have as much gain by it, as he in whose hands
it is? Will he not rather be glad, that he is rid of so great a trouble, and
freed from so great a fear, which the charge of the Money would have brought
upon him; for he shall have an equal diuident in the gain with him, in whose
custody it is; in the mean time being free from the negotiating, and of fear
lest the Money miscarrying, he be made to make it good? The case is the same
here. The increase that comes of the gifts of thy brother, is as well thine as
his. If the principal sustain any danger, he must look to that; thou art not
to be accountable for his negligence and unskillfulness. I, but thou will say,
Herein is my brother advanced above me, in that he is so be trusted with so
many Talents; God does not me the like honor. O fool! does this grieve thee?
Thou look upon the honor, but see not the burden annexed; for to whom much
is committed, of him shall much be exacted: and when he is called to his
account, if he be found either idle, or unfaithful, the greater will his
judgment be. Therefore think with thy self thus: If the Lord had made me
steward of those gifts, happily I might have failed in the skillful and faithful
employment of them. So in the end there should have been a heavy reckoning
for me. Gods dealing is both therefore wise and merciful toward me. If these
Talents had been in my hands, they might have perished without any advantage
to God, my self, or the Church. Now then, how wise is God, to put them into
the hands of a more skillful husband, that can employ and use them better then
I should, and yield a greater increase of profit, even to my own self, then I
my self could have done, if I my self have had the husbanding of them in my
own hands? For it is most certain, that many men would not have half that
benefit of the gifts of God, being in their own keeping, which they have now,
being conferred upon others. As the foot, if it should have the power of
seeing, which is in the eye, it could make nothing that use of it, which it
does now, whilst it is in the eye. Here then is a further cause of
Thanksgiving, for the blessings of God upon our brethren, not only that we have
benefit by them, but more benefit oftentimes, then if we had them our selves in
our own possession. Wherefore that common proverb is to be left, which we use
when we see any good blessing has befalne our brother. O, such a one may
thank God. It is true: But why do thou lay that duty wholly upon him, and
exempt thy self? May thou not thank God too, to whom the Lord is
beneficial in thy brother? The ointment powered on AARONS head, though first of
all, and in greater quantity, it lighted upon the next parts, the beard, the
shoulders, etc. yet from them it descended to the nethermost Vestments. So the
graces of our Head Christ, though first they come to those that are the most
eminent members in his body, yet they rest not in them, but from them they drop
and distill down upon the inferior members, and that in far greater measure,
then if they had flowne immediately from the Head to them. Wherefore, as in
Confession we are bound to lament and bewail the sins of our brethren, as
our own; so likewise in Thanksgiving to rejoice in their blessings, even as if
they were our own.

Thirdly, If in PAVLS example, others are bound to give thanks for our graces;
then it is our part, who Are they not our own, may we not do with our own
what we list? No; they must know, as DANIEL very ingenuously confessed,
concerning the Gift of Prophecy, before NEBVCHADNEZAR, Dan. 2. 32. that they
have received them for the Church, whose servants and debtors they are. And
therefore, if we shall not communicate our gifts to the Church and people of
God, they will complain of us to God, and complain of us of injustice, in
withholding the good from the owners thereof, contrary to SALOMONS Precept,
Prou. 3. 27.

Fourthly, PAVL saying, that he heard of the Faith

Fifthly, Observe Gods providence, recompencing A good report the recompense of
Religion.
open our hearts and mouths to extol Gods name, God will open our brethrens,
yea, sometimes our enemies mouths, to extol ours, Heb. 11. 3. By this (namely
Faith) our Elders obtained a good report. This was the means whereby they
became so famous. What marvel then, if thou have an ill name, when thou have
an ill conscience? Naughty faith and fame, cracked credit and conscience,
commonly go together. The use of ointments among the Ancients was especially
in their Feasts. Then may we look for God to come and drench us with the
precious Ointment of a good Name, when we are keeping the Feast of a good
Conscience. If we would serve God with a good Conscience, by faith purged from
dead Works, then should we find, that God, who sees our Faith and good
Conscience in secret, would reward us with credit and estimation openly.

Thus much generally concerning the cause and matter of PAVLS praying unto, and
praising God, viz. the hearing of Gods graces in PHILEMON.

Now more particularly, let us consider what these Graces are. There are two
set down here by name; first, the Love; secondly, the Faith of PHILEMON: Both
these Graces are set forth by their Objects, whereabout they are conversant,
Which thou have toward our Lord Jesus, and all Saints. Both these Objects
belong in common to Love, the former only to Faith. By Faith only we
apprehend Christ, and unite our selves to him; but by Love, we apprehend and
unite our selves both to Christ and our fellowmembers. Thus then is the meaning
of the words, and thus they are to be construed, Hearing of thy Faith and Love;
thy Faith, which thou have in our Lord Jesus; and thy Love, which thou have
both to our Lord Jesus, and all Saints. The Rhemists therefore err by this
place, confirming that confidence which they teach us to repose in the merits
of the Saints, whereas it is manifest by the seventh Verse, that the Apostle
speaks not of the dead, but of living Saints.

Here then two points specially are to be considered.

First, these two virtues, Love and Faith. Secondly, their objects: toward the
Lord Jesus and all Saints.
First, for the Virtues: the first place is here given to Love, though both in
nature and excellency it comes behind Faith, as the Effect the Cause, the
Daughter the Mother, Gal. 5. 1. Tim. 1. 6. Therefore elsewhere Faith is set
before, as Coloss. 1. 6. 1. Thessal. 1. 3. But nothing is more usual in the
Scriptures, then to give the former place unto the effect, as being more
obuious to our senses then the cause.

By Faith understand justifying Faith, which only is able to bring forth true
Love, either to God or man: and by Love, as the Apostle shows, not only love
to God, but also to man. Here observe

First, the distinction of these graces of Faith and Cor. 13. in the end. There
remain these three, Faith, Hope, and Charity. This observation will not seem
idle, if we consider the Doctrine of the Papists concerning faith, viz. that
there is a two fold Faith, one informed, and a second formed, and that by
Charity. They make Charity the form, the life and soul of Faith, which if
it were so, then Faith and Love are not to be distinguished, but confounded.
Neither could the Apostle say, These three, but, These two remain. Neither
could Charity be preferred before Faith, in respect of long durance; for the
form of a thing is the thing it self, and therefore as long as the form
lasts, so long the thing it self continues.

Secondly, the conjunction of these two Graces, Faith and Love are
distinguished, not divided.
to be divided. Wheresoever true Faith is, there necessarily Love, both to God
and our Brethren, will follow: for though Faith be alone in justification, yet
not in the justified: As the eye, though alone in seeing, yet not in him that
sees, but joined with the ears, nose, and many other members of the body.
Faith therefore is a fruitful Mother of many daughters, and Love is the
firstborn of them: Faith, though it be in regard of God, a Beggar, always
holding out the hand to receive, and crying, Give, give, yet in regard of those
in whom it dwells, it is like a Sovereign Lord and King, and has as a King
his Officers under him, and among the rest, Love, his Almner, to distribute and
disperse those treasures, which it self has received from the Lord. And first
of all, our love toward God proceeds Our love to God proceeds from Faith.
from Faith, which apprehending Gods love to us, enflameth our affections
again with the love of God. The bearnes of Gods love lightning upon our
hearts, reflect back upon God himself, by the Virtue of our Faith. The love
of Christ, says the Apostle, namely, being apprehended by our Faith,
constrayneth us. An example whereof we have in MARY MAGDALEN, whose Faith
believing, that much was forgiven her, caused and constrained her to love much,
Luke 7.

1. This plainly conuinceth the Faith of many to be Faith works by Love! Yea,
but I love God, or else it were pity I should live. Thou lie, hear Christ.
If you love me, keep my Commandments. And yet thou delightest thy soul in
the daily breach of them, for all this so affectionate entreatie of him, whom
thou professest thy Savior. Behold MARY MAGDALEN, and in her, see undoubted
arguments of love. Her eyes which had been entisements to uncleanness, she
makes a Basin of water to wash CHRIST'S feet, her hair abused to the same
purpose, a towell to wipe them.

Thou then that preferrest thy unlawful pleasures before Christ, whatsoever
thou confessest with thy mouth, certainly, thou beleeuest not with thy heart
unto salvation.

Secondly, but as this Doctrine is terrible to the Hypocrite, whom it vnmasketh
of his vain vizzard of faith, so it is no less comfortable to the true
Christian: For what do thou feel thy soul panting and breathing in the
earnestness of desire after God? do thou find thy self grieved when thou
missest of thy desire? do thou find thy heart to arise, when thou see
Gods Name dishonored, etc? Surely, these things as they are arguments of
sincere love, so likewise of Faith not feigned.

If thou feel these things in any manner, in thy self, thou may truly
say with him in the Gospel, Lord, I believe. For it is impossible for us to
love God, unless by Faith we have tasted how sweet Gods love is to us. But if
thou find these things in a smaller measure then is fit, go on with the
same man, and say, Help my unbelief. For as true Love argues true Faith; so
a luke warm love, a faint and feeble faith. For the Fountain of Love being as
a good Conscience, so likewise, and that primarily and originally, Faith not
feigned, 1. Tim. 1. verse. 6. Look what measure of Love there is in any, the
like measure of Faith also. If then we find great want of zeal in our selves,
we have cause to bewail the smalnesse of our Faith, out yet so that feeling
any measure of zeal at all, we may raise up our selves in a comfortable
assurance of having Faith. Therefore, 1. Pet. 1. after that he had said, They
loved the Lord, he infers presently, that they also believed in him. In
temptations oftentimes many excellent men are greatly troubled with doubting,
whether they have Faith or no, in as much as they cannot confidently and
boldly, nay, scarce faintly and fearfully say that Christ is theirs, but
rather they are ready to say the contrary. They feel the hand of Faith not
only trembling and quiuering, but even stricken with a dead Palsy. But if at
the same time thou can perceive that thou have the giving hand of Love,
giving unto God and man those duties which thou owe them thou may assure
thy self that thou have also the receiving hand of Faith, taking those mercies
which he owes thee not, howsoever for the present thou have no feeling of it,
Satan and Sin have so benumbed it. If thou can with DAVID, Psalm. 18. 1.
say, I love the Lord, thou may as truly use the words following, and say,
The Lord is my Rock.

Thirdly, this Doctrine of Loves issuing and flowing from Faith, confuteth
those that teach, our Election depends upon our foreseen obedience. By that
which has been delivered, it appears that our love of God is caused and
stirred up in us by his love, to us apprehended by our Faith. And therefore we
say with JOHN, We love him, because he loved us first. But according to their
Doctrine contrariwise, God loves us, because we loved him first.

Fourthly, this Doctrine teaches us what to judge of that love of God, of that
devotion that is in Ethnicks, Jews, Papists, or any superstitious persons.
PAVL grants to the Jews a zealous love of God, but says, that it is not
according to knowledge, which is the very beginning of Faith. But we have
showed that the true love of God, is the handmaid of Faith. And therefore if it
shall wait upon any other Mistress, as upon blind devices of man's own brain,
upon good intentions falsely so called, it is to be censured as a base, a blind,
and preposterous zeal, whatsoever shows and colors it may have. For PAVL
rejoices in PHILEMON, not for his love alone, but for his love and faith, that
is, for his love conjoined with, and proceeding from his Faith. There is no
matter of joy then, in Love severed from Faith.

Thus we see how our love of God comes from Faith.

Secondly, our love of our Brethren springs Love to our Brethren proceeds
from Faith.
likewise from faith, for the Apostle speaks here of both loves.

This will appear, if either we consider those duties of love, which we owe
generally to all, or in special to some.

For the first, this is a duty which we owe to all indifferently, to be
ready to forgive one another, being offended. Now what is that which will make
a reuengefull nature yield to this, but Faith, which when once it has
apprehended Gods love, forthwith reasons, as the Master in the Parable with
his servant, Matthew. 19. The Lord has freely forgiven me my whole debt, ought
not I then to show the like compassion to my fellow-seruant? Therefore the Lord
enioyning the duty of forgiveness; the Apostles pray, Lord, increase our
Faith, Luke 17. 4, 5. Ephesians. 5. Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's
sake, has forgiven you: and, 1. Ioh. 2. 12. I write unto you (namely, the
Commandment of love) because your sins are forgiven you. Other duties there
are which we owe specially to some: As first, to those that are yet
unconverted, the desiring of, and by all means possible laboring after their
conversion. Now, it is Faith only which will make a man do this: For, when by
Faith we have felt the sweetness of Gods love our selves, we cannot but call
upon others, and with the Prophet DAVID inuit them to the eating of the same
dainties with our selves. Ps. 34. Come, and see, and taste how good, etc. As at
the table, if we meet with any dish that pleases us above another, we offer
it presently to others, desiring that it may have their commendation as well as
ours. Thus EVE reached forth the Apple to ADAM. Albeit here there be many (to
whom yet EVE, though fallen, was unlike) so given to their appetites, and loving
their bellies, that if they light upon any meat which they love more
specially, they, like ravenous Harpies snatch it all to themselves, grudging
another the least morsel, thinking all is lost that goes besides their own
lips. But here no such thing can fall out; for these exquisite delicates do so
fully satiate us, that there still remains enough for many thousand
thousands. Therefore we cannot endure to eat our Morsels alone, but we desire
the company of others, as PAVL did AGRIPPAES, and the whole Assembly there
present besides, Acts 26. Would to God, that both thou and all that hear me
this day, were not only almost, but altogether, even such as I am (Christians)
except these bonds. But yet a more special love, which therefore has a
special name of brotherly love, is due unto those which are already
effectually called, and so made members of Christ.

This love also comes from faith, which causing us to love God, must needs
also force us to love all those, in whom we shall see the very face and lively
Image of God himself so clearly shining.

First, By this then once again we may try our These. 1. 3. If then thou art
of a hard and implacable nature, of a memory fastly retayning injuries of
affections vindicatiue, which the Scripture calls, Feet swift to shead blood,
this bloody nature of thine shows thou have no part in the blood of Christ by
faith. The like is to be thought of those which are moved with no compassion
toward the soul of their brethren, sitting in darkness and the shadow of
death, but can suffer them to pine and perish away in their sins, and never
reach forth the hand, to pull them out of the ditch. Certainly, if thou had
ever felt the gain of godliness thy self, thou would persuade others to
deal with this so gainful a commodity. They that are converted of God,
confirm their Brethren; being passed over the bridge, they will wish others to
follow them; so far will they be from plucking up the bridge. The same
sentence also is to be passed upon them, that do not feel their hearts
enlarged toward Christians more then to others, that are none. If the Image of
God by Faith were repaired in our selves, we could not but be delighted with
those that are like our selves. But on the contrary, if thou feel these
effects of love in thy self, undoubtedly, thou have Faith. For it is the love
of Christ only felt by Faith, which is able to soften and melt our hard and
frozen hearts. When we shall see how great a debt he has forgiven us, this
will make us willingly to forgive small ones to our Brethren, yea, and to bury
all injuries in the grave of forgetfulness, never to revive again, even as
Christ has done all ours to him, though never so indigne and contumelious: he
lodged them in his own grave, not to rise again with himself the third day,
(though many of us raise up our own injuries far sooner out of their graves)
but to be left behind him in that Den of darkness, to sleep an eternal
sleep. So, when Faith shall cause us to consider, how that the Lord Jesus,
being rich, became poor, that we might be made rich, this will make us to
earne in the bowels of compassion toward our poor and distressed Brethren,
and to reach forth our releeuing hand toward them. But the most evident
demonstration of our Faith, is that brotherly love, wherewithal we love a
Christian as a Christian, and because a Christian. 1. Ioh. 3. We know that we
are translated from death to life, because we love the Brethren: for none can
love any good thing unknown. Love presupposes knowledge of the thing loved:
he then that loves the Image of God in his Brother, sees it. But none can see
it, but by the eye of Faith. He that loves his Brother for his Faith, must
needs know Faith: but no man can know it, but he that has it; Faith is only
known by our own experience.

Secondly, this Doctrine serves not only for the trial of our Faith, but also
of our love to our Brethren: for as that Faith, which is without this Love, is
an idle and empty, and imaginary faith, so that love of our Neighbor, which
comes not from Faith, is blind and foolish, and in the end will prove a
deceitful, and unfaithful love. Natural men, that seem to love very dearly
to day, to morrow are at deadly feud.

The reason hereof is, because their love comes not from Faith. Therefore
amongst the true children of God, ye shall never see such bitter fallings out,
as amongst worldly men. In natural men and the unregenerate, besides natural
affections, which they have as Fathers, Husbands, Wives, Children, ye shall
find further many times a kind and courteous nature to strangers, a liberal
and free heart to the poor. But that which the Apostle speaks of Faith, void
of Charity, 1. Cor. 13. is true also of Charity, void of Faith. It is worth
nothing before God. Let us not then deceive our selves, either trusting in the
love of others, or glorying in that love which is in our selves, not proceeding
from Faith: for the former, if we rely too much upon it, it will give us a
shrewd fall in the end, and the latter will make us but ashamed, when it shall
come to be scanned before Gods Tribunal, who will esteem most vilely and
basely of all thy kind-heartednesse, of all thy alms and liberality, unless
Faith did wring them from thee.

Thus we see how Faith, when once it reigns in the heart, begets both
these loves, both to God and our Neighbor, in us, and so how true that of the
Apostle is, Romans 3. in the end, By Faith we establish the Law. For whereas the
sum of the Law is love, of the first Table to God, of the second to man;
Faith, as we have showed, very effectually works both. Hence PAVL gives the
name of a Law to Faith, calling it the Law of Faith, because it succeeds into
the room of the Law, commanding the same things that the Law does, and so is
in stead of Law to the regenerate that are freed from the Law. So far is it
(as the Papists slander us) for giving any license to break the Law.

Thirdly, here it may be asked, How could others Love and Faith of PHILEMON,
which are secret and hidden Virtues, that be in the innermost corners of the
heart, far from the sight of the eye?

They saw not PHILEMONS faith, but his outward

First, when we see in any the fruits of Faith and

Secondly, in that PAVL, by a Metonymie of the

The very Spirits and quintessence of our Faith and Love, must be in every good
work, else they are but dead works, unless they be built upon the foundation
of Faith and Love, easily will they be shaken.

First, for Faith, it has a special stroke in every Every good must be done
in Faith, and
good action: For, first, it cleanses the conscience, and purifieth the heart,
and so fitteth it for the bringing forth of a good work; for out of a defiled
Fountain, no pure Rivers can come. A good man brings forth good things: but
whence? out of the good treasure of his heart. Now this good treasure is a
work of Faith, 1. Tim. 1. 6. Acts 15. 9.

Secondly, it sets before our eyes the Commandment of God, enioyning us
that which is to be done, and withal persuades us, that the Commandment
belongs to us, and binds us, Romans 14. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

Thirdly, it sharpneth the Commandment of God, set down in that word, and
drives it in more deeply into our minds, by adding thereto a Commandment of
her own. For, as we showed before, Faith to the regenerate, is in stead of a
Law. Hence our obedience, Romans 1 6. is called, the obedience of Faith, because
it harkneth not only to the Word of God, but also to Faith, urging and
pressing that Word of God. In every good work which we do, unto the
Commandment of the Word, must come the Commandment of our Faith. The which by
the apprehension of the love of God the Commander, sweetly inuiteth and gently
allureth us to perform obedience. Wicked men are moved sometimes by Gods
Commandment, to do some good things, but yet not by the Commandment of
Faith, they have none at all. Unless therefore when thou go, come, do
this or that, thou hear thy Faith, like the Centurion in the Gospel, saying,
Go, Come, Do this, or that, assuredly, thy coming, thy going, thy doing this
or that, though grounded upon the Word, are yet sins in thee.

Fourthly and fifthly, it presents to our memories the Promises. First, the
promises more specially to that particular good work, which is to be don. This
is a notable spur to our obedience. Unto this Commandment, Apoc. 2. 10. Be
thou faithful to the death, is added this Promise, I will give thee the Crown
of life. Now, that we may more cheerfully obey this Commandment, our Faith,
as MOSES his did, Heb. 11. must behold the Promise annexed.

Secondly, the Promises that are made generally to all good works, concerning
the covering of their defects and blemishes. For the best works we do, are
tainted and stained with our natural corruption. Here then is the last action
of Faith, the vpshot and conclusion of all* namely, the apprehension of the
merits of Christ, whereby both that evil which we have mixed with our good
works, may be removed, and that good which is wanting, may be supplied.

In the second place; when Faith shall thus have In love, both to God and
done her part, comes Love, succeeding and seconding Faith, in the bringing
forth of every good work.

First, Love toward God: For this is the difference betwixt the obedience of
the godly, and that show of obedience that is to be found in the Ethnicks,
Papists, Civil men, and all such Iustitiaries. The love of God thrusts
forward the godly, but these the love of themselves; for they think to demerit
God to themselves by that they do. And therefore they say with that young man
in the Gospel, What good thing shall I do, that I may get eternal life? Lo,
the base mind of a servile Mercenarie, they do all like hyrelings for their
wages. But a child like ingenuitie draws forth the obedience of the godly. The
child, when he does any thing for his Father, looks for no recompense; but
his intent is only to show his love toward his Father. The obedience of the
godly is wholly Filial, and a testimony of their thankfulness for benefits
already received. Therefore their voice is not. What good thing shall I do
for the getting of Life, but for Life already gotten? What shall I render to
the Lord? Psalm 116.

Secondly, Love also to our Brethren, must be Our Brethren.
the ground of our obedience. This, as it is plain in the works of the second
Table, wherein that of the Apostle has place, Do service one to another by
love; so it is true also in the works of the first Table. Even those works of
obedience which concern God immediately, must be done in love to our Brethren,
namely, that by our example we may do good unto them, provoking them to do
the like. Thus PAVL in his sufferings for the Gospel, had a special regard of
the Elect, 2. Tim. 2. verse. 10.

Thus much of these Virtues of Faith and Love. Their objects follow.

First, the object of Faith is only one, viz. Christ.

How is Christ the object of Faith?

Faith is taken two ways: First, properly for an Christ, the object of Faith.
truth. Secondly, improperly, and Metonymically, for an act of the Will, in
resting and relying upon some thing which is called Confidence, which way
soever we take it, Justifying faith has Christ her object. First, if it be
taken for assent, which we call belief, or credence, Christ may worthily be
accounted the object thereof, for this is the truth whereto she assenteth,
namely, that Christ is hers. If it be taken the second way for confidence, so
also is Christ the object of Faith, for in the merits of Christ only, and
naught else, can we safely repose any trust, of him may we depend only for
our salvation.

Here then, first of all is overthrown the Doctrine of the Scholemen, that
make God simply the object of our Faith, without making any mention of Christ,
who yet is the Way, by the which we go to the Father, otherwise dwelling in
the light inaccessible: so our Savior, Ioh. 14. 1. You believe in God, believe
also in me. As if he should say, Ye cannot truly believe in the Father,
unless also ye believe in me: so most excellently are both these coupled
together, Ioh. 17. 3. The knowledge of the Father, and of whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ. So, 1. Pet. 1. verse. 21. By whom (namely Christ) you believe in
God.

By this see then, what to judge of the faith of the Turks, Jews, and all
those that know not Christ, yea, of the Papists, destroying that Christ indeed,
whom they grant in word. The way of God is hedged up, considered in himself,
simply without Christ. He only is the foundation of Faith.

Secondly, here again the Papists are met with that dare join with CHRIST'S
merits, of Saints, for Faith to lean upon. But it is Christ only that Faith
can lean upon. In him only can she find that, which is to be opposed to the
Laws rigor, to Gods anger and justice. Therefore it is oftentimes called the
Faith of Jesus Christ, as Romans 3. It is only the blood of Christ that will stay
and strengthen our hearts in the hour of death, and it is only that which will
choke Satan with his temptations. Tell him of the merits of Saints, and he
will answer thee, as once those Exorcists, Acts 19. Jesus I know, but these
merits I know not.

Thirdly, this Doctrine of the object of Faith is the rather to be marked, that
we may more clearly understand the doctrine of our justification by faith. For
the Papists always have it in their mouths, that Faith is a work, and so, if
we be justified by Faith, then by Works. But with Faith we must join the
object of Faith, viz. Christ: for Faith iustifies not in regard of the subject,
in which it inhereth; but of the object, to which it adhereth, not as a
quality created in the mind, nor as an action of this quality (for both are
imperfect) but as it applies Christ; and so in him covers as all other
defects, so also her own, whereby she is disabled from justifying in her
self. This Doctrine is full of comfort to those that are discouraged, in
regard of the small measure of their Faith. But it is not the measure of thy
Faith, or the strength of thy Faith that iustifies, but Christ apprehended by
thy Faith, whether strong or weak. And a Palsie-trembling hand will receive an
alms, as well as a stronger. So the squint-eyed or purblind Israelite was
healed by the looking on the brazen Serpent, as well as they whose eyes were
better.

Lastly, from this manner of phrase, wherein Christ is made the object of
Faith, namely, Faith in Christ. Some do gather that Faith properly is an act
of the will, resting it self on Christ, and not of the understanding,
believing the Truth of the promise in particular: for then, they say, the
Scripture should rather speak thus, Faith to Christ, and to believe Christ,
and not in Christ. This particle, In, they think argues that confidence which
we have in Christ, whereby we cast our selves upon him, and as it were, go
into him. But these men seem to me to be deceived: for,

First, it is most certain that this particle (In) is 1. Three Reasons,
proving Faith to be an act of the Understanding, as well as of the Will.
often given to the Faith of persons unregenerate, who have not that confidence
in Christ, as Ioh. 2. 23. Many believed in his Name seeing his miracles: where,
by believing in his Name, is meant only that credence which they gave to
Christ as a true Prophet, and no Deceiuer, which was wrung from them by force
of his miracles: for hear Christ's judgment of them in the next Verse: Jesus
would not commit himself unto them, for he knew what was in the heart of man;
where they that before are said to believe in his Name, are closely touched for
their hollownesse and perfidiousnesse. If they had put their trust in Christ,
Christ (questionless) would have put more trust in them then he did. So Exodus
14. ver. 31. They believed in MOSES, as it is in the Hebrew, that is, they
believed MOSES, as the learned have well expounded it. Certainly, to believe in
Christ, and to believe Christ, sounded all one in the ears of those Jews,
that conferred with Christ, John 6. for whereas Verse 29. Christ had said, This
is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent, they presently
answer, What sign do thou show that we may see, and believe thee?

Secondly, the Scripture distinguishes Faith and By whom we have access with
confidence by faith, Ephesians. 3. 12. Now, it would be absurd for the Apostle to
say, We have access with confidence by confidence.

Thirdly, Reason it self is against this opinion:

Yet, I deny not, but that oftentimes, yea very usually in the Scripture, this
Confidence is put for Faith, because it is an immediate, and most excellent
fruit of Faith. For when once the understanding shall judge of the truth and
goodness of the Promise, the will forthwith must needs claspe about them. And
withal we feel diverse times this action of our wills in cleaving to the
Promises, when yet we feel not so clearly the action of our understanding, in
assenting unto them. But our feeling must not be the rule to determine matters
by; we feel Repentance before Faith, which is yet a fruit of Faith, and
commonly we feel the effects before the causes themselves. As we see and
discern the light of the Candle, before the Candle it self; and yet the
candle in order of nature is first. Thus much for the object of Faith.

Now of Loves objects. They are two: The Objects of Love, two:
former she has in common with Faith, viz. Christ.

The latter, proper to her self, and all Saints.

The first object of our love, is Christ, who is to First, Christ.
be loved in many respects.

First, As he is God, for himself. For the matter of love is good, Christ
being God, the chief good, in whom lie hid all the Treasures of goodness; he
is to be loved chiefly and above all.

Secondly, As he is our Lord, which respect the Apostle may seem to insinuate
here, saying, toward our Lord Jesus. Good is to be loved, in, and for it
self, but much more when that which is good in it self, shall be good also to
us, from whence arises this title of Lord here given him: for, first, He
created us of nothing, good and perfect in our kind. Secondly, Falling away
from this perfection, he has restored us to an estate better then the former:
being restored, he preserues us in it, and reserues us for eternal glory, in
the mean time lading us daily with his blessings. Here then is place for that
Song of DAVID, Psalm. 18. 1, 2. I love the Lord, he is my Rock: and, Psalm. 116.
I love the Lord, he has heard my prayer. Thirdly, As he is our Brother, not
only because we are all as ADAM, Luke 3 in the end, the sons of God by
creation, and he has the same humane nature with us, created by God, but also
by adoption, and that through his means.

But wherein consists our Love of Christ?

In Love, there are especially these two things: Wherein the love of Christ
consists.
the desire to the thing we love, that we may enjoy it: secondly, the resting
of the mind, and the rejoicing of the heart in it, after once we have obtained
it. Would we then know how to love Christ? First, before all other things, thou
must with great earnestness, and contention of desire, long after Christ, and
that in two respects: first, that thou may come to him, and be united by
Faith, as PAVL, Philip. 3. being desirous to redeem Christ's righteousness
with the loss of all other things whatsoever: secondly, that he may come to
thee by sight, and take thee into his own Company in the Heaven; as PAVL also
did, Phil. 1. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Again, thou
must feel thy heart rejoicing in Christ, even in that apprehension of him
which thou have in this life, feeling the want of all other things made up in
him, and so fully contenting thy self with his love: else thou do no more
love Christ, then that woman her husband, which receiving small contentment
from him, desires the company of other men. This was in PAVL, 1. Cor. 15. 31.
calling Christ, his rejoicing. And when we feel these things, then may we
truly call Christ our Love, as IGNATIUS did, saying, His Love was crucified.
But if these things be wanting; no hungring, no thirsting after Christ, and his
Righteousness; no rejoicing, nor resting of the heart in Christ; but we linger
in our desire after worldly things, and find more comfort in them, then in
Christ, nor yet no desiring for the coming of Christ to Judgment; it is an
argument, that in truth there is no love of Christ in us.

Again observe, as before concerning Faith the same thing was observed, That
not God simply and absolutely in himself, but God in Christ, is the object of
our Love. I grant indeed, that we owe Love to God, as in himself he is good,
and as our Creator, though he should never have further manifested his Love
unto us in Christ. But we can in no wise pay this debt of Love, but unto God,
considered in Christ. The reason is, because our Love of him arises of his
love to us, as S. JOHN witnesses. And he loves us only in Christ, Matthew. 3.
in the end. The Jews that denied Christ, pretended a zealous Love of God, but
the Apostle worthily condemns it: for no man can truly love God, out of
Christ. Vainly therefore do all Papists, and all profane Protestants, brag
of their Love to God. The second Object of our Love follows.

And toward all the Saints.
HOw may any thing, besides Christ, be loved? himself, what then will be left
for any other thing? 2. The Saints.
Again, Good only is the matter of Love: And God only is good, Matthew. 19.
therefore he only to be loved.

It follows not, if God only be to be loved,

First, Mark the Order of our Love: First, it The Order of our Love.
to Christ, the Head; then, to the Saints, the members. All Creatures therefore
are to be loved in God, and for God only: so that the Love of the Creature
must be so far from taking any thing from our Love of God, that rather it
must confirm and increase the same. And then is the love of the Creature
lawful, when it is referred to the Creator: So that we love not so much the
Creature, as the Creator in the Creature. Now this is done Two ways how the
Creator is loved in the Creature.
these two ways:

First, in regard of the Beginning, from whom the Love of the Creature arises;
namely, the Love of God, for whose cause we love the Creature, his
Workmanship, as the Son for the Fathers cause.

Secondly, in regard of the End to which it tends. Now that Love of the
Creature which is lawful, tends to the Love of the Creator: For the glory
of God is that end which we must propound to all our actions, and so
consequently, to our Love of any Creature. And this must be the end of all
those duties of Love which we are to perform to our brethren, that by that
means we may provoke them to the Love of God. If we love the Creature
otherwise then thus, we sin grievously, in as much we cleave to the Creature,
and contrary to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 62. We set our heart upon it,
which God claymeth as his own peculiaritie.

The Rivers that come out of the Sea, as they pass, do lightly touch the
Earth; but they stay not there, but go on forward, till at last they return
again into that Sea, from whence they first came. So it is here, our Love must
first come from God to the Creature; but being so come, it must not rest and
settle there (howsoever, like a River, it may in passage touch it;) no; it must
return back into that infinite Sea, even God himself, whence first it came.
But how many shall we see so blinded and bewitched with the Love of the
Creature, that God is wholly forgotten of them! Thus is God robbed of his
Honor, with the Love of whom only, the heart is to be possessed, and wholly
taken up; and the Creature abused, and transformed into an Idol. For, for this
cause is Covetousness called Idolatry, because it glueth and fasteneth the
heart to Riches. Now the adhering of the heart, is proper only to God.
Therefore also is the excessive Love of the Creature called Adultery, because
thereby we withdraw our affections from Christ, our Spiritual Husband, James
4. 4. O ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not, that the Love of the
World, is Enmity with God?

Let us take heed of being enamoured with any Creature, though never so
glorious and pleasing unto us, forgetting in the mean time the Creator,
Blessed for ever. If it shall please God to take from us any Creature we love,
as our Children, Wives, Husbands, Goods, Health, Credit, etc. which he does
oftentimes, because he sees we love them too well; let us willingly suffer our
selves to be severed from them. Let no man, in the loss of Children, cry out
with DAVID, as bereft of reason; ABSALOM, ABSALOM, O my son ABSALOM, would
God I had died for thee! or with RAHEL, feed their sorrow, wilfully refusing
comfort: for then we show plainly, we loved the Creature for it self. If
we loved it for Gods cause, and rather loved God in it, then it self alone;
we should then, with AARON, without any more ado, hold our peace, Leuit. 10.
For though thy Son, thy Spouse, thy Wife, whom thou louedst as thine own
soul, dearly and tenderly, be taken away from thee; yet God, whom thou love
in them, still remains with thee. Therefore, if the presence of God cannot
comfort thee, in the absence of the Creature which thou louedst, nor thou can
not yield quietly to God, parting thee and the Creature which thou love; it
is a plain argument, thou art too far gone in thy Love. For when we keep
this our Love of the Creature within her lawful bounds, then shall we not
only be well content, that God should make a Divorce betwixt it and us, but we
our selves will be ready, in case he commands us, to give a Bill of
Diuorcement into it hands, willingly to deprive our selves of the same. This is
that which our Savior calls, the hating of Father, Mother, Wife, Children, and
Life it self, when as we seeing God calls for them at our hands, because we
cannot both keep them and a good conscience too, we do willingly resign
them up. Thus did ABRAHAM chearefully sacrifice ISAAC; PAVL, his life, Acts 20.
MOSES, his honors, Heb. 11. thereby plainly showing, that in truth they loved
the Lord in these Creatures, simply in themselves, because they were so willing
to forgo them, when God called for them. And therefore God himself said to
ABRAHAM, Now I know that thou love me. Now I see, that there is no Creature,
no, not ISAAC himself, that is able to alienate and estrange thy affections
from me. Now I see, that howsoever thou LOUEDsT ISAAC well, yet thou louedst
me better, and ISAAC only for my sake, when at my command thou can even
hate him.

Secondly, The Apostle conioyning the Love of Christ to be loved in his Saints.
and that in truth, none loves Christ, who also loves not his Members: for
we may truly say with DAVID, Psalm. 16. 2. Lord, my well-doing reaches not to
thee; All my delight is in the Saints on Earth.

The Lord Jesus is in the Heavens. We cannot so manifestly declare our Love to
his own Person; but he has left, in his own stead, a most fit Matter for our
Love, the poor Saints to be with us always. Whereas, if those duties of
kindness and humanity, which JOSEPH of Arimathea performed to the dead Corpse
of our Savior, were arguments of his Love, how much more shall we declare our
Love unto him, in helping the Church, his living Body, his Fullness, called by
the Name of Christ himself, 1. Cor. 12. specially then, when it shall be in
ieopardie? If the glorified Body of Christ in the Heavens were here upon Earth
with us, no doubt we would be very officious and respective of it. But alas,
it is not that Mass of flesh, though glorified and united to his Godhead,
which he so much respects: No; he makes greater account of his faithful Ones
amongst us; setting that upon his own Skore, which is done unto them. Every
one of these has he honored with his Name, as well as the whole Company of
them. Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not my Prophets, neither hurt my Christ's.

Vainly therefore do they prattle, that speak of their Love to Christ, who
yet are wanting to his Members in their Troubles; suffering PAVL to answer for
himself before NERO, and with the Parents of the blind man, Ioh. 9. saying,
He is old enough, let him speak for himself. To such I say, If any man love
not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed, 1. Cor. 16.

Thirdly, Observe, who, next unto Christ, are to Saints. All men, being of The
Saints to be loved, next unto Christ.
the same mould, the same humane nature with our selves, are to be loved; for
we may not hide our selves from our own flesh. But the chiefetie of our Love
is due unto the Saints, that are of the same Spiritual flesh and
consanguinitie with us. Others may not have the tithe of that Love they have.
Let us do good to all (says the Apostle) but specially to the Household of
Faith, Galat. 6.

1. Tim. 5. He that provides not for his own, is worse then an Infidel. But
a man's own (happily) may be none of the Saints. S. PAVL here seems to prefer
a man's own, though never so wicked, in our Love, before the Saints.

If the Question be, Whether I must rather help my wicked Wife in her
necessity, then any godly friend? this place to TIMOTHY, says, My wicked
Wife. But here the Apostle gives the first place of our Love, next to CHRIST,
unto the Saints.

This Doctrine, That our Love must chiefly may equally be compared with them:
as, Those of mine own, which are godly, must be loved more then those of mine
own, which are not. I must love all my Children, Servants, Kinsfolks, but
specially those that are Saints. But in an unequal Comparison, it holds not.
An ungodly Son, Wife, Brother, etc. is to be respected before a godly friend,
that is further off from me, and not so near in blood.

Again, though natural affection may be greater in us toward our Kinsfolks
wicked, then toward strangers godly; yet true Christian Love belongs to the
Faithful, without any carnal respect: Neither must we measure it so much by
outward effects, as by the inward affection of the mind: It is a Spiritual
Love, and is specially seen in Spiritual Things; as, in the holy cleaving of
hearts together in mutual Prayers, Consolations, and heavenly Conferences.

And thus I may love my Christian friends more then my ungodly Wife, or
Children, though in nourishing of them, I suffer them to perish with famine, as
not having sufficient to relieve both.

Fourthly, Mark; The Object of PHILEMONS All the Saints. He that loves All
the Saints must be loved.
one Saint truly, and because he is a Saint, must needs love all: Though
there be diverse degrees of our Love to the Saints, as there be also of their
Sanctimonie; so CHRIST loved JOHN above the other Disciples. But if we love
but one Saint, because of his Grace, we must needs carry the same mind to
all. Otherwise; if loving one, we hate another, it is an argument we love him
not because he is a Saint, for then we should love the other also, but for
other respects.

Here then is condemned that partiality, which JAMES taxes, James 2.

Fifthly, Observe, That the Christians with Saints; so the Apostle usually
calls all that he writes unto. We are not then to restrain this name to
the glorified Souls of just and perfect men in Heaven. Certainly, unless
thou art a living Saint, thou shall never be a Saint when thou art dead; for
that Holiness which is perfected then, is begun here.

Let now those profane Knaves go and scorn the Name of a Saint, together
with all Sanctimonie; in the mean time, they themselves being scorned by Him
that sits in the Heavens.

VERSE. 6. That the communication of thy Faith may be effectual in the
knowledge of all that good that is in you by JESUS CHRIST.
IN the former Verse, both those effects of PAVLS love to PHILEMON, set down
in the fourth Verse, were jointly described by the cause, common to them both.
In this Verse, and the seventh, they are described severally. And first, his
Prayer in this sixth Verse, from the matter of it. This was that which he prayed
for in PHILEMONS behalf, That the communication of his Faith might be
effectual in the knowledge, etc. The words are something obscure.

First then, By the Communication of thy Faith, understand, Thy Faith
communicating it self. Then the words following, in the knowledge, etc. are to
be understood Passiuely, not Actiuely. Therefore the sense is well expressed
in our English Translation, That whatsoever good thing is in you, may be
known: for he speaks of that knowledge which others should have of PHILEMONS
virtues, and not that which PHILEMON himself should have.

Now here, are two Things to be considered:

First, What that is which PAVL prays for in PHILEMONS behalf, The Efficacy
of his Faith: Secondly, Wherein this Efficacy of Faith consists; first, in
Communication, That the communication of thy Faith may be made effectual; that
is, that thy Faith, by communicating, may be made effectual; secondly, in the
Knowledge of whatsoever good was in him by Christ.

For the first, That Efficacy of Faith which here PAVL desires for PHILEMON,
was two: First, in regard of PHILEMON himself, that it might work effectually
in him: secondly, in regard of others, that it might be examplarie to them, and
so might be effectual in provoking them to the like.

And that the Apostle had some reference, even to this latter kind of
Efficacy, the words following seem to import, That whatsoever good thing is
in you, may be known: For when the light of our Faith shines to others, it
very effectually stirs them up to the glorifying of GODS Name, Matthew. 5.

Hence observe, First, That true Faith may True faith may faint.
under the ashes. A slothful kind of Sleepiness may sometimes seize upon it,
and unfit and disable it for Spiritual Exercises. As we see in the Disciples;
who being oppressed with carnal grief for the departure of CHRIST now at
hand, were not able to attend the Exercise of Prayer, no, not one hour, with
our Savior. So likewise in the Philippians, Phil. 4. 10. Of whom, when the
Apostle says, That they were revived, or, as the word signifies, waxen green,
or fresh again, in their Love and Liberality toward him; thereby he
declares, That for a time they were like Trees, that in the Winter are in
their Widow-hood, having lost their Leaves, and appearing outwardly as dead,
all their Sap being in the Root within. And truly, as Trees, so Faith also,
has her Winter, namely, the Storms and Tempests of Temptations, which by
their violence shake off all her green and glorious Leaves, and so make her
appear naked and desolate, she being driven into the secret corners of the
heart, and there for a time to lie gasping and panting, ready to give up the
ghost. Therefore, Revel. 3. 2. they of Sardi are willed to strengthen the
things that are ready to die. Faith of it own nature is very laborious, and
whiles it is strong and healthie, ties her self duly to her Task, and is
always at work: Yet sometimes, the Feuer-Lurden having caught her, she
begins to be lazy, and to have no list to work. Nay, then it is Holy Day, and
Vacation-time with her, till she recover her self again. Therefore PAVL here
prays, that PHILEMONS Faith might be preserved from this Lethargy and
Sleepiness, to the which, in it self, it was subject, and so might show it
self to be a lively and effectual Faith.

Secondly, observe, How Faith being by Satan's Prayer recouers fainting Faith.
and how it may shake off this Spiritual Laziness, namely, by this Spiritual
Exercise of Prayer. Therefore here PAVL prays for PHILEMON, That his Faith
might be effectual. And if other men's Prayers may do this, much more our
own.

But it may seem, that Faith must rather give

It both gives and receives; yea, in giving, it Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation.

Now, those things which are able to prevent Diseases, are able also, for the
most part, to cure them. Yet think not, there is any virtue in our Prayer, to
do this, but in GOD; who having bound himself thereto by promise, sends his
Spirit into our hearts, when we are in this exercise, whereof see an example,
Acts 2. 1.

Thirdly, PAVL here plainly teaches us, that Faith is a lively Grace.
full of vigor and spirits. 1. Thessal. 1. verse. 3. The work of your faith,
that is, your working Faith. Faith is of a working and stirring disposition,
and is always quicke-spirited and nimble, unless when it be wounded by some
grievous temptation.

Thy faith then, which like the Sluggard, holds her hands in her bosom, loath
to stir out of doors, which always lies dreaming within, leading an idle
sedentarie life; this Faith, I say, which is of so heavy a mold, of such leaden
heels, is a false faith, what shows soever it have. For actiuenesse is the
property of true Faith. I discern the picture of a man, though never so
lively, to be no true man, because it stands still and stirs not. Therefore,
though it have show of eyes, mouth* feet, etc. yet, when I see, it neither
goes, sees, nor speaks, I know it is no man. So, when I look upon thy faith,
and find for all the colors of outward profession, that it is idle, I conclude
forthwith, that it is an Idol, a shadow, void of truth, and substance.

Show me thy faith by thy works, says JAMES. Indeed, if Pride, Swearing,
profaning of the Sabbaths, Uncleanness, were fruits of faith, then these
Braggers would justify their faith as very effectual.

But since the fruits of Faith are* Mortification, Meekness, Love, etc. and
not the least drop or dram of these Graces are to be seen in them, it
appears, that their Faith is a very empty and imaginatie Faith.

The second follows; namely, wherein this Efficacy of Faith, here prayed for,
consists; first, in Communication; secondly, in the knowledge of every good
thing.

For the first, Observe, That Faith is no sparing Faith is a bountiful grace,
and communicatiue.
It hoordeth not, it hides not those Treasures which she receives of God,
but communicates them to others; That the communication of thy Faith. For that
which Christ said to his Disciples, Faith says to her self, Freely have I
received, freely will I give. This Communication therefore is a most necessary
effect of Faith, as the Apostle shows in his own example, Romans 1. 12. That I
might receive Exhortation together with you* through our Faith. Faith is made
the fountain where-from that mutual communication of Exhortation or Comfort,
betwixt PAVL and the Romans, should spring. If then thou will show thy self to
have true Faith, let me see the Communication of thy Faith. But this is very
rare. Men are afraid, lest by this means all their store will be soon spent,
and so they shall be drawn dry; wherein they are much wide: For here, not
Parsimonie, which agrees not with Faith, but this liberal Communication of
our gifts, is the best thrift and husbandry: for as those Loaves in the
Gospel, so our gifts increase and multiply, even whilst they are in
distributing. Even out of that which the hand reaches to the mouth, it self
is nourished.

Again, how should we look that others should communicate to us, if we
communicate not to them? Here then is another benefit of this communication,
we do not increase our own, but gain unto our selves the benefit of our
Brethren: By the help whereof we shall be enabled to do that which of our
selves alone we could never do. The Blind, of himself, cannot go a journey,
neither yet the Lame man, the one for want of eyes, the other for want of his
legs. But now, if there be this communication betwixt them, the Blind man carry
the Lame man on his back, and so become legs to him, the Lame man lend his
eyes to the Blind, and direct him in the way; by this means they will dispatch
that journey, which apart, neither of them could have done. God, of set purpose
has so disposed of his gifts, that we should stand in need one of another,
even the Head of the Foot not giving all to every one; for then finding a
sufficiency in our selves, we would not seek for help abroad, when we might
have it at home, but, one to this man* another to that; that so this mutual
communication might be maintained amongst us.

In these and many other respects, must we have special care of this
communication. Our own gifts, by their use, will increase; our Brethrens, in
regard of use, will become ours; and both united together, will be stronger;
laying our Moneys together, we shall make up that shot, which by reason of our
poverty, we could not have done apart.

The second thing, wherein this efficacy of Faith consists, is the Knowledge
of all that good.

That Faith then is effectual, which has all other Faith sets all other
Graces on work, and makes them manifest.
one, Go, it goes; to another, Come, it comes; to all of them, I would have
you known of others, they forthwith come forth into the open light, and by
practice make themselves known to all. If a King command, and be not obeyed,
it shows, his power is not great, that he is not as yet thoroughly confirmed
in his Authority. So, it is an argument that Faith, as yet is but weak, and
of small force, when it commands not with a Kingly and Imperial Majesty and
Authority, so that without further delay his commands are obeyed. That thy
faith may be effectual: but how? In the knowledge of every good thing that is
in you.

Unless then, Faith do thrust forth all other Graces whatsoever in thee, and
cause them in some manner to be seen, and acknowledged of others, thy Faith is
ineffectual. What then shall we say of those, who vaunt of their Faith, Hope,
Love, and other Graces, and yet they give us not the least taste of any of
them? They say, they feel the power of these Graces within their hearts,
though they have not that gift that others have, of making manifest that which
is in them. But in saying so, they bewray they have not the gift of Faith at
all. For Faith cannot suffer Grace to lie enclosed and cloystered in the Closet
of the breast, but it will presently deliver them out of this Prison: if the
door be shut, it will break it down, and by force make way for them to come
out. I believed, therefore I spoke, Psalm. 116. Faith then is, as it were, the
Porter, that opens the door of the mouth, that when we have believed with the
heart, with the mouth also we might confess to salvation, Rom 10. and so not
our hearts only, but our flesh also might praise the Lord, Psalm. 104. It is to
be doubted then, that those Graces that love thus to keep their Chambers, are
sick Graces: If they were healthy, they would delight to come abroad and take
the air; for as Verity, so likewise Virtue seeks no corners. Nay, such is
the power of Faith, that it drives all grace out of corners, and causes every
secret thing to be evident, and every hid thing to come to light, Luke 8. 17
for the Spirit of God once seated in our hearts, is like unto Wine in new
bottels, which will break the bottels, but it will have some vent, Job 32. 19.
and like to fire that cannot be pent in, but makes way for it self, and
breaks out into open flame, Ierem. 20. Again, others there are, not
altogether dry and empty of grace, as those vain vaunters, but endued with
some good portion thereof, who yet do deserve just reprehension, for that they
do not manifest every good thing that is in them by Christ for as sometimes we
make semblance of that Grace we have not, so again at other times, we
closely dissemble and conceal that Grace which we have, sometimes for fear of
danger, as PETER did his zeal and affection to Christ; and NICODEMVS, who came
by night, and so his light did not shine before men: sometimes again, through
an unchristian, and indeed, shameful shamefastness, thinking it does not
become us; so to put forth our selves, either by word or action: and last of
all, through our own negligence and carelessness, whereby suffering Satan to
surprise us, we are disabled for manifesting our spiritual strength. The
strongest Giant that is, when he is fast fettered and chained, and manacled,
cannot show his strength, as long as he is in that case; no more can we, when
through our want of watchfulness, we have suffered Satan to bind us hand and
foot, and withal have banished that good Spirit of grace, without whom we are
able to do nothing. Thus SAMSON, when he had yielded to Satan's temptations, in
losing the badge of his Profession, and so had grieved the Spirit, was not able
to show his former strength, howsoever he thought with himself, to have done
as in former times. So it fares with us, many a time we think to give proof
of this or that Grace, as we have done formerly, but when it comes to the
trial, we do nothing less. Being, through our own security, hampered in
Satan's snares, we are not able to stir; and so now, not our grace, but our
wants and weaknesses are made known. Therefore let us take heed of these three
impediments, Fear, Bashfulnesse, and Carelessness. Let us endeavor, not so
much in word, which is Pharisaicall, but specially indeed, and in the whole
course of our carriage to express the inward grace of our heart, that that may
speak when we hold our peace, that the prints and marks of that Humility,
Love, Meekness, Sobriety, Wisdom, etc. which are within us, may evidently
appear in our several actions, that so they which converse with us may have
experience of them, and so may give us that good testimony, which the
Philippians were able to give TIMOTHY, Philip. 2. 22. This is that which the
Apostle commanded the Philippians, Phil. 4. Let your patient mind be made
known to all: and to TIMOTHY 1. 4, 15. That thy profiting may be made manifest
to all: and our Savior to us all, Let your light shine. Let us not violently
smother and suppress the Spirit in our selves. Let us not detayne in unjust
captivity the graces of God, desirous to break forth. Let us not desire to
keep the light of the Candle within the Lantern only. Let us not set the
Candle, which GOD has lighted in us, under a Bushel, or under the Table, but
in the Candlestick of all our outward actions: but yet not for ostentation,
that we might have a name: but, first, that Four ends of the manifestation of
Grace.
God may be glorified, Mat. 5. Secondly, our Brethren strengthened and
confirmed; yea, and those that as yet are without, may be gained by our good
example. Thirdly, the mouth of the malicious watching for occasion of slander,
may be stopped, 1. Pet. 2. 15. Fourthly, we may acquit our selves as true
Israelites, approving to be that in truth which we profess, for otherwise we
give just occasion to be suspected of Hypocrisy.

But here mark, that not every good thing that All good in us is not to be
made known.
comes from us, must be made known; as our private Prayers, good Thoughts,
Meditations, Desires, etc. These things we must keep secret to our selves, as
doing them to our Father that sees in secret, who also will reward us openly,
and not reveal them to others, unless upon some special occasion, as PETER,
and CORNELIUS, Acts 10. and JOHN, Apocalyp. 1. 10. did. But those good Graces,
which are in us, as Love, Zeal, Patience, etc. must be made known, and that
not so much by prating as practicing, and yet not always, but as occasion
shall serve, and in discretion. Pro. 25. verse. 11. A word spoken in due season,
is like Apples of gold with pictures of silver. Psalm. 1. 3. That bring forth
fruit in due season.

VERSE. 7. For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because by thee,
Brother, the Saints bowels are refreshed.
NOw he comes to the special and several setting forth of his thanksgiving as
before he had in the former Verse specially set forth his Prayer, both which he
describes jointly together in the fifth Verse, being jointly propounded in the
fourth Verse. Now he sets his thanksgiving by the cause, that moved him to give
thanks for PHILEMONS love, viz. The joy and comfort he received by it. The
reason may thus be disposed:

Thanks is to be given for that love which brings joy.

Thy love brings me much joy and comfort. ERGO, The Proposition is wanting.

The Assumption is in this seventh Verse, in the beginning, where first his joy
is described by the quantity, Great, and then the Assumption is confirmed in
the end of the seventh Verse, by the effect of PHILEMONS love, The refreshing
of the Saints bowels. The Argument may thus be framed:

That love which refreshes the Saints bowels, must needs rejoice me.

Thy love is such: ERGO, The Proposition is here also wanting.

The Assumption in the Text, By thee, Brother, the Saints bowels, etc.

Bowels. The word signifies not only the Guts, but all the Inwards, as Heart,
Liver, Reins, and such noble parts. But yet these are not here meant, but by a
Metonymie of the subject, those affections of the soul, that have their seat
in these parts.

Refreshed. A Metaphor, drawn from the rest of the body, wearyed with travel,
or tired, and ouerpressed with some burden, and sweetly applied to the rest of
the affections, toyled, and turmoyled with grief, and ready to sink under
the burden of some grievous affliction.

That this is the proper signification of the word, appears, Matt. 11. 28.
Come to me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. The
word there translated to ease, is that, which here is translated, refreshed. By
this Metaphor, PHILEMONS love is notably amplified, for hereby the Apostle
declares, that his love was no less comfortable and sweet to the distressed
Saints souls, then rest and sleep is to the tired body of the travailing man,
or the taking away of the burden to him that is ready to sink under it.

In the Verse it self, consider these two points. First, the reason or cause
that moved PAVL to give thanks for PHILEMONS love, in the first part of the
Verse.

Secondly, the confirmation of this reason, in the end of the Verse, For by
thee, Brother, etc. For the first, he makes a double cause. First, his joy,
which PHILEMONS love ministered to him, and that no small or slender joy, but
great joy. Secondly, his comfort, which he received by the same love, and this
latter is an amplification of the former: for PAVL hereby signifies, that the
joy he took in PHILEMONS love, was not a simple joy, but a comfortable joy,
such a joy as did counteruaile and swallow up all the grief of his present
afflictions. Here observe,

First, that whatsoever breeds joy, is a just matter Argument of joy must be
argument of thanksgiving.
thanksgiving for PHILEMON, For we have great joy in thy love. And the ground
of this reason must needs be this: That which stirs us up to joy, must
likewise stir us up to thanksgiving: but you will say, The wicked take great
delight in mischief. It is a pastime to a Fool, to do wickedly. Must they
then give thanks for their wickedness? God forbid. Understand this of a
lawful and just joy, coming from God, and not of an evil joy coming from
Satan: for the end of that joy is heaviness, Pro. 14. and not thanksgiving; it
being a sin, must drive us to a sorrowful confession of sin, and not to
any cheerful praising of Gods Name. But in a lawful and holy joy it holds,
such as is the joy, arising out of the works of Gods Wisdom and Mercy,
whether done to us, or by us to others, or by others.

They are wickedly ungrateful, who when God shall have cheered and revived
their spirits by his mercies, do not make their joy and cheerfulness a
whetstone for thanksgiving, but rather for wantonness, and uncleanness, and
vanity of speech. As we see many, when God at the Table has filled their
hearts with food and gladness, in the strength of their joyful spirits
quicken their wits to swear, blaspheme, revile, and reproach the Saints, and
not once to bless Gods name for his creatures, that have refreshed and revived
their spirits. This is a profane and carnal joy, though otherwise lawful in
it self, which rests only in the creature, and aduanceth not up the mind to
the Creator: whereas we should rejoice more in the good will of the Giver,
then in the gift.

Let us then have a special eye to this affection of joy, that as soon as we
feel the first motion and tickling of it; if it be evil, we may restrain it;
if lawful, we may use it lawfully, as a goad to prick us to thanksgiving, and
first, pay the toll and tribute of our joy, to the Lord, in thanksgiving,
before we proceed further in it our selves; as Merchants, before they can have
the benefit of their commodities themselves, must pay their Impost to the King.

But, alas, how oftentimes have we felt the Lord, even replenishing our souls
with much joy, specially of outward comforts, and yet we, in the mean while,
have not one thought of paying God his toll!

Whereby it comes to pass oftentimes, that God being angry with us, for
keeping back from him his right, his Mercies are turned into Judgments, and
our joy into heaviness: yea, hence it comes to pass, that that joy which
otherwise is lawful, is now, because the fruits thereof were not hallowed to
God, become to us unlawful and unholy, to be checked with SALOMONS
reprehension. Eccles. 2. Thou mad Fool, what do thou? whither runnest thou
headlong, forgetting that GOD, in whom thou should rejoice? from whose
Mercy this thing, wherein thou art so delighted, did come unto thee?

Secondly, that joy is a singular and wonderful is much more so it self. If
joy make others things just matters of thanksgiving, then much more is it a
matter of thanksgiving it self. 1. Thessal. 3. 9. What thanks can we
recompense again to God for you, for all the joy wherewith we rejoice for your
sakes? And truly, joy is the very soul of the soul, the very life of our
life, without which our life is a dead, and liuelesse life, and we our selves
but living carcasses.

Therefore if God shall grant unto us a joyful and merry heart, in the use of
any of his mercies, let us acknowledge it with SOLOMON, Eccles. 2. as a
special, yea, a double blessing, and so not content our selves with single
thanks; but,

First, thank God for that benefit, which is the occasion of our joy; and,

Secondly, for the joy it self, which we have out of that mercy: for no
benefit of it self can work joy, without the special blessing of God: so,
Act. 14 The filling of the heart with food and gladness, are made two distinct
works of God. For how many are there that enjoy not those things they possess,
who though they should eat Manna, the bread of Angels, might yet be said to
eat the bread of tears?

Thirdly, observe, what that is which must stir The ^n^entiue of Thanksgiving.
in due manner, namely, the feeling of joy in the benefit bestowed upon us: for
this is the reason, that howsoever we want not sufficient matter of
thanksgiving, as being compassed continually with GODS mercies, yet oftentimes
we find our selves very unfit and indisposed for this duty: we want the
sweet sense of Gods Mercy, Goodness, Power, etc. in those benefits we have,
which should enlarge and dilate our hearts with joy: when thy heart shall once
be possessed with this joy, it grows so full presently, that it cannot any
longer contain it self within, but must needs power out it self into
thanksgiving. Psalm. 92. 2. It is good to praise the Lord, to sing to the most
High; but what drove DAVID hither, he himself shows the reason in the words
following: Because thou causest me to rejoice in thy works: and, Psalm. 16. in
the midst of his Thanksgiving, see how the heat of joy breaks forth in him!
My heart is glad, and my tongue rejoices. Every part of Gods worship has his
proper and special affections. Now, as in Prayer, the feruency of an hungry
and thirsty desire is the special grace thereof; so in Thanksgiving, the
triumphing Spirit of joy. If this be wanting, alas, how poorly and coldly do
we give thanks! Therefore here that of Saint JAMES must be remembered, Is any
man afflicted? Let him pray. Is any man merry? Let him sing Psalms, namely, of
Thanksgiving, as appears by the opposition.

Fourthly, mark, that PAVL did not only take joy, will bring ease and comfort
to the minds of Gods children in their troubles, namely, the virtue and good
carriage of those whom they love and respect: As this will be the comfort of
good Ministers in their afflictions, if their flocks stand fast in that Truth,
which they have preached. As PAVL tells the Thessal. 1. 3, 6, 7, 8. Now are we
alive, if ye stand fast in the Lord.

Those then, that have such, as are nearly bound unto them, under the cross,
as People their Ministers, Children their Parents, etc. must learn here to
minister sound comfort unto them in their afflictions, namely, by continuing
the same good course they walked before. If they shrink and go back, they
add to their afflictions, and even kill their hearts. And those parents which
in their afflictions have such children, those Ministers that in their troubles
have such people, according to PAVLS example, must comfort themselves here
withal.

Fifthly, observe what that is, wherefore we are to viz. his grace. We have
great joy Grace, argument of joy in others.
in thy love. This is that, which may justly cause parents to rejoice in their
children, one friend and kinsman in another. 2. John, We have no greater joy
then this, that we hear thy children walk in the Truth. Phil. 2. 2. Fulfill
my joy, that ye be likeminded, etc. If we rejoice in them for other respects,
as for Wit, Wisdom, Knowledge, Learning, Beauty, etc. our rejoicing is not
good, the end of our mirth will be mourning, we rejoice not so fast now, but
we shall weep and wail as fast afterward. Withal let us here learn how to
minister occasion of joy to those that desire to have joy of us, as our
Parents, Ministers, Acquaintance, etc. Let us grow in grace, and in the true
knowledge, and fear of God. Otherwise a profane people, given to Swearing,
polluting the Sabbath, are thorns and pricks in the sides of godly Ministers,
and a foolish son is a heaviness to his religious parents.

The second part of this Verse follows, namely, the confirmation of the
former part, which was, that he had great joy in PHILEMONS love. This he
proves, because PHILEMON refreshed the Saints bowels.

Here observe; First, that PAVL does not say, he Love to be more rejoiced in,
then in the profit of it
refreshed by him, but because the Saints bowels were refreshed. Many will
rejoice in that love which is profitable to themselves. But where is he that
will as well rejoice in that love which is profitable only to others? It is
plain then, that we rejoice not so much in love, because it is love, because
it is a virtue, but because it is beneficial to our selves, and that only we
rejoice indeed in our profit that we reap by that love, and not in the love
it self. For if we rejoiced in the love it self for it self, then it would
be all one unto us, whether we or others were benefited by it. For that love
which performs the duties of kindness to others, is as well love, as that
which shows the like kindness to us. Then therefore shall we show our selves
to be of S. PAVLS spirit, when we can heartily rejoice at the graces of Gods
children, and love them for those graces, whether we have any profit by them
or not (we stand not upon that) yea, and when we have profit by them, we
rejoice, yet more in their profit, because of the fruit that shall further
their reckoning, then in our gain, Phil. 4.

Secondly, mark, that then is a most seasonable The fittest time of joy, when
it is well with the Church.
Saints refreshed, the Church and People of God relieved in their distresses.
So on the contrary, if we see the bowels of the Saints wrung with grief, and
the Church pinched with the persecution of her Adversaries, and that she is
given as a prey into the hands of Wolves and Bears, hunted by many mighty
NIMRODS, and furrows are made upon her back by the Ploughes, then we are to
know that it is a time of mourning, and of hanging up our Harps with the
captiued Jews upon the Willowes. But for the most part, if it go well with
us, in regard of our own particular, we care not greatly which way things go
with the Church, sink she, swim she, all is one, so we live at ease, and
sleep in whole skins. If our own private estate be shaken, we take on and
are much cast down, but tears do soon wax dry in the evils of others,
though they be common to the whole body of the Saints, whereas every man's
particular depends upon the common good of the Church. And therefore as when
the Church of God flourishes, and holds up her head, we must lift up ours,
though otherwise it go not so well with us in our own private: so when the
Church mourns and hangs down the head, we must cast down ours, though our
own condition be never so good: for as the peace of Jerusalem sweetneth our
own private grieuances: so her afflictions and dangers do sour and make
distastefull unto us, all private comforts whatsoever. Thus NEHEMIAH distasted
his favor and honor in the Court, the Jews in Babylon their Houses, their
Orchards, and all other their delights whatsoever, Psalm. 102. VRIAH his own
house, and wife.

Thirdly, in PHILEMONS example we are all, according The bowels of Gods Saints
must be refreshed.
of Gods poor distressed Saints, if we will show our selves to have that love
which we profess. For this is the effect of PHILEMONS love, the refreshing of
the bowels of the Saints: for there is a cold charity and lip-loue, which is
common euerywhere. That which JAMES taxes, Chap. 2. of such as will say to the
naked, Clothe thee; to the hungry, Feed thee; to the cold, Warm thee. But
this last, they had need to say to their own frozen charity: for they only
say so, they do nothing for the releeuing of those necessities. But true love,
as it is seated in, and comes from the heart and bowels of him that loves:
so it goes down into the very heart and bowels of him who it loves and
refreshes them. The heart is both the place, from whence love comes, and
whither it goes. And then shall our love justify it self to be sincere and
hearty, when, as a comfortable Cordial, it does our Brother good at the very
heart.

But wherein stands the refreshing of the Saints Bowels? I answer in one
word: In the performing of those parts and offices of kindness unto them,
which may carry an express signification of our tender commiseration and
compassion toward them in their miseries. If thus thou give but a cup of
cold water, thou shall be a refresher of the Bowels of the Saints; for nothing
grieueth one in misery more, then to see himself neglected of others. This
was that which went very near DAVID'S heart in his affliction, and therefore he
complains bitterly of it, Psalm. 69. 20. But when others shall pity them,
moan, and tender their case, and in a Christian fellow-feeling, put under
their shoulder, to help them in their weakness, therein imitating the
Spirit, Romans 8. 24. This is a great ease and refreshing to their heavy and
oppressed minds.

Now, more specially, we are to express this our compassionate affection
toward them, in these duties:

First, in speeches of Comfort, Psalm. 41. 1. Blessed Three things in which we
must refresh the Saints.
is he that has respect of the Poor, saying, (namely, unto the poor Saints)
The Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. Thus JOSEPH confirmed and
raised up the hearts of his poore-brethren, cast down with fear, by speaking
kindly unto them, Genesis 50. Now, these Consolatorie speeches, wherewithal
we are to revive and refresh the spirits of our disconsolate brother, are
especially to be taken from the sweet promises of GODS Word, which, in the best
and wisest sort we can, we are to apply unto them.

Secondly, in commending and remembering their afflicted Estate to GOD in our
prayer. And this also is another thing, which the Psalmist in the former place
makes another part of our respect toward the afflicted. In the third Verse,
after his words of Comfort, he sets down his prayer to GOD in the behalf
of the afflicted, Deliver him not to the desire of his enemies. The Lord
strengthen him, lying in the Bed of Faintness: For so TREMELIVS translates it.

Thirdly, in the Works of Liberality, as the need of the afflicted shall
require, and our own ability give us leave. Phil. 4. When PAVL had received
the Liberality of the Philippians, being in prison, he professes, that he
received, and that now he was full. 2. Tim. 6. ONESIPHORVS ministering unto him
is called refreshing of him: Where the word of Refreshing is another word then
this here used; a Metaphor taken from those, who being almost overcome with
heat, find some cooling, to show, how acceptable and comfortable ONESIPHORVS
his relief was unto him. Where yet, besides his ministering unto him, he makes
mention of his diligent seeking him out, and so visiting him in the prison, as
another part of his refreshing him: That we may see the truth of that which
before I said, That the least office of kindness whatsoever, performed with a
tender and pitiful heart, is a refreshing of the Saints. But these three are
the chiefest waves of refreshing.

Now, if in this sort we are to refresh the Saints Bowels, what shall we say
then to such miserable Comforters as JOB was troubled with, that afford small
or no comfort at all? True comfort is sweet to the very Bowels. But much more
are they to be condemned, who are so far from comforting the Saints, and
refreshing their troubled Bowels, that they gripe and pinch their Bowels,
adding to their affliction, wounding them whom the Lord has smitten, as DAVID
complains of some, Psalm. 69. 26. What shall we say to such as SHIMEI, that
come out to gather sticks when the Tree is fallen, and tread down the Hedge
where it is low, as he did, reuiling DAVID in that great extremity? such as
the Edomites, Psalm. 138. that insulted over the Israelites in the day of
Jerusalem, crying, Raze it, Raze it to the foundation thereof; that speak
words which are as the prickings of a Sword, to the piercing of our Bowels
through, when rather words, as it were suppled with Oil and Butter, should be
used. Surely, God will remember such. DAVID'S imprecation shall befall them.

But let us rather imitate PHILEMON, in refreshing the Bowels of the Saints,
knowing,

First, That God himself has pronounced such Six reasons to move us to the
refreshing of the Saints Bowels.
Blessed, Psalm. 41. Matthew. 5.

Secondly, That herein we imitate the Spirit of God, Romans 8. 26. whose office
it is, to comfort the hearts of the afflicted Saints.

Thirdly, That by the same means we refresh the Bowels, not only of the
afflicted, but also of others, who lay to heart the afflictions of JOSEPH, as
here PAVL says, how he was comforted, when he heard of PHILEMON refreshing the
Bowels of other Saints.

Fourthly, Yea not only so, but we shall refresh the Bowels of Christ
himself. The which, as they are pricked and pierced in his Saints, Acts 9. for
even the apple of his Eye, tenderer then the Bowels, is hurt in them; so
likewise are they refreshed in them, Matthew. 25. Therefore the Apostle called
that Gift which the Philippians sent him, lying in Prison, an Odor that
smells sweet, a Sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to God, Philip. 4. 18. So
that as sweet Odours are a refreshing of the senses, so our refreshing of the
Saints Bowels, is in a manner a refreshing of Gods own Senses and Spirits.

Fifthly, That hereby we shall enlarge the spirit, not only of the afflicted,
but of all other good men besides, to whom our Love is known, in praying to
God for us. See an example in PAVL, praying again and again for ONESIPHORVS
and his Family, because he had been refreshed by him, 2. Tim. 1. 6. O happy
ONESIPHORVS, that by thy Liberality gainedst the so effectual Prayers from so
worthy an Apostle! Never layedst thou out any money better then that, which
returnedst unto thee so great again, as that did which thou bestowedst on
PAVL: For the seruent prayer of any just man, much more of an Apostle,
preuayleth much, James 5.

Sixthly, That if we reap not this benefit of our Love from men, who may prove
ungrateful and unmindful, yet God is not unjust, that he should forget the
labor of our Love, which we have showed toward his Name, ministering to the
Saints, Heb. 6. Nay, he will cause it to be as Seed, that shall bring us a
plentiful Harvest of many temporal blessings in this life, and of eternal
life it self at the resurrection of the Just.

But here it must not be omitted, that besides those ways of refreshing,
spoken of before, common to all sorts, there was one way proper to PHILEMON, in
regard of his Ministry, that which is spoken of, Isai. 50. when the tongue of
the Learned ministers a word in due season to the soul that is wearied with
the burden of sin. Thus must all Ministers refresh the Bowels of the Saints,
as need requires. But now adays men's Bowels needs no such refreshing. They
are rather to be pricked, as those, Acts 2. with the Sword of the Law, and then
they will stand in some need of Evangelical refreshing.

Fourthly, Here mark, what is the Condition Luke 2. 35. And hence it comes,
that their Bowels stand in need of refreshing: Whereas the wicked, for the most
part, are always fat, fresh, and flourishing, that they need not to be
refreshed by any.

But here is our comfort in this life, God will raise up some PHILEMON, to
refresh us; some SIMON, to help us to bear our Cross; at the least, he will
send his Spirit, the Comforter, into our hearts; and at the length will bring
that happy Day of refreshing, when all tears shall be wiped, and we shall
need no further refreshing. Then shall the wicked, with the rich man, tormented
in Hell, cry for some refreshing, as standing in great need thereof, but none
shall they get.

VERSE. 8, 9, 10. Wherefore, though I have great liberty in Christ, to command
thee that which is convenient,

Yet for loves sake I rather beseech thee, being such an one as PAVL, aged, and
now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ,

I beseech thee for my son ONESIMVS, whom I have begotten in my bonds.


HEre the Apostle comes to the second and that most principal part of his
Epistle, his Petition concerning ONESIMVS, to the which, as an appendant, is
added a Petition in his own behalf. But the whole Epistle is taken up in
ONESIMVS his matter, and in his Petition for him. The which he propounds
first in these three Verses, and then pursues and follows with arguments, and
preventing of objections in those which follow.

Now his Petition is not propounded barely and nakedly, but set forth with many
amplifications, for the moving of PHILEMONS affections.

These Illustrations are either general, belonging to the whole Petition, or
special to the several parts thereof.

The general Illustration is set down in the first Particle, Wherefore; which
being a Particle of Illation, shows, that this Petition of PAVL, howsoever a
distinct part from the former, yet depends and hangs upon them. Wherein
appears the wonderful Artifice of the Apostle, that so sweetly coupling two
such diverse and distinct parts of his Epistle, does by this means, as it were,
secretly and by stealth, slide on from one part to another, the Reader scarce
perceiving him.

Now these things depend on the former in this manner.

In the end of the former Verse he had said, That by PHILEMON the Saints Bowels
were refreshed. Now hence he takes occasion very fitly of propounding his
suit for ONESIMVS, Wherefore I pray thee for ONESIMVS; as if he should say,
Since hitherto thou have been exceeding kind to the Saints, a refresher of
their Bowels, I would not have thee wax weary hereof, but continue still like
thy self, and show thy self now to ONESIMVS, in refreshing his Bowels, cast
down in grief for his sin, that thou have formerly done to others.

By this inference we learn, that those good Good past, a motive to future
good.
effectual incitations to us, for the doing of the same, yea greater, as
occasion is offered. For thus PAVL reasons here with PHILEMON: Hitherto,
Brother, thou have been a refresher of the Saints bowels: Continue so still,
and refresh now likewise poor ONESIMVS his bowels. But many reason
contrariwise: Hitherto I have done this or that, I think that well for one. I
hope, now I may rest me awhile, and let others take my room, and do as much
for their part, as I have done for mine. But the Apostle tells us, we must not
be weary of well-doing, which they do which would pay the debt of Obedience
to God, in some good actions, with that which they have paid him in some other
formerly: we cannot use a more effectual argument to stir up men, either to
godliness in general, or some special actions thereof in particular, then
this, which is drawn from their own former practice. What more forcible
exhortation to constancy in the Truth, then this? Heretofore you have been so
zealous for the Gospel, that for it you have endured banishment, imprisonment,
and many other afflictions, and will you now begin to faint? Now, the ground
of this argument is this, That when once we give over the course, which
formerly we held, we lose all which we have done before. All our former
labor was vain and bootlesse, our Prayers, Fastings, Hearing, Preaching,
Suffering, all to no purpose. If a man in a journey of an hundred miles, after
ninety nine gone, should there rest and go no further, he might as well have
stayed at home, and never have set foot out of door. Hence S. JOHN Epistle 2.
exhorting to perseverance: Let us take heed to our selves that we lose not the
things we have done, (namely, by flinching) but may receive a full reward. And
PAVL Chap. 3. to the Galatians, ready to revolt, Have ye suffered so many
things in vain? for as in godly Repentance, when we change our former course
of life, our former sins shall nothing hinder us; so in this wicked
repentance, whereof we may see at this day fearful examples, when we repent
us of our former good course of life, and forsaking it, follow the course of
the world, all our former good deeds shall nothing avail us, Ezekiel. 1. 18. for
we our selves by our present contrary practice, do condemn them all. This is
the general amplification.

Let us come now to the special illustration of the special parts of the
Proposition of the Petition. The Proposition is this: I PAVL pray thee for
ONESIMVS. Here there being three things; first, the act of his praying.
Secondly, the person praying. Thirdly, the person prayed for: all these have
their several amplifications.

First, the act of praying is set forth by the diverse, Verse 8 Though I have
great liberty. Secondly, by the moving cause, Verse 9. Yet for loves sake,
etc. Secondly, Person praying described from his present condition: First, of
his Age. Secondly, Restraint. Thirdly, Person prayed for, ONESIMVS, described
by relation; that he was PAVLS son, begotten in his bonds.
For the first, The act of his praying is set forth by the Diverse, namely,
that power which he had of commanding. And it is, as if the Apostle should
have said: If I would use my power and authority, I might command thee, but
being overcome by that great love I bear toward thee, I willingly yield from
that my right, and choose rather to entreat. So that this amplification
contains a very powerful argument, from the greater to the less. If thou
ought to harken unto me in this cause commanding, how much more, dealing
more mildly by way of entreatie?

This his power of commanding he sets forth: first, by the measure, Having
great liberty, or, Though I might be very bold.

Secondly, by the manner of it, in Christ.

Thirdly, the matter or object of it, That which is convenient.

Here first of all observe, that the Ministers of Ministers have authority.
they may command their Hearers. 1. Tim 6. Charge them that are rich, that they
be not high-minded, etc. They may command with a charge, which is more then a
simple command. So, 2. Thessal. 3. verse. 6. We command, or charge you (for the
word is the same that before) to withdraw, etc. And lest any should say, that
this was a peculiar privilege of Apostles and Evangelists; let him hear PAVL,
inuesting all ordinary Pastors with the same authority. 1. Thessal. 5. We
beseech you to know those that be over you in the Lord. And, Hebr. 13. Obey
those that are your Guides. But that we may the better know this authority,
whereof we speak, the manner of it here set down by the Apostle is to be
considered: Having power to command thee in Christ.

This authority then they have to command, is not in their own name, but in
Christ's: wherein the Civil and Ecclesiastical power are differenced. In the
Civil power Christ has Deputies and Vicars, which may command in their own
name, and by punishment constrayne men to obedience, for this power respects
only the outward man. But in this Spiritual power, because it is over the
conscience, he has no Deputy that may be fully possessed of his own
authority, but only Ambassadors. He calls Ministers Stewards, who have only
authority to signify Christ's pleasure unto us, and cannot, as the Civil
Magistrate, compel by punishment.

The Church therefore has no absolute Lordship in things spiritual. It is
Christ's alone incommunicable to any other. Let a man's place be never so great
in the Church, he is but a servant, as MOSES was, Heb. 4. having no Imperial
authority in himself to command, but only in his Masters Name.

First, Here then we see the Papists refuted, who Cor. 5. 20. Now then are we
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through us; we pray you,
in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God. So here, and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. he
commands in Christ's Name. But if so be that Christ had as well set them in his
own place for spiritual things, as Magistrates for temporal, they might then
have commanded in their own name. Therefore all the Authority of Ministers
is to be confined within the bounds of an Embassage, contrary to that which
the Pope has done, stiling himself the Vicar of Christ; and so turning the
Spiritual power, which in the Church only is Ministratorie, into a mere
Tyranny and Lordship over the Faith of the Church; which yet the Apostle
rejects as a thing not beseeming him, 2. Cor. 1. in the end, Not that we have
dominion over your Faith, wherewithal he linketh the power of the Ministry,
adding, But we are helpers of your joy.

To whom then can that description of Antichrist, sitting in the Temple of God,
as God, better agree, then to the Pope of Rome, who blasphemously arrogateth
unto himself a Power, and that absolute, to command in his own name, to bind
the Conscience with those his commands, to remit and retain Sins? But we
have showed, that the power of the Church is only the power of Servants,
Ministers, and Stewards, 1. Cor. 4. 1. whereby all is done in Christ's Name. And
therefore, when Ministers are said to have power to command, to bind, and
loose sins, all these things are thus to be understood, That they have power
to declare Christ's will, in his Commandments, in his Promises, in his
Threatenings. Then does the Minister command, when he tells us Christ
commands; remit, or retain sins, when he truly testifies, that Christ does
so.

Secondly, But as this their Doctrine of the Spiritual Jurisdiction is
unsound, so is that likewise which thereupon they build: For hence they would
gather the Superiority of Ecclesiastical men above Civil Magistrates. And
their Argument at the first may seem to carry some show.

He that commands, is above him that is to be commanded.

Ministers command all Christians, even Magistrates. Therefore. So Likewise
thus: Shepherds are above the Sheep.

Ministers are Shepherds; Magistrates, the Sheep. Therefore, etc.

But the Answer is easy, to any that shall consider that which has already
been spoken: Every Commander is not greater then he that is commanded; Kings
sometimes send mean men to command great Nobles. What? is a Pesant therefore
above a Noble man? We must distinguish therefore of those which command: some
command in their own; some, in another name. The first, always, and simply,
obtain Superiority; the latter, only in the cause of their Embassage. Now
Bishops and Ministers are of this last kind. And therefore it follows not of
this, That because they have power to command Magistrates, therefore simply,
and in themselves, they are their Betters; that they may take the upper hand of
them in sitting at the Table, in going, and such like actions, as it was wont
to be in the Papacy; and as BELLARMINE, though very erroniously, would have it
both acknowledged of the Emperor MAXIMUS, and practiced by Bishop MARTIN. To
whom, when the Emperor, says BELLARMINE, as unto the worthier person, had
sent the Cup, brought by his servant to himself, and he had received it, and
drunk himself, yet would not send it back again to the Emperor, but gave
it to the Priest, thinking none, next to himself, so worthy as he; and that it
would not have been safe for him, to have preferred either the King, or any of
those next him, before a Priest. This Story he alleges out of SVLPITIVS
writing of the life of this MARTIN, De Pontif. lib. 1. cap. 7.

But first BELLARMINE, with his SVLPITIVS, do clean mistake the matter. For
this example rightly understood, does rather show the inferioritie of Ministers
beneath the Magistrates. The Emperor sent the Cup as a sign and token of his
favor, as it is the manner of great men to do at the Table, as appears in
JOSEPH'S example, sending portions from his own Mess to his brethren. Now it
had been no good manners for him to have sent back the Cup to the Emperor,
which he had sent as a favor to him, to grace him. But admit, BELLARMINE
could bring many such Examples of Clergy men, preferred in such things before
Magistrates, and that this example would serve his turn for this purpose, yet
the Doctrine we have gathered out of this place, overthrows them as
unlawful: for the superiority of the Minister is only in his Embassage,
whilst for the time he is Gods mouth to us. But when they are at Dinner, or
at Supper, they are out of their Embassage then. And being out of their
Embassage, they are inferior, not only to Kings, but also to their Servants,
inferior Magistrates, 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14.

Again, it may be answered, That the Commander is above the commanded; but
the Minister properly does not command, but God by the Minister; and so
Princes are subject, not to the Ministers, but to Gods own Authority, whereof
the Ministers are only dispensers. And thus understand that, Esai. 60. 10.

Away then with the pride of ambitious DIOTREPHESSES, that even in Civil
Things would have Preeminence above the Civil Magistrate.

Thirdly, But we must take heed, lest whilst we find fault with the Papist,
for giving too much, we our selves, in the mean time, give not too little.
This is the property of fools, to run from one extreme to another.
Therefore PAVL, after that he had refuted, in the three former Chapters of the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, those that went too far in magnifying of
Ministers, in the beginning of the fourth, lest he should seem to be Author to
any, of derogating from the Ministry, he adds, Let a man yet so think of
us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and dispensers of the Secrets of God.

It can scarce be expressed in words, with what disdain Ministers are
contemned, not only of the great Ones, but even of the vulgar sort. Every base
companion will in reproach call them Parsons and Priests. Why! what are you, but
a Priest? As if one should say to the Kings household-seruant, You are but the
Kings servant. I, but do you make but a but of it? Is not this a place of good
account? Is the Steward of a Kings Family no body, because he is over the
Family not as a Lord, but as a Steward? Is the Minister no body, because he
commands not in his own name, but in Christ's? But is it not counted a matter
of greater honor, to be sent in Embassage by an earthly Prince.

The authority of Ministers, as I have showed, is only the authority of
Messengers, and Ambassadors, and lasts only during the time of their message,
and embassage. What then, when they have done their message, are they so
lightly to be regarded? God forbid. Nay, according to the Apostle, for their
works sake, they are to be had in singular account always, and euerywhere, and
not only whilst they are in their work, being a preaching in the Pulpit.

But when they are in their embassage, declaring the Will of Christ, then
special reverence and regard is to be given them, then according to CORNELIUS
example are we to set our selves before them, as before God himself: for they
command in Christ's Name, and therefore their contempt is contumelious to Christ
himself, in whose Name they speak, Matthew. 10. Ministers therefore must be
heard with submissiue and obedient minds; for if they have authority to
command us in Christ, how can any whosoever deny obedience? Nay, Kings
themselves are to be obedient to them, that are over them in the Lord, as the
Apostle wills, for it is Christ's authority, and not the Ministers, and
therefore it equally binds the King and the Beggar. But, alas, Ministers may
command, even mean persons: but who obeyes their commands? They may command,
and do themselves. Their words are accounted only, as a blast of wind.

This authority of commanding, as it is set forth by the manner in Christ, so
by the measure, having great authority, etc. For, being in Christ, it must
needs be great.

This must teach Ministers to speak with great boldness, when they know they
are armed and backed with Christ's authority. Indeed if those things we
speak, were in our own names, we had just cause to be afraid, because
oftentimes our message is very unwelcome to carnal ears, but speaking in
Christ's Name, we may, as the Apostle here says, be very bold, lifting up our
voices as Trumpets, Esai. 58. 1. knowing that God has given us the Spirit, not
of fear, but of power and love, and of a sound mind, 2. Tim. 1. 7. The meanest
Sergeant, that is in the Kings name, dares arrest the greatest Duke that is. In
this house, the basest Skullion in that kitchen, being set on by your Honors,
would not be afraid to control the Steward. But take heed, thou that art a
Minister, lest at any time thou presume to command, to rebuke, or threaten in
thy own name. Christ will not bear thee out in such commands, neither will he
make good such threatenings. If men in such a case offer violence, look not
that he should rescue thee, but in his own cause he will be a wall of brass
unto thee, Ier. 4. Wherefore, as a faithful Ambassador, reveal the whole
Counsel of God, let neither fear, nor the golden squincey, nor any thing else
stop thy mouth. Thou have Christ to be thy Author, in that thou art to say.
Assuredly, he will never go back from that, which he has willed thee to
speak. ABSALOM encouraged his servants, to slay his brother AMNON, by this
argument: Have not I commanded you? 2. Sam. 13. How much more should the
Commandment of Christ put heart and spirit into the Ministers, to open their
mouths, and to speak freely, and fully, and frankly, whatsoever they have in
Commission?

Thirdly, S. PAVL sets forth his authority of commanding, by the matter of it.
What is it that he may command? any thing what he please? No. Though he were
an Apostle, yet he has no such infinite authority. What then? That which is
convenient. See then the bounds of this spiritual power. It can command
nothing, but that which is convenient.

And this necessarily follows out of the former, for it is in Christ. And
Christ can command nothing which is not convenient; wherefore, if Ministers at
any time shall command things inconvenient, they do now exceed their bounds,
they go beyond their Commission, neither do they now command in Christ's Name,
but in their own. And therefore in such cases we are so far from being
bound to obedience, that we are in conscience to disobey. This overthrows
the tyrannical and usurped Dictatorship of the Pope, who makes his own will
a Law, and thinks, he may do in the Church what him lists.

The propriety of the word, Convenient, is also to be observed. It signifies
that which in equity we are bound unto, though not in the rigor of the Law.
If PHILEMON should stand upon it, he was not to receive ONESIMVS again, but
in Christian equity he was.

Note then, that we are bound not only to do diverse, his power of
commanding: Though I have great, etc.

The second follows from the moving cause: Yet for loves sake, I rather
beseech thee.

The cause that made PAVL deal by entreaty, when he might have commanded,
was love, not PHILEMONS love toward the Saints, that he spoke of in the
seventh Verse, as some would have it, but his own love toward PHILEMON.

Observe first, in the example of the Apostle, that Ministers must deal mildly.
manner that may be with their Hearers, entreating, persuading, exhorting,
beseeching, even then when they may lawfully command. 1. Cor. 15. in the end.
We beseech you to be reconciled. Romans 1. 12. I beseech you, Brethren, by the
mercies of God. For so it is, that we see, even in the things of this life,
that men must be feign to sue for that which is their own, and may be glad if
by fair entreaties they can get up their debts. So the Ministers may think
they have done some great matter, if by any means, even by earnest and
affectionall persuasion, and exhortation, they can get at our hands this debt
of obedience we owe to God. And no marvel if Ministers thus deal, when God
himself herein goes before us in his own example. Oh that Israel would have
harkned, Psalm. 81. 13. and Matthew. 23. Christ shows that he invited the
Israelites in the same manner unto himself, that the Hen does her Chickens.
Wherein we have great cause to admire the unspeakable goodness of God toward
us. Men commonly are earnest and importunate Intreaters for those things which
may be profitable to themselves, but who is earnest in desiring another, to do
that which is only for the profit of him, with whom he deals, and not any
whit profitable to himself. If a man of himself cannot see what is for his
own good, and of his own accord do it not without further ado, we count him
worthy to smart for his folly. But here, God dealing with us by his Ministers,
so pathetically to turn, and reconcile our selves unto him, the profit is
solely our own: we only shall have the commodity of this reconciliation, and
not God, who could as sufficiently glorify himself in our everlasting
confusion. Our hearts therefore must relent, and be overcome by this kindness
of God, so sweetly, and gently calling and alluring us unto himself.

Observe further, in PAVLS example, that sometimes Sometimes we must yield of
our right.
may we do those things, which of themselves are lawful and indifferent. It
is a weak argument. This is lawful in it self, therefore it is lawful for
me. In it self it was lawful to eat of things sacrificed to Idols, and yet
in the case of scandal, the Apostle forbids the Corinthians to eat of them,
1. Cor. 8.

It is lawful in it self for a Minister to receive maintenance from his
flock; but it was not lawful for PAVL, preaching at Corinth, 1. Cor. 9. For
then he had abused his liberty, Verse. 18. And hindered the Gospel, Verse. 12.
and so consequently sinned. The case is alike in the use of our Christian
liberty, in things indifferent, as meat, drink, apparel, sport, recreation.
It is a point of Christian wisdom to consider, not only what is lawful, but
also what is expedient and profitable, not only what is lawful in general,
but also in special, what is lawful for me and thee; for if the use of our
liberty be a stumbling block, at which our Brethren may fall and hurt
themselves, we must then bridle and restrain it. Here then is condemned the
tenacitie and temeritie of some in the use of that liberty, which the Word
has granted them in things indifferent. Their tenacitie, that they hold their
own stiffly, and will not let go the least part of their right, though the
glory of God, and good of their Brethren do earnestly crave and beg it at
their hands. Their temeritie, not only that they themselves rush venturously
upon all things that in themselves are lawful, not considering with
themselves, whether in regard of some circumstances, it may not be unlawful
for them, what inconvenience may ensue, what hurt may also arise to the
Gospel, but also censure and condemn others, who kept back by Christian
wisdom and charity, dare not run with them to the same excessive use of
their liberty. Let them remember that PAVL, in this place, having much
liberty of commanding, yet chose rather to entreat.

Observe thirdly, what it is that will make a Christian Love makes a man
abridge himself of his liberty.
liberty; namely, the love of God and our Brethren. For loves sake I rather
beseech thee. For this is reckoned among the properties of love by the Apostle;
That it seeks not her own, 1. Cor. 13. but his, whom it loves. If Gods
glory and the Churches good be dear unto us, we will not use our liberty to
the full, in those things which may hinder and hurt both. If therefore thou
would obtain so much of thy self, as to remit and give in something of thy
right to God and thy Brethren; first, it is necessary that thy heart be
inflamed with a zealous affection both toward Gods glory, and the Churches
good. This conuinceth many of small love to their Brethren, that will not
moderate their liberty, no not in those things which they see necessarily will
bring in the ruin of the Church.

The Papists also are here confuted, who would make this departing from our
right, for Gods glory and the Churches good, to be a work of supererogation:
For this is their judgment of PAVLS preaching gratis, and diverse such like
examples in the Scriptures. If the works of Charity be above the Law, then
also are these works to the which the Law of Charity binds us above the Law,
for it is love which makes us yield. And, I hope, the Law commands us to love
God with all our heart, and our Neighbor as our self.

Thus much for the first special illustration of the Proposition of this
Petition, namely, of his act of praying.

The second follows, namely, of the person praying: PAVL himself: I pray
thee, described first by his age, being as I am, PAVL aged; secondly, from his
imprisonment, which he makes a greater matter then his age, and now also a
prisoner of Jesus Christ; both these are here brought in, to add further
weight to his petition, and to stir up the affections of PHILEMON.

First, That he urges his years, as a matter that Reverence due to age.
suit, we learn, that special reverence is due to this age. God under the Law
provided for this, that there should be more then ordinary regard had of the
aged, but specially in the Ministry; for after they began to be in years, he
would have them eased of the burden of their Ministry, and yet double honor
to be given to them, both of reverence and of maintenance. Now, if the white
head and silver hairs of a Minister, suing for another, should procure
authority unto him in his suit, and mooues the affections of those he sues
unto, how much more then, suing for himself? And questionless, there cannot
be a spectacle of greater compassion, then an aged Minister, gray headed, in
the Service of God and the Church, being in distress. Age (says SOLOMON) is a
Crown of Glory, being found in the way of righteousness. If in any way of
righteousness, much more in the way of the Ministry, righteously and
faithfully discharged.

Such then that are like PAVL in the Ministry, or in any other Calling, that
have spent their time painfully and profitably, may with honesty urge their
age, pleading for themselves and others. But the old man, that has lived
vainly and unprofitably all his youth, and has always been a burden of the
Earth, is an uncomely sight. For old age is an honor in it self yea, a part
of Gods Image, who is the Ancient of Days. And honor (says SOLOMON) becomes
not a fool. To such old men, their honor is turned into shame; Their gray
hairs are rather ashes of shame and humiliation, then a Crown of glory.

Secondly, Urging his imprisonment, as another Ministers to be regarded the
more for their afflictions.
wherefore he should be respected in this fuit, he teaches us, that the
afflictions of Gods Ministers are so far from being any just cause to make us
less to reverence them, that for them they are more respectively to be used,
and honorably to be conceived of. Many Ministers enjoying peace and liberty,
and flourishing in the Pulpit, have been much flocked after, and greatly
regarded, as JOHN BAPTIST; but when once they have been clapped up in Prison,
then they have been shamefully neglected, as it seems JOHN was by many of
his hearers, whom our Savior vpbraideth with this, That they rejoiced only in
him for a season; namely, whilst he enjoyed his Ministry peaceably. And this
their forgetting of him in the Prison, is not improbably thought by some to be
the cause that made Christ break forth into so large commendations of JOHN
being then in the Prison.

The third special illustration follows; namely, of the last part of the
Proposition of the Petition, which is the party sued for, viz. ONESIMVS: for
it is a matter of great moment, in suing for any, that the party we sue for,
be such a one, that he may sufficiently commend himself, even without our
commendation. Now here PAVL shows, that ONESIMVS was such a one; entituling
him his Son: Withal, he notes the circumstance of the place where he begot
him, in the Prison. The name of Son is Metaphorical, and implies only thus
much, That by PAVLS Ministry, ONESIMVS was converted to the Faith.

First, Here I observe, That the Ministers are moved Affection of Ministers to
their Conuerts.
not surpassing, the natural affection of Parents toward those whom they have
gained to Christ. Therefore PAVL here calls ONESIMVS, whom he had converted,
his Son, and afterward, his Bowels. And so Esaias 8. Behold I and my children,
whom thou have given me. We must love all Christians, but yet more specially,
those that are of our own begetting, the workmanship in some sort, of our own
hands. As men naturally love all little children, but yet their own in a
higher degree. For it is true which the Philosophers once said, Every man loves
his own Work: as we see in Poets, loving their own Poesy, hatched in their
own brains; and Artificers, loving their own inventions. And hence it must
needs follow, that the affection of the Apostles toward the Church, as being
the Fathers and Founders thereof, must needs exceed the affections of
ordinary Pastors that succeed, building upon their foundations, 1. Cor. 4. 15.
S. PAVL challenges the name of Father of the Corinthians, as proper to
himself, and calls those that succeed in that Church, but Schoolemasters.
Now, the affection of a Father far exceeds the affection of a Schoolmaster
to the child. Now, if Ministers carry this fatherly affection to them whom
they have converted, then it behooves those whom they have converted, to
carry the dutiful disposition of loving and obedient sons to them, above
any other Ministers. If we owe much to natural Parents, the instrument of this
Temporal, how much then to our Spiritual, the instruments of our eternal
life? Never can we come out of their debt.

Secondly, Observe, what Ministers may truly be What Ministers are the true
Fathers of the Church.
which have begotten children unto God, and with Esaias, can present themselves
before the Lord with the goodly train of their Spiritual progeny. This name
belongs first of all, and principally, to the Apostles, who laid the first
foundation of the Church: as we showed a little before, how PAVL claymed this
name in special sort, in regard of the Corinths; because, howsoever other
ordinary Pastors that succeeded him, begat, no doubt, some particular persons,
yet he begat the whole Church. They then have a special interest in this
name, that begat whole Churches at once, thousands at one clap, as PETER, Acts
2.

Now this which is spoken of the Apostles, that gave the first constitution to
the Church of the New Testament, is true also of others, sage men, of
extraordinary and Apostolical spirit, as LVTHER, CALVIN, and many others, who
gave a restitution to the Church, fallen in these latter days. They also more
specially may be called the Fathers of the Church. Secondly, this name also
belongs to ordinary Pastors; and amongst them, more especially to such that
increase the Church, established with new offspring: For although they are
far more noble and excellent Fathers, that are Fathers of the whole Church,
then they who only are Fathers of some few particular members of a Church; yet
these latter also are Fathers: for it is not the multitude of sons, but a
son, that makes a Father. And PAVL here calling ONESIMVS his son, makes
himself a Father, as well in regard of him, as of the whole Church of the
Corinthians.

The Pope then and Popish Prelates are unworthy of the honor of this name,
with all idle and slothful Ministers, serving only their own bellies.
Rather may they be called Betrayers of the Church, then Fathers thereof, who
either convert not at all, or else pervert and make their Conuerts, as the
Pharisees in our Saviors time, seven times more the children of the Devil,
then they were before. But yet among the Pastors of the Church, not only those
whose Ministry God honors with the conversion of Souls, are to be
honored also with this name of Fathers, and none else: Honor thy Father and
Mother, says the fifth Commandment; where God honors our Superiors with
the name of Parents, and so in the Commandment does that himself which he
bids us do. Now all true and lawful Ministers, set over us by the Lord,
are our Superiors; and yet how many such are there, whose Ministry, though it
be very faithful, yet is nothing fruitful in the gaining of Souls? These,
though they have no Spiritual posterity, How Ministers that convert not, are
called Fathers.
yet in the fifth Commandment are called Fathers. And so well may they be
called, for these two respects:

First, Because they do their best endeavor to be Fathers; they cast forth
continually the Spiritual Seed of the Gospel, and sow it in the furrows of
our hearts. Indeed, it is not sufficient for the getting of the name of a
natural Father, to do thy endeavor, unless the event answer thy endeavor,
because the fault may be in the Seed; unfit it may be for generation: but here
the Spiritual Seed of the Gospel is incorruptible, subject to no fault; and
therefore the blame of the Ministers sterilitie cannot be imputed to
themselves, faithfully doing their best endeavor.

Secondly, Because they carry the affections of Fathers toward their people;
such as PAVL describes, 2. Cor. 6. 11, 12. And in this respect, S. JOHN in his
general Epistle calls all the members of the Church, his Children, though
not all begotten by his Ministry. This fatherly affection they show
principally in these points:

First, In seeking not the Churches, but the Four things, in which the
fatherly affection of Ministers appears.
Church it self, 2. Cor. 12. 14. and that with so earnest a desire, that they
prefer the good of the Church before their own lives, as PAVL shows in the
same place; for this is the affection of natural Fathers, as we see in the
example of DAVID toward ABSALOM, that they can be content to redeem their
childrens lives with their own. Hirelings therefore, that make this the only
end of their Ministry, that they may warm themselves with the fleece of
their Sheep, setting the Church at sale for their own lucres sake, are not in
any wise to be called Fathers of the Church. Are Children thus dealt withal by
their Parents? The true Fathers of the Church prefer the good thereof before
their own lives; these men, their own private commodity, before the very
life of the Church it self.

Secondly, Parents nourish their children at their own Table; and that they
may be able so to do, they are content to take any pains whatsoever. So must
and do Ministers that are faithful, provide Spiritual nourishment for the
Church: And for this purpose are always and plentifully furnished with store,
both old and new, which they may bring forth for the benefit of the Church, as
need shall require. Therefore idle and ignorant Ministers, killing the people
with the Famine of the Word, are justly deprived of the honor of this name.
Parents lay up for their children, 2. Cor. 12. says the Apostle. These men lay
up no Spiritual Treasures for the Church; therefore the Church cannot
acknowledge them as their Fathers.

Thirdly, They resemble Fathers, in that they do not only give their people
Spiritual food, but with a fatherly and motherly affection, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10.
As you know how we exhorted and comforted every one of you, even as a father
his child. It is not enough to exhort, to admonish, to teach, and instruct, but
all this must be done with the affection of the Father; so that we may give
them their Spiritual sustenance, as Nurses do little children their bodily.
This is that, in his own example, the Apostle commends unto us, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
7, 8. We were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her children. Thus
being affectioned toward you, our good will was to have dealt unto you, not
only the Gospel of God, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. This phrase of dealing his own Soul, signifies that effectual affection
wherewithal he delivered the Word unto them, as Esa. 58. God commands to give
Alms to the Poor with feeling and compassion, uses the same phrase, Thou
shall power out thy self to the hungry. So Phil. 1. 5. God is our witness,
how we long after you from the very heart root.

Fourthly, They resemble natural Fathers in this, that as there, so here
likewise, Love descends, rather then ascends. The natural Parent cannot blot
out natural affection, no, not toward untoward and rebellious children, as
we see in DAVID'S mourning for ABSALOMS death. Can a Mother forget the fruit of
her Womb, says the Prophet? Esaias 49. No, certainly she cannot, though the
degenerating child should forget her.

Here then do good Ministers show themselves true Fathers, when yet they
continue to love them that are wicked and unthankful, yea, injurious toward
them. Thus it was with PAVL, 2. Cor. 13. 15. We will willingly be bestowed for
their Souls, though the more we love you, the less we be loved of you. Now
the ground of this so strange and strong affection, in the former verse he made
to be this, that he was to them a Father, and they to him in stead of Children.

If Ministers are thus Fathers, and must thus behave Cor. 6. 3. After the
Apostle had most lively deciphered, and as it were in an anatomy laid open
and naked his fatherly bowels, infers forthwith thus, I speak unto you of
like recompense as unto children, Be ye also enlarged. Idolatrous MICAH shall
justly condemn many of us, who entertaining that rouing Leuite into his house,
promised unto him the honor of a Father, Judge. 17. Thou shall be (said he)
unto me as a Father.

Thirdly, observe, in that PAVL says he begat, that calls us Gods own
Creatures, his Workmanship, Ephesians. 2. 10. Therefore we are not, in regard of our
Conversion, the Creatures of any Minister: yet because God does it not without
the Ministry of his Servants, therefore this blessed work is oftentimes
given to them also. This PAVL tells TIMOTHY, He shall save those that hear
him. And all Ministers of the Gospel are called Saviors, Obadiah the last;
and yet properly, Christ is our Savior.

This may serve to check the Papists, urging against us these places of
Scripture, which seem to ascribe some virtue to the Sacraments; as, Titus 3.
He saved us by the washing of the new Birth. 1. Pet. 3. Baptism saves. If
they can understand, how TIMOTHIES preaching may save the hearers, after the
same manner let them know, that Sacraments do confer grace, not as in
themselves, not by the work wrought, but because without them God ordinarily
uses not to work.

Fourthly, Note the Dignity of the Ministry, Whom I have begot. Properly,
God only is the Father The dignity of the Ministry.
of Spirits, Heb. 12. Call no man Father; ye have but one Father, that is, in
Heaven, Matthew. 23. And yet we see in some sort, how God takes the Ministers
into the Society of the same Honor with himself. Natural Parents count it a
blessing, to have fair and well-fauoured children; but the Sun never saw so
goodly and so glorious a Creature, as is this new Creature in Christ, the
workmanship of the Ministry. If then unto natural Parents, having store of
children, that of the Psalmist may truly be said, Blessed is the man that has
his Quiuers full of such Arrows; certainly, much more fitly may it be applied
to those Spiritual Fathers: for natural children oftentimes prove those
fools SOLOMON speaks of, that are a shame and discredit to their Parents; and
that even in the Gate, opening the mouths of the adversaries to triumph and
insult. But these Spiritual children cannot prove such fools; therefore they
cannot disgrace their Parents, but do offer just matter unto them of stopping
the mouth of their adversaries. For this did that famous Father of our restored
Church, JOHN CALVIN, of blessed memory, answer the Papists, vpbraiding him
with his want of children in marriage: Oh (said he) God has, in stead of such
children, given me many thousands of far more excellent kind of children
through the whole world. Since then God has vouchsafed so great an honor to
the Ministry, that he will use their help in this Spiritual Generation; go
to then, let us that are Ministers, labor that we may attain to this so high
an honor, accounting this barrenness no less reproach and rebuke, then once
the Jews did that other.

O then, thou unfaithful and negligent servant, when others shall bring into
the Lords Barn a plentiful Harvest of the Seed of the Gospel, wherewith they
were betrusted, what shall become of thee, who through thy negligence and ill
husbandry have suffered that so precious a Seed to rot under the Cloddes? With
what face will thou come alone into the presence of Christ, and his holy
Angels, at the last day with others, being attended with the Honorable Train
of their thousands, and hundreds, as the Apostles and others (O sweet and godly
sight!) shall appear before him, and say, O Lord, here we are, and not we
alone, but these our children with us, whom we having begotten and gained unto
thee formerly, do now present before thee.

Then shall thou, as unsavory salt, be cast out on the dunghill, when these
that have made many wise, shall shine as the Stars in the firmament, Dan. 12.
Neither yet serves this for admonition to the Ministers alone, but also to the
People, by whose fault it comes to pass, and that very often, that the
Ministers want the full honor of this name. For though we strive never so
much with you to convert you, yet such is your perverseness that ye will not
yield. Though as PAVL with the Galathians, we travail as women in childbirth
with you, till Christ be formed in you, yet in many of you, that is true, which
is spoken of EPHRAIM, Hosea 13 13. He is an unwise son, else would he not
stand so long a time in the place of the breaking forth of the children.

Fifthly, observe likewise the necessity of the Ministers The necessity of the
Ministry.
God refineth our souls, he frames and fashioneth us anew. Contemn not then
the Ministry as a thing superfluous, unless thou love thine own
destruction. If thou would have the Church to be thy Mother, thou must have
the Ministers of this Church, in some sort likewise her Husbands, to be thy
Father.

Sixthly, here some may say: if PAVL beget ONESIMVS, Corinthians be justly
blamed, for calling themselves by the names of their Ministers? for children
are to be called by the name of their Parents.

Ministers are improperly called Fathers: for as Christians, and not from PAVL,
Paulians; from CEPHAS, Cephists; who are only Christ's instruments: therefore
CHRYSOSTOM interprets that place, 1. Cor. 1. 12. I am PAVLS, and I am APOLLOS,
I am CHRIST'S, that the last words should be the Apostles own, crossing the
Corinthians, and showing them in his own example, who they must be called by.
Wherefore, Ministers beget children; as under the Law, the Brother that raised
up seed to his elder Brother, deceased without issue, the seed was called by
the name of his deceased Brother, and not his own.

Seventhly, the Metaphor of begetting, shows Conversion, a new Generation.
our Savior shows plainly, Ioh. 3. Therefore, no man ever got sanctification
out of his Mothers womb: No man sucks it out of his Mothers breasts. That thou
may be truly sanctified, thou must have another birth besides thy first.
Hence it is called, A new creation. If then thou have nothing but thy pure
naturals, nothing but that which thou broughtest with thee out of thy Mothers
belly into the world, assure thy self thou art not as yet converted. And yet
it is strange to see how men do flatter themselves, in regard of their
natural gifts, yea, oftentimes of their natural birth, being descended of
honorable or worshipful Parents. But if that first birth would serve, what
needed there another? Certainly, even the Royal blood it self is stained and
taynted with original sin. And it is the water of Regeneration only that
will wash out this stayne. Thy natural birth may entitle thee to a temporal
and earthly Kingdom. Only the spiritual birth can give thee right to the
Kingdom of heaven, Ioh. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 3, 4.

Eighthly, this same Metaphor teaches us also, We are patients in our
conversion.
as the Infant is in his generation, he receives his being from his Parents,
but he himself does nothing for the making of himself. Wherefore the
disposition of our will and works preparatorie to conversion, are here refuted.
If the Infant can dispose himself to his own generation, then also may we
prepare our selves for our own regeneration; or if the world at the beginning,
before it had yet any being, could dispose it self to the work of her
creation, then may we also to the work of our recreation in Christ The BAPTIST
foretelling the calling of the Gentiles, sets it forth by this notable
Metaphor, God is able out of these stones to raise up children unto ABRAHAM. If
stones, void of all life, can dispose themselves to the receiving of life; then
may we also, very stones, in regard of any Spiritual life, dead in our sins,
have some disposition in our selves to our conversion.

Ninthly, Further, this Metaphor of Generation The order of our conversion.
The Infant is not perfited at once in his Mothers Womb, but by degrees, piece
by piece; first, his brain, heart, and liver, then the nerves, veins, and
bones are framed, then, in the last place, comes flesh, and so he has his
perfect constitution. No man is suddenly, in one moment, an absolute Christian,
as ADAM was made at the first dash an entire complete man; but our Conversion
proceeds on by degrees; first, we have some imperfect rudiments of Faith;
some good motions, but those as yet confused; some good desires, but those very
faint ones, not much unlike to smoking Flax: But afterward, the skilful
finger of the Holy Ghost polishing us, and as the Bears do their misshapen
birth, by licking of them, more acurately refining us; then the indigested and
confused Chaos of our faith is brought into a more comely order, then the
smoke begins to break forth into an open flame. The Infant in the Mothers
Womb first lives, as ARISTOTLE will have it, the life of a Plant, then, of a
sensitive Creature, and then last of all, of a Man. The same wonderful
Progress, the same divine Artifice, yea, far greater is there in the
fashioning of this Spiritual Infant in the Womb of the Church, then there is
of that other, in the Womb of his natural Mother. And therefore, considering
the course and order of our regeneration, we may well translate those words of
DAVID'S, concerning the framing of our natural bodies, from that work, to the
work of our new birth, and cry out, Fearfully and wonderfully am I made,
namely, a new creature in Jesus Christ. This must teach us, not to despise the
weak ones as no Christians, for they are Christians in making, though not as
yet thoroughly made. The Infant is no less a man, then he of grown years; and
withal, let us remember, that we had our time of Conception, before we were
borne and brought forth.

Tenthly, In PAVLS example, setting forth him

Eleuenthly, And when we do commend such I beseech thee, I beseech thee for
my son ONESIMVS. So then only commend the worthy, and commend them
worthily, or not at all.

Twelfthly, If PAVL with such contention and of Spirit, is to be thought he
would have dealt for a whole Church, standing in like need of his help.
Wherefore, if at any time we shall have occasion to deal with any in the
behalf of a whole Church, let this importunity of PAVL in ONESIMVS his cause,
shake out of us that our maidenly modesty, and arowse and quicken our spirits.
For if we shall deal more remissely in the public cause of the Church, then
PAVL dealt in the private cause of a poor slave, surely we may seem rather
dissemblers and preuaricators, then petitioners.

In the end of the Verse, the circumstance of the place where he begat
ONESIMVS, is noted, in my bonds. And this circumstance adds weight to the
reason: for by calling him Son, he sufficiently showed, that he was dear
unto him; but adding, that he begat him in his bonds, he does not obscurely
intimate, that he was the best beloved of his sons, dearer unto him then the
rest: For neither do natural Parents love all their children equally; their
affection uses to be greater to those whom they have in their old age, as
IAACOBS was toward JOSEPH; because a good thing, the less hope we have of
it, the more grateful it is when we have it. And in old age, Parents have
less hope of children then before. So also had PAVL less hope of Spiritual
children in the Prison, then when he had liberty of preaching the Gospel
freely where he listed. ONESIMVS then was PAVLS Darling, as being then begot of
him, when by the Adversaries he was cast into Prison, that he might beget no
more.

First then observe, That Ministers may love their

Secondly, Note, That the Spirit of God and the The Spirit and Word are not
bound.
of the Ministers, for both these, namely, the Spirit and Word of God, were now
effectual in the Prison for ONESIMVS his conversion. The Adversaries then must
not think, that the restraining of the Ministers, and of the Gospel, will
prove one work. The Earl of Derbies Accusation in the Parliament House
against M. BRADFORD, was, That he did more hurt (so he spoke, calling good,
evil) by Letters and Conferences in Prison, then ever he did when he was
abroad, by Preaching.

Thirdly, Note, PAVL saying, that he begot him in PAVL upon ONESIMVS in the
Prison, and PHILIP upon the Eunuch, in iourneying; they are by all means
possible, no just cause detaining them, to endeavor the conversion even of
such, and to do the part of a good Samaritane toward them, whom they find so
dangerously wounded by Satan. For what? must we help the Ass, even of our
enemy, couching under his burden, and shall we not much more relieve his
soul? for we are not to think, that God is so tied to public meetings, that
he cannot elsewhere, specially in times of Persecution, use the Ministry of
his Servant, for the effectual calling of his Elect: although I doubt not, but
ONESIMVS heard PAVL more solemnly preaching in the prison. See Acts 28. in the
end.

Fourthly, But as all Ministers are greedily to catch Cor. 6. 10. and when they
are bound and captive, to make others free! as here PAVL bestows a far more
excellent freedom upon ONESIMVS, then that whereof NEROES Prison had deprived
himself.

Fifthly, See how God mitigateth the bitterness God sweetens the afflictions
of his children.
comfort therewithal, even as the Physicion sugreth his bitter pills. This is
the respect God has of our weakness. PAVLS imprisonment could not choose out
be grievous to the flesh; but this grief was lessened, when he saw himself
bound, to be the instrument of unbinding ONESIMVS, chayned with a far
stronger chain, then that which he was bound withal, for the hope of Isreal's
sake. This also was a great comfort to JOSEPH, being sold, that he found such
extraordinary favor with his Master; and when he was in the Prison, he was so
specially respected by the Master of the Prison. Thus God in Anger remembers
Mercy, and we must remember this his Remembrance to our selves, thereby to
quiet and still our lamenting minds. Even as otherwhiles also he remembers
Anger in his Mercy: for God will both sauce his Blessings with some Cross, that
we should not be too much lifted up, and he will sweeten our Crosses with
some Comforts, that we should not be too much cast down.

VERSE. 11. In times past unprofitable to thee, but now profitable both to thee
and me.
WE have heard of the propounding of the Petition. Now we are to come to the
prosecuting thereof, which consists partly, in answering Objections that
might be made against it, and partly, in fortifying it with strong and
perswasiue arguments. Now here first of all he preuents an Objection; yet so,
that withal he does bring a very effectual reason for the strengthening of
his Petition.

The Objection may more fully thus be framed, What is this that I hear? Do
thou entreat me for that vile Varlet ONESIMVS? that vile Varlet and fugitive
Thief? Will thou open thy mouth for such a one? PAVL answers by a distinction
of times, Once, now, granting, that once he was so, but now the case is
altered with him, he is become a new man.

In his answer note two things: first, his grant of the Objection, in regard
of time past, wherewithal he mollifies the Objection with a lessening kind of
speech, when he says only, that he was unprofitable; although he was not only
unprofitable, but also hurtful: secondly, the denial of it in regard of the
time present, which is set forth by the contrary Affirmation, Now (he says
not he is not unprofitable, but) he is profitable. And this his profitablenesse
is amplified by comparison of unequals, that it is far greater then his
former unprofitableness; which is showed by the subjects of both: Before he
was unprofitable to thee only, but now his profitablenesse extends it self,
not only to thee, whom only he hurt with his theft, but to me also, and so in
me, to many others.

Hence note, how hard a thing it is even for good Hard for good men to forgive
injuries.
for what needed PAVL to have prevented this Objection, if he had not thought
PHILEMON would have been ready to have objected it? And in that PAVL, as
soon as ever he had named ONESIMVS, forthwith prevented this Objection,
thereby he gives us sufficiently to understand, That such is our corruption,
that we can scarce patiently endure the very names of those that have wronged
us. And truly, we shall see oftentimes, at the very naming of those whom they
count their enemies, their blood will presently rise. But as PAVL went about to
prevent this in PHILEMON, so must we in our selves; and for this purpose, we
must call back our minds from those injuries which our brethren have done us,
and set them to consider of those which we very indignely have offered the
Lord. And when we shall once see his patience, in bearing with great and
grievous contumelies at our hands, this will make us more easily to pass the
small and petty injuries of our brethren. Thus much from the Objection.

Consider now PAVLS answer, and first his concession, Once he was unprofitable.
Wicked servants may be in good Families.


Whence we may learn, that sometimes there may be wicked servants even in the
families of most religious Governors. ONESIMVS, when he was yet a
Naughty-pack, was yet in godly PHILEMONS house. Thus was ELISHA troubled with
GEHAZI, and ABRAHAM with HAGAR. Neither always may the wickedness of the
servants be imputed to their Masters, so that they do that which belongs to
them, as, no doubt, PHILEMON did abundantly, for his house was the Church of
God. But if any such naughty servants grow desperate, and seem to us past
recovery, then they must be cast forth, as once HAGAR was with ISMAEL. And it
is to be thought, that ONESIMVS continuing so as he did, if he had not run
away himself, would quickly have been put away by his Master.

The second part of PAVLS answer, is his denying of that which is objected, in
regard of the time present, but now profitable.

Here first mark the unlikeness of ONESIMVS Once, that is, True conversion
works a manifest change.
before his conversion, he was unprofitable, but now, after his conversion, he
is become profitable. Wherefore, true conversion has manifestly joined with it
a change and alteration; insomuch, as when I compare a man's life present with
his life past, I may break forth into an admiration, and say, O how much he is
changed from that he was wont to be! See 1. Cor. 6. 11. Romans 6. and Ephesians. 5. Ye
were once Darkness, now ye are Light. This then is no small or obscure change,
which is like that change which is made in the air by the rising of the Sun;
nay, it is such a change, that not only the inward affections of the mind do
put on a new nature, but also the outward carriage of life, a new face and
habit, and that even in the judgment of those which before were our
companions in wickedness, Who think it strange we hold not on our former
course, 1. Pet. 4. 4. Here then is a notable note, to try our conversion by;
Look, if there be difference of our affections and actions past and present,
felt of our selves, and discerned of others. How many are there, that are the
same that they were always, even from the beginning? and this they think a
special commendation. Others indeed are changed, but with a change clean
contrary to this of ONESIMVS, from good to evil, and from evil to worse: of
whom it may be said, Once profitable, but now unprofitable; once Preachers, now
persecuters of the Faith. But if any will be in Christ, let him become a new
creature, let all old things pass away, and let all things become new.

Secondly, In that PAVL stops PHILEMONS mouth, ready to take vantage
against ONESIMVS for his former wicked life, with his present course of life
now converted, we learn, that the sins which went before our conversion,
must nothing prejudice us, having repented. For true repentance wipes and
washes away all the stain of them, even out of the sight of God; much more
should it do so out of the sight of men. Shall man be more severe then God, who
is Justice it self? Shall we condemn those that God has justified? Shall we
lay open that nakedness which God has covered? Shall we rake up those dead
carcasses which God has buried; and that in the grave of his own Son? Far
be it then from us, to vpbraid any of the Saints, either with their sins
before their conversion, or with those their faults and falls after conversion,
the blot whereof they have taken away by their renewed repentance. Nay, far be
it from us, to show our selves any thing more severe to a true Penitentiarie
for his former sins. We are not to hit men in the teeth with that base estate
wherein once they were, after it pleases God to advance them to higher
callings, Galat. 2. 6. much less then are we to vpbraid those whom God has
lifted up to the high calling of Christianity, sarre exceeding all the
Callings of this life whatsoever, with that servile condition they were under
before, to Sin and Satan. And yet this is the common practice of many,
insomuch, that the proverb is true, Once I did ill, etc. But herewithall PAVL
imparts thus much, that unless ONESIMVS had repented, there had been place
for this exception. If then, having sinned and defiled thy Conscience, thou
go on impudently, and carrying a whoorish wainscot forhead, that cannot
blush, and art not any thing troubled or touched in Conscience for it, then
know, the stain of thy sin still remains, and makes thee ignominious; God
and thine own Conscience, yea Satan and the world may cast the dung of it in
thy face, and fill thee with reproach: till thou have baptized thine own
Conscience with the tears of repentance, the filth of thy sin still sticks
in it, even as dirt does in the face, till it be washed. Though the very act of
doing the sin pass away happily in a moment, yet impenitencie is a kind of
continuation thereof. Hence Christ says, Ioh. 19. 41. to the obstinate
Pharisees, that their sin remained, continued, and stood firm and settled: and
10. 8. All that were before me, are thieves, though they were dead: yet he
says not, They were, but in the present tense, They are thieves and robbers,
because in the impenitent, sin cleaves to them no less after the committing
of the sin, then if still they were in the very act of doing of it.

But to repentant sinners this ministers singular comfort, specially then,
when by the clamors of Satan, their own conscience, and the insulting world,
they shall be constrained, with JOB, to possess even the sins of their
youth. To all these, setting upon us at once, we must answer as here PAVL did
for ONESIMVS, opposing the sweet divine Sentence of sweet and holy BRADFORD,
Tell me not, Satan, what I have been, but what I am and will be.

This profitablenesse of ONESIMVS, as I touched before, is made greater then
his former unprofitableness, in regard of the persons whom it respects,
which are two, first, his Master, to thee, secondly, PAVL, to me.

For the first, it may be asked, how could ONESIMVS

It is likely, that whilst ONESIMVS was with Verse 13. But I take the simple
meaning of PAVL to be, That he was now, by his conversion, made such a one
that might be profitable to him, though as yet actually he were not.

Hence then we learn, who be the profitable servants, Religious servants
profitable.
that ONESIMVS, whilst he was profane, was also unprofitable to his Master;
but being now converted, he says, that he is profitable. This I would have
Masters consider, in the choice of their servants. Commonly, all that is stood
upon here, is skill and ability for those services we purpose to employ them
in; as it is said of SOLOMON, that he saw JEROBOAM was a man fit for the work.
But as for Religion, no great matter is made of that, which yet is all in all:
for I avouch it, that the ungodly servant, though otherwise he may seem never
so fit for our turns, to be unprofitable; and that a servant fearing God,
though coming far short of the other, in wit, knowledge, and dexterity, for
managing of businesses, ought yet to be preferred before him, as far more
profitable. For first, the evil servant draws the Curse of God upon all his
endeavors; whereby it comes to pass, that even the wisdom of such as are
not inferior to ACHITOPHEL, often vanishes into foolishness. And whereas the
contrary, by virtue of Gods blessing prospering whatsoever the righteous man
takes in hand, Ps. 1. 3. even his foolishness and simplicity, in respect of
the deep policies of the wicked man, is turned into wisdom, and sorteth to
very good and happy effect, Ps. 37. The little of the just man is more then
great riches of the wicked. That which is spoken there of wealth, is true
likewise of wit, and of the inward gifts of the mind, as well of the outward
goods of this life. A little wit, skill, and knowledge in a godly servant,
shall go further, and be more serviceable to his Master, then twice as much in
an evil servant. When JOSEPH managed POTIPHARS businesses, and IAACOB, LABANS,
all things were well. If then godly servants, by virtue of Gods blessing upon
their labors, be profitable to ungodly men, how much more then to godly? If
the impiety of the Masters whom they serve, cannot withold Gods blessing
from their labors, how much more shall the piety of their Masters, concurring
with their own, draw down the blessing of God? But as the Masters wickedness
hurts not the godly servant, faithfully walking in his calling, so neither
does his godliness any thing profit the labors of the wicked servant, whom
he wittingly and willingly has chosen, though wicked. Therefore here PAVL
confesses, that ONESIMVS, whilst he was a wicked servant, was unprofitable to
PHILEMON, though a godly Master. Again, the wicked servant does not only
bring the Curse of God upon himself and his endeavors, but upon others that
live and converse with him, as by the example of ACHAN endangering the whole
Army, and JONAS the whole Ship, may sufficiently appear. Contrariwise, for the
sakes of godly servants, others in the Family have fared the better: neither
are ungodly servants unprofitable only to the body, but to the soul also,
infecting the whole Family with the contagion of their evil example, even as
one scabbed sheep will do a whole flock. On the contrary, by their good
example, adorning the Gospel of Christ, and causing it to appear beautiful in
the eyes even of their irreligious Masters, they do oftentimes gain them to
the love and liking thereof, Tit. 2. 10. 1. Pet. 2. 10, 11, etc. to the 15.
Verse, even as the believing wife does the unbelieving husband, 1. Cor. 7.
Lastly, the religious servant will surely be faithful and trusty to his
Master, as being tied unto him by a sure bond; that Conscience which he makes
of obeying Gods Commandment, that inioineth him obedience to his master, not
with eye-seruice, but in simplicity of heart. Now for irreligious servants,
howsoever some sometimes prove faithful, yet we cannot safely trust them, as
not having the like sure hold of them: for how should thou look he should
be faithful to thee, that is unfaithful to God? whom Conscience restrayneth
not from unfaithfulness, but either want of occasion, as we say in the
proverb, makes a thief, or fear of punishment, or hope of gain, or some such
like reason. But that fidelity which is built only on such foundations, will
easily be shaken and overcome: whereas the fidelity of the godly servant having
a far surer and safer foundation, namely, his faithfulness to God, is not
subject to the like ficklenes. Such a servant therefore, that serves his
heavenly Master, in serving his earthly, may thou betrust with any thing: as
we see ABRAHAM did commit that weighty business of providing a wife for his
son, to his godly servant* whom withal he betrusted with a great part of his
substance, which he had in his hands, going that journey about ISAAKS marriage.
I trust now, that it is sufficiently manifested, That only the religious
servant is the profitable servant, howsoever the world, blinded in judgment,
judge him, of all others, the most unprofitable. Wherefore, as this must teach
Masters, as we have showed, to have a special respect of Religion in the
election of their servants, so likewise servants, if so be that they desire to
do any profitable service to their Masters; first of all, truly to convert to
the Lord, their heavenly Master, to subject themselves to him, and for his sake
to serve their earthly, and then they shall be right ONESIMVSSES indeed, and of
unprofitable servants become profitable.

But here Masters also must learn another Lesson, That since their godly
servants are profitable to them, they likewise be in some good measure
profitable also to their servants, and do not deal with them in any case so
as LABAN would have done with JACOB, send them away empty, when they have for
many years had the benefit of their service, and thereby have been made
partakers of many of Gods blessings. Masters must not be unprofitable to their
profitable servants.

Further, we may observe out of this, that S. PAVL Conversion work conscience
in particular Callings.
makes ONESIMVS, now converted, a profitable servant; that the fruits of true
conversion do not only appear in the general duties of Christianity, but
also, and that specially, in the special duties of our personal Callings.
Many profess, hear, receive, pray, and do such like general duties, who yet
in the works of their special Callings are found halting so grossly, that
they may seem wholly to deny the power of Godliness. For they make no
conscience, if they be Children, or Servants, to shake off the yoke of their
Parents and Masters; if Tradesmen, to deal deceitfully and unfaithfully. But
if thou be truly converted, whatsoever thy Calling shall be, in it specially
thou will show the power of Religion. If a Servant, thou will be a Religious
and dutiful Servant; if a Master, a just and equal Master, one that will have
a care of thy households souls, as well as their bodies, etc. Therefore, Luke
3. when JOHN'S hearers came to know what were those fruits of Repentance he
would have them to bring forth, every one had the works of their special
callings enjoined them: The Publicanes given to oppression and extortion, To
ask no more then their due; the Soldiers given to Rapine and Violence, To do
no man wrong, to be content with their wages, etc.

The second person to whom ONESIMVS is profitable, is PAVL himself: and to me.

Here then we see, that the profitablenesse of ONESIMVS being now converted,
does exceed his former unprofitableness: That he may seem to deserve more
love now, then he did hatred before. And thus it is with all those that are
truly converted, the good they do then, exceeds the evil they did before.
If they have hurt any, they do very abundantly make up that harm, not only
being profitable to those whom they have hurt, but also to others whom they
never harmed. As here ONESIMVS by his theft specially hurt PHILEMON, but being
now converted, he was not only profitable to his Master, whom he had hurt,
but to PAVL and many others, whom he never hurt. So PAVL himself in his
persecution hurt only the Churches in Judea, and near adjoining: but by his
Preaching and Writing he did good to the whole Church throughout the whole
world, not only whilst he lived, but even by his Writings, being dead. Art
thou then converted? Recount and recognize thy life past; remember what hurt
thou have done by thy evil example, and labor to do not only as much, but
far more good, by giving of good example. If thou have exceeded others in
sin, thou must likewise exceed them in obedience. The worse we were before
our calling, the better must we be afterward. This was that which made PAVL go
beyond the rest of the Apostles in pains and zeal in preaching, because he was
beyond them all in malice before. This made MARY MAGDALENE so excessive in her
love to Christ above others, because she had been as excessive and immoderate
before in the love of her unlawful pleasures.

But here it may be asked, How was ONESIMVS

Many ways. First, in that he rejoiced him by Luke 15. Much more then might
PAVL, who was the author of his Conversion, and so the founder of the Angels
joy. Secondly, he ministered to him, questionless, whilst he stayed with him,
and he was now made fit to minister unto him, Verse 13. Thirdly, ONESIMVS
having received the gift of spiritual speech, was able thereby to edify and
comfort PAVL, even as the poor Romans were, Romans 1. 12.

Here then we see, that a Christian man is not only profitable to them that
he is bound to by his special calling, but also to others further off from
him; and that which may seem strange, though he be the least of the faithful,
he may be profitable to the greatest. Wherefore the strong and tall Christians
must not contemptuously cast off the weak and little ones. The head to the
foot cannot say, I have no need of thee, thou can do me no good. PAVL, the
chief of the Apostles, here affirms ONESIMVS, of the basest sort of
servants, to be profitable unto him.

Wherein we have further in PAVL an example of

Lastly observe, That unto true Conversion, it is Ephesians. 4. Let him that stole,
steal no more, but let him rather work with his hands that which is good.
ONESIMVS had hurt his Master before by his theft; but now being converted, he
does not only give over his stealing, but begins faithfully to attend his
Vocation, and therein to be profitable to his Master. It is not sufficient for
us to say, we lead harmless lives; nay, Every Tree that brings not forth
good fruit, shall be hewne down; and not those only, that bring forth evil
fruit. Neither shall Christ accuse the wicked at the last day, for taking the
Meat out of his Mouth, or plucking his Apparel off his Back, but for not
putting Meat into his Mouth, and Clothes upon his Back.

VERSE. 12. Whom I have sent back, Thou therefore receive him, that is mine
own Bowels.
Unto the former Argument, drawn from the profitablenesse of ONESIMVS, he
adds another in this Verse, propounded in an Enthymene, that is, a short and
contract kind of reasoning, in this manner: I have sent him unto thee; namely,
to this very end, that thou should receive him: Receive him therefore. Now
to the Conclusion, a new Argument is added, when he calls ONESIMVS his bowels;
whereby he shows how dear and tender he was to him. But let us see wherein
the force of this Argument consists; in two things specially.

First, in this, that he sent ONESIMVS, and that ONESIMVS came not of himself;
Whom I have sent: that the force of the Argument should be in the word, I. As
if he should say, If ONESIMVS of himself had come unto thee, submitting
himself, Christian compassion would have taught thee to have respected; much
more then now, coming in my name, and with my Letters. So that we are not
easily to reject those that come graced and countenanced unto us with the
commendations of godly and reverent Ministers.

Secondly, in that he did not only send his Letters to PHILEMON, keeping
ONESIMVS with him at Rome, till he had received an Answer from him, and so know
whether he were willing to reaccept ONESIMVS, but together with his Letters had
sent ONESIMVS himself; who having now gone so long a journey, as betwixt Rome
and Colossus, could not now, with any honesty, be refused, lest all his
labor, in that so hard and tedious a journey, should be made frustrate. This
latter I take to be the chief force of the Argument.

Here note then, that PAVL promising himself much of PHILEMON, and trusting to
the equity of this cause, did not first write to PHILEMON, to know, if he
might, with his good leave and liking, send ONESIMVS, but sends both him and
his Letters both at once. One would think, this was not so wisely done of
PAVL: For, first he should have known, before he sent him, whether his Master
would give any entertainment to him, being come. For how, if PHILEMON should
have sent him back again to PAVL, what a deal of toil had ONESIMVS taken in
vain? It was easy for PAVL to foresee this: Therefore PAVL sending him in
this manner, it is a manifest Argument, that he did nothing doubt of PHILEMONS
readiness to pleasure him therein, which afterward, Verse. 21. he confesses.

Hence then it is evident, that sometimes Christians, of special acquaintance,
in some causes may presume one upon another; namely, when the cause is equal
and honest; and then specially, if we be their superiors, upon whom we presume,
not only in calling, but also in well-deseruing of them; as PAVL here was, see
Verse 19. Otherwise to presume, is the part of a shameless and impudent man.

Again, we are to learn, That when friends, well-deseruing of us, shall in
such causes as this was, so far presume upon us, that great inconveniences
will follow, if we grant not their desire, we are not then lightly to
deceive their hopes: As here, if ONESIMVS had been refused, his journey had
been lost, and he must have gone back again to PAVL: For it is likely, he
knew not where else to bestow himself.

This is the ground of PAVLS Argument in this place.

In the Conclusion of the Argument, in the latter end of the Verse, we are to
observe in PAVLS example, calling ONESIMVS his own bowels, what great account
is to be made of the meanest, being truly converted. Though with PAVL we were
Apostles, yet we might not disdain the basest Bondslaue, being the son of
God. JOB durst not contend with his servants, because they had the same Creator
with himself, fashioning them in the same manner in the Womb, as himself;
much less then would he have contended with such servants as had the same
Redeemer, CHRIST JESUS, with himself. The grace of God is no less grace,
which resides in a poor servant, then that which is seated in a rich and
mighty man. A Diamond will shine even in the dirt. And as with men, the more
they demit and debase themselves, the greater is their glory; so is it here
also with the grace of God, by debasing it self, as it were, to respect the
low degree of servants, and to dwell in the Cottages of Poor men, rather then
in the Palaces of proud Kings and Emperors, the more glorious and goodly is it;
so far is it off, that the base and obscure condition should any thing at all
obscure the brightness of Gods grace, that abides in them. Away then with
that vain and proud partiality, condemned by S. JAMES, Chap. 2. 1.

VERSE. 13. 14. Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might
have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel.

But without thy mind I would do nothing, that this thy benefit might not be
as of constraint, but willingly.


HERE is the preventing of another Objection. In the Answer whereof, is, as in
the former, included an Argument, to further his Petition.

These things which thou saydst in the former

Weary of him? No: feign would I have retained not knowing how you would have
liked the keeping of that servant, I was content to part with him, and send him
to you, who have greatest right to him.

In the Answer there are two things.

First, a remouall of the false cause of sending ONESIMVS, which PHILEMON might
surmise; namely, that he was a burden to the Apostle, being still the same old
ONESIMVS that he was before. The Apostle affirms the contrary, Whom I would
have retained; showing withal, what reason he had to have retained him, that
in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel. Where
he shows two commodities that would have come by retaining him; first his
own, that he might have ministered to me; secondly, PHILEMONS, in thy stead.
PHILEMON by this means had been freed of a burden which he was bound to
undergo, namely, ministering to PAVL.

The second thing in his Answer, is the setting down of the true cause why he
sent him, in the 14. Verse, But without thy mind I would do nothing. He was
ignorant of PHILEMONS mind, and so he might have kept and used his servant
against his liking: The which he shows would not have been well, by the
commodity that thence would have ensued. The benefit of ONESIMVS ministering
would have been forced, and not free; where he implies thus much, That if he
were willing to send him back, he was not against it; yea he would rather have
it so, then he should be hardly dealt with at home.

For the first part of this Answer, from thence we learn,

First, With how fast a glue Christians hearts are The union of Christian
hearts.
without great sense of grief; and if it were possible, they would enjoy
always the bodily presence each of other, living and dying together. But more
especially is this affection betwixt Ministers and the true members of the
Church, specially those whom they have converted by their Ministry. See this
affection in PAVL toward the Romans, 1. 10, 11. and Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians.
2. and Galat. 4. 20.

A just rebuke to such Non-residents, that have not this affection to their
Flocks; that do willingly divorce themselves from them, coming only amongst
them (sometimes) to reap the fruits of the Earth, and not those fruits whereof
PAVL speaks, Romans 1. 10. the reaping whereof was that which made him so
desirous to see the Romans.

And as Ministers are thus affected to their people; so, the people to them.
See the example of the Ephesians, Acts 20. toward PAVL; and of LIDIA, Acts 16.
Of the Demoniacke, Luke 8. 38. And of whole Multitudes, Luke 4. 42. toward our
Savior; of ELISHA to ELIAS, ready to be rapt up, and many such like. But
many, in these days, are rather like the Gadarens, loving the Ministers room
better then their company.

Secondly, From the end, whereby PAVL was the Bonds of the Gospel, in a most
elegant kind of speech; not so much by a Metonymie of the Cause, as I take it,
because the Gospel procured him those Bonds, but to signify a further matter
unto us, namely, that in him, the Gospel it self, in a manner, was bound,
though not in it self: For like a Mighty SAMSON, it will break all Bonds
whatsoever; and the Word of God cannot be bound, 2. Timoth. 3. yet in the
endeavor of the Adversaries.

Therefore let us not think, when a Minister of the Gospel is cast into
Prison for any Truth of the Gospel, that it is only the Ministers own Cause;
nay, it is the common Cause of the Church: for through his sides, they strike
at the Gospel it self; which is to be respected of us all. And therefore, if
we be wanting to him, we forsake the Gospel, and so Christ himself, who one
day will say unto us, I was in Prison, and ye visited me not.

For the second part of his Answer in the foureteenth Verse, thence we learn,

First, That the authority of Masters over their Religion abolishes not civil
government.
their subjects, is not taken away by Christian Religion, but still remains in
force, confirmed rather, then any thing impaired. ONESIMVS his conversion to
the Faith, gave him no manumission and liberty from his Masters service. PAVL
here plainly acknowledges, that PHILEMON was specially interested in ONESIMVS;
and therefore, not knowing his mind, he would not retain him: and the benefit
of ONESIMVS his ministering to him, is called PHILEMONS, That thy benefit might
not be, etc.

Servants then, and all inferiors, must learn still to acknowledge their
Superiors and Governors, and not under the pretense of Religion, to shake off
that yoke which God has laid upon them, and which, in truth, Religion
fasteneth most surely upon them. If before Religion, Master and Servant, Prince
and People, were out of joint, Religion coming, sets them in, and establishes
both the King in his Throne, and the Master of a private Family, in that his
authority over his Household. This was a Doctrine, that many servants in the
Apostles days could not well brook; alleging, That if their Masters were
Infidels, then it was not fit, that they who are Christians, should serve such,
being, in regard of their Christian calling, above them; and if they were
believers, then they were their equals. The Anabaptists likewise at this day
oppose this Doctrine, who would have the Gospel cry down all Civil Policy.
But here we plainly see the distinction between Master and Servant, yea, such
a Servant as is a Bondslaue, whose life is in the hands of his Master, to be
confirmed: and surely, even this kind of Bondage may still stand, being used
with Mercy and Moderation. Arguments may be these:

First, If we look to the first original, it will not seem unreasonable.
Now, the first original, was the saving of those whom they subdued in the
Wars; Whence comes the Latin word, Servus, quia in bello seruatus, because
he was preserved in the War, taken captive, and his life spared. Now, that
such men's service and subjection may be in a far lower degree then other
Servants, who only we hire for Money, may very well stand with equity.

Secondly, The Jews being captiued, and become NEBVCHADNEZZARS slaves, are
commanded by God to quiet themselves in that state, and willingly to subject
themselves to the Lordship of the Babylonians.

Thirdly, ABRAHAM had such in his house, Genes. 17. and the Jews were
permitted to have such, Leuit. 25. 45.

Fourthly, The Apostles in their Epistles impose subjection upon Servants, most
of them then being Bondslaues; see 1. Cor. 7. 21. Art thou called, being a
Bondsman? Care not for it: but every man abide in that calling wherein he was
called. But many things are objected to the contrary.

First, That in the same place, 1. Cor. 7. Be not servants of men.

That is, in regard of Conscience, which knows

Secondly, Bondage is a fruit of Sin, from

Sickness, Death, and all temporal punishments

Thirdly, Every man was made to the Image of

The Argument is not good: for EVE was made

Fourthly, God said only at the beginning, Have Dominion over the Creatures,
and not one man over another.

Those words are spoken to ADAM and EVE the fifth Commandment, a part of the
Law of nature, written in both their hearts, God said, Honor thy Father and
Mother, and there was dominion of one man over another established. And though
such a dominion, as is over bond-slaues, were not confirmed by the Law of
nature remaining pure, yet it is not against the Law of corrupted nature, a
fruit whereof is bondage.

Fifthly, Romans 13. Owe nothing to any man but love,

That place is directly against them: for whereas Give tribute to whom tribute,
honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear belongs, and many of the lawless
Libertines of those times, would be ready to object that the Law required
nothing but love of them, and therefore they were not bound to any such
subjection; the Apostle takes hold of that which they objected, that they owe
nothing but love, and retorts it upon them in this manner. Why, I ask no more
at your hands, then this, to pay the debt of love; for love is the fulfilling
of the whole Law: this will make you give every man his due; you that are
Subjects, tribute to the Magistrate; Servants, fear and reverence to their
Masters.

Sixthly, they allege those places, Gal. 3. verse. 24. Coloss. 3. etc. where
distinction of bond and free is taken away, and all are made one in Christ.

They are taken away from the spiritual body of of men upon earth; for then,
if the Apostles meaning were so, there should be no distinction neither of
Countries, nor of Sexes, there should be neither Scythian or Barbarian, there
should be neither Male nor Female. And it is true, there is no consideration of
these either Countries or Sexes in the invisible body of Christ, but in our
civil life we see manifestly that there is.

Secondly, from the end that made PAVL, not to (lest thy benefit should have
been of constraint, and not willingly) we learn that the grace of a benefit
is voluntarinesse, the freeness of the mind, and the opennesse of the heart.

This was that which so commended the widows Mites, and therefore we must all
learn by PAVLS example, not to extort any kindness from our friends against
their wills: for it is the mind that is worth all, and is to be accounted of us
far above the benefit it self. And when occasion is offered to us of showing
any kindness to our friends, specially in the works of beneficence to the
poor, then this willing Spirit is to be sought for, that we do it not
grudging and with indisposed hearts. 2. Cor. 9. 7. And if this willing and
cheerful Spirit be required in those services we do to our Brethren, how
much more in those we do to God. No man might offer to the Tabernacle, but he
whose spirit moved him, Exodus 25. Many of us come to the Congregation to pray,
hear, and do such like religious actions, and herein we rest.

But it is not sufficient to do them, unless they come from us vninforced.
When then thou come to the Church with a dull and dead spirit, as a Bear to
the stake, more for shame of the world, and obedience to the Magistrates Law,
then for any desire to glorify God, what thanks can thou look for at his
hands?

VERSE. 15, 16, 17. It may be he was therefore parted from thee for a season,
that thou might receive him for ever.

Not now as a servant, but more then a servant, a brother beloved, specially to
me: how much more to thee both in the flesh, and the Lord?

If therefore thou account me one, with whom thou have communion, receive him
as my self.


HErein is another Objection answered. Yea, but he ran away from me:

The Apostles answer is, a retorting

If his departing from thee, in Gods secret counsel was so carried, that it
might be an occasion of thy receiving of him for ever, then for all his
departing, thou ought to receive him.

But his departing, etc. therefore. The Proposition is wanting, the Assumption
is in the fifteenth Verse, in plain words, and it is confirmed in the
sixteenth Verse, because now by means of his departure, he is become a
Brother, that is, one truly converted, joined with him in the body of Christ.

The Argument is this: If his departure have been an occasion to make him a
Brother, a fellowmember with thee in Christ, then it was so carried in Gods
providence, that thou might receive him for ever. But now, by his departure,
he is made thy Brother, etc. The which is illustrated by comparison of the
lesser, Not as a servant, but above a servant, and then confirmed by an
Argument, from the lesser to the greater, Specially to me, how much more to
thee?

Then in the seventeenth Verse follows the Conclusion of the principal
Syllogism, Therefore receive him, set forth by the manner, as my self, and
enlarged with the addition of a new Argument, If thou count me one, with whom
thou have fellowship. This is the Resolution of the words. Let us now take them
as they lie in order.

It may be he was, etc.
THis is the Assumption, as we showed, of the Apostles Argument for ONESIMVS,
against PHILEMONS objection; wherein the Apostle affirms that ONESIMVS was
severed from PHILEMON for a time, That he might be received of him for ever.

Where consider, first, the manner, wherein the Apostle utters this.
Secondly, the matter it self uttered.

The manner in this word (...), it may be, which is not to be taken, as though
the Apostle spoke doubtingly, for the event did manifestly declare the truth of
that which he affirmed.

And that this word is not always a particle of doubting, appears, Exodus 32.
30.

Why then does the Apostle use it? to what purpose? first, that he might seem
to mitigate only, and something to extenuate the sin of ONESIMVS, and not to
commend it as a thing in it self good.

Secondly, because it was thus carried in Gods secret providence, and was no
ordinary course of conversation: otherwise, if he had spoken absolutely and
confidently, wicked servants would have taken occasion hence to have run from
their Masters, that they might be converted.

Now then by the example of PAVL, Ministers Ninevites, pronounced absolutely by
ISAIAH and JONAH, lest if the condition had been uttered, it might have bred
too much security in them, and have hindered their repentance.

For the matter it self, there are two special things here avouched
concerning ONESIMVS his departure. First, the Author of it God, he was parted
from thee; for so the word properly is to be translated, rather then departed.
If he were parted and separated from ONESIMVS, then there was a Separator, and
that is God. Secondly, the end whereto God did dispose this his separation, that
thou might receive him for ever, which is amplified by the contrary
opposition of his temporary absence, he was parted only for a season.

For the first, God is the Author of this separation; not in that he did incite
and stir up ONESIMVS to steal, or run away; for then he should be the
Author of sin; but because that in his eternal Council he having decreed
his events, does now willingly suffer it, withdrawing his grace from ONESIMVS,
and leaving him to Satan and his own corruption, that his own righteous
Decree might come to pass.

Here then we have just occasion to consider of The infinite extent of Gods
providence.
extends it self to all things, even the meanest, not only to Kingdoms,
but Families, and every particular member therein, even to poor bondslaues:
Insomuch, that a bondslaue cannot run from his Master, without Gods special
providence. This must teach us to admire the infinite depth of Gods Wisdom
and Knowledge. We think amongst our selves, that in a great Family, he that
takes charge of it, and all therein, and through whose hands all things in the
Family must pass, must needs be a man of special parts. O then, the
bottomless profunditie of Gods Wisdom and Knowledge! that before all
Worlds, did in one Act dispose of all the several actions of every particular
man, yea, and all other creatures in the world besides. How should this make us
rest and rely upon God in our troubles, looking for that event which he in his
providence has appointed. If Gods providence reach to bondslaues, how much
more to others? If nothing come to pass in one poor Family without it, much
less in a whole Church: If in a Family, a servant be not parted from his
Master without Gods appointment, much less in the Church are Ministers taken
away from their Flocks: And if such things fall out by Gods providence, we
must quiet our selves in Gods will.

Secondly, The end is to be considered, why God parted ONESIMVS from his
Master, That thou might receive him for ever. This word, for ever, sometimes
signifies some set time; as often in the Law, This is a statute for ever, that
is, during the old Covenant, till Christ. So we use to say, for ever, that is,
during life. And so some take it here, That thou might receive him for ever,
as long as you both shall live. But I rather take the words properly, for
ever, that is, for all Eternities, as the words following, a proof of these,
do clear it, Not as a servant, etc. but as a brother. Now this spiritual
brotherhood betwixt ONESIMVS and PHILEMON, was to last indeed for ever and
ever, and not only the short space of this present life.

Here observe, first, how God has a hand even How God has an hand in sinful
actions.
in regard of ordination and disposing of them to good. ONESIMVS had no such
intent, in running away, to knit himself in a more near bond to his Master
then before; no, he went with a desperate mind, meaning to free himself wholly
from his Masters service; little thought he of converting; but yet contrary
to his own intent, turned it to be a means of his conversion. So JOSEPH'S
brethren little thought of any good, when they sold him; nay, they thought
evil, as JOSEPH told them, against him; but yet God turned it to good, to be
the means of the preservation of the Church, in time of Famine. This must not
make us do evil, that good may come of it, which we are forbidden, Romans 3.
for God only has this skill, by reason of his infinite Wisdom and Power, to
work Good out of Evil, to draw Light out of Darkness. He only has the
Philosophers Stone, to turn Dross into Gold. In vain therefore is it for us
to assay any such thing. The right use of this Doctrine, is for us to comfort
our selves, when we see wicked men plotting and practicing mischief against
Gods poor Church. Their heads and hands work not so fast, but God works as
fast. When they go and strive one way, he sets them a work another way; as
the Sun going in his own proper motion one way, is every day, by the violent
circumvolution of the Heavens, turned another way: nay, he makes their striving
against his Glory, and his Churches good, to be the means of furthering both:
As in a Boat, when the Rowers go with their faces striving toward the East,
they set the Boat going apace toward the West. ONESIMVS, in running away from
his Masters house, the Church of God, did as much as in him lay, strive against
his own conversion, and yet it is made a means of conversion. JOSEPH'S
brethren, in selling him, thought to have frustrated his Dreams, and to have
made him sure for ever having dominion over them; and yet their selling of him,
was the special means of accomplishing his Dreams. Satan, in Christ's death,
thought to have wounded the Church to the death; and yet thereby we were healed
of his deadly wounds. Even as the man that was thrust at with the Sword of his
enemy, to be killed, was thereby cured of his Impostume. Thus HAMANS Plots to
overthrow MORDECAI and the Jews, were means to advance them. This is the
work of the Lord, who knows how to catch the wise in their own wyles, and
it must be marvelous in our eyes. Let not then the Power and Policy of all
the ACHITOPHELS and MACHIAVELS in the World, combining themselves against the
Gospel, dismay us; for God has his Oar in their Boat, he has a special
stroke in all actions whatsoever, and can easily ouer-reach and make stark
fools of the wisest, by making their own counsels and endeavors like
CHVSHAIS, to overthrow those intentions which they seem to support.

Secondly, Gods power in conversion is to be noted; Gods honor in our
Conversion.
go on a long time in their wicked courses, till they come to the very height
of wickedness; and then, contrary to all expectation, suddenly turns them.
ONESIMVS, all the while he lived in PHILEMONS house, a godly Master, using the
best means for his good, still grew worse and worse. Having now woefully
banished himself out of this house, and so Gods presence, was he not now, in
man's reason, desperate and past all recovery? But yet see here, how God
pursues him, being run away, makes huy and cry after him, seizes upon him by
his Spirit, and causes him to return to his heavenly Master, and then his
earthly. After the same manner was PAVL converted, Acts 9.

This God does, first, That the work of our Conversion might evidently appear
to be his own, and so he might have the sole glory of it. What disposition
of ONESIMVS his will could there be now, to convert that Runne-away from the
means of Conversion? In PAVL, when he went with a mind to persecute the
Faith? Here then does Gods power appear, in that even then, when we are most
rebellious and stiff-necked, most untoward and auerse, yet even then he
catches us, and makes us yield, and draws us to Christ; making our wills, of
stiffely nilling, desirously willing. And when we shall be converted on this
manner, then shall we forthwith be forced to admire our Conversion as a
strange miracle, and wholly abasing our selves, to give all the glory to God;
reasoning thus with our selves: Running down so steep a Hill, like a furious
Horse, in so mad a mood, I could never have possibly stayed or saved my self,
nor any man else. It was then, surely, the Divine Power of God that has done
this.

Secondly, God takes this course in our conversion, that we might cleave the
faster unto him in hearty and sincere love; for to whom much is forgiven, they
love much. This made PAVL exceed his fellows in zeal and painfulnesse in his
Apostleship.

Thirdly, that hereby we might learn to despair of none though never so
outrageous and violent in sin; notwithstanding many good means which God
has used to reclaim them. God is able to call those into his Vineyard at the
twelfth hour, and to make them faithful Laborers therein, that one would
think, by standing idle so long, were so habituated and radicated in
idleness, that it were impossible for them to set themselves to labor.

Thirdly, Gods manner in taking away some of his blessings oftentimes, is here
to be observed God restores our losses with advantage.
Surely, his taking of them* is but a kind of borrowing of them; that he (as it
were) occupying of them for us for a time, they might afterward return unto
us in a holy kind of Usury, with vantage and great increase. PHILEMON loses
ONESIMVS, and with him, and his service, some of his goods, which he took away
with him; and yet see in the end, how he loses nothing by all this, but rather
is made a great gainer. Whilst ONESIMVS was with him before, he could have no
great good of him, being an ungodly and unfaithful servant: but now, in his
absence, God so works upon him, that he makes him, of ONESIMVS before in
name, only ONESIMVS indeed, that is, truly profitable, as was showed in the
eleventh Verse: and having thus fitted and prepared him for PHILEMON, he
returns him unto him again, not as he was before, but with vantage, such
vantage as might sufficiently counteruaile, not only the want of his service
all the while of his absence, but the loss also of PHILEMONS money; for a good
servant, such a one as ONESIMVS was made now, is worth much Gold, and happily
PHILEMON could not have got such a profitable Servant as this new ONESIMVS was,
no, though he would have given ten times as much as that which ONESIMVS
took away. But the salvation of his precious soul far exceeded the worth of
the whole World, and no doubt, if money might have done his soul good,
PHILEMON would have thought it much more vile in comparison. See then the
increase of the absence of ONESIMVS, and loss of his money.

This must teach us patience, when God takes away any mercy from us: for in his
good time either it or as good, or a better thing shall return unto us.
ABRAHAM must part with ISAAK, and in a manner was taken from him, but presently
he receives him again as a surer pledge of Gods love, and confirmation of his
faith then before. At death our poor souls shall have their bodies taken from
them: yet we must not be discouraged; for they are severed only for a season,
that they may return again for ever at the Resurrection, and that in another
manner then we left them, not mortal and coruptible, but glorious and
spiritual bodies, 1. Cor. 15.

Sometimes God takes away his Word and Gospel and Ministry from his people,
as he did in Queen MARY'S days. But how? Only for a season, that they might
have it again afterward more confirmed and better established then before, as
it was in worthy Queen ELIZABETH'S days. Sometimes, which is worst of all, God
himself departs from us, and hides his face, as Exodus 33. from the Church of
the Israelites, but it is but for a season, for a little while, for a moment,
Esai. 44. 7, 8. that he might make us the more seek after him, and so return
unto us afterward with greater comfort, making the falling out of lovers to be
only the renewing of love. Specially must this point be thought upon, when we
are called to suffer for the Truths sake, the loss of outward comforts of
life, as Liberty, Lands, Living, yea, Life it self: He that loses his life
for my Names sake, shall find it, says our Savior. We lose these things no
otherwise, then the Husbandman loses his Seed: for the loss of these things
is but as Seed cast into the ground, which shall even in this life, according
to our Saviors promise, return unto us the increase of a hundredth fold, and
in the World to come life eternal Mat. 19.

Fourthly, Note the privilege of the spiritual Conjunction in Christ, above
any other civil Conjunction whatsoever, that it lasts for ever. That thou
might receive him for ever. Civil Societies and Conjunctions whatsoever
shall end, only this spiritual Conjunction shall continue eternal.

This must teach those that are conjoined each The spiritual Conjunction is
eternal.
and callings in the World, as Husband and Wife, Master and Servant, Parents
and Children, to labor likewise to be conjoined together in Christ; for the
other Conjunction will not hold long, and if they be not knit together
likewise in the bond of the Spirit. O then there will be a woeful parting,
even betwixt those that are knit fastest and nearest together in these fleshly
bonds, the Husband and the Wife! Two shall be in one bed, one shall be
refused, the other shall be received. It serves also for comfort to
Christians, when by death, carnal Conjunctions are dissolved, for still the
spiritual Conjunction continues.

Fifthly, from the scope of the Apostle in these The good end of crosses must
quiet us.
good end whereto God turns those things which are grievous unto us, whether
injuries offered us by men, or afflictions immediately by his own hand, must
quiet our minds, and minister contentment unto us. It could not choose but be
a great grief to PHILEMON for ONESIMVS to run away: for besides his own
loss of the money, he grieved, no doubt, much more for ONESIMVS own sake, who
was posting on in the high and ready way to Hell, and for the Gospels sake,
which was subject to the slanders of the wicked, upon occasion of this accident
falling out in the house of such a Professor and Preacher as PHILEMON was: yet
here PAVL stops his mouth with this, that this was turned now both to his own
and ONESIMVS his good.

Afflictions for the present are grievous, but when they shall bring with them
happy fruits, whether that of righteousness, Heb. 12. or any other, whether to
our selves or others, we are then to rejoice more in that, then we were
grieved before in our own hurt. Thus JOSEPH quieted himself in those injuries
which his Brethren had done him, and would not nourish any desire of revenge in
his mind, because God had turned them all to so great a good.

Now, howsoever, whilst we are in the bitterness of our afflictions, we see
not what is that good whereunto God will dispose it in the end, yet sure we
have the promise of God, that all things shall work together for our good,
Romans 8. and we have heretofore in our own and others experiences seen the
like practice of God. This must make us comfortable in the midst of our
distress, knowing assuredly that God will make a good and happy end of it.
And then we shall condemn our selves of folly, in wishing our own hurt and
hinderance; then we shall thank GOD for our crosses, being made means of
that good which we would not for any good have missed. Be not then impatient,
fret not, murmr not at any injuries whatsoever, or any afflictions whatsoever
that befall thee: wait a while, and thou shall see GODS special providence
over thee in those crosses, insomuch that thou would not for any thing but
those crosses had befalne thee. Martha, though she was grieved much at her
Brother LAZARUS death, and began even to murmr, saying, Lord, if thou
had been here, my Brother had not dyed, yet afterward when she saw her
Brother raised again, and by this, many to believe in CHRIST, then she could
not but wonder at her own folly, that would have hindered that so glorious a
work of God, and the salvation of so many souls.

VERSE. 16. Not now as a servant.
A Confirmation as we showed in the former Verse, because now by his
departure, ONESIMVS was become a Convert: which is set forth by the Metaphore
of a Brother, and therefore now by his departure was joined to him for ever:
for this spiritual Conjunction of Brethren in CHRIST, shall never fail, but
shall continue for ever.

By a Brother then, is here meant a true Christian, as 1. Cor. 5. If any who is
called a Brother: and Gal. 1. 2. and the Brethren that are with me.

First, Here note the spiritual kindred that is The spiritual kindred and
brotherhood between Christians.
by the Fathers side, having one Father, God the Father of Spirits; Brethren by
the Mothers side, lying in the same womb of the Church, having one and the
selfsame elder brother CHRIST JESUS, begotten with the same spiritual Seed;
fed at the same Table with the same nourishment. This Brotherhood must far
exceed the natural, even as Gods Father-hood toward us far exceeds the
natural Father-hood among men: look then what nature tyeth natural Brethren
to, that does grace much more tie spiritual unto, as

First of all, unto Amity and Unity. Psalm 133. What duties it teaches.
10. How happy a thing is it for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! Let
there be no strife, said ABRAHAM to LOT, betwixt thee and me; for we are
Brethren.

How then do they show themselves Brethren, that do bite, yea, and devour
those that are of the same holy Profession with themselves? Even as in the Sea
the greater Fishes swallow up the lesser.

When there be Schisms and Factions, partakings in the Church, EPHRAIM
against MANASSES, and MANASSES against EPHRAIM, and the Children of the Church
strive together in her womb, as once ESAV and IAAKOB; it argues that some at
least are unnatural Brethren.

Again, it is the part of Brethren to take one another part, to cleave one to
another, taking that which is done to their Brother, as done to themselves, as
we see in the examples of IAAKOBS sons, taking the abuse offered to their
sister, as to themselves, and thinking it a sufficient excuse for their joining
together in the revenge of the Sichemites: it was done in their sisters
quarrel. Should they abuse our sister as a Whore? Well, spiritual
Brotherhood ought to be more effectual then natural: for there is a friend
that is above a brother, Prou. 16. that is, the Christian friend, who also is a
spiritual Brother. In evil causes therefore shall natural Brethren think
themselves excused, that they do it in defense of their Brethren, and to
manifest their natural affection? How then shall we be able to excuse our
selves, if in good causes we flinch one from another, as DEMAS and diverse
others did from PAVL, leaving him to answer for himself? O, this is not the
part of good Brothers. How do we show our selves Brethren, Sons of the same
heavenly Father, when we will not join together in those things which are for
the honor of that our Father, and the good of our Mother the Church?

Thirdly, it is the property of a Brother, though at other times he have
been something more unkind to his Brother, yet in his affliction and
extremity, then to feel nature working in him, and to show and express his
affection by doing his best.

This is that which SAEOMON notes, Prou. 17. 17. A friend loves at all times,
and a brother is borne for adversity.

Wherefore, howsoever in the time of peace we have not so manifested our love
to Christians as we ought to have done, yet in persecution, if there be any
brotherly affection, we cannot then contain it, nay, then it will break
forth: Then we shall cry out amain as Joseph did, though before, with him,
we hide and dissembled our affections, I am JOSEPH your brother.

In Histories we read, that CROESVS his son having been always dumb, yet
the City being surprised by enemies, he seeing one ready to kill his father,
Nature so wrought in him, that it violently (as it were) broke the impediments
and strings of his tongue, and caused him to cry out with great passion: O kill
not King CRoeSVS.

If we then will show our selves true and natural Sons of God, and so
brethren to his children, when we see his Honor ready to be trod under
foot, when we see his children evil entreated, then is it high time for us to
manifest our affection.

A notable example of this we have in MOSES, whose brotherly affection toward
the persecuted Israelites, all the pomp and pleasure of PHARAOHS Court was not
able to smother and suppress, but it brake forth in that manner, that it
caused him to relinquish the Court and all his hopes there, and to choose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God.

Natural kindred in some cases may be concealed, and specially in the case of
danger, as ESTHER was counseled by MORDECAI, to conceal of what Country she
was. But our spiritual kindred least of all may be concealed in the time of
danger and trouble; nay, then is the trial of it; for as by SALOMONS wisdom,
going about to cut that controuerted child in two, the natural mother was
discerned: so the like wisdom of God, suffering our brethren in the Faith to
be in like manner dealt withal, as the child should by SOLOMON, our
affections are tried, and true brothers are notably discerned, and base ones
detected.

Let this be remembered then of us, that profess the same holy Truth, that we
are Brothers, yea, Twins, and therefore we must always be knit together in
a holy harmony of wills and affections, rejoicing and weeping, living and
dying together. If we find these qualities and properties of brethren in our
selves, it is no matter for the Worlds scorning at this brotherhood, it is our
glory.

Secondly, Observe that this spiritual brotherhood The spiritual brotherhood
is among all Christians indifferently.
difference there be amongst them in outward civil respects, yet they are
nothing prejudicial to this spiritual Fraternity in Christ: for here
PHILEMON and ONESIMVS, the Master and the Servant, are made these kind of
brethren. Howsoever we are differenced in civil policy and in civil
societies, some being Noble, some being Base, some Rich, some Poor, etc. yet
in that spiritual society, of which CHRIST is the Head, there is no such
distinction. Here we are all equals, all one, all brethren: Christ in his
body gives no special place to a King, because he is a King; no, he respects
not the King, more then the Beggar.

This Doctrine is of special use, both for comfort to Inferiors, and for
humiliation and moderation of mind to Superiors, in as much as the servant is
Christ's Freeman, and the Master is Christ's servant, 1. Corinthians. 7. Let then
the brother of low degree rejoice in this, that he is exalted, JAMES 1. in
Christ, to be equal with the greatest Prince in the world, yea, to be above
him, if he be out of Christ. Again, as Saint JAMES counsels in the same
place: Let the brother of high degree rejoice in his humility, even in this,
that in Christ he has made equal with himself the meanest. Let him not
rejoice in his outward preeminence he has over them, but let him know this is
his glory, which in the world is counted humility, that he has such a poor
beggar his equal. And surely, we have no cause to be ashamed of them that be
poor, to be our brethren: for if God acknowledge them to be his Sons, I
hope, it is no disparagement to any, to acknowledge them their brethren, nay, a
credit, and, as Saint JAMES shows, A matter to be boasted in, for if we have
them our brethren, then we have God our Father. And if we deny them to be the
Sons of God, who be our brethren, in so doing we openly disclaim God from
being our Father.

Let us then acknowledge the poorest Christian as our brother, though our own
bond-slaue, doing the parts and offices of a brother unto him. Natural men
oftentimes, by the force of natural affection, acknowledge their natural
brethren, though they themselves be highly exalted above them in the world. And
shall not grace exceed nature? shall not brothers in the Lord much more every
way acknowledge their brethren, though they be never so much advanced above
them in their civil calling? The Christian calling will not overthrow the
civil. Religion will not overthrow Policy, nay, rather it confirms this. It
will not teach thy servant to slip his neck out of the collar, and to deny
thee service and subjection: why then should Policy be so unkind and
unthankful to Religion, as to overthrow it? Though, in truth, it is not so
much Policy, as our corruption, taking occasion by civil Policy, that would
ouerturne Religion.

It is the pride of men's hearts puffed up, in regard of the outward condition
in the world, that makes them forget their inferiors, and so to carry
themselves toward them, as if they were not their brethren of the same
Christian Calling, of the same precious Faith with themselves. Neither is this
spoken, as though Superiors might not lawfully maintain their superiority
and authority over their Inferiors, but only that their inequality in their
civil calling, cause them not to forget the equality in the Christian. And
this is a point of great wisdom, so to temper our carriage, that neither our
equality in Christ make us to forget our inequality in the world, nor yet on
the other side our inequality in the world, make us forget our equality in
Christ.

Again, this Doctrine teaches Superiors, not only moderation to others
their Inferiors, but also all humility and subjection toward GOD. A good
Meditation is it for them, seeing their Inferiors in the world creeping and
crouching to think thus with themselves: O, this man is my brother, not only
in regard of creation of the same stuff with my self, but also of
regeneration, he is as good, as I, before God. O then how ought I much more to
abase my self before my heavenly Master, casting down my self at his
foote-stoole, though a King, with the meanest Beggar, coming to Gods House
with all my Subjects, as their Companion, Psalm. 122!

This brotherhood betwixt ONESIMVS and Religious servants are more then
ordinary servants.
servant, a sole and single servant, but more then a servant. Whereby we learn
that servants, fearing God, are more then common and ordinary servants, that
are without the fear of God, and therefore by good reason more to be
respected. Every servant will look for special favor and respect though
perhaps they are nothing but servants. If thou look to have more then other
ordinary servants, thou thy self must become more then a servant: Though yet
a worldly Master will make thee less then a servant, and thy condition with
him will be worse then of other servants, not fearing God. But this is their
sin.

If thy servant be more then a servant, why then has he less at thy hands,
then he that is a servant, and a servant only?

Specially unto me.
THat which PAVL presses PHILEMON unto, he vrges from his own example, by an
Argument drawn from the less to the greater, on this wise.

I desire nothing of thee, but what first I do my self. I plead but for that
affection from thee toward ONESIMVS, which I my self bear to him. If he be
dear to me, then much more ought he to be so to thee, for I am tied to him,
but in one bond, as he is a Christian: but thou art bound to him with a twofold
cord which cannot be easily broken. Only spiritual and gracious respects
challenge affection from me, but together with these do outward and natural
bonds plead for regard from thee, who art bound to him both in the flesh and in
the Lord, both as he is a servant, and as a Christian servant. He is dear to
me only as a member of the household of Faith, thou art also bound to him as a
member of thine own household. If then I upon this single bond hold him so
dear, how dear then should he be to thee, thus doubly obliged to him? The
reason may be drawn into this form.

If I PAVL, thus dearly love ONESIMVS, then ought thou, PHILEMON, to do
the like: But I dearly love him. Therefore, etc.

The Consequence of his Argument he proves thus: He that is bound to a man
by a double bond, ought to regard him more then he that is bound to him by a
single bond: But thou art bound to ONESIMVS by a double bond, I, but by a
single one: Therefore, etc.

First, PAVL vrges PHILEMON from his Ministers should be exemplarie in what
they teach.
thou, and what I require at thine hands I do my self. I, that plead for
affection, do show affection. I, that call for love, do show love. Then a man
pleades strongly indeed, when he makes himself a precedent.

Ministers should be exemplarie in all they urge, and teach. Then is there
life in their Doctrine, when there is Doctrine in their life. Men in this case
are readier to live by sense and sight, then by Faith. Religion has a Truth
and a Power. People will never believe the Truth of a doctrine in our mouths,
where they see not the Power of it in our lives.

The want of sight causes the want of Faith. Except, with THOMAS in another
case, they see, they will not believe. Their eyes must be taught as well as
their ears. Philip. 4. 9. Those things which ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me, do.

As GIDEON to his Soldiers, so should Ministers to their people be able to
say, Look on me, and do likewise, as I do, so shall ye do, Judge. 7. verse.
17.

Therefore PAVL wishing TIMOTHY so to carry himself in his Ministry, as he
might be free from contempt and scorn, counsels him to be exemplarie. 1. Tim.
4. 12. Let no man despise thy youth, but be thou an example to them that
believe.

How many bring contempt both upon their persons, and their doctrine, whilst
their doctrine condemns their own lives, or their lives confute their own
doctrine, while they stand like way-markes, and point out the way to others,
and yet stir not themselves!

It is poor comfort for a Minister to be no further then a Pharise. Of the
Pharisees was our Saviors caution, Matthew. 23. 3. Do ye not after their works,
for they say and do not. Such as say, and do not, do after their works.
While we do after their works, which is to do no works, how shall we make
our peace with that Text, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven?
We exceed them not, unless we be practical, they were verbal Doctors.

If dangerous, not to go beyond a Pharise, how much more to come short?

To usurp MOSES his Chair, and not to open MOSES his Law, is to be worse then
a Pharise. But yet only to open the mouth and no more, what singular thing is
this? Did not the Pharisees the same? And what art thou the better that thou art
not worse then a Pharise, so long as thou art not better? As good never a whit,
as never the better.

Physicians and Ministers that in diverse things do agree, yet herein must
disagree. Physicians will often prescribe that to others, which they will not
venture to practice upon themselves. Ministers practice with EZRA, should go
before their prescriptions. Ezra 7. verse. 10. For EZRA had prepared his heart
to seek the Law of the Lord and to do it, and to teach in Israel Statutes and
Judgments. Where they fail in this, let them make account to be choked with
that prouerbiall speech, Physician, heal thy self. And they will be as
ridiculous as LVCIANS Apothecarie, who sold Medicine to cure the cough, and yet
was shrewdly troubled with it himself.

It censures therefore such as have their tongues of a larger size then their
hands, having indeed in regard of any practice, withered hands.

A Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. No more can a Ministry
divided against it self. Such a Ministry is that whose practice gives the
doctrine the lie.

It is not enough for Ministers (...). 2. Tim. 2. verse. 15. to divide aright,
but they must also (...) Galat. 2. verse. 14. Walk aright, See how sharply
PAVL takes up such, Romans 2. verse. 21.

Specially to me. And yet the bond whereby he was tied to him, was the
general bond of Religion No bond stricter then that of religion.
and Christianity. Even this general calling is a special ligament of
affection. Religion has it is name from binding. As it binds to God, and
obedience to him; so it binds the religious in special and hearty love each
to other. Though Religion and Christianity be our general calling, yet works
it special affection. Gal. 6. 10. Do good to all, but especially to the
Household of faith. That affection between persons, that have the special
bands of natural and civil relations, is not so special, as that which this
general band causes. Nature makes Husband and Wife but one flesh; Grace makes
them even one Spirit. How often is there no affection where a special band?
Not to instance in the nearer band of natural brotherhood (in the which how
general and superficial oftentimes are affections) how slight and slender is
the affection between masters and servants? But be it that there is the
greatest measure of affection, that this relation can yield, yet are they but
still master and servant, it brings them no nearer. But see the exact and
strict knot of religion, it brings master and servant, an Apostle and a slave,
to the dear and special affection of a brotherhood. Nothing riuets hearts so
close as religion. The special bands of nature are but general ones: the
several ones of grace are special. There is a friend that sticks closer then
a brother. Pro. 18. 24. The gracious friend sticks closer then the mere
natural brother. All the bands of nature, of policy, of civil society, they
are highly beholding to religion. They are but loose at the straightest, in
comparison of the nearer and stricter knot which grace makes. Religion is the
surest cement of all societies, the looser joints of all natural and civil
relations are compacted and confirmed by the sinew of grace and religion, which
endeeres men one to another in a special manner, specially to me.

Would we then have all those that are any way

This shows what little hold there is in their

Observe who are especially to be loved of us. Grace the attractiue of love.
Grace is not only the surest band, but also the greatest attractiue of love.
There is a debt of love due to all men, due to our enemies; but our special
love and kindness is due to the Saints. Our love is ready to be drawn away
with glorious outsides, and with those, Iam. 2. we are ready to prefer, in
our respects, a good suit before a good heart. The more shame for us. Poor
ONESIMVS, in the condition of a mean servant, is specially beloved of Paul,
and esteemed of him as a brother. Why should a ring on the finger winn such
respect? Is not a swine a swine, though he have a ring of gold in his snowt,
and is not a pearl a pearl, though it be trodden under foot? The rule of our
love should be the Lords love, to love those most, who are most beloved of him.
They should have ye chiefly of our respect and affection, whom the Lord has
honored with the most liberal largess of his grace.

Specially to me. Why specially to him? Because he None deerer to Ministers
then their conuerts.
the special attractiue of Ministers love. Their love cannot better be
bestowed, then where their love and labor has best prospered. Those trees
delights the Husbandman most in, which were of his own planting and griffing.
The good success of our former love, is the greatest motive that may be to
present and future love. Most men's loves are for good received, they love such
persons, who have been instruments and means of good to them; but here it is
otherwise, Ministers love those most, not from whom they receive some
temporal, but to whom they do some spiritual God. And thus to love one, not
for good received, but for good done, is truly Christian and royal. Great is
the affection of a Convert, to the Minister and Ministry, which has been the
means of his conversion. He accounts his very eyes but a vile recompense for
so great good. Gal. 4. 15. Yet notwithstanding, in this case love rather
descends then ascends, 2 Cor. 12. 15. and the abundant love of the Convert,
is superabundantly surmounted by the love of the Conuerter. So much seem those
passionate and affectionate speeches of Paul to witness, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. 20.
and 3. 8. 9. And though the Galatians could, out of their dear affection to
PAVL, impart their eyes to him, yet PAVL goes further, and could be content to
impart his own soul to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2 8. because they were
dear unto him. This may serve to satisfy the unjust exception of some against
their Ministers, whom they accuse of partiality, because he loves some more
specially then others, and why should not they be as much regarded, inasmuch
as happily they are as friendly, and as beneficial to them as others. Well, it
may be true thou do so: but what good has his Ministry wrought upon thee?
Has it brought thee to knowledge, obedience, repentance and reformation, as it
has done other some, who are highly regarded of thy Minister? No such matter;
why then complainest thou? Desire the like affection, and then complain if
thou have it not. Boast not of what good thou do to him, show what good his
Ministry has done to thee. The fault is thine own. It is not partiality, upon
difference of desert, to show difference of respect.

But how much more to thee, both in the flesh and the Lord?] The assumption of
the second syllogism which was, but thou art bound by a double band, the band
of the flesh; as he is thy servant, and by the bond of religion, in the Lord,
Therefore etc.

According to the number and nature of the The more bonds, the more duty
should have force in our affection. Upon doubled grounds and bonds, should be
doubled love and duty. We are to love every Christian, though no other bond tie
us thereunto, but that of Christianity. But if unto this there come others, our
affection should increase together with them. 1 Timothy 5 17. Let the Elders who
rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in
the word and doctrine. Why a double honor? because a double desert, which
binds thereunto. A Christian is worthy our love, of what kindred or family
soever; but when a Christian shall be both of Gods family and of our own
family, both Gods child and our own, Gods servant and our own, this increase
of bonds should not be without increase of affection. They are fowly to blame
then, that on the contrary, the more their bonds, the less their affection.
How many could better affect some near unto them in natural bonds, if they
were farther off. The quarrel is the greater from the neernesse of their
bonds. So many a woman is so much the more hateful, because a wife, and a
zealous one; many a child less beloved, because a religious child; many a
servant less respected, because a godly servant. So many a child despises the
counsel of a gracious mother, because a mothers counsel: whereas so much the
rather to be regarded, because good counsel, from a mother, and from a good
mother. Is she not thy wife, nay a good wife? therefore to neglect her advice,
aggrauates thy sin: for the more the bonds between thee and her, the more
art thou bound to regard her. From hence does the Lord aggrauate those husbands
sins, Malac. 2. 14. Thou have dealt treacherously against the wife of thy
youth, yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. The more the
bonds, the more their sin. It will not serve the turn therefore, to make but
a tush at a wives, a soones, a servants, a mothers counsel, so far are they
therefore from being neglected, because such, that therefore they are to be
regarded, because such, to whom thou art obliged by so many bonds.

As fowly also to blame are such, whom all the bonds of nature, grace, reason,
religion, affinity, necessity, poverty, honesty cannot bind to the works of
mercy. How many are far more cheerful, and open handed and hearted in
releeuing the necessities of strangers, then the necessities of such, to whom
nature, alliance, blood and religion binds them. Hence the proverb, of much
kindred and few friends, whereas on the contrary, by this rule, the more kindred,
the more friends should a man have. One cannot provoke hard hearts more, then
by pleading for relief, for their near, poor, and religious kindred. This was
the inhumanitie of the Virgin MARY'S kindred (for so they were that came
together to Bethelem to be taxed) that they would not amongst them afford her
the kindness of the worst room in the house, being in travel; but though
their near kinswoman, yea and the Top-branch of their family, Inheretrix of
the Kingdom, and a gracious woman besides, yet notwithstanding all these bonds
of birth, of grace, her present condition and exigent, they can be content
(against all all humanity and ciuility) she should be delivered in a stable.
When the Persian Sages came to Bethlehem, they showed themselves far more
respective, and they presented CHRIST with gold, frankincense and myrrh.
Surely, if his mother had been among them in Persia, they would have provided
her a better room then a stable. A vile shame that MARY should find more
kindness in Persia, then in Bethlehem, from mere strangers, then from those
that were near unto her in blood and in religion. So JEREMY found more
courtesy from the barbarous Caldeans, then from his own people. The Jews
imprisoned him, the Caldeans gave him his liberty.

VERSE. 17. If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as my self.
IF you count me a partner, (...), or if you count me one that has fellowship
or communion with thee, if thou count our things common. Here then is another
argument wherewith PAVL presses PHILEMON, to receive ONESIMVS, and it is drawn
from a ground of our faith: the communion of, and between Saints. So that he
pleads here much after that manner, Phil. 2. 1. 2. If any communion or
fellowship of the Spirit fulfill ye my joy. So here, if any fellowship or
communion between us, then fulfill my request, and as thou would receive
me, receive him. The reason then stands thus. If we have communion and
fellowship together in all things, then receive him: but we have such a
fellowship: therefore receive him, which conclusion is farther illustrated, by
the manner how he would have him be received, As my self. In which reason two
things may be considered, 1 The force. 2 The ground of it.

1 The force of it. And that teaches thus much.

That the communion which is between Saints, Phil. 2. 1. 2. If any fellowship
fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded. etc. As if he had said, you profess
a communion and fellowship amongst you, I adjure you by this fellowship which
you profess, to perform these duties of love and peace. ABRAHAM'S argument to
LOT buts much upon this. Genesis 13. 8. Let there be no strife between me and
thee, for we are brethren. That communion which is between Saints should make
them faithful in the performance of all duties, that belong to their
fellow-Saints. If thou count me a partner. There is a partnership between
Christians, they are fellow-partners. One partner will not wrong another, will
not hinder another, one partner will further and help another, love and make
much of another. Let there be no strife between us, no want of love and duty
between us, for we are fellow-partners. This language and this practice does
this communion teach.

2 The gound of this reason: and it implies thus much:

That there is a communion, a fellowship, a partnership The partnership of
Christians, and in what it stands.
they may be said to have all things common. There is a double fellowship in
which Christians are interessed, a fellowship with GOD in CHRIST, a fellowship
among themselves, both joined together, 1 Ioh. 1. 3. That which we have seen
and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have also fellowship with us, and
that our fellowship also may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. And indeed the communion of Saints flows from the communion with
CHRIST. Hence those titles of fellowship in Scripture so often: in this short
Epistle, we have verse. 1. Fellow Laborer. verse. 2. Fellow-souldier. verse. 23.
Fellow-prisoner; and in this verse a fellow-partner. And Galat. 2. 9. the right
hand of fellowship. For the understanding of this point, two things may be
considered.

1. Wherein, or in what particulars this partnership and communion stands. 2.
What be the ligaments or bonds thereof.
1. The things in which it consists are set down by PAVL, 1 Cor. 3. 21. All
things are yours: In all things have the Saints a communion; more particularly
in these things consists their partnership.

1. They have one common Father. Ephesians. 4. One God and father of us all. Hence
our Savior teaching us to pray, teaches us to say, Our father, not my father
which art in heaven, even in the first word of that prayer, putting us in mind
of our communion. And herein this partnership exceedes all earthly ones, which
though they make other things common to such as are joined in partnership, yet
cannot their partnership make them have one common father. It may make them
near friends, it cannot make them brethren, as this Christian partnership
does, which makes us all brethren of one father, Ioh. 20. 17. I ascend to my
father, and to your father, to my God, and to your God. Hence these two joined
together, Ephesians. 2. 12. to be aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel; and to
be without God in the world. But when once we come to have fellowship in one
and the same Commonwealth of the Communion of Saints, then thorough Christ we
have access by one spirit unto the father, even unto one and the same father.

2. They have one common mother, the Church: Gal. 4. 26. Jerusalem which is
above is free, which is the mother of us all. So are they fellow-brethren, both
by fathers and mothers side. Fitly therefore are these two articles joined
together: I believe in the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. By
virtue of the Communion of Saints, we challenge a freedom in that holy
incorporation.

3. They have one common elder brother JESUS CHRIST, Heb. 2. 11. For which
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. This Communion stands not only
in a brotherhood among themselves, but in a common brotherhood between CHRIST
and the faithful. As the head is not only the head of the shoulders, but of
the feet, of the legs, and all other parts of the body: They have all one
common head.

4. They have all one common inheritance. So that this partnership and
fellowship does not only make them brothers, but herein it goes further: for
many brethren have common parents, a common elder brother, but not the
inheritance common, their common elder brother makes that proper and peculiar
to himself. But here there is a communion in the inheritance, it being alike
common to every one. Hence the faithful are called fellow-heires, Ephesians. 3. 6.
and Fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of GOD, Ephesians. 2. 19.
And JOHN writes himself a brother of the Churches, and a companion, or
co-partner, [(...)] in the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST, Apoc. 1. 9. Hence in
CHRIST, neither bond nor free, etc. but he has made us all Kings and Priests
to God his father. Apoc. 1. 6. Hence IVDE calls it the Common salvation, Jude
3. The Saints of God have all communion in one and the same salvation and
Kingdom of God. So PETER speaks of himself, I a witness and a partaker
((...)) of glory, 1 Pet. 3. 1.

5. They have all one common profession of the same faith. Therefore howeuer
faith, in regard of the believers application, is proper and particular, yet in
regard of the profession thereof, it is called the common faith. Tit. 1. 4. To
Titus mine own son after the common faith. This is that fellowship PAVL
mentions, Philip. 1. 5. your fellowship in the Gospel. Their fellowship stood
as in other things, so in the common believing, receiving and professing the
Gospel. Thus are they fellow-beleeuers, and fellow-professours.

6. They have all the same ordinances of Gods worship in common, and have a
joint fellowship and communion in the use and exercise of them, fellowhearers
of the same Word and Gospel. Hence that phrase of the fellowship of the
Mystery, Ephesians. 3. 9. fellow-partners, and fellow-partakers of the same
Sacraments. Hence the Supper called the Communion. The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the body of Cbrist? 1 Cor. 10. 16. and see
the reason, verse. 17. for we being many are one bread, and one body: for we
are all partakers of that one bread. The Ministers and their Ministry is not
their own, nor any man's peculiar goods, but the common goods of the Saints, in
which they are all fellow-partners. It was a miss in the Corinthians, when
they said, I am Paul's, and I am Apollos, I am Cephas, 1 Cor. 1. they are as
far awry, that say PAVL is mine, APOLLOS mine, CEPHAS mine, for all things
are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, etc. all are yours, and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. There are but three Lords of all things, GOD,
CHRIST, and the Saints, and these subordinate each to other. So then PAVL, and
APOLLOS, and the Ministers, and Ministry of the Gospel, the Word and
Sacraments, are the common goods of the whole Church, in which all the Saints
are fellow-partners.

7. They have the prayers each of other in common. Therefore our Savior
teaches us to pray, Our father: Give us this day our daily bread, forgive us
our trespasses. Teaching us an exercise of this fellowship in prayer: we are
bound to pray for others, therefore others have a partnership in our prayers.
Herein is the poorest and meanest Saint of God happy, that as he has the
benefit of Christ's intercession in heaven, so has he also the benefit of the
prayers of all Gods Saints on earth.

8. They have the graces and gifts each of other in common In Grace there is
not this meum and tuum: we have no grace, hut by virtue of this communion we
are bound to communicate it, and to make it common to others: what gifts we
receive, others have a right in them, 2 Cor. 1. 11. the gift bestowed on us for
many. As once of goods, Acts 4. 32. so ever of grace, none must say of the
grace he possesses, that it is his own. Conduits are not any ones proper
goods, but are common to the whole town. And PAVL says of the Philippians,
Philip. 1. 7. That they were all partakers, or fellow-partners ((...)) of his
grace. All the graces and gifts that any have, they are but the Church-stocke,
and part of their treasury, in which the whole Church has a partnership.
Graces who ever is berusted with the keeping of them, are Church-goods, in
which all the Saints are fellow-partners.

9. They have a partnership in their affliction: so that one Christian suffers
not without the fellowship of another, as the members of the same body have all
communion in the same grief. If one member suffer, all suffer with it, 1 Cor.
12. 26. Remember those that are in bonds, as though ye were bound with them,
and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves of the body. They have as
well a partnership in the crown of thorns, as in the crown of glory, as well
in the sufferings, as in the Kingdom of CHRIST, Revel. 1. 9. I John who am
also your brother and companion, or co-partner in tribulation, and in the
Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ. This partnership in afflictions stands
both in a fellow-feeling, and a fellow-suffering: both are joined together,
Heb. 10. 33. 34. Partly whilst ye became companions, or partners ((...)) with
them that were so used. Now mark wherein they showed themselves partners with
those that were so hardly used in afflictions: For ye had compassion on me in
my bonds, there is a fellow-feeling, and took joyfully the spoiling of your
goods, there is a fellow-suffering. Hence verse. 23. of this Epistle, calls
EPAPHRAS his fellow-prisoner: fellow-prisoner, not in regard of place, but of
cause and affection: yea, so near is this partnership, that in regard of their
fellow-feeling each in others crosses, even they that have their liberty are
notwithstanding fellow prisoners, inasmuch as they remember those in bonds, as
if bound with them.

10. They have a partnership each in others goods, and in some sense may be
said to have common goods. Not that this partnership and communion should be
Anabaptisticall, denying men the propriety of their possessions, as if hedges
and ditches could not stand with Christian religion; but such a communion, as
denies no man the right: but only craves the use of men's temporal goods, for
the refreshing the necessities of the Saints. And in this regard it is that the
poor, needing the help of our goods, is called the owner of them, Pro. 3. 27.
Withhold not the goods from the owners thereof. Even this fellowship and
partnership makes the poor Saints owners of our temporal goods, in regard of
the use of them: when the poor members of Christ are in want, we must not say
our goods are our own, because the Communion of Saints binds us to communicate
unto the necessities of the Saints. And in this sense may we apply that
extraordinary fact, to our ordinary communication to the Saints necessities:
Acts 4. 32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of
one soul; neither said any of them, that ought of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had all things common. The waters of a man's
well and cisterne may be common for the use of others, but yet the well and the
cisterne, let them be thine own only, and not the strangers with thee, Prou.
5* 15. 17. Hence PAVLS phrase of the fellowship of the ministering to the
Saints, 2 Cor. 8. 4. And he commends the Philippians, for communicating to his
affliction, Phil. 4. 14. And no marvel that their goods are common, when their
lives are not their own, for we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren,
1 Ioh. 3. 16.

The second point. The ligaments or bonds of this partnership. They are two.

1. The Spirit of CHRIST, which being one in all, must needs bind all in one.
The Spirit, as it knits us all unto CHRIST, so all of us one to another. The
Spirit of CHRIST communicates it self to all the true members of CHRIST, there
is but one spirit which rules in all believers, Ephesians. 4. one spirit. And by
one spirit we are baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Therefore have they
all communion with themselves, because communion with that one spirit: for
look as it is with the body, in which, though there be diverse members, yet
they have a fellowship each with other, because they are all informed but by
one and the same soul, and because they have all communion in one form, so is
it here. The spirit is as the form, which gives being to the body, and so by
virtue of this one spirit common to us all, though we distinct and several
persons, yet have we communion and partnership each with other.

Hence called the communion of the Holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 13. 13. The communion of
the holy Ghost be with you all. The communion of the holy Ghost, because he
communicates himself to us, and we in and by that Spirit, have mutual
communion and fellowship each with other.

2. The grace of love, which is as the sinews and arteries, knitting this body
together: therefore called the band of perfection, Col. 3. 14. And PAVL ioynes
these two together, Phil. 2 1. If any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit. It is said, Acts 4. 32. That the believers had all things common: now
what might be the ground thereof? the beginning of the verse shows, They were
all of one heart, and of one soul, In partnership in the world, what is it
that makes partners join together, and cleave together, but the good and
hearty affection each bears to other.

That which the Apostle himself here inferrs upon

To labor, to procure and advance the good Phil. 2. 1. 4. If any fellowship of
the spirit, Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the
things of others. It is a foul fault which PAVL taxes in the same chapter,
verse. 21. That all seek their own, and an high commendation, which in the
same place he gives TIMOTHY, that he naturally cared for their estate. They
that are of the Commonwealth of Israel, must be no priuate-wealths men. They
are all bound together by the bond of love, and love seeks not her own
things. Since GOD has made us all fellow-partners, seek we every man the good
of another; labor we to provoke each other to love and good works, to
admonish, to instruct, to edify, to build up one another in our holy faith.
Be not straight hearted, but communicate thy graces unto others, let them have
the benefit thereof. Be not straight handed, but communicate thy goods unto
others, let the necessities of the Saints have the comfort thereof. What a
shame, that one fellow-partner should see another want? Is thy fellow-partner
behind hand, and plays he not the good husband in his spiritual estate? Call
upon him, advise him, help him, and direct him how he may thrive. Especially
do such Ministers transgress the laws of this partnership, who hide their
talent in a napkin, and dig it into the earth and return not the advantage of
it to the common treasury of the Church. Their gifts are not their own, but
they are the common goods of the Church. It is odious to enclose Commons:
Church-robbery is sacrilegious and infamous. How can they escape that infamy,
that deny Gods Church the benefit and use of those gifts, God has given them
for his Churches sake. Many speak against Impropriations, and justly; but the
spite is, that in the mean time they mar, or at least wrong a good cause,
with their own guiltiness. For while they speak against temporal, they
themselves are guilty of spiritual Impropriations, and the world reckons, and
not amiss, that the impropriations of Church-graces, is a greater sin then
the impropriation of Church-goods.

This shows where the right and best good fellowship

If we be fellow-partners, and have communion fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, and reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion, or partnership,
has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 14. we cannot be fellow-partners with
Saints and swine, with the members of CHRIST and the members of BELIAL. We
must break off, and give up partnership with all other companions and
companies, now we are once admitted into this holy society. The conclusion of
the argument is amplified in those words, as my self, that is, in regard of
truth and sincerity of love, though not for measure and degree: for Christian
love, though it must be in truth to all the household of faith, yet requires not
an equality of affection to all. All our Saviors Disciples were loved of him
heartily and truly, yet JOHN was the special beloved Disciple above the rest.
So that PHILEMON is not required with the same respect and measure of of
affection, to receive a servant, though religious, as an Apostle, but he
entreats him with as true, though not with so great love, to receive him as he
would receive PAVL. And surely, the former partnership requires so much. The
same thing which had made PAVL and PHILEMON partners, had also now made PAVL
and ONESIMVS partners. And therefore the same partnership that bound PHILEMON
to receive PAVL, binds him also to receive ONESIMVS as PAVL, because he is
now admitted into the same society of partnership with them both. Love me and
love my partner; one partner receives another, even for a partners sake.

Even the meanest Christian should as well be The meanest Christians to be
heartily reg^eded.
must be received as well as PAVL, nay as PAVL, and loved as well, though not
so much as he. The commandment is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. If ONESIMVS must be regarded of PHILEMON, as himself, then surely must
he be received as PAVL. And indeed this is a singular good evidence, that we
love men rather for their religion, then religion for the men, when we love the
meanest that are religious. Otherwise, if we love great ones, with the neglect
of meaner Christians, we give the world just cause to suspect, that we have
the glorious faith of CHRIST JESUS, in respect of persons. He that loves grace
and religion for it self, loves it where ever he finds it, loves it as
truly clad in russet, as in velvet, in a poor servant, as well as in a rich
master; He that gives a cup of cold water to a Disciple, in the name of a
Disciple, etc. The ground then of a man's love to another, should be his
Disciple-ship: where the same ground is, why should there not be the same
affection? He that loves one disciple in the name of a Disciple loves all
Disciples, servants as well as masters, Christ should be loved in every
Christian, Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of these little ones, ye have
done it to me. Mat. 25. All we do to Christians, should be done as to CHRIST
in them. If PHILEMON love CHRIST in PAVL, why not in ONESIMVS? The same CHRIST,
the attractiue of our love being in both, why not the same affection and love
to both. He that loves CHRIST truly, loves him in any condition, as well in
his humiliation, as in his glory* in the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 7. as
well as in the form of God. Phil. 2. 6. for in both he is the same CHRIST.
He therefore that loves not CHRIST in a servant, loves him not in an Apostle.
It is not merely CHRIST that makes thee love PAVL, but some other carnal
respect gains thy affection to him, that can not, or do not love
ONESIMVS. If CHRIST had come to the Jews in the goodly beauty and bravery, in
the pomp and port of an earthly Potentate, who would not have received him,
believed in him, loved him: but now that he comes in the form of a servant,
and not of a King, here was the trial, as of their faith, so of their love.
It is easy to love CHRIST in the throne, he loves him truly, that loves him
in the manger and the stable; he loves him in the stable, that loves him in the
meanest and simplest servant. How much therefore are they to blame, that admire
and magnify small pittances in great ones, and in the mean time ouerlooke
great graces in meaner persons: as if men rather gave grace to religion, then
religion grace to them. This is to have men's persons in admiration, which IVDE
condemns, and not their graces.

VERSE. 18. If he has wronged thee or owes thee ought, put that on mine
account.

19. I Paul I have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it: albeit I
do not say to thee, how thou owe unto me even thine own self besides.


THese words are a prevention of an objection, that PHILEMON might make against
the former reason on this manner. How shall I receive again such an one as
he, that has so deeply wronged me and mine estate, by pilfering and
purloyning away my goods. It were too much favor, now that I know and hear
where he is, to forbear him, and not to bring him to shame and punishment. If
for thy sake I overcome my self, so far as to remit revenge, may not that
suffice, must I also receive him, and that with love, who has thus weakened
mine estate, and wasted my substance. Ans. Let not that damage thou have
sustained, be one whit prejudicial to my suit, I confess he has wronged
thee, and hurt thine estate; but rather then that shall stand in the way, I
will engage my self to thee, to see that discharged, make it my debt, and put
it upon mine account. I pass my word to thee, to see it paid. An honest man's
word is as good as his bond, how much more an Apostles word. If thou will not
take my word, as I make no question but thou will, then for thy better
assurance and security, lo here a bill of mine hand, to see the debt
answered, I Paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it. Yet I
must needs add one thing further, that I think thou will not be so strict
to urge me with the payment thereof, neither have thou any great reason so to
do: for if thou but seriously considerest, and castest up thine accounts, thou
shall find that I am before hand with thee, and that thou art indebted to me
a far greater matter then this comes to. So that in these words thus
unfolded, here are three things.

1. An acknowledgement of the wrong done to PHILEMON by ONESIMVS, and of a debt
due to him. 2. An undertaking of the debt, and a covenant of satisfaction by,
and from PAVL. 3. But yet with a Reuocation, and bringing of the business into
the court of conscience.
1. The acknowledgement is in those words, If he has wronged thee, or owes
thee ought, that is, I grant he has wronged thee, be it confessed. In which
acknowledgement, note the terms in which he acknowledges it, If he has
wronged; If he owes, not, If he has stolen, rather using the name of Injury
then Theft.

The faults of repenting sinners should not be rehearsed Mildness to be used
in naming the sins of the penitent.
terms PAVL knows not how to call ONESIMVS a thief or a runnagate, now he
is humbled for his sin, and become a new man. If the man be new, why should
the old names of his sins remain, and be cast in his teeth? In a man's
conversion old things are passed away, and all things are become new. A new
life and a new course should not be disgraced, nor discouraged with the odious
rehearsalls of a man's old sins. Their sins that have repented, should not
be rehearsed at all, but when there is some necessary cause; yea, and even
then without all rigidity and harshnesse of broad language, and in such easy
and gentle phrase, as it may appear, that we are unwilling but to remember
what is past. Indeed, the repenting sinner himself, speaking of his sins,
especially in his confessions to God, thinks he cannot have terms odious
enough, wherewithal to aggrauate his offenses, he speaks of them in the
broadest and fowlest manner he can: but yet when he has repented and
testified the same, we must avoid the harshnesse, and speak of them in the
easiest manner we can. PAVL confesses of himself more then LVKE reports of
him, I was a blasphemer and a persecuter. 1 Timothy, 1. 13. LVKE reports of him
Acts 9. that he breathed out threatenings, but not that he breathed out
blasphemies. If GOD have have remitted, why should we retain? why should not we
pardon where he does? How does it appear that we pardon, when we speak
with the harshest and roughest, of an offender. How gently does the Scripture
speak of DAVID'S foul fact after his repentance, He was a man after GODS own
heart in all things, save in the matter of Vriah, 1 King. 15. 5. both
forgetting many offenses, and speaking of that gross one with an easy phrase,
save in the matter of Vriah, not save in the murder of Vriah; It is good in
the praises of our brethren, to give them the full of their desert, but in
their falls upon their repentance, to be compassionate and gentle. But we are
most commonly of a clean contrary disposition; In praises we have our
diminuent and extenuating terms; in offenses, yea after repentance, we have
the gift of amplification. To speak easily in a man's praises, as it argues
envy; so to speak harshly of a repenters offenses, argues rigor and severity.
How many of us have the elder brothers evil eye and evil tongue, Luke 15. 15.
The Prodigalls father, after his sons repentance, neither tells him of ryoting,
nor whoring; but only this, This my son was dead, and is alive; he was lost,
and is found. How easily and like a father speaks he of his sons gross
misdemeanors? But how speaks the elder brother? surely broadly enough, and not
like a brother: for as he can neither brook to call him brother, but this thy
son, so neither spares he to speak plainly, and with the most odious
aggravating terms, But when this thy son was come, which has devoured thy
living with harlots, etc. He broadly charges him with riot, and whoredom at
once. But Christian moderation teaches more mild language and carriage toward
poor penitent sinners. It is good to turn this vindictiue edge upon our own
sins, and to set them out to the full in our confessions. If this sharp edge
were more used against our own sins, other men's should find and feel it
far more blunt. But because the back edge is toward our selves, therefore is
the sharp edge against others.

If he owes thee ought: PAVL then acknowledges Communion of Saints makes not a
community of goods.
reason of that wrong done him. The Communion of Saints then makes not an
absolute community of goods. For were the right of men's goods common, ONESIMVS
now being become a Christian, was upon those terms to have been forgiven the
debt, and PAVL needed not to have been over officious, in taking the debt upon
himself. That community of the Anabaptists, takes away the distinction of
borrower and lender, of debitour and creditour. Though, as before we said, the
Saints have all things common, yet this communion preiudices not their private
rights and possessions. Private possessions will stand with the Saints
Communion. Else from this Community might ONESIMVS, or PAVL for him, have
pleaded an Immunity both from restitution and punishment. If JOHN BAPTIST had
been an Anabaptist, he would both have condemned the soldiers for their
callings, and have commended, or at least not have condemned them for their
courses. Luke 3. 14. For what wrong or violence is it for a man to take that,
to which he has as good a right as another? If goods be common, he does
another no violence, that takes his goods. And to what end does the Apostle
every where so stir up men to the duty of Alms, if he allowed this
community, in which every man might be his own caruer, and relieve himself as
his need was. There is no place for alms, where all are joint and equal
owners. Our Savior teaches to pray for our daily bread, and PAVL enioynes men
to eat their own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. If we may have bread of our own, why
not all other things of our own. Indeed the Apostle wishes us so to buy, as
though we possessed not, and to use this world, as though we used it not, 1
Cor. 7. 30. 31. But he does no more forbid possessions in the world, then the
use of the world. If not lawful to possess, then not lawful to use the
world; and if lawful to use, then lawful to possess. The Apostle forbids not
possessing in, but being possessed of the world, It remains, that they that
have wives be as they that have none, says the Apostle in the same place. Now
does he (think we) thereby give liberty to uncleanness, and prostitute
other men's wives by a Nicolaitan community? Nothing less, for verse. 2. of the
same chapter, he enioynes every man to have his own wife, and every woman to
have her own husband. He therefore no more allows community of goods, then of
wives. The drift of that place suits with that parable, wherein one pleads he
had bought a farm, when his farm had bought him: another, that he had
married a wife, when his wife had married him, and teaches not a community, but
an holy kind of neglect of all earthly things, and to have our conversion in
heaven, while we live here on earth.

2. The undertaking of the debt. That is in these words, Put that on mine
account, I Paul have written it with mine own hand, I will repay it. He
undertakes it by giving him a bill of his hand. If there were no remedy, but
satisfaction must be made, though yet he hoped for a remission, then he
undertakes for him, he will be his surety, and make the debt his own.

It is not unlawful for one man to become surety Suretiship lawful, but with
cautions.
which not only may be done, but sometimes must be done. So IVDAH became
surety to his father for BENJAMIN Genesis 43. 9. I will be surety for him, of
mine hand shall thou require him. So the good Samaritan undertook, and became
surety for the wounded man. Luke 10. 35. And Heb. 7. 22. CHRIST became our
Surety. Had it been unlawful, though PAVL hoped for remission, yet would he
have abstained from all appearance of evil, and would not have engaged
himself for ONESIMVS. It is a point indeed, in which men may miscarry on both
hands, both by an over great forwardness to wrong themselves, and an over
great backwardness in helping others. Here therefore we must remember some
cautions in the practice of this point. For true charity is always guided by
the wisdom of God to walk between credulity and suspicion, so as neither to
wrong a man's self, nor yet others in the neglect of any duty of love. The
cautions to be observed therefore, are in regard

1. Of the person for whom we are bound. 2. Of the person to whom we are bound.
3. Of the person himself that is bound, and becomes surety.
1. For the person for whom we are sureties: we must be sure he be no stranger
to us. Pro. 11. 15. He that becomes surety for a stranger, shall be sore
broken; but he that hates suretiship, namely rash suretiship for strangers, is
sure. Prou. 20. 16. Take his garment that is surety for a stranger. Therefore
is it worth our nothing, to see how SOLOMON ioynes those two verses together,
Prou. 27. 12. 13. a prudent man sees even the plague and danger of rash
suretiship, and hides himself by a wise refusal, whereas going on rashly, are
punished with the loss of their garments and goods. It is therefore requisite
here to remember these cautions.

1. That we know him: that he be not a stranger, in regard of our knowledge
of his person: for though he may be one happily, for whom a man may safely
undertake, yet is it neither wisdom nor discretion for a man, to be so over
officious, to be bound for he knows not whom.

2. That we know his condition, means and ability, whether his sufficiency be
such as may free and secure a man from such snares and nets, as suretiship
brings commonly with it.

3. That we know him to be one religious, of the household of faith, that makes
conscience of his dealings, one whose fidelity and integrity may plead for him.
A man's neighbor must be a stranger in this case, if so be he be a stranger
from the Commonwealth of Israel. It were no strange thing if such an one
should give thee the slip, and leave thee in the lurch. It were strange, being
a stranger, if he should deal otherwise.

4. That we know the reason and cause of his need of our suretiship. If his
necessities have been brought upon him by the immediate hand of GOD, for the
causes of GOD, and the Church, without his own carelessness, negligence in his
calling, or vain wasting of his substance, then here is place for this duty,
some other things following being answerable: otherwise, if intemperancy,
negligence, have been the causes, then let the same hand bring him out, that
brought him into debt.

2. For the person to whom we are bound and become surety. Surely, it were to
be wished, that so near as could be, he might not also be a stranger, which
SOLOMON seems to caution, Prou. 6. 1. for thy neighbor, to a stranger. For
howsoever the surety is so to make his account, that be the creditor what he
will be, good or bad, that he is to see the debt paid, yet it is a great
deal better to fall into the hands of a PHILEMON, then of NABAL, of a
religious then a rigorous person. It being always to be presumed that the
conscience of the same commandment, which made the one upon good grounds to
become surety, will also move the other upon the same grounds to show pity,
either in remitting part of the debt, or at least in forbearing the rigorous
exaction of the whole at once, and in giving the longer day of payment. For
surely, so much does that speech seem to import. Prou. 20. 16. Take his
garment that is surety for a stranger, that is, if a man be so silly and so
rash, to be a surety for one he knows not, or knows to be a vile person,
and that by vile courses has brought himself into necessity never spare such
an one, let him abide the smart of it, and learn to pledge honester men.
Therefore it follows on the contrary, Take not his garment that is surety for
one that is no stranger; but upon just and lawful grounds, in pity and
commiseration of a poor Saint, became his surety. Take not his garment, do
not exact the full: but bear thou part of the burden, and help thou also to
relieve that poor man for whom the other is become surety.

3. For a man's self that is to become surety. First, be not over hasty to
thrust thy self in, be not to forward to offer thy self, Prou. 17. 18. A man
void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes surety before his friend, that
is, before his friend desires and seeks for it. Herein is more have then good
speed. Secondly, when thou undertake, and becommest surety for another, let
it be for no more then thou art willing and well able to part withal. A man
is not bound to pluck a thorn out of another man's foot, to put it into his
own; Thou must love thy neighbor as thy self, but not better then thy self, to
raise him with thine own ruin. Every surety that undertakes for another,
makes the debt his own, and he stands in conscience charged withal. This is
clear Genesis 44. 32. 33. Doubtless thy servant became surety for the child to
my father, and said, If I bring him not unto thee again, then will I bear the
blame unto my father for ever. Now therefore I pray thee, let thy servant bide
for the child, as a servant to my Lord, and let the child go up with his
brethren. This would be well thought upon, by such as are sureties, before
they become bound. Now then consider, what is the sum, tell it out in ready
money, and look well on it, and bethink thy self whether thou art able to
part with it, whether will it not break thy back, crack thine estate, undo
thy children, and make thy life uncomfortable. If it will, then Be not thou of
them that touch the hand, nor among them that are surety for debts; If thou
have nothing to pay, why causest thou that he should take thy bed from under
thee? Prou. 22. 27. No law requires that a man should lie in the streets, to
let another lie in his bed. Therefore in this case, whatsoever and how good
soever the grounds may be, yet keep out of of the snare. Rather give what
thou art able out of thine estate, presently to relieve his wants, then so to
crack thine estate, as to come into want and misery thy self.

It is lawful and just, in civil contracts and commerce, to give and to take
mutual and formal assurance. It is no breach of the bond of charity, to ask,
demand, and take bonds and obligatory bills, for the assurance of a man's own.
Persons to whom we lend being subject to mortality, if the Lord should take
them away before the time that the debt is due, how will it appear that it was
due, and how shall a man come by his own again. Bonds, writings, and
instruments of that kind have ever been in use among the people of GOD, Ier.
32. 9. 10. 11. 12. and Luke 16. 5. 6. 7. A necessary course to preserve charity
and peace.

The third point, the Reuocation. Albeit I do not say to thee, that thou owe
unto me even thine own self besides.] In which words he secretly and
modestly intimates unto PHILEMON, what great things he had done for him in his
conversion, so great as made PHILEMON a debtor, not only of his goods, but of
himself.

Learn from the Apostles example, with what Modesty must be used in mentioning
our own praises.
our own praise. PAVL does not in open words glory, that he has been the
means and instrument of his conversion, that he may thank him for bringing
him both to the knowledge and hope of a better life, but only secretly, and so
modestly glances at it. So great is the difference between an Apostolical and a
Thrasonicall spirit. Such is the modesty of selfedenying religion, that it
loves not to speak of his own deeds, much less to vaunt of them, and when
upon just cause it is forced thereunto, yet it is either only with glancing
intimations, and with covert terms, or else in the person of another. 2 Cor.
12. 2. 5. I knew a man, etc. of such an one will I glory of my self I will not
glory. And yet was he the man of whom he might glory. Or else with some
checkes and abasements. Hence that so frequent parenthesis, I speak as a
fool. 2 Cor. 11. Let another man's mouth praise thee, and not thine own. Prou
27. 2. Yea, an humble heart loves not to hear it is own praise out of another
mouth, much less to speak it with it is own. MARY trembled, or was troubled
at the saying of the Angel, wherein she was magnified. Luke 1. 29. Good
hearts suck not in their own praises with a bibbing ear, neither flatter
themselves when flattered by others, neither suffer themselves like pitchers to
be held by the ears, much less do they make their own mouths the trumpets
to sound forth their own acts, nor their own tongues their pensills to paint
forth their own deeds. Heerin appeared the modest spirit of SAMSON after that
honorable and renowned action, in the slaughter of the Lion: the text notes
his modesty, Judge. 14. 6. That he told neither his father nor his mother what
he had done. If he kept it close from them at home, how much more from others.
Had some proud spirit done but half so much, SAMSONS Lion roared not louder,
then they would have vaunted of the fact, and HERCVLES-like would have walked
up and down in the Lions skin, to give the world notice of their puissance.
MATTHEWES modesty is also worth the noting, in the penning of the history of
his own entertainment he gave CHRIST. LVKE reporting that history, says of
him, Luke 5. 29. That he made CHRIST a great feast in his own house. But
MATTHEW mentions neither great nor feast, nor his own house: but only this,
As Jesus sat at meat in the house. Matthew. 9. 10. That a man would imagine it
as soon to have been in another man's, as in MATTHEWES house; neither by his
words can any gather, that he so much as feasted CHRIST, much less that he
made a great feast. Often do holy writers put that upon record, which may
seem to blemish them in plain and clear manner, if they report what makes
for their praise, it is done covertly and closely; as JOHN writing of himself,
speaks as of another. Ioh. 13. 23. That there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one
of his Disciples whom Jesus loved. They that love not to hide their sins, yet
love to hide their own praises. This savors not of a carnal spirit A carnal
spirit is a boasting and a vaunting spirit, that loves both to hear and tell
what seems to make for it is own praise and honor. Such a spirit was
NEBVCHADNEZZARS. Dan. 4. Is not this great Babel, that I have built for the
house of the kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty. Base worm, how like a God? yea, the King of Tyrus dares take the
name of God, and vaunt of his own great wisdom and understanding, whereby he
has gotten his riches, Ezekiel. 28. The Pharisie cannot pray, but he must tell
GOD of his great works, Luke 18. He cannot give alms, but he must have a
trumpet to tell men, Matthew. 6. Most men will proclaim every one his own
goodness, but a faithful man who can find? Prou. 20. 6. If they that
proclaim their own goodness were faithful, where might they not be found, a
man might find the Pharisie to be faithful by his trumpet. Learn we then
this humble modesty of the Apostle, we lose our praise while vain gloriously
we seek it, and GOD seeks it whilst we in humility seek it not. Ioh. 8. 50.
I seek not mine own glory, there is one that seeks and judges. As on the
contrary, if we seek our own glory, there is one that sees and judges.

See how deeply people stand indebted to their The deep engagement of people
to their Ministers.
faithful Ministry, is more then can be recompensed with all a man's
substance. See who are the greatest creditors, and the greatest debtors that
are. Thou owe unto me even thy self. People owe not only their goods, Gal.
6. 6. but even themselves. How many are there, whose righteousness comes short
of the righteousne of the Pharisees, I pay tithe of all that I possess, Luke
18. 12. Many pay the tithes not of all they possess, as being afraid happily
of being Pharisaicall, though PAVLS precept enjoin no less, Gal. 6. 6. but
only think they owe the tith of goods legally tithable, and paying those
(though no better then those Jews, Malac. 3. 8.) how richly think they that
they have discharged their debt due to their Ministers. But be it, that thou
indeed do faithfully discharge the debt of maintenance, and art not therein
wanting; yet one thing is yet wanting, Thou owe even thine own self, Thou
art still in debt. Therefore the Galatians would have plucked out their eyes,
to have done PAVL good. Gal. 4. 15. And no marvel: good reason that men should
owe themselves to those, who spend even themselves for them. And I will gladly
spend, and be spent for you, 2 Cor. 12. 15. And so dear are people to their
careful pastors, that they could be content not only to spend their pains
and bodies in preaching, but if it were possible even to deal their very soul
unto them, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7. 8. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were
willing to have imparted unto you, not the Gospel of God only, but also our
own souls, because ye were dear unto us. Is it not reason, that so much
should be owing as was lent. If they lend and spend so much, no marvel if
peoples debt be so great. Nay, yet more, Ministers do not only give
themselves unto, and spend themselves for their people, thereby engaging them
to the debt of themselves, but even do give people themselves unto themselves.
We say of mad men, They are not themselves, and being recovered, they are come
to themselves. So may it be said of persons unconverted, that they are not
themselves, they are both out of their way, and out of their wits, and
therefore of the repenting Prodigal it is said, Luke 15. 17. And when he came
to himself. Now what brings men to themselves, but the ministry of the word
which brings men to repentance. If then Ministers bring men to be themselves,
good reason that men should owe even themselves unto them.

If the debt so great, the more shame for people, the performance and payment
is so poor. If thou owe thy self, then much more thy goods. The body is
better then raiment, a man's self greater and better then all his outward
goods. If then thou owe the greater, why do thou withhold the lesser. The
acknowledgement of the greater debt, is in the payment of the lesser: I seek
not yours, but you. 2 Cor. 12. 14. but yet Ministers should find both us and
ours, us in our obedience, ours in our recompense. The Galatians that would, if
it had been possible have plucked out their eyes for PAVL, would never have
stuck to have plucked out their purses to do him good. Never think that they
will pluck out their eyes for their Ministers, that will not so much as open
their eyes to look compassionately upon their necessities. They have great
cause to suspect that the Ministry has not wrought upon their hearts, who
acknowledge not the debt of their persons; they acknowledge not that, that
being taught, make not him that teaches partaker in all their goods.

The drift of this Reuocation being a full remission Mercy to be used in
exacting of debts.
mercy in exacting debts, where no ability of payment. If ONESIMVS had been
able to have restored, or repaied, or repaired the loss and damage his master
sustained by him, PAVL would not have thus pleaded for remission, and offered
himself a surety for the payment. Even the conscience of GODS dealing with us,
should as well teach us moderation to our poor brethren, in forgiving their
debts, or forbearing at least, as well as in forgiving offenses. How many
merciless creditors are there, that take the poor debtours by the throat,
with rigid arrest, Pay me that thou owe me, and has no more mercy to
forbear, then the debtour has ability to pay. It would go hard with thee, if
the Lord should imprison thee till thou had paid the utmost farthing. Be ye
merciful, as your heavenly father is merciful. Luke 6. 36. Even thy pecuniary
debts, are but penny-debts to those talents which he has pardoned thee. It is
indeed a Parable which we find, Luke 7. 41. 42. but yet that creditors fact
should be exemplary, who when his creditors had nothing to pay, he forgave
them both. If morgages, in cases of extreme necessity, ought to be released,
as we have a clear case, Neh. 5. 3. 11. then much more ought rigorous exaction
of debts to be forborne,

VERSE. 20. Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee, or let me enjoy this fruit
from thee, in the Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord.
THis verse contains a most emphaticall repetition of his former petition,
with the strength of a new argument thus. That which will rejoice and refresh
mine heart, thou ought to do: but this the receiving and remitting of
PHILEMON will do. Therefore ought thou to do it. Which reason being full
of holy passion, may be more largely thus amplified. Howbeit, as an Apostle
and a father, I might enjoin thee as a son, yet as a brother I do entreat
thee, do this for me as thou tendrest my comfort and joy in thee: do this
refreshment to me, an aged and toyled prisoner of CHRIST JESUS, even for his
sake I beg it, refresh my bowels in the Lord.

Christians should be careful to do those things, Christians should aim at
the ioying the hearts each of other.
this ground does PAVL urge PHILEMON to this duty of receiving ONESIMVS. So
every member of the same body not only reioices at the good of his
fellow-member, but aims at that which may be for the comfort of his
fellow-member. It is unnatural for one member to vex and grieve another. GOD
threatened the Israelites for sparing the Canaanites, that they should be pricks
and thorns in their sides. It better becoms Canaanites to be thorns to
Israelites, then Israelites to be thorns in each others sides. In the world
ye shall have affliction, Ioh. 16. 33. yea, and from the world shall we have
sorrow, but from the Saints of GOD should we have refreshment and rejoicing.
They shall have cause of sorrow enough from the worlds malignity, the rather
therefore should every one study how to assuage those sorrows, by ministering
mutual comforts each to other. It is a great joy to one Christian, to see
another religious, 2 Ioh. 4. 3 Ioh. 3. 4. It is a great joy to one Christian,
to see another zealous and forward in the service of GOD, Psalm. 122. 1. I
rejoiced when they said, Let us go up to the house of the Lord. It is a great
joy to one Christian, to see another forward in the works of bounty to GODS
house, 1 Chronicles. 29. 9. The people rejoiced when they offered willingly, and
David the King also rejoiced with great joy. It is a great joy not only to the
Angels in heaven, Luke 15. but even to the fellow members on earth, when we
turn from any sin by repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 9. It is great joy to good
hearts, to see others orderly and constant in holy services, Coloss. 2. 5.
rejoicing and beholding your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in
Christ. To all these particulars are we bound, therefore because we are bound to
rejoice, not only our own, but the hearts of all GODS people. Here
particularly it binds people to obey those that have the oversight of them,
that they may do it with joy, and not with grief. Heb. 13. 17. It binds
children to be wise and gracious, For the father of the righteous shall greatly
rejoice, and he that begets a wise child shall have joy of him. Prou. 23. 24.
and my son, if thine heart be wise, mine heart shall rejoice, even mine.
Prou. 23. 15. Thus should children do that which might rejoice the hearts of
their parents, people that which might the hearts of their Ministers, and one
Christian that which might rejoice another.

But far are they from this, that rather Minister Ezekiel. 13. 22. That they
made the hearts of the righteous sad, may be truly taken up against many
private people, who by forsaking their first love, and returning to their first
sins, and by careless and unconscionable courses, causing the Gospel to be
evil spoken of, do grieve and make sad the hearts of all good people. We
must not grieve the good spirit of GOD, Ephesians. 4. 30. we grieve him not only
then, when we grieve him in our selves, but when we grieve others in whom the
spirit of GOD is, and so are greeuers of the spirit, when we grieve the spirits
of the righteous. Might but this one thing be thought upon, it would be a good
stay in time of temptation. Am not I bound to refresh the bowels of GODS
Saints, and shall I pierce their bowels? Am I not bound to rejoice their
hearts, and shall I now give my self liberty in these follies, which will sad
their souls? If thou regardest not thine own peace, yet regard their joy. Or
if thou will not rejoice, yet do not grieve them, or if thou will not joy
them, joy not theirs, and thine own enemies. They were wicked ones that
grieved the heart of DAVID, Psa. 119. 158. I beheld the transgressions, and was
grieved because they kept not thy word. It best becomes such persons to grieve
GODS Saints. No less culpable in this kind are many people in the sadding of
the Pastors heart, not only by their non-proficiency and unfruitfulness, but
by their obstinacies, and cross carriages, when on set purpose they will do
such things as they know will grieve their Ministers. PAVL glories of his
Thessalonians, that they were the crown of his rejoicing, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 19.
these are also crowns, not of rejoicing, but crowns of thorns, which pierce
the heads, yea the hearts of their faithful Ministers. PAVL here vrges
PHILEMON to do the thing he requested, because it would rejoice him, these
will do the clean contrary things to those they required, because they know
it will be matter of grief and vexation, and take more delight in ripping up
and rending, then in refreshing their Ministers bowels.

Learn what should be the special ground of our

Refresh my bowels.] The same petition in another phrase, Refresh my bowels,
that is, refresh me, and do this kindness to me, howeuer it may also be
applied to ONESIMVS as before v. 12. ONESIMVS being his own bowels, in
receiving ONESIMVS he shall refresh his bowels. But I rather take the former
to be the true sense.

See what great comfort and content Ministers Peoples obedience, how great a
refreshment to Ministers.
It is as their meat and drink. Meats and drinks do not more refresh, and
content the hungry, and thirsty man's bowels, then the obedience of people
refreshes the hearts of Gods ministers. Great is the labor of the ministry,
full of sore toil and pains, but yet all the pain is swallowed up with that
joy peoples obedience yields. My meat is to do my fathers will. Ioh. 4. It is
meat and drink to good hearts, not only to do, but also to teach the will of
GOD. But when they teach it, and see others thereby brought also to do it,
this goes as a refreshing oil into their bowels. Me thinks this might
somewhat move people to yield obedience to the Ministry of the word. Many
would often seem to pity us, and do acknowledge the toil of this
Ministerial business. Do thou pity the Minister indeed? Does it pity thee
to see his weariness, and how his spirits and strength are spent? out of thy
pity then refresh his bowels. Refresh him with thine obedience. This will
revive him after all his weariness, this will put life, and vigor, and spirits
afresh into him again, when he shall see his labor well bestowed. The joy in
the success of their labors fills them with more spirits, then the labors of
their body spent. Then is the Ministry a wearisome work indeed, when after a
great deal of sore labor, a man has no recreation or refreshment; but is
more wearied and tied with the sight of men's hardness, then with the hardness
of the labor. The only cordial and sweet refectiue, after the wearisome
work of the Ministry, is the success of our labors. Why then will men deal
thus unkindly with us, thus hardly and cruelly with us, to deny us our
refreshings after our labors? why deal men worse with us, then ordinary
servants; yea, then their beasts? Thy beast after his day-labour, wherewith he
is wearied and tired, he shall have his bait and lodging to refresh him, and
will thou not use thy Minister as kindly as thy beast? pity his great pains
and weariness, and recreate and refresh him with thine obedience. Many when
they see the labor of the Ministry, would give ease to the pains thereof, with
that speech of PETER'S to our Savior in another case, Matthew. 16. Master pity
thy self, what need you take so great pains? But to let pass that answer
given to PETER, fitly suiting with their counsel, Thou sauourest not the
things that be of God, but those that be of men, we desire them to pity and
refresh us by their taking of more profit, and not to be pitied or refreshed
by our own taking less pains. Their profit would ease and refresh us against
all our pains. This was CHRYSOSTOMES refreshment after his pains, Propterea
non Ad pop. hom. 9.
sentio docendi laborem auditorum lucro releuatus. Haec enim merces nos
reparare potest, and releuare, and alacres promptosque facere, etc. His
auditors gain so refreshed him, as to take away the sense of all pain in
teaching. Their profit was his refectiues and reparatiues.

In the Lord] The Lord indeed is the end and aim of all a Christians actions.
That as he has all things from the Lord, so he refers all things to the Lord.
He enioyes GOD in all things, and does all things in GOD. As he is nothing,
so he does nothing out of the Lord. If he rejoice, he reioyces in the Lord.
Phil. 4. 4. If he glories, he glories in the Lord, 2 Cor. 10. 17. he loves in
the Lord, Romans 16. 8 His works of mercy are in the Lord, Romans 16. 2. His
works of courtesy are in the Lord, Romans 16. 22. Yea, he marries in the Lord, 1
Cor. 7. 39. And indeed this is to walk with GOD when we have GOD with us in
all our actions: Then is he with us, when we do all in him, and with
reference to him. Otherwise are all carnal men's actions carried. They walk in
the flesh, in the lusts, in the hardness of their hearts, in the vanity of
their minds, in the ways that seem good in their own eyes. Their actions
are in the flesh, in the pride, in the vain glory of their hearts; yea, often
in Satan, but not in the Lord. We must first be in the Lord, and the Lord
must first be in us, before we can do any thing in him. They which are in the
flesh cannot do any thing in the Lord.

VERSE. 21. Having confidence in thine obedience, I wrote unto thee, knowing
that thou will also do more then I say.
Here is a secret prevention of an objection, that might arise in PHILEMONS
mind in another kind, then any of the other were. PAVLS importunity, and
often pressing, and earnest urging of PHILEMON, might happily have occasioned
him to nourish this hard conceit against PAVL, that he seemed to be suspicious
of the truth of his religion, as if he were void of the power of it. What needs
all this ado, might happily PHILEMON think, what needs so many arguments,
such eager pressing, such importunity? Do you think that I am so hard to be
entreated? Do you think that I have such small sparks of grace and religion,
as that you hope not to prevail, but as the widow with the unrighteous Judge,
by mere importunity, as if nothing could be had at mine hands, except it were
wrung from me with the multitude and violence of arguments? If you were so
well persuaded of me, as I hoped you were, less urging would have served. Now
PAVL preuents this suspicion, and remooues this objection in these words, the
sum whereof rises to this. Do not conceive that this my importunity is from
any doubt or distrust of thee; I write not thus earnestly, as fearing thou will
not regard me: but on the contrary, because I have a special confidence in
thine obedience; yea, I profess unto thee, that my confidence in thee is such,
that I dare presume, that thou will do not only this which I desire, but
far more then I have moved thee in.

PAVLS confidence abates not his earnestness. The forwardest may, and must be
quickened.
error to put to our best strength. Even the most forward may be quickened.
Assurance of speed should not cool our fervor in our suits for GOD. GOD loves
not only obedience, but a cheerful spirit therein. Though we assured of men's
obedience, yet who knows what oppositions, reluctations and discouragements
may come from Satan, and a man's own corrupt heart. How seasonable then in such
cases may some motives be? and how may our warmth heat another? It is no
absurdity in this case to put spurs to a running horse. There is a great
difference between matters of knowledge, and matters of affection. A man's
knowledge is not so subject to an omission, as good affections to a remission.
In good affections there be floods and ebbs, sometimes glowing coals, and
sometimes but warm embers, and therefore there needs a continual blowing up
of the flame; but a man's knowledge is not subject to such sudden eclipses, and
it is far easier for a man to keep his knowledge at the same height and
pitch, then to keep his affections at the same bent. And yet for matter of
knowledge, see the care of PETER, 2 Pet. 1. 12. Wherefore I will not be
negligent, to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know
them, and be stablished in the present truth. The same was also the care and
mind of JOHN, 1 Ioh. 2. 21. I have not written unto you, because ye have not
known the truth, but because ye know it. If this care and diligence be to be
used, in putting men in remembrance in matters of knowledge, here there is
more setlednesse, how much more then in matters of affection, ought this care
to be had, where such often damps and eclipses? Because ye know it, therefore
I write, says the Apostle: so because men do good duties, ought they to be
admonished, to be urged and called upon. Men's forwardness to their duties,
should not make us backward in calling upon them, to do the same duties. It
is no absurdity to stir up a liberal man to bounty, a devout man to prayer,
an holy man to mortification. Especially the most forward, that is, not having
attained to that height and perfection required. Neither therefore must
Ministers think it a tedious work, nor people an idle work, to be urged and
pressed, to the doing of that they already do.

Mark what has all this while made PAVL. so Having confidence of thine
Zealous people make zealous Ministers.
obedience. Never has a man a better heart to speak, then where he has an
hope to speed. Surely, peoples zeal kindles Ministers, the forwarder they are
to hear, the forwarder are they to speak. PHILEMONS obedience puts heat and
life into PAVL, and makes him earnest. A man has but little heart to speak,
where he has but little hope to speed. When a man fears he shall have but a
cold suit of it, it chills his affections, and makes him a cold suitor. PAVL
could hardly have been thus earnest with a NABAL, as he is with PHILEMON.
Nothing encourages a Minister to be more zealous in preaching, then to have
his people zealous in hearing and obeying. DAVID'S thirst and earnest desire
after the waters of Bethlehem, made the three Worthies to break thorough the
host of the Philistims, and put life and courage into them. 2 Samuel 23. 15. 16.
Heat prouokes and procures heat. For as on the contrary, a dead cold people
make such a Minister, Is. 6. 5. I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell among
a people of polluted lips, and Hos. 9. 7. The Prophet is a fool, the
spiritual man is mad for the multitude of thine iniquity: So here the
forwardness and zeal of people is helpful to the Ministry, and the fire of
their zeal is able to warm the heart of one but cooly disposed.

It lets us see what oftentimes is a maine reason of defects in the Ministry.
Many complain, and justly Take heed to thy Ministry, etc. So many faithful
Monitours must needs make a faithful Minister. People may thank their own
disobedience, if their Ministers are not as they should be, Ier. 3. 14. 15. O
ye disobedient children turn again, etc. And I will give you Pastors
according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. Therefore had they not such Pastors, because they were
disobedient children; and the way to amend their Ministers, was first to amend
themselves, Turn again, and I will give your Pastors, etc. It is not enough
to pray, but they must turn also to the Lord of the harvest, if they would
have painful laborers. For peoples disobedience it is, that makes windy,
frothy, and vain Preachers. See to this purpose, Ier. 22. 21. 22. Thou
would not obey my voice, the wind shall feed thy Pastors. And then how
shall they feed with knowledge and understanding, when themselves are fed with
wind?

See the credit, yea the honor, that conscience obedience puts upon a man.
PAVL makes no Conscience breeds credit.
question, but to prevail with PHILEMON, because he knew him ever before to
make a conscience of yielding obedience. PHILEMONS good conscience works PAVLS
confidence. It is a great honor, when our carriage is so good, as that an
honest man dare be confident in us. It is the honor of the virtuous wife,
Prou. 31. 11. that the heart of her husband trusts in her. It is no less the
honor of a Christian, that a man may trust and presume upon him. Many have
lost their credit in the world, and what may be the reason? Nothing else, but
their greater loss and shipwreck of a good conscience. Credit and a good
conscience are shipped both in one bottom. There cannot be a wrack of
conscience, but with the joint loss of a man's credit. Be jealous and
suspicious of thy self, when thou see an honest man shy and suspicious of
thee. It is suspicious thy credit is but sandy, when an honest man dares not
build upon it. A man cannot have a better evidence of his approved honesty,
then when good men dare be confident in him, especially in cases of obedience.

Knowing that thou will do more then I say.] Charity believes, and charity
presumes the best, and the most. The former experience of PHILEMONS obedience,
made PAVL thus confident, that PHILEMON would be so far from coming short of
that he requested, that he would do more.

The property of a gracious and an enlarged A good heart deals not illiberally
and michingly with God.
to give GOD no more then his just dues in extremity, but enlarges it self so,
as to go further, then it is tied by express commandment. There are some
particulars, for which we have not a direct Text, but only rules in the
general; as how often a man should pray privately in a day, how much he is to
give in alms, and some other such things of this kind. Now in this case,
where there is not so express a rule, a good heart will be sure to go rather
with the furthest, then to come short; and will rather do more, then less;
Thou will do more then I say. So Luke 2. 41. not only JOSEPH, but MARY also
went up to Jerusalem every year, at the feast of the Passover. Now there was
no express commandment for MARY to come, for the commandment enjoined the
males only to appear, and yet MARY comes to. Her love and devotion to the Lords
worship, was a sufficient Law. As she in the ceremonial, so CHRIST in the
moral, did more then the Law required. The Law requires to love GOD above all,
and our neighbors as our selves. CHRIST did more, he loved his enemies not
only as himself, but above himself, giving himself to death for them, which
the Law requires not. Such should our free-hearted disposition be in our
obedience to GOD. Indeed the Law requires more then we can do, we abhor
works of supererrogation, and we can do nothing, but GOD has required it of
us. But yet so should we be affected toward the Lord, as that rather then we
would do less, we would if it were possible, even do more. And for such
things which are not directly commanded, to be so far from hutching and
shrinking, as rather to go with the farthest, then to do with the shortest.
So that I may say in this case, as our Savior in another, Mat. 6. 40. If any
man will take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also, and if any man would
compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. So here, If GOD require of
thee to give to the poor a penny, give him twain; if he require a shilling,
to the maintenance of the Ministry, give him five; if he require of thee to
pray twice a day, rather then fail pray thrice a day; if GOD require thee to
preach once a Saboth, rather the fail preach twice. So bountiful is a
gracious heart, it does not stand articulating with GOD: It will give him with
the most, rather then the least measuring the same measure to the Lord, which
it has from the Lord. The Lord gives unto us, not only beyond our deserts,
but beyond our desires, even more, and above that which we are able to ask or
think, Ephesians. 3. 20. A good heart therefore hates so base and illiberall a
requital, as to return, though a short, yet not a shortened measure of
obedience. In this case it were good for us to do as the Jews in the keeping
of their Saboth, who because they do not know the precise moment in which the
Saboth begins and ends, therefore begin it an hour the sooner, and end it
an hour the later, and this time they call additionem de prafano ad sacrum.
Not to dispute the lawfulness of their fact in that particular, without
question in all doubtful and undetermined cases, it is best to do with the
most.

It serves then to check the base niggardize of that care not how much they
have from, how little they give to the maintenance of the Ministry. A good
heart we see would feign (if it were possible) do more then GOD requires. How
much more will it do more then man requires. Because the law of GOD and man
requires maintenance of the Ministry from tithes: therefore many, though never
so well able, think themselves freed from maintaining the Ministry, because
they have no tithable goods, it may be themselves living upon the usurious
tithes of ten in the hundred. Heerin give they evidence of their hearts
unsoundness, for if a good heart would (if it could) do more then GOD
requires, surely it would not keep it self within the narrow and straight
compass of man's prescription.

VERSE. 22. But withal prepare me also a lodging, for I trust that thorough
your prayers, I shall be given unto you.
HItherto of PAVLS suit and request for ONESIMVS, this verse contains a suit
or request concerning himself, to provide, or prepare him lodging, set forth
by the ground of it, his hope of deliverance out of prison, which hope is
illustrated by the ground of it also, the means of his delivery, through your
prayers. Though also in this verse there may be a secret motive for the
receiving of ONE SIMVS. For if PAVL should shortly come to PHILEMON, and find
how little he had regarded his former suit, with what face could PHILEMON look
upon PAVL, it were enough to estrange PAVL from him. And who would not
willingly receive ONE SIMVS, coming as PAVLS harbenger, to provide him
lodging. Though indeed PAVL make him his harbenger, more out of a desire to
procure him welcome, then out of any state or greatness in himself. It is
therefore but a weak ground for the Popish Apostolical Legates, to have their
harbengers, Prince-like, to go before them, for to take vplodging for them,
though some of their Interpreters would deduce the original of it from this
place. First then for the request, prepare me lodging.

Religion is no enemy of hospitality, nay it requires it. Hospitality well
becomes the Saints, Romans Distributing unto the necessities of the Saints,
Religion is hospital.
giving your selves unto hospitality. It is a title of great worth, which the
Apostle gives GAIVS, Romans 16. 23. Gaius mine host, and of the whole Church.
Many give happily unto the necessities of the Saints, but yet give not
themselves unto hospitality. The most conceive it a ministerial duty, because
PAVL requires that a Minister be harborous, 1 Timothy 3. 2. and they cry out upon
Ministers, that they are not harborous and hospital, whilst therein indeed
they are guilty of a double iniquity. For first, they do what they can, to
abridge them of their means, by customs and impropriations, and so would have
them then impropriate this duty to themselves. Indeed Ministers should be
eminent, as in all other good works, so in that of mercy: but otherwise, it is
no more proper to the Ministry, then other duties there required of the
Apostle, as sobriety, modesty, gentleness, etc. Nay, such are the injuries
oftentimes of the world, that they are fitter to have hospitality shown to
them, then by them. It is a duty lies upon all able ones, people as well as
Ministers, Heb. 13. 2. forget not to lodge strangers. And our Savior to all
his at the last day, I was a stranger, and ye lodged me. But the truth is,
most men mistake this duty, and glory much in their hospitality, whilst they
keep great houses, and have great resort, and company flock to them; but in
the mean time, no entertainment of poor religious distressed strangers, that
are in want and in necessity: to receive and provide for such is hospitality.
As for the other, the rich glutton kept such hospitality, like enough that
gallants, and good fellows, and the Gentlemen of the country, had
entertainment enough at his table, but LAZARUS must be gone, there is neither
meat nor lodging for such as he is. He that feeds gluttons shames his
father, Prou 28. 7 So he that feeds and entertaines vicious and idle persons,
to spend their time in gaming and reuelling, graces not, but shames religion.

This request is set forth by the ground of it. I trust I shall be given unto
you, or freely given unto you, for so the word implies.

Whether PAVL were ever delivered, it is uncertain, and likely that he rather
was put to death at Rome, yet he hopes to be delivered.

We must ever depend upon GODS gracious administration, not known to him, how
it might please GOD to deal with him, therefore till he know he depends upon
God with hope of his liberty. Though he neither desire life or liberty simply,
but in reference to Gods Church.

Ministers of the Gospel, and their liberty to do good, is a fair gift and
blessing of God, I shall be given Ministers liberty a fair gift of God.
to you. It is a great gift of GOD to send his Ministers to his Church, Ephesians.
4. 8. 11. When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave
gifts unto men, that is, singular and special gifts, as tokens of his favor,
such as Princes bestow upon the day of their solemn inauguration. And what
might those gifts be? He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers. It is no less
gift to restore them to their liberties, and execution of their functions, when
the unjust tyrranny of man has hindered and difabled them. Not only the gifts
of Ministers, but their liberties are the gift of GOD. Oh if men knew but this
gift of GOD, and were answerably thankful for so great a gift. Satan enuies
the Church this gift, and it grudges him that any of GODS Saints, but much more
that any of his Ministers should have their liberties.

This hope of PAVLS is set forth by the ground of it, through your prayers.

Even the greatest and most gracious stand in need of the prayers of their
inferiors. The greatness of The most gracious need their inferiors prayers
men's graces and places does not free them from needing the prayers of meaner
ones. Nay the greater either places or graces, the greater is their need of
others, helpful prayers. Satan follows that policy of the Syrians, 1 King.
22. Fight neither against small, nor great; save against the King of Israel.
The sharpest brunt of Satan's enmity is bent against those, especially whose
graces and places are highest in the Church. The more Satan's malice is against
them, the more our charity should be toward them; the greater our charity,
the more our prayers for them. Therefore PAVL often desires the prayers of
others, Ephesians. 6. 18. 19. Pray for all Saints, and for me. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25
Brethren pray for us. The prayers of inferiors are beneficial to their
superiors, whether in outward things, as 2 Cor. 1. 10. 11. or inward and
spiritual things, as Romans 15. 30. GOD is no respecter of persons; he regards
the hearts, not the conditions of those which pray unto him. It is not in the
court of heaven, as in Kings courts, where only the Nobles and great
personages may speak for a man, poor plain men can do a man no good with
their petitions: But here it is otherwise, the poorest and meanest Christian
may do a man a pleasure, by speaking for him in prayer to the King of heaven.

Great comfort to inferiors, that GOD has so ordered

Despise we not then our inferiors, but esteem well of him that has the
least measure of grace. Who would despise a favorite in court, whose good word
may pleasure him. Even the meanest officer in the Kings house shall be regarded
of a petitioner, though a better man, if he may pleasure him in his suit.

Note the duty of the Church toward Ministers, Ministers to be prayed for.
Therefore PAVL in the closure of diverse Epistles, does not only pray for
them, but prays them to pray for him. Neither desires he this only for
complement in his valediction, but desires it to be done heartily and
earnestly in his behalf, Romans 15. 30 Also brethren, I beseech you for our
Lords Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the spirit, that ye would strive
with me by prayers to God for me. 2 Cor. 1. 11. So that you labor in prayer
for us. See Heb. 13. 18. 19. If PAVL, an Apostle who had the immediate
assistance of Gods spirit, stood in such need of their prayers, how much then
do our Ministers now. And great reason is there to challenge this duty at our
hands.

1. In regard of the love, which is due from people And why?
to Minister. People are bound to love their Pastors. Now love seeks not her
own things. He that prays not for his Minister, loves him not.

2. In regard of their great charge wherewithal they are betrusted. A charge
of greater worth then all the world, the soul of their people. The greater the
charge, the greater the gifts required to discharge it. The more graces they
need, the more earnest should our prayers be to procure the same.

3. In regard of their danger, as in the former point. They are in danger of
Satan's malice, he knows if he can but with his tail cause these stars to
fall from heaven, that he shall cause the greater darkness and the greater
scandal: their corruption in life or doctrine will be exemplary and
infectious. They are also in danger of unreasonable men. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. The
greater reason that they should be helped with our prayers.

4. Pray for your Ministers, because in praying for them you pray for your
selves, and procuring their good, you procure your own. The better Ministers
are, the better is it for people: many people complain of the insufficiency of
their Teachers, and as many Ministers may complain of the negligence of their
people. For if they were more diligent in prayer, their Ministers would be
more able to preach, if they would pray more for them, then should they be able
to preach better unto them.

Quest. What be the things we should beg for them?

Answ. PAVL specifies some particulars, wherein he would be remembered. As

1. Free and bold utterance of the Gospel. Ephesians. 6. 19. Col. 4. 3. 4.

2. Free passage of his Ministry 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1.

3. Deliverance from wicked men. Romans 15. 30 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.

4. Other particulars are mentioned. Romans 15. 31. Pray then for all these, pray
for the guidance and blessing of Gods spirit with and upon them, pray for all
such gracious endowments and enablements, as may fit them for the work of the
Ministry.

This taxes peoples gross negligence. Some there are that never pray for
themselves, it is no

But a worse sort there is, that is so far from praying

To condemn yet another sort, who in steed of praying for us, do prey upon
us, and are so far

More particularly yet observe.

The power and efficacy of prayer. I trust that thorough your prayers, I shall
be given unto you.] It is a The efficacy of prayer.
key that will unlock as heaven, so likewise the prison door. It is not so much
petitioning to NERO, that PAVL trusts upon, as to the Lord Prayer opened
heaven, Luke 3. 21. what wonder if it open a prison? Prayer proves the same to
Gods children oftentimes, that the Angel did to PETER, Acts 12. It opens the
prison gates, and brings them forth. Nay the truth is, it was prayer rather
then the Angel, which brought PETER out of prison, Acts 12. 5. So Peter was
kept in prison, but earnest prayer was made of the Church unto God for him. The
Church first sent up their prayers, before GOD sent down his Angel. And Acts
16. 25. 26. At midnight Paul and Sylas prayed unto God, and suddenly there was
a great earthquake, so that the foundation of the prison was shaken* and by and
by all the doors were opened, and every man's bands were loosed. Oh sweet
comfort to all the imprisoned Saints of GOD. The enemies of the Gospel have
not them in so sure hold, as they make account of, they have a key about them,
which if GOD see it good, shall open the prison doors, and unloose their
bands, and set them at liberty. There is more power in the Saints prayers, then
in their enemies threatenings, and so more comfort in the one, then matter of
fear in the other. There is no prison so strong, but prayer (if God see it
good) is able to open. It is no less powerful to fetch down the prison
walls, then the trumpets of Ramms-hornes were to fetch down the high walls of
Jericho.

Observe the special means of restoring GODS I trust thorough your prayers I
shall be given unto you. The prayer of the righteous avails much, Iam. 5. It
avails to the restoring of PAVL to his liberty, if GOD see it fit for him. If
the prayer of one righteous man is of such force, what are the joint and united
prayers of the whole Church, Heb. 13. 18. 19. Pray for us, and I desire you
somewhat the more earnestly that ye do so, that I may be restored to you the
more quickly.

I trust thorough your prayers, I shall be given, that Prayer merits not.
which we have from God by prayer, are free and frank blessings. Though we
obtain blessings by prayer, yet not for our prayers, that is, not by the merit
of our prayer. Prayer is a begging of blessings from the Lord, what can the
beggar deserve by his begging? Though we give when one beggs, yet not for any
worth in his begging, but we do it out of mere compassion, without any
desert on his part. The prayer of the righteous avails much, not simply
because prayer, but because the prayer of the righteous, whose person is
justified and reconciled in CHRIST, and accepted in his merits. If our prayers
were meritorious, then could it not stand with GODS Justice so much as to
defer, much less to deny them sometimes. What Justice is it to keep back
that from a man, which is his due by desert. He that obtaines no more then his
prayers deserve, will find little heart to pray, and may spare the labor of
thanksgiving.

VERSE. 23. There salute thee Epaphras my fellowprisoner in Christ Jesus.

24. Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow laborers.

25. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.


THE conclusion of the Epistle, which is spent in salvation and in prayer.
First, he salutes PHILEMON from EPAPHRAS, MARCUS, etc. EPAPHRAS is mentioned,
Coloss. 1. 7. and 4. 12. MARCUS is mentioned, Acts 12. 12. ARISTARCHVS is also
named, Acts 19. 29. 30. and Coloss. 4. 10. DEMAS is well known by that place,
2 Timothy 4. 10. And LVKE no less known by his Gospel. Concerning salutations
and their manner, we heard before verse 3. Here then only observe the
descriptions of these men. EPAPHRAS is called his fellow-prisoner in CHRIST
JESUS.

PAVL in prison has a fellow. GOD leaves not Gods prouides for the comfort of
his children in the prison.
of the prison with the communion of Saints. PAVL ioyed not that EPAPHRAS was
imprisoned, he had rather he might have been preaching at Colossus: but yet
herein see the good providence of God, and therein might PAVL joy, so disposing
that EPAPHRAS being imprisoned, should be imprisoned in the same prison with
PAVL. If PAVL had been alone in one prison, and EPAPHRAS in another, they had
been deprived of that sweet communion which now they had together in prayer,
in conference and holy discourse. Herein therefore did God graciously provide
for them both, to be fellow prisoners, not only in the same cause, but
happily in the same house, because he sends salutations from EPAPHRAS. Yea, God
does not only provide EPAPHRAS to be a fellow-prisoner to PAVL. but rather
then they shall want fellows, God himself will bear them company in their
prisons, Genesis 39. 20. 21. And Joseph's master took him, and put him in prison,
in the place where the Kings prisoners lay bound, and there he was in prison:
but the Lord was with Joseph. Who would not be in JOSEPH'S prison, to have
JOSEPH'S companion? I am not alone (says our Savior Ioh. 16.) for the father
is with me. GOD will provide fellows for his prisoners, if not, he will
recompense the solitariness of the prison, with the sweet fellowship of his
Spirit.

The cause of EPAPHRAS imprisonment is laid down, In Christ Jesus. And indeed
it was their fellow-ship in the cause, rather then in the house, that makes
PAVL give him the title of fellow-prisoner. Happily there might be others in
the same prison for other causes, which justly deserved the prison, but they
were none of PAVLS fellow prisoners, because though put into the same prison,
yet not for the same cause. What else might be here observed, was handled
before verse 1.

The other four are described by another title of fellow-ship,
fellow laborers, to wit, in the work of the Ministry.

The ministry then is a painful and a laborious calling. It is not a calling
of ease or pleasure, Mat. 9. Pray The Ministry a laborious and a painful
calling.
to the Lord of the harvest, that he would thrust forth laborers into his
harvest. Ministers are laborers, yea harvest laborers, which of all others
are the sorest, no labor more toylesome then the labor of the harvest man: of
all others it is the most sore sweating labor. Surely, the sweat of the
Ministry exceedes the sweat of other callings, and with the sorest labourer,
the Minister eats his bread in the sweat of his brows, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. Now we
beseech you brethren, know them which labor among you. Men ordinarily will not
know them, nor know their labor, yet GOD himself takes notice of it for a
labor. Reu. 2. 2. I know thy works, and thy labor. GOD acknowledges the
Ephesian Angels labor. The Elders that rule well of double honor, especially
they that labor in the word and doctrine. 1 Timothy 5. 17. we shall find, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9. two sore words joined together, (...), ye remember our labor and
our travel. Hereupon in Scriptures so often compared to soldiers,
shepherds, husbandmen, nurses, all callings of no ease. The pastoral toil in
the cure of soul, is no less then was IAAKOBS in the keeping of LABANS sheep.
Genesis 31. 40.

To stop the foul mouths of such persons, that Matthew. 6. 28. They labor not.
But the point is not, what is the labor of some persons, but of the calling
and office. And yet indeed many may be said to labor hard enough, and yet
are guilty of idleness: we labored day and night, viz. even with our hands.
So far go many with PAVL, that well may take up that speech of themselves,
Zach. 13. 5. I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman: but yet they leave him in
that which follows, And preached unto you the Gospel of God, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
They labor indeed, but in their own fields, more then in the Lords.

We have therefore a right to means and maintenance, for the labourer is worthy
of his hire. It is vile Iam. 5. It is a sin that brings a curse, Ierem. 22.
13. Woe unto him that uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him not for
his work. Upon the heads of how many must this woe needs light, who are
guilty not only of injustice, but of sacrilege also, in detaining and
withholding the wages of Gods workmen and laborers. Why should Gods Ministers
be worse dealt with then our oxen? why should they work muzzell'd? a plain
sign that men are as horse and mule, in that they prefer the labor of their
oxen before the labor of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5. 17. They that labor in the
word and doctrine, are worthy double honor, the honor of countenance, the
honor of maintenance. Some will give their countenance to the Ministry, so
they may be spared in matter of maintenance. Some the Law forces to give
maintenance, therefore with CAIN, Genesis 4. 6. they cast down their countenance.
Some will give neither countenance nor maintenance. How single a number is
there of those that will give the double honor of countenance and maintenance.

Let not such as undertake that calling dream of ease, pleasure, and of an
idle life. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. These a Minister and a Labourer in the Gospel.
Prepare for, and buckle to thy labor that intendest, and entrest into the
Ministry. How many are Ministers, that yet no laborers, and so occasion the
world to judge Ministers, as PAVL the Cretians, to be flow bellies. If they
were so taken up, that were idle in the market place, why stand ye here all
the day idle, what sharpness must they look for, that stand idle not in
marketplace, but in the vineyard. It is ill being idle in the marketplace,
it is worse in the vineyard. Alas for us, that we should be so dainty to
shed a few drops of sweat, for those for whom Christ sweat drops of blood; yea,
shed his heart-bloud. Arrant shame for us, that LABANS sheep should be more
painefully attended then CHRIST'S.

The second part of the conclusion is in prayer. The grace of our Lord Jesus.
etc. In which prayer we may consider

1. The person prayed to. 2. The thing prayed for.
The person prayed to: our Savior, described by three titles. 1. Our Lord. 2.
Jesus. 3. Christ. The three titles which were in the glad tidings of the
Angel. Luke 2. 11. A Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

1. Of the title Lord before, verse 3.

2. Title, JESUS, that is, a Savior. The reason of which name we find Matthew.
1. 21. Thou shall call his name JESUS, for he shall save his people from their
sins.

Quest. How is he our JESUS, and how saues he us?

Answ. 1. By satisfying GODS wrath and justice Christ is our Jesus and Savior
in five respects.
for us, and undergoing that curse which was our due, Acts 20. 28. CHRIST has
purchased his Church with own blood. By his death and bloodshed, he has
saved and redeemed us from the curse, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us.

2. By his obedience to the Law, and fulfilling of it. And thus CHRIST may be
said to be the end of the Law, Romans 10. in regard of that perfect obedience he
yielded thereunto. And so he tells JOHN, that it became him to fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. 3. for salvation stands in two things. 1. In a freedom
and deliverance from hell. 2. In the possession of heaven and eternal life.
CHRIST by his death merits the first, and by his obedience in fulfilling the
Law merits the second. For though CHRIST'S death had delivered us from death,
yet if obedience had not been yielded to the Law, still the curse would have
been upon us, excluding us out of heaven, in regard of the Laws
transgression. Whereas now the Law being translated from our persons, to the
person of our Mediator, he has perfectly fulfilled it, and so is our JESUS by
his obedience, both in his sufferings, and in our doings.

3. By the remission of our sins, He saues us, by pardoning us, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
and Col. 1. 14. In whom we have redemption by his blood, that is the
forgiveness of sin.

4. He saues us by destroying the Kingdom of sin in us, and by dis-throning
our corruptions, so that we are no longer servants to sin, but to him. He
saues us from the commanding power, as well as from the condemning power of
sin. He saues us from the dominion and service of it. See Romans 6. 11. 12.
and 8. 2.

5. He saues us not only from the dominion of sin in this life, but from the
very presence and inhabitation of it in the life to come. Here he saues us,
that it reigns not; there he will fully save us, that it shall not so much as
have a dwelling in us.

All these may be reduced to two heads, namely, that CHRIST saues us.

1. By his merit, he meriting by his death freedom from the curse and remission
of sin, and by his obedience eternal life for us. 2. By his efficacy,
whereby in this life he daily mortifies the body of sin, and wholly in the
life to come abolishes the same.
Acknowledge we then CHRIST for our JESUS. The Papists are like the Jews, they
trust in Moses. Ioh. 5. 45. They would come into Canaan by MOSES, as well as by
IOSHVA, and so make themselves their own Iesusses, while they will be saved,
partly by CHRIST, partly by themselves. CHRIST will be JESUS alone, or not
JESUS at all.

The third title is CHRIST, a Greek word, the same with the Hebrew MESSIAH,
signifying Anointed. So that JESUS CHRIST is as much as a Of the name Christ,
and what it signifies.
Savior anointed. And so this name comprehends all his three offices of King,
Priest and Prophet, inasmuch as all these three under the Law were invested
into their offices, by the rite and ceremony of annoynting; and that typically
to shadow out, that CHRIST was ordained of his father, our spiritual King,
Prophet and Priest. Priests were anointed, Leuit. 21. 10. Kings were
anointed, 1 Samuel 10. 1. Prophets were anointed, 1 King. 19. 16. This name
CHRIST therefore teaches, that he is the true anointed King, Priest, and
Prophet of his Church. Acts 4. 27. Thine holy son Jesus whom thou have
anointed. Acts 10. 38. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost,
and with power. Psalm. 45. 7. God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above all thy fellows. There is his annoynting as King, which is
also found Psalm. 89. 20. And CHRIST applying that Isa. 61. 1. to himself, Luke
4. 18. shows thereby his annoynting as a Prophet: yea, and this is to be
marked, that the three offices of King, Priest and Prophet, though they were in
some doubled, yet never had any one all of them jointly but CHRIST, who was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows. MELCHISEDEC was King
and Priest, SAMVEL was Priest and Prophet, DAVID was King and Prophet; but
only CHRIST King, Priest and Prophet: He alone was indeed that anointed
One, at whom all legal unctions poynted. For the better understanding of this
point, consider breefly four things.

1. The parts of his annoynting. They are two. First his consecration, whereby
he was set a part to do the office of a Mediator between God and Man. For
as the Priest under the Law, Exodus 30. 30. when he was anointed, was thereby
separate and set apart for the office of the Preist-hood, and consecrated unto
that function. So Christ's annoynting consists first in this, in being from all
eternity set apart to be a Mediator between God and man, and the King, Priest
and Prophet of his Church. Secondly, the effusion or pouring forth the fullness
of Gods spirit and grace, into his manhood. And therefore Isa. 61. 1. and Acts
10. he is said to be anointed with the Holy Ghost. Wherein Christ's
annoynting excells the annoyntings of all Kings, Priests and Prophets, inasmuch
as the oil wherewith he was anointed, was the spirit of God it self.

2. The object of this annoynting. The object or subject is the whole person of
Christ, God and man. He was anointed in both natures: for he was anointed as
Mediator, now he is Mediator, not as man only, but in both natures, and
therefore in both natures anointed. But this must rightly be understood. He
was anointed in the Godhead, only in regard of the first part, which was
Consecration, by which he was designed to be Mediator.

3. The manner or measure of his annoynting. That we find Ioh. 3. 34. He has
not received the spirit by measure, that is, he has received the spirit of
GOD in a wonderful, extraordinary measure. Indeed we all receive the Spirit
in measure, Ephesians. 4. 7. But unto every one of us is given grace according to
the measure of the gift of Christ. But his measure was a measure well heaped
and thrust, even so great a measure, as a finite nature was capable of.
Therefore Psalm. 45. 7. Thy GOD has anointed thee with the oil of gladness
above thy fellows. More grace has he then all others, yea all that others
have, they have from him, for of his fullness we all receive. Yet was not this
measure infinite, for the manhood is finite.

4. The benefits we have by his being CHRIST, that is, Anointed. They are
these three.

1. We are hereby made Kings and Priests, Revel. 1. 6.

2. We by his annoynting, are also anointed with the gifts of GODS spirit, 1
Ioh. 2. 27. and hence GODS Saints are called GODS anointed, Psalm. 105. 15. and
we called Christians from CHRIST. And if CHRIST had not been anointed,
neither should we. For the oil that was powered on AARONS head, Psalm. 133. 2.
ran down upon his beard, and the border of his garments, but yet first upon
his head, and then to the garments. So we are anointed, but our head first,
and so this oil of grace runs down from the head unto all the parts of this
mystical body.

3. Hereby GOD smells a sweet savor of rest in all our sacrifices, duties and
services. CHRIST being anointed with that sweet oil, and we being in him are
a sweet savor unto the Lord, yea hence have our prayers their sweetness.
Whatsoever touched any thing that was anointed with the holy oil, was holy.
Exodus 30. 29. yea. the altar of incense was anointed with holy oil. CHRIST is
that anointed altar, our incense, our prayers laid and offered thereon,
thereby come to be sweet and holy.

By this may thou try whether CHRIST be in

This sweet ointment should draw our affections to him, Cant. 1. 2. They are
wise and blessed virgins

That CHRIST our head is anointed, it is great with the oil of grace, even
whole rivers of this oil are powered forth upon him, and that not for himself,
but for us. Whence we are called Christians, because every one of us in our
measure shall be made partakers of this unction. If we be members of CHRIST'S
body, though the meanest, the lowest, the foot, the very skirts of the garments
thou can not miss of thy share in this oil. It will run down all the
body from the head. Thus we see what a sweet name this name of Christ is, his
name is indeed as an ointment powered out. Cant. 1. 2.

2. The thing prayed for. The grace of etc. of this before verse 3. Thus as
PAVL begun with prayer, so ends he with prayer. So should all our actions be
both begun and closed with prayer. So Col. 3. 17. And whatsoever ye shall
do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. Therefore the
Israelites, when they removed and pitched their tents, they did neither
without prayer. Numb. 10. 35. 36. Prayer should begin, and prayer should end
the day. Then if our actions prove successful, we may rejoice in the
success as of GOD, of whom we begged it; if not, we may comfort our selves
in GOD, to whom we commended both our selves and our actions.

Gratias Domine Jesus.
THE SCHOOL OF AFFLICTION.

OR A SERMON OF THE benefits and blessings of AFFLICTION.

By the same Author.

Schola crucis schola lucis. printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for Robert Millburne.

1618.

A Table of the lessons taught in the School of Affliction.
Affliction teaches 1. The unconverted, Conversion. 2. The Converted.

1. The right bearing of afflictions in Faith, Obedience, manifested in
Patience. Cheerfulness.

2. The right use of afflictions, which is in regard of
Knowledge of our Corruptions. Graces.
Practice in
Renewing graces decayed, which are General Faith in Gods Providence. Promise.
Repentance in the acts concerning Sin past, which are four Sight of sin
upon examination. Humiliation Inward in the Judgment. Affections.
Outward in our carriage to God. Man.

Invocation. Reformation.
Sin to come. Wisdom in prevention.

Special, which are Thankfulness. Compassion. Preparation for death. Desire
of the life to come.

Increasing graces renewed.
THE SCHOOL OF AFFLICTION.
PSALM. 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastizest, o Lord, and teach in
thy Law.
AFTER that the Prophet had preferred his complaint to the Lord against the
adversaries of the Church, from the first verse to the eighth, he leaves God,
and in a sudden conversion of speech, turns himself from the party complained
unto, to the parties complained of, the cruel oppressors of the Church,
terrifying them by those just judgments of God, which in fine must overtake
them, and so consequently cheering and comforting the distressed Church. But
because the distress of the Churches enemies, of it self could be no
sufficient matter of comfort unto her, therefore a second argument of further,
and that far more effectual consolation, is added in this twelfth verse
drawn from the happy condition of the Church, even whilst she is thus
ouerborne with these tygerly and tyrannical persecutours. And the argument is
propounded by the Prophet, not directing his speech to the Church, but rather
in his own person bringing in the Church suddenly turning her speech from her
enemies, with whom she was expostulating, to God himself, and breaking forth
into this patheticall exclamation, Blessed is the man whom thou chastizest, o
Lord, and teach in thy Law. From the coherence of which words with the
former, we may observe,

That the outward miseries of our enemies is but to a further meditation of her
own case and condition. Wherein she seems thus to reason with her self.
What though these mine enemies shall at length be brought to their deserved
ends? what though I know they be reserved for shame, and confusion? what ease
can this bring to my mind now dejected, and cast down in it self, and
happily thinking it self as miserable as these my foes? now these doubtful
thoughts something disquieting her, further comfort is ministered unto her by
the Spirit of God in this verse, whereby she is enabled to answer that
objection she made against her self, namely, that she is assured, that as her
adversaries case is wretched so is her own most happy and blessed. Let no man
then rest in that comfort which the ruin of his and Gods enemies ministers
unto him, but rather in that which his own conscience assuring him of
happiness affords unto him, that so (to use the words of the Apostle Gal. 6.
4. though in something a diverse sense) he may have rejoicing in himself and
not in another. Yet I deny not but great comfort may be taken out of the
confusion of the Churches wicked enemies. The righteous shall rejoice when he
sees the vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, Psalm.
58. 10. But yet this joy which arises from the seeing of Gods justice executed
upon others, as it is nothing so full, and so perfect as that which proceeds
from the feeling of his mercy in our selves, because it is something curbed
with grief, in seeing the destruction of our own flesh; so neither of it
self without this latter is it any thing sound, or sincere, as not being able
to uphold and sustain the wearied, and feeble knees of our fainting souls.
Therefore it follows in the eleventh verse of that former Psalm, So that a
man shall say, verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a
God that judges in the earth. The righteous could not so heartily, and
sincerely rejoice if there were not a reward for him, as well as vengeance for
the wicked.

Again, it is worth our observation to consider Blessed is the man whom thou
chastisest, o Lord. What may be the reason of this? Did the Lord stand in need
of his comfort? why does he not rather direct, and address his speech to his
own soul, and the rest of his brethren, and fellows in affliction to whom
this comfort belonged? Surely hereby to teach us, That comfort is then most
sweetly and sensibly felt and apprehended, when we lift up our hearts in holy
meditations to him who is the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation.
Otherwise though arguments of never so great comfort offer themselves unto us,
yet hardly shall we stay, and quiet our troubled minds by them, unless in
thinking on them, we do withal think on God, breaking our minds to him in
prayer, and meditation, and familiarly communicating unto him; what be those
points of comfort we have thought upon. Have we therefore in our afflictions
furnished, and fortified our hearts with arguments of consolation, and
meditations of comfort out of the word? let us pour them forth into the Lords
bosom in prayer, and then we shall feel the sweetness of them indeed, then
shall we find our former comforts doubled, and tripled upon us, even as the
beams of the sun receive an increase of heat by reflection. It being the
Lords usual manner in this holy exercise of prayer, and coming with him to
shed abroad his love abundantly into the hearts of his children, thereby
reviving, and raising up their dead and dejected spirits, which Paul right well
knowing having commanded us to rejoice, and that evermore even in our
afflictions, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. 17. adds immediately a commandment of praying
continually as the only special, and sovereign means whereby sound joy, and
comfort is carried, and conveyed into the soul of man. Would we then rejoice,
and refresh our spirits cast down, and lift them up again with consolatory
meditations? See then that thou remember the Apostles rule to pray continually,
and in prayer to acquaint God with those thy meditations, prayer being that
which wringeth, and presses out that sweet juice, and precious liquor of that
heavenly comfort which is contained in them. They be the sighs of the Spirit
in prayer, that fetch out the comforts of the Spirit in the word. And to them
only, and to no other are the doctrines of the word comfortable in affliction,
who in prayer can utter them to the Lord with the same spirit wherewithal the
Holy Ghosts Secretaries wrote them. And this is the reason that many learned
men which know the comforts of the word yet reap no benefit by them, because
they want the Spirit of Prayer to utter them. This one meditation of the
blessedness of the man chastised, and taught by God, yeeldes comfort only to
him, who with this holy Prophet can in the apprehension of this meditation
advance his heart to God, and say, Blessed is the man whom thou chastizest O
Lord, etc. And surely good reason is there if we rightly consider of it, that
matter of comfort conceived in our hearts should be uttered in prayer unto the
Lord. For whence was it that any matter of comfort came into thy mind? Was it
not of God who has this as part of his style to be the God of comfort? was it
not he that poured those comforts into thy soul? good reason then thou
should again pour them forth into his bosom, and return them back to
him that is the Father, and fountain of them. And in truth such is the nature
of spiritual comfort that being shed into our hearts it so enlarges, and
dilates them that it makes them to pour forth themselves in prayer unto the
Lord. The sweet comfortable rays of this sun when once they have lighted
upon our hearts by our reading, and meditating in the word do forthwith again
rebound, and reflect back upon God from whom they came, by our earnest, and
fervent prayers sent up to him. And therefore no sooner could the Lord minister
an answer to the objection which rose in the Prophets mind out of his former
argument of consolation, but the Prophet forthwith as ye see returns this
answer to the Author thereof, therein giving him the glory of that comfort
which he reaped by it, saying, Blessed is the man, etc.

So much of the scope and coherence of the text. The words themselves contain
an attribution of blessedness to the man chastised of God, and taught by him in
his Law. In the man therefore, here pronounced blessed, two things are
propounded: 1. He is one of Gods chastised: 2. He is one of Gods taught. And
here for the right understanding of the words, we must remember that
blessedness is given in both these respects jointly together, and not
severally in regard of each. The Prophets meaning is not, that he who is
chastised of God, is blessed; and so also, he that is taught of God; but that
he in whom both these meet together to be both chastised, and taught of God,
that such an one is blessed. In the handling of the words I will speak of these
two points.

1. Of the qualities of the man here blessed by the Prophet. 2. Of that
blessedness which here is ascribed unto him in regard of those qualities.
For the first the qualities are two:

1. He is chastised of God. Here it may seem strange, that the Prophet
speaking of afflictions which came by wicked men unto the Church, as appears
by the former part of the Psalm, should yet ascribe them unto God. But we
must know that it is not the Prophets meaning hereby any thing at all to excuse
the wicked Persecutors, who besides the evil of punishment in correcting the
Church, which is Gods just, and holy work, are to be charged with the evil
of sin, in that they do this work of God blindly, and ignorantly, propounding
to themselves the satisfying of their own malicious, and spightfull
affections, as the only end of that they do, and no such thing as God
intends. What then?

Surely hereby he would teach us that Gods holy Is there any evil in the
City, and I have not done it? Amos 3. 6. And yet we know that many, if not
most evils are done by some bad men, or other. But for all that God will have
all acknowledged, as his own doing. Hereupon Joseph, though of his envious
brethren sold into Egypt, says, that God sent him thither. And Job robbed of
the Sabaans, says, The Lord has taken away, Job 1.

The Lords hand in the punishment inflicted on his by evil ones, shows it
self in these three actions:

1. From all eternities he did appoint them, Act. 4. 28. to do whatsoever
thine hand, and counsel has appointed to be done.

2. He being able to hinder and restrain them, does not, but willingly suffers
them, yea he withdrawes that which might hinder, as his retaining grace which
before kept them in, and other outward impediments, yea he sends those things
which he knows through their corruptions will further, and forward them, as
outward objects, and occasions.

3. He orders, and disposes these punishments, turning them to his own
glory and the good of his Church. Thus Joseph said of his selling into Egypt,
God disposed it to good, though his brethren thought evil against him, Genesis
50. 20.

This must teach us patience when we are wronged, Ashur is called, Is. 10. This
use David made, Ps. 39. 10. Absalon rising up against him, I was dumb and said
nothing, because it was thy doing. And this made him so patiently endure
Shimies railing, not suffering his servants to take revenge, because the Lord
had commanded him to curse, 2. Sam. 16. 10. As in that persecution of the
tongue, so likewise in the persecution of the hand it may be said, The Lord
has commanded Tyrants to imprison, to impouerish, to beat, to banish, and to
behead his children. And therefore as noble men condemned to die, do patiently
suffer the stroke of death at the hands of the base Executioner, therein
showing their subjection, and obedience to their Prince, so must we patiently,
and meekly endure all the indignities, and injuries of wicked worldly men,
therein giving testimony of our obedience to God, who uses them as
instruments of his justice to correct us. In corrections coming immediately
from Gods hand we are not ordinarily so impatient, as in those which come by
means of wicked instruments. The reason is, because in these latter, we cast
our eye too much upon the malice, hatred, and spite of the instruments, and
cannot therein behold the Lords holy hand striking us with these rods. But if
we would consider that it is God that scourges us by them, we should then be
ashamed of our folly, in being angry at the rod without any regard of the
Smiter, in snarling like dogs at the stone, never looking at the flinger. Yea
we should then frame our selves to greater patience, putting our mouth in the
dust, and giving our cheek to him that smites us, because it is the Lords
doing more then his, and though he be unjust, unmerciful, unfaithful, and
unkind, yet God therein is most just, merciful, faithful, and kind unto us.

2. It is a doctrine of singular comfort to the children Pilate; further then
it is given them from above, Ioh. 19. A merciful father, though he take a great
swindging rod into his hands to correct his child, yet he will not spend it
wholly upon his tender childs back, he will strike but softly, and so will
not do him all the hurt which he might, using the rod to the uttermost; when
the poor child sees such a terrible rod, he might justly be afraid, knew he
not that his loving Father would so handle the rod, that it should do him no
more harm then a smaller one would. When God lets loose upon us bloody and
boisterous Tyrants, whose throat is an open sepulcher, whose feet are swift to
shed blood, and whose mercies are cruel, this might well dismay us, knew we
not that God by his ouer-ruling hand did moderate, and restrain them.
Otherwise, if as their power is the rod, so their malice were the hand that had
the ordering thereof, there would be no hoe with them, but they would soon
make a final dispatch, and riddance of Christians from the face of the earth.
But since God is the hand wherein these rods are holden, we need not to fear
the greatest of them, though living rods. For howsoever David, 1. Sam. 24.
oppose the hand of God, and man, and says, It is better to fall into the hands
of God then of man, yet we must know, that even that which David calls the
hand of man, is the hand of God. And therefore, although it be better for us to
fall into the hand of God immediately correcting us, then mediatly by evil men;
as it is better for the child to have a box on the ear with his fathers hand,
then to be scourged with a whip, and that God shows more mercy ordinarily in
the former kind of correction then in the latter, yet mercy also does he show
unto us in the latter, in that he bridles, and curbs, yea oftentimes
mollifies, and mitigates the minds even of most fiery, and furious
adversaries, suffering them to do no more then he himself has appointed.

2. Thing to be considered in this our blessed man, is, that he is taught of
God in his Law. And teach in thy Law.

Here note, that happiness is not ascribed to the

But more particularly to handle this teaching here spoken of. Teaching implies
both a Schoolmaster, a Teacher, instructing, and lessons taught. In this
Teaching, both these points are here noted out. And for the first, namely, the
Schoolmaster, it is two fold: 1. The outward affliction and chastifement, Whom
thou chastisest, teach, that is, whom by chastising thou teach. 2. God
himself, who is the chief, and principal head Schoolmaster, the other being
but an inferior, and subordinate one, Whom thou teach. And for the second
point, The lessons taught, they are included generally in those words, In thy
Law. To begin then with the Schoolemasters, and first with the first.

The first Schoolmaster is Affliction. A sharp, ears, and hearts, that no
doctrine can enter, unless it be pegged, and hammered, and knocked into us by
the fists of this sour and crabbed Schoolmaster.

The second Schoolmaster is GOD himself. taught of God. For it is his Spirit
that quickneth, and animateth the outward means, which otherwise are a dead
letter. And this is the reason that many men have rather grown worse by their
afflictions, then any thing better; because Gods Spirit has not gone with the
affliction, to put life and spirit into it, as Moses observed in the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4. Ye have seen, says he, all that the Lord has
done before your eyes in the Land of Egypt, the great tentations which thine
eyes have seen, etc. Yet the Lord has not given you a heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. And David complains also of
them, Psalm. 106. 7. Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt. They saw
them, but understood them not, because God gave them not an understanding heart.

The second point is, The lessons taught this blessed man by the two former
Schoolemasters, Whom thou teach: What? In thy Law.

Here observe generally, what it is which afflictions, Word: as the
Schoolmaster teaches his scholar the same thing by the rod, which he
teaches by words. The Word then is the storehouse of all instruction. Look
not for any new diverse doctrine to be taught thee by affliction, which is not
in the word. For in truth, herein stands our teaching by affliction, that it
fits and prepares us for the Word, by breaking and subduing the stubbornness
of our hearts, and making them pliable, and capable of the impression of the
Word. Wherefore, as the Apostle says, that the Law is our Schoolmaster to
Christ, Gala. 3. because the Law by showing unto us our disease, forces us to
the Physician. So likewise it may be said, that afflictions are Schoolmasters
to the Law. For whilst we are at ease, and in prosperity, though the sons of
thunder terrify us never so much, with the fearful cracks of legal menaces,
yet are we as deaf men, nothing moved therewith. But when we are humbled, and
meekened by affliction, then is there way made for the terrors of the Law, then
do we begin with some reverence of attention to listen, and give ear unto
them. When therefore God sends us any affliction, we must know that then he
sends us to the Law and to the Testimony. For he teaches us indeed in our
affliction, but it is in his Law. And therefore if in our affliction we will
learn any thing, we must take Gods book into our hands, and carefully and
seriously peruse it. And hereby shall it appear, that our afflictions have
been our Teachers, if by them we have felt our selves stirred up to greater
diligence, zeal, and reverence in reading, and hearing the Word.

We see then the general lesson which affliction teaches; namely, that which
is in the Law.

But this general, comprehends within his large circuit many specialls worth
the knowing. In special therefore, to consider of the particular lessons which
affliction teaches those whom it makes blessed, we must know that they are
very many. They may be reduced to two heads, according to the sorts of the
scholars that learn: which being Afflictions lessons 2.
of two kinds, either such as are to be converted, or such as are already
converted, answerably are the lessons taught, some for the one sort, some for
the other.

1. For the first sort, Those who are yet to be converted. They by their
afflictions are taught this 1 To the unconverted.
one worthy lesson, worth all the lessons in the world; namely, to convert and
turn to the Lord, to repent and believe the Gospel. This affliction teaches
us not of it self, for of it self it teaches us rather aversion from God,
then conversion unto God: of it self, it rather drives us further from, then
draws us nearer unto Christ. But only by accident, and occasionally, even as
the Law shows us Christ, which of it self shows us nothing but damnation. For
in this very point, as in many others, affliction is the Deputy and Vicar of
the Law, working with us in the self same manner. For it is that hammer that
breaks our rocky hearts, and makes them to see, and feel even by our own
experience, how vile and miserable we are: and so when we are, thus brought to
the sight of our own misery by sin. God, who can draw forth water even out of
the rock, takes occasion thereby to stir up in our hearts, a serious
consideration of, and an earnest desire after that remedy of our misery, which
is propounded in the Word.

This lesson did Manasses learn in the school of affliction, being before a
very monster of men. The prison was a means of his spiritual enlargement. The
bolts of iron wherwithall he was fast fettered, and deteyned under the power of
his adversaries, unloosed the bonds and fetters of sin, wherewithal he was
held captive under the dominion of Satan. Thus was it also with the Iaylor,
Act. 16. unto whom the danger of his outward man, was a happy means of the
safety, and salvation, both of his outward and inward man. The sword
wherewithal he would have thrust himself thorough, was that which whetted,
and sharpened the sword of the Spirit to enter piercingly, and deeply into his
heart and conscience. A scholar of the same form was Paul, Act, 9. who when
he was unhorsed by Christ, and stricken down to the ground, and smitten with
blindness, then, even by means hereof, was spiritually lift up, to the high
dignity of a son, and servant of God. His bodily blindness opened the eyes
of his mind, and made him in meekness of spirit to humble himself under his
hands, whom he was persecuting, and to say, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? It were to be wished that afflictions might find such happy scholars now
a days amongst us, that by them our ears, as Job speaks, being opened to
discipline, being before uncircumcised, and shut up, we might justly say with
Paul, 1 Cor. 11. that we are judged here, that we should not be judged
hereafter. Then might we safely assume to our selves the blessedness here
spoken of, when being chastized we have also been taught of the Lord, to
abhor our former sinful wicked courses, and in truth of heart to turn unto
the Lord. But it is far otherwise, men's hearts are like the Smiths stith, the
more God strikes them with his judgments the harder they are, like to those
Jews Amos complains of in his fourth chapter: I have sent these and these
judgments, as pestilence, famine, sword, yet have not turned unto me. And why
should ye be smitten any more, since ye fall away more and more. Isay 1. 5.
Such Non-Proficients are our unconverted ones in this school of affliction.
For he that profits in this inferior school stays not long here, but is
presently sent to an higher school, even the school of Christ himself. And
then, oh thou wicked wretch, shall thou show thy self a good scholar of thine
affliction, when by it thou art made a Disciple of Christ. For this is all this
Usher teaches thee, to enter into the school of the Arch-Teacher JESUS CHRIST.
Then therefore have thou learned thy lesson, and so become one of those happy
ones of our Prophet here, when thou art but lifting thy foot over the
threshold of Christ's school, bringing with thee a mind desirous to learn,
ready to deny it self, tractable and teachable, saying with Paul, Lord, what
would thou have me to do?

And thus have we learned what is the lesson of affliction to the unconverted.

2. The second kind of lessons taught by affliction, 2. To the converted. 2.
is to those already converted. And these lessons are of two sorts.

1. Concerning the right manner of bearing affliction.

2. Concerning the right profit, and holy use of afflictions. These lessons are
proper to the converted, it being impossible for a man unconverted to leave
either of them.

For the first, namely, the right manner of bearing 1. Right bearing. 2.
afflictions. This lesson is necessarily required for the attaining the
happiness here pronounced upon the chastised of the Lord. Heb. 12. If ye
endure afflictions, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons. Every one
has not the happiness of Gods son sealed up unto him by affliction, but he
only that endures it, namely, in the right manner.

Now concerning the right manner of suffering, the Lord teaches two lessons to
his children, and that even by means of their afflictions.

1. That they suffer them in faith, hanging on 1. In faith.
Gods providence, and promises for comfort, deliverance, and turning the
affliction to our good. Hab. 2. 4. The Prophet having foretold great troubles,
shows the people the right manner of their behavior in those troubles. What
may that be? The just man shall live (even in the midst of those troubles) by
his faith. And here the special work of our faith, is to strive and struggle
with doubts arising from infidelity, which we do, when with Job we cry out,
Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee, Job. 13. 15. And with the
poor man in the Gospel, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.

2. That they suffer them in obedience, in submitting 2. In obedience. 2.
their wills to the will of God. 1. To his revealed will in his Word, the
Commandment. Luke 9. of taking up the cross. 2. To his will revealed in the
event of the cross that is upon us. For nothing comes to pass, but by the will
and appointment of God. When therefore any cross befalls us, we must subject
our wills to the will of God, that has disposed that cross unto us, saying
with Christ, Not my will, but thy will be done. Hence, Heb. 5. Christ is said
to have learned obedience by his sufferings; that is, he had experience of his
obedience in suffering, to the will and good pleasure of his Father.

Thus obedience shows it self especially in these two points.

1. In Patience, whereby we are content without 1. In Patience.
murmuring, or grudging, to resign our selves into Gods hands, to be dealt
withal even as it shall seem good to him, both for the time and measure of
our affliction: Luke 21. By your patience possess your souls, there in
prescribing them a course of an orderly carriage in those afflictions there
foretold. Now God will account of us, as of patient sufferers, if finding
impatiency to arise in our affections, we shall be displeased with our selves
for it, saying with David, Psalm. 62. Yet my soul be silent to Jehovah.

2. In cheerfulness, when willingly we shall 2. In cheerfulnes.
put our necks under this yoke, and willingly kiss the rod. If we go to
the cross, as Bears to the stake, we suffer not in obedience. For the
obedience that God requires and loves, must be cheerful. Therefore the
commandment of suffering says, Let him take up his cross, which phrase
argues cheerfulness. He must not let it lie only on his back, being laid
on; which argues patience: but he must even himself stoop, and take it up,
which implies willingness. This cheerfulness receives a special increase
in those afflictions which we suffer for the truths sake at the hands of evil
men, whereupon the Apostles rejoiced in their scourgings. Yet this
cheerfulness is not so to be found in any, as that he shall not meet with
many sore fits of dumpish heaviness, but as before it was faith to encounter
with infidelity, it was patience to wrestle with impatiency, so likewise here
it is cheerfulness, with the Prophet David, to chide and check our souls
for our vncheerefulnesse, Psalm. 42. 5. Why art thou cast down within me, O my
soul.

Thus much of the lessons touching the right manner of suffering: now come we
to those, which are concerning the right use of affliction.

2. The second kind of lessons, which affliction teaches the Converted, is in
making an holy use 2. Right profiting. 2.
of their afflictions. And this use of our afflictions is either in regard of
knowledge or practice.

1. For knowledge: By affliction we learn a 1. Knowledge. 2.
twofold knowledge.

1. We come by affliction to have knowledge 1. Of corruption.
of our corruption, and a very clear sight of our weakness and infirmity,
because then there is matter for our corruption to work upon. Therefore,
howsoever before it lay hid, and couched in the heart, and so undiscerned of
us, yet being provoked, and stirred up in us by affliction, it plainly
manifests it self. A glass of water being shaken, many motes ascend, and
appear, which before were not seen. A man would hardly believe that there
were so much infidelity, impatience, techines, frowardnes, rebellion,
faint-heartednes, love of the world, and many such like corruptions in him, as
he shall find and feel in himself in the day of his affliction. We then, who
in the day of our prosperity thought our selves, by reason of the pride, and
deceitfulness of our hearts, goodly and glorious Christians, strong in faith,
of great meekness and patience, able to deny our selves, and this world, by
that trial which we have of our selves in affliction, are taught the clean
contrary. In this regard afflictions are called Tentations, Iam. 1. because
they try us what is in us, and discover, and detect the close corruption of our
hearts. So Moses witnesses to the Israelites, that God humbled them by want in
the Desert to prove them, and to know what was in them, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Let this
then be the first lesson we labor to learn by our afflictions, thereby to
take a more through notice of our manifold corruptions, that so we may learn
to abate that high conceit of our strength, remembering Salomons Proverb, If
thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is but small, Prou. 24. 10.

2. We come by affliction also to an experimental 2. Of Grace.
knowledge of that measure of spiritual grace which is begun in us. For this
is the time wherein Grace shall be even forced to show it self in us, if there
be any: for our corruption exasperated by the affliction, begins to work
presently. And then if there be grace in us, contrary to this corruption, (as
always one contrary is provoked by another) it will be also exasperated by the
contrariety of corruption, to oppose and encounter it. There is no time for
the Martialist to show his valor, but in the time of war. The time of
affliction therefore, being the time of the spiritual war, and conflict
betwixt the flesh and spirit, then questionless, howsoever before the spirit
lay asleep in us, yet then he will awaken, and stir up himself, and declare
his mighty power, and puissance in us. Hence it is that afflictions, by Peter,
are called the trial of our faith, 1. Pet. 1. 7. And as they are the trial of
our faith: so of our patience, hope, obedience, courage, constancy, etc.
Therefore, Romans 5. 3. Afflictions are said to bring forth patience: because by
them, this grace of Gods Spirit is stirred up in his children, and in their
afflictions they have experience of their patience. Afflictions, in themselves
bring forth impatience, and by this impatience of the flesh, the patience of
the spirit is excited. Our Savior is said, Heb. 5. to have learned obedience
by the things which he suffered. How was that? Being before disobedient, did
he then learn to become obedient? Not so: but he learned it experimentally,
that is, he had trial of his obedience, which was always in him before, but
had not so fit an occasion to show it self till then. So in the same sense may
it be said, that Abraham learned love by that grievous affliction of being put
in fear of losing Isaac. For so God tells him, Gene. 22. Now I know that thou
love me. God knew it before, but the meaning is, that now by manifest
experience it was made known indeed, that Abraham did in truth love God.
Therefore it is said that God tempted Abraham, in giving him that commandment
of sacrificing his son. By affliction therefore we come to have knowledge of
that grace to be in us, which before we either knew not to be in us at all,
because there is no occasion for it to show it self, unless in affliction: as
how can a man show his strength, unless some burden be laid upon his back;
or else we knew not to be in our selves in that measure, and sincerity that
it was: because there can be no occasion of so sound a trial of affliction.
Reave. 13. 9. John having foretold some grievous persecution, he adds, Here
is the faith and patience of the Saints. That is to say, Here is matter now for
the faith of the Saints to work upon. Hope is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6.
whose use is specially in a storm. For though in prosperity we may have
experience of our faith, and hope, and love to God, yet nothing so soundly and
thoroughly as in affliction. In prosperity there is place for the Devils
objection, Does Job serve God for naught? but in affliction it is taken away,
and it appears plainly that we love God, serve and obey him, not as
mercenaries for our own profit, but even for himself. Again, though in our
prosperity we might have some experience of the sincerity of our graces, yet
not of that great measure of them which we have in affliction. Many of the
Martyrs that before they were in question, quaked and trembled, after GOD
brought them into the field were emboldened, and strengthened to suffer the
most exquisite torments their adversaries could devise. While the corn stands
in the field, we may give some guess what it will amount to, but when it is
cut down and threshed out, the yield proves more oftentimes then we could
before possibly expect. So is it with Christ's harvest; till we be threshed
with the flayle of adversity, we cannot tell what increase of corn we shall
yield to our heavenly Master. So much for the use of affliction respecting
Knowledge.

2. For Practice; The use of affliction in matter 2. Practice. 2.
of practice, is either in renewing graces decayed, or else, in increasing these
decayed graces after we have afresh renewed them.

1. And first of all, our afflictions teach us to renew, 1. Renewing graces
decayed.
and take up afresh the practice of all Christian duties, which prosperity had
caused us to intermit. For oftentimes, the children of God being drunken, and
besotted with ease and prosperity, fall into dangerous Lethargies, and such
dead sleeps of carnal carelesnes, that they even forget God, and themselves.
Now by affliction, God coming and giving them a privy nip in their flesh,
awakeneth them, and causes them to return again unto themselves. So that in
this respect, affliction is to the children of God, as the prick to the breast
of the Nightingale, whereby she being awakened out of her sleep, sings most
melodiously. See how the Apostaticall Church of the Israelites, pricked with
the thorns of affliction, Hosea 2. 7. plays the Nightingale, sweetly singing
the song of her returning again to the Lord, her first husband. So the
Prodigal son, feeling the prick of famine, Luke 15. having been once a
member of the Church, a son living in the house of his Father, and afterward
running away, what is it that sends him home again, and makes him renew his
conversion? The present misery wherewithal he was pinched. To this purpose
excellently speaks Elihu, Job 33. 15, 16. that God in trouble rounds men in
the ear, that lie securely snorting in their sins, and so arouses them by
the noise of his voice speaking in affliction. Have we therefore being wise
Virgins, begun to slumber with the foolish? have we left our first love, and
decayed in the graces of the Spirit? then surely if affliction come unto us,
the lesson we are to learn, is to remember from whom we are fallen, to repent,
and do our first works, and to quicken those things that are ready to dye.

Now these decaying, and languishing graces, Which are 2.
which affliction calls upon us to revive, and stir up afresh in our selves,
are either general, and the maine foundation of all the rest, or else
special, depending upon the former.

1. The general and fundamental graces, the renouation 1. General. 2.
whereof affliction teaches, are Faith and Repentance.

And first, affliction teaches us to renew our 1. Faith. 2.
Faith, both in regard of Gods providence for this temporal life, as also of
his mercy for the life to come, in the salvation of our souls.

1. For the first; whereas in prosperity we having 1. In Gods providence.
all things according to our hearts desire, as health, strength, credit,
countenance, maintenance, we did too too much rest, and rely our selves upon
these, for the preservation of this transitory life: now when in affliction God
takes from under us these proppes, these stilts, and staves of our confidence,
then we are constrained by faith to fly unto him, and depend on his good
providence, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Therefore he humbled thee, and made thee hungry, that
thou might learn, that man lives not by bread, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God. This was the lesson God would teach the
Israelites by that hunger and want they endured in the Desert, namely, to call
back their confidence from the outward means of life, as bread, and to give
it wholly to Gods providence. This lesson also Paul confesses that he was
taught by his affliction, 2. Cor. 1. 9. We received the sentence of death in
our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in GOD who raises us
from the dead. We are all like proud beggars, who so long as we may have
relief at home, will not go seek abroad: as long as we have the outward
means to stay our selves on, we will not seek to God. But in affliction God
makes us give over our hold, in the means which he takes from us; and so
wholly to cast our selves by faith on him. When riches have taken unto the^ the
wings of the Eagle, and are gone from us; when our credit shall be cracked, and
our honor laid in the dust; when the precious ointment of our good name shall
putrify; when our dearest and nearest friends shall deceive us as a brook; in
a word, when all outward helps and hopes shall fail us, and we shall be left
destitute, and desolate, stark naked, and bestript of all, will not this make
us, denying all other things, by faith to catch hold on God, houering and
covering our selves under his wing? Yes surely: Then shall we be forced to say,
It is better to trust in God, then to have confidence in man, yea, it is better
to trust in God, then to have confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118. 8, 9. And with
Iehoshaphat, 2. Chro. 20. O Lord, we know not what to do, but our eyes are
toward thee.

2. Neither does affliction cause us to renew our 2. In Gods promise.
faith only, in depending upon Gods providence for these outward things, but
also in depending on his merciful promises, for the salvation of our souls.
For unless this latter act of our faith be renewed, it is impossible we should
renew the former. In Christ only come we to have right to temporal mercies;
and therefore none can have faith in God for his preservation in this world,
that has not faith in Christ for the remission of his sins. Afflictions
therefore teaching us to renew the former, do necessarily also cause us to
renew the latter. And as in this regard affliction stirs us up to renew our
faith, in believing in Christ, so also in another respect. When afflictions are
come upon us, Satan uses to descant upon them, and cast them in our teeth, as
arguments of Gods anger. Hereupon we are necessarily constrained to look to
our assurance, to search our evidences, to consider well on what ground we
stand, and to try our faith to the uttermost. Thus Job renewed his faith in his
affliction notably, by examining the soundnes of his former faith, and by
continuing in it after he had found it sound; not casting away his confidence,
but cleaving more forcibly to GOD then before, Lord, though thou kill me, yet
will I trust in thee, Job 13.

2. The second maine and general grace which 2. Repentance. 2.
affliction teaches us to renew, is Repentance. Now afflictions cause us to
renew our repentance, either in those acts which concern our sins past, or
those which respect sins to come.

1. The acts of Repentance respecting sin past, 1. is 4.
taught by affliction, are 4.

1. The first is to examine, and search our hearts, 1. Sight of sin upon
examination.
and so to come to a knowledge of them. For affliction preaches Gods wrath,
and Gods wrath necessarily presupposes some sin. The darkness of affliction is
a light whereby we find out sin. When we see things go not well without, we
are enforced to conclude that there is some disorder within, and to say with
the Church, Lam. 3. Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for
his sin.

And hereupon we proceed further, and say with the Church in the same place,
Let us search and try our ways; let us find out those sins for which we are
now rebuked. This is that which Elihu plainly teaches, Job. 36. 8, 9. And if
they be bound in fetters, and tied with the cords of affliction, then will he
show them their work, and their sins, because they have been proud. Before
these cords and fetters came, men would take no notice of their sins, but
slubbered them over as matters of nothing, soothing, and blessing themselves in
them: but when God comes with this scourge, he makes them enter into their
hearts, and ransack their consciences, and there to find out their close and
secret corruptions, which before they saw not. This did the grievous mortality
of the Israelites in the Wilderness effect in Moses, and others fearing God.
Psalm. 90. 8. Thou set our iniquities before thee, and our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance. God sets our iniquities before himself, when he
sets them in order before our own consciences. Psalm. 50. So was it with Job,
by means of his affliction possessing the sins of his youth; with the widow
of Sarepta, who cried out to the Prophet when her child was dead, Why art thou
come to bring my sins to remembrance? With Joseph's brethren, whose memories
being rubbed by affliction in Egypt, they came to see the greeuousnes of that
sin, which for the space of twenty years they had suffered to lie
unquestioned upon their consciences. And thus was it with Iaacob, who being
made odious in the sight of his neighbors, by the bloody butchery of his
sons, thereupon took occasion to search his family, and to find out that
secret idolatry which for a long time had lain lurking there. And thus ought it
to be with every one of us in the day of our affliction, to harken to the
commandment of the Prophet, Zeph. 2. 1. Sift, sift your selves, O Nation, not
worthy to be beloved. Enter we into a more serious consideration of our own
ways, and courses, that so we hunting, and ferreting out our corruptions out
of the close corners of our hearts, we may both see those sins which we could
not formerly espy, and may more clearly discern those which already have
been discovered unto us.

2. The second Act is truly to humble and deiect 2. Humiliation. 2.
our selves for these sins found out. This Humiliation taught by affliction,
is two fold.

1. Inward; which is first in the judgment, 1. Inward. 2. 1. In Judgment.
when we have a very base, and mean opinion of our selves, yea of that which
is most glorious and excellent in us. In prosperity we could nourish great and
high conceits of our selves, and admire our own beauty, and excellency: but
in affliction being taken down by God, we are urged to take down our selves
further, and in the sight of our foul deformed feet, to pluck in our Peacocks
feathers. Then with Job, though before justifying our selves we cry out,
Behold, I am vile, and abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job. 42. Then, with
the Prodigal child, though before thinking our selves to be too good to be
sons, we judge our selves scarce worthy the room of a servant. Then with
David, though before blessing our selves with the pomp and pride of our
glorious estate, we said we should never be moved: yet then by experience,
seeing our former vanity, we despise all the glory, and greatness of this
world, saying with David, Psalm. 39. 11. When thou with rebukes do chastise
man for iniquity, thou as a moath make his beauty to consume: surely every
man is vanity.

Secondly, this inward Humiliation is also in the afflictions, when in the
sight of our sins we have broken, 2. In affliction.
bruised, and bleeding hearts. This humiliation also has affliction always
wrought in the hearts of Gods children, Iere. 31. 18. I heard Ephraim
lamenting. Lam. 3. 20. My soul has them, namely, the gall and wormwood of
affliction in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

2. Outward; Which is declared in our outward 2. Outward.
carriage, both toward God and man. This also affliction will wring from us:
for it will bring us down upon our knees before God, and make us confess our
own unworthiness, as in Job, the Prodigal, and in Ephraim, Iere. 31. 18.
confessing his own vntamednes with tears. And Lam. 3. It makes a man to put
his mouth in the dust. It makes us also to be of an humble and lowly carriage
toward men, doing nothing that may savor of pride, contempt, or disdain, but
rather abasing our selves to our inferiors, and Lam. 3. giving our cheeks to
the smiters, and patiently and meekly, without desire of revenge, enduring many
opprobrious indignities. Hereof we have a notable example in David, who though
the King, yet being thoroughly humbled by that grievous affliction of Absaloms
treason, most quietly and contentedly suffered the base pesant Shimei to be
mire him with the dirt of his filthy tongue, restraining his servants from
revenge.

3. The third act of Repentance, which affliction 3. In vocation.
teaches us to renew, is, after that we have seen our sins, and in some good
measure have been humbled for them, to pray earnestly, as for life and death,
for the pardon of them, and for power over them. In prosperity we pray heavily
and drowsily, as though we had no life, but in our affliction this laziness is
shaken off. The sense of our present misery, sets an edge upon our prayers,
puts life and spirit into them: yea, it gives wings unto them, and causes them
to ascend aloft, whereas before they lay groueling on the ground. Oh! how
sauourly do we pray in affliction? how feelingly, fervently, and forcibly? Esaias
26. 16. Lord, in trouble how they visited thee? they poured out a prayer when
thy chastening was upon them. So fit and seasonable a time is affliction for
prayer: then it flows from us, and we can pour it forth; but alas! how
droppingly it comes from us in prosperity? Iam. 5. Is any man afflicted, let
him, above any other, pray. For he most of all feels his wants, and he most of
all has the presence of the Spirit, the only Schoolmaster of prayer, to help
his infirmities, and to stir up strong sighs, and cries, and groans
unutterable, Romans 8. 26.

4. The last and principal act of our Repentance, 4. Reformation.
which afflictions call upon us for, is reformation of those our sins, for
the which after we had found them out by examination, we humbled our selves,
and prayed earnestly for the pardon of them. Job 36. 10. Elihu having set down
the first act of repentance for sins past, namely, the discerning of the^ as
a fruit of affliction, adds also this last of reformation as another, He
opens their ears to discipline, and commands them to depart from
iniquity. So likewise Esaias 27. 9. By this, namely, the afflictions formerly
spoken of, shall the iniquity of Iaacob be purged, and this is all the fruit,
the taking away of his sin. So then afflictions, when by Gods Spirit they are
made powerful Teachers, they will not let us rest in seeing our sins, in
humbling our selves for them, in praying against them: but they will command
us, as Elihu speaks, to depart from iniquity, to leave and forsake our sins,
and to learn the contrary graces and virtues. This David felt in his own
experience, Psalm. 119. who before he was afflicted, went astray, but having
been nurtured in this School, acknowledges that it was good for him that he
had bin afflicted, because thereby he had learned to keep the commandments.
The blewnes of the wound, says Solomon, serves to purge out evil. Pr. 20. 30.
when we have felt the smart of sin, by our affliction, then like burnt
children will we dread the fire. In this respect affliction is compared in
Scripture to a Furnace, into which gold being cast, loses his dross, and comes
forth pure, and purged, 1. Pet. 1. 9. In prosperity we contract, and gather
together much soil and dross, which the Lord is feign to drive out of us by
the heat of this scorching fire, that so we might be pure, and refined metal
for himself, being made partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. Therefore
Lam. 3. are afflictions compared to a yoke, It is good for a man to bear the
yoke in his youth, because it tameth, and mortifies our wild, and unruly
corrupt natures, and makes us in all things pliable to the will of God. This
Purgatory therefore we willingly acknowledge, the Purgatory of afflictions,
whereby God scowres, and cleanses us from the draffe* of many noisome and
unsavory corruptions; and as it were by a strong Purge, empties, and euacuates
those superfluities of malice, envy, pride, security, wherewith we were before
surcharged. Let us all therefore examine our selves in this one point, whether
our afflictions have brought the quiet fruit of righteousness unto our souls:
whether the Niter and Fullers soap thereof has washed out our Leopards spots;
whether the rawnesse of our corrupt, and fulsome humors, have been taken away
after that we were sodden, and soaked in afflictions: For this is the maine use
of our afflictions. And that which our Savior said to the man healed, Ioh. 5.
do all our afflictions say to us, both at their coming; as also, and that more
especially at their departure, and farewell: Go your ways, and sin no more,
lest worse things come unto you. The want of this fruit is lamentable in many,
who, howsoeeuer in the extremity of their affliction, purpose, and promise;
yea, and solemnly vow this reformation, yet no sooner is the hand of God off
them, but with the dog coming out of the water, they shake their ears; and do
again with the Sow return to the wallowing in the mire.

And these be the acts of our Repentance in regard of Sins past.

2. There is another Act respecting sins to 2. Wise prevention of sins to
come.
come, which affliction also stirs up in us; namely, care to prevent them:
For afflictions, as they serve to reform sins past, so likewise to prevent
sins to come. Therefore are they compared to an hedge, Hos. 2. 6. stopping us
in our way that we can go no further. And this Paul shows in his own
example, 2. Cor. 12. 7. This was the end why God sent him the Thorn in the
flesh, to prevent pride in him, lest he should be exalted above measure in the
multitude of revelations. And hence it is that so many times in the children of
God, before honor has gone humility; before some great blessing, some
grievous cross; that by this means those sins, which through our
corruption, prosperity would have brought with it, might be prevented. If
David had been presently taken from the Sheepfold to the Throne, he might
happily have grown insolent, too forgetful of God, and his duty in
government: Therefore a long time before, did the Lord exercise him with many
sore afflictions, that so those mischiefs might be escaped. To the same
purpose was Joseph abased in the dungeon, before he was advanced to that place
of authority. So were the Israelites forty years wandering in the Desert; and
after that many years taken up with tedious wars, before they obtained the
peaceable possession of the Land of Canaan: and Moses forty years an exile,
and a keeper of sheep, before he was the Conductor of the Israelites to the
promised Land.

So much for the renewing of these two maine and General graces of Faith and
Repentance.

2. Besides the stirring up of these, affliction 2. Special 4.
further awakens in us many special, and particular graces; and among them
specially four.

1. Our Thankfulness for his mercies, which 1. Thankfulness.
we forgot in our prosperity, though daily before our eyes. But by affliction,
in the want of them, perceiving the worth of them, we are stirred up to a more
regardfull estimation of them; and so are we taught to be truly thankful
for them when again we do re-obtaine them. After long sickness, in the want
of health, feeling the sweetness of health, how shall we then relish our
health, and how thankefully shall we receive it at Gods hand? So after long
imprisonment, how highly then shall we apprise our liberty, more carefully
using it for Gods glory then ever before.

2. Compassion toward those that are in the 2. Compassion.
same, or like affliction: We are very cruel, and hard-hearted, by nature, to
our brethren in distress and misery: That therefore our hearts may be enlarged
toward them, God sends afflictions to us, that we may have experience of the
same misery our selves. This use Christ himself made of his afflictions, Heb.
4. 15. We have not an high Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are. This Paul makes
plain, 2. Cor. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

3. Preparation for death, whereof every affliction 3. Preparation for death.
is a messenger or harbinger; and therefore when afflictions come, we have
warning given us of deaths approach, and so are justly occasioned to renew our
preparation for the entertainment of him. This use the Apostle Paul made of
his affliction, 1. Cor. 15. when by them he learned to die daily. For besides
that they put us in mind of our mortaltty, they themselves, being little
kinds of death, make death seem less grievous unto us. If a man would be
able to bear a great burden, he shall be the more able to do it by inuring
himself to bear a less: as Bilney prepared himself to the fire of his
martyrdom, by the fire of his Candle.

4. A longing, and hungring after the life to 4. Desire of life to come.
come. When we have the world at will, we begin to be besotted with the love
thereof, and to say as once Peter in the Mount, It is good being here, let me
build my Tabernacle here: God is therefore feign to weane us from the world,
even as mothers do their children, by laying on some sour thing which may
cause us to distaste it, and so being out of love with it, to cry, Come, Lord
Jesus. This use Moses, and the rest of the Israelites made of those contagious
sicknesses which reigned amongst them in the Desert, Psalm. 90. 12. Teach us to
number our days, and to apply our hearts to wisdom. All is little enough to
make us think of our home. Never would the Israelites have been brought to
have stirred one foot out of Egypt, had they not been tired with that sore
brick bondage, and Pharaohs tyranny; they that in the Desert wished for the
fleshpots, and onyons of Egypt, notwithstanding their sore bondage, surely but
for that bondage, would never have left those fleshpots.

So much of the first maine use of our afflictions in regard of practice, the
renewing of graces decayed.

2. The second follows; namely, an increasing 2. Increasing Grace renewed.
in those graces renewed. This use of afflictions our Savior notes; Ioh. 15.
2. Every branch that brings forth fruit, my Father purges, with the pruning
knife of afflictions, That it may bring forth more fruit. Look then how Vines
pruned, and Trees lopped grow the faster; so the Christian afflicted, thriues,
and prospers the better in Christianity: So 2. Cor. 4. 16. the decays of the
outward man by afflictions, are the renewings of the inward. The happy
Antiperistasis of the outward cold of afflictions does increase the inward
heat, and fervor of the grace of God in us. And these be the lessons which
God teaches by correcting of us. So that now we may fully see the meaning of
these words, And teach in thy Law.

Hitherto of the first part of this Text, concerning those things which are
required by the Prophet, in him whom he blesses; namely, that he be as
corrected of God, so also taught of God.

Come we now to the second part, concerning that blessedness which in these
respects belongs to the child of God. Blessed is the man.

The doctrine of the Psalmist in this place is a paradoxe to flesh and blood,
which judges no men more unhappy then those that are laden with miseries,
specially such as here the Prophet speaks of, which come by means of cruel
enemies. What blessedness would one think there were in being trod under
foot, and trampled upon like dirt by others, our bitter adversaries? Well,
though the blind buzzards of this world cannot see this; yet the faithful
can, by the quick and piercing eye of their faith, behold the light of the
Sun, through the thickest and darkest clouds. Let us therefore consider a
little of this blessedness of those whom God schools by correction, and see
wherein it consists.

This blessedness therefore is twofold: Privative and Positive.

1. The first kind of blessedness I call Privative, because it consists in
taking away of that curse which naturally cleaues to all afflictions: For as
death, so also all other afflictions have their sting, which yet is taken away
by the death of Christ: So that now to them that are in Christ, all afflictions
are but droanes, they are vnstinged by Christ; they may buzze, but hurt they
cannot, Christ has fully satisfied Gods justice, and therefore no further
punishment can be demanded of us. Therefore our afflictions are now no longer
punishment, their nature is altered, but only fatherly corrections, and trials
of our faith. And herein consists the first part of our blessedness in
affliction, that we are freed from the curse and anger of God, which is
necessarily annexed to all the afflictions of the ungodly. Whereupon we may now
insult over affliction, and sing triumphantly; Oh affliction, where is thy
sting? And being out of the danger of hurt by it, we may securely laugh at it,
as the wild Ass, at the Horse and the Rider, Job. 5.

2. There is also a Positive blessedness in the afflictions of the godly.
There is not only the absence of evil from affliction, but good also is
present, in regard whereof the afflicted worthily are called, and counted
blessed.

This presence of good in our affliction is specially in these respects.

1. The good from whence they have their Original; namely, the love of God
disposing these afflictions to us: Heb. 12. Whom he loves, he chasteneth.
This love of God manifests it self specially in these two points: The Measure,
and the Manner of their afflictions.

1. For the Measure: In this regard have the godly an happy turn in their
afflictions, that whereas the ungodly drink up the whole cup of his wrath,
dregs and all, the godly do but sip of it: whereas they are scourged with
Scorpions, these only are corrected with the rods of men. In this sense, Hab.
3. 2. God is said to remember mercy in anger: because in punishing his
children, he respects their weakness, not suffering them to be tempted
above their strength, 1. Cor. 10. 13. It is the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, Lam. 3. 22. Mercy is a curb to Gods Justice in afflicting his
children, and causes him to moderate, and mitigate the punishment; and as
Jeremy speaks, Ier. 10. to correct them in judgment; that is, in an holy
wisdom proportioning their affliction according to their strength, and not in
his anger, left he bring them to nothing. This is that which the Prophet Esaias
teaches, chap. 27. 7, 8. showing the difference betwixt the afflictions of
Gods own people, and strangers: Has he smitten him as he smote those that
smote him? or is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain
by him? In measure will thou contend with him? This merciful measuring out the
portion of our cup, is grounded upon Gods own promise, Psalm. 89. 30, 31. If
his children break my Law, etc. then will I visit their transgressions with
the rod, and their iniquity with strokes: But my loving kindness will I not
take from him, neither will I falsify my truth. Here then is another point of
our happiness in our affliction, that God lays not load upon us, as on the
wicked, but sweetly tempering mercy and justice together, gives us occasion to
say with David; The Lord has chastened me sore, but has not delivered me to
death, Psalm. 118. 18.

2. For the Manner. God shows his love to us in our afflictions, in the manner
of inflicting them upon us, in that he does it as fathers correct their
children, unwillingly; Lam. 3. 33. For he does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men. He does not take any delight in our pain and
misery, but being necessarily thereunto enforced, out of a fatherly respect
which he has of us, to do us good, and to keep us from mischief, 1. Cor.
11. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Gods bowels do even earne over our souls, when he
comes to correct; Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I
deliver thee, Israel? etc. Mine heart is turned within me, my bowels are
rolled together: See how lively God sets forth in himself the affections of a
father, that can find in his heart to beat his child having done a fault.

2. Respect of our blessedness, in regard of the Good thereof, is in regard of
the good annexed unto them, and necessarily concomitant with them. This Good is
threefold.

1. Our conformity with Christ our elder brother, who first suffered, and then
entered into glory, who first wore a crown of thorns, and then of glory; who
first felt the weight of his burdensome cross, and then that eternal weight
of happiness, Romans 8. 29. Those whom he knew before, he predestinate to be
made like to the image of his Son: that is, in being consecrated through
afflictions, as he was, Heb. 2. 10. Hitherto belongs that of Paul, Phil. 3. 10.
That I may know the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death. This is one point of our blessedness, for the liker Christ, the
happier surely we be.

2. Our communion with Christ, who is a fellow-sufferer with us in all our
afflictions, unless such wherein we suffer as evil doers, 1. Pet. 4. 13.
Therefore, Act. 9. Christ speaks to Paul persecuting the Church, as persecuting
himself, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Now is not this a happy turn
to have such a companion in our sufferings, to have Christ, as it were, bearing
our cross, as Simon of Cyrene bare his?

3. The powerful presence of Gods Spirit, cheering and comforting us in our
affliction. Blessedness is nothing else but enjoying sweet communion with God.
Now since this communion is most of all enjoyed in affliction, worthily are the
afflicted counted blessed, Psalm. 112. Unto the righteous arises light in
darkness. That is, the lightning, and quickening presence of God in affliction.
And this was the Churches comfort, Mic. 7. 8. When I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light unto me. 2. Cor. 12. My power is made perfect in weakness.
When we are weakest, in regard of our affliction, and temptations, then does
the power of Gods presence most show it self. And hence it is, that Romans 5. 3.
Afflictions bring forth patience, because the love of GOD is then most
abundantly shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit, as the words following
show. This is that which makes us to rejoice in affliction, the sweetness of
Gods love, allaying the sowrenes of affliction, Psalm. 91. 15. I will be with
him in trouble. Oh then how happy things are afflictions, which bring with them
so precious a pearl, as the sweet company of God himself, and the comforts of
his Spirit rejoicing our souls in the multitude of the thoughts of our hearts,
as David shows in the 17, 18, 19. verses of this Psalm, in his own
experience! Therefore, as the Psalmist speaks, Psa. 107. of them that go
down into the natural Sea, that they see the wonderful works of the Lord,
that much more may be said of those that go into this Sea of affliction: oh
they see and feel many wonderful, and glorious works of the Lord, many
heavenly and unspeakable comforts, and joys in the holy Ghost, that they
never knew before in the day of their prosperity. For God by his promise has
tied his presence to us at that time, Esaias 43. 2. When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, etc. But especially this privilege belongs to
such afflictions which we suffer for righteousness sake; as the example of the
Apostles, singing in prison, and the Martyrs, skipping for joy in the midst of
the fiery flames do manifestly declare.

3. Good, in respect whereof afflictions make us happy, is the good confirmed
unto us by them. This good is either present or future.

1. The present good is our Adoption, whereof they are assured pledges, and
badges unto us. Heb. 12. If you suffer affliction, God offers himself unto you
as unto sons. When two children fight together in the street, and one comes
and takes the one and whips him, and leaves the other; who will not say that
the child taken and corrected, is that man's son or pupil, and the other
left, is none of his, but a strangers? Again, afflictions are the high beaten
way to heaven, Acts 14. 22. in which only the sons of God walk. Neither do
afflictions only assure us, that we are the sons of God, but sons grown
to some strength and ripeness; for young babes and infants are not able to
bear affliction. This privilege also more specially belongs to such
affliction as we suffer for the truths sake, and is a special point of their
blessedness. 1. Pet. 4. 11. If ye be railed on for the Name of Christ,
blessed are ye, for the Spirit of glory, and of God rests on you, which on
their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is glorified. Phil. 1. 28. And
in nothing fear your adversaries, which to them is a token of perdition, but
unto you of salvation, and that of God: for unto you it is given not only to
believe in him, but also to suffer.

Mark how sufferings are made special gifts of God, and above the gifts of
believing. He that believes, sets to his hand and seal that God is true,
Ioh. 3. 33. but when we suffer, we come with a second, and that a far
stronger seal. Therefore such are called Martyrs, that is, witnesses, by way
of excellency.

2. Good which afflictions confirm unto us, is future. And that twofold.

1. In this life, an enlargement of comforts both inward and outward, even
answerable to the measure of afflictions. And in this regard are the afflicted
pronounced blessed, Mat. 5. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Affliction is the very
seed of comfort. And therefore as seed cast into the ground, promises an
harvest; so do our afflictions promise comfort, both bodily and spiritual.
Yea, the longer and stronger our afflictions be, the longer and stronger
comforts are thereby promised. For herein also is the Proverb true, He that
sowes liberally, shall reap liberally. Hence Moses prays, Psalm. 90. 15.
Comfort us, O Lord, according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and
according to the years wherein we have seen evil. But afflictions do not
only promise comforts, even, and answerable to themselves, but far
exceeding, as the increase of good seed is oftentimes an hundredfold. Thus
was it with Job, Job 42. He had twice so much given him, as he lost; and his
last days were better then his first. And the advantage of an hundredfold, is
promised by our Savior even in this life, Math. 19. 29. For as the sufferings
of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ, 2. Cor. 1. 5.

2. In the life to come. The afflictions of this life, confirm unto us the
hope of eternal life; For if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him, 2. Tim. 2. 12. The afflictions and troubles of this life, are happy
assurances of the rest of a better: See 2. Thessal. 1. 4. 5. 6. 7. And not
only so, but the Apostle goes yet further, 2. Cor. 4. 17. For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of glory. What makes a man more blessed, then to have that
massy, and weighty crown of glory upon his head? Blessed is the man that is
afflicted; for blessed is the man that shall be crowned. This is also more
specially the privilege of such afflictions which we suffer for the truths
sake: Math. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall persecute you for my sake,
Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven. Thus were
the Martyrs blessed in their afflictions, blessed in their Martyrdom, God
honoring them like Elias, sending for them, as M. Bradford speaks, to heaven
in a fiery chariot. Thus we see how in every respect the afflicted are to be
accounted blessed.

Why then should we fear afflictions before they come, or faint under them
after they then cheerfully to the School of afflictions, and not like
loytring trewants, and when in that School, ply we our business with that
diligence, that when we are come thence, we may be able in our own experience,
and out of our own learning, to say with David here, Blessed is the man whom
thou afflictest, O Lord, and teach in thy Law.

FINIS.

