TWO TREATISES: THE ONE Of Good CONSCICNCE; Showing the Nature, Means,
Marks, Benefits, and Necessity thereof.

THE OTHER The mischief and misery of Scandalls, both taken and given.

Both Published. BY IER: DYKE, Minister of Gods Word at Epping in Essex.

The Sixth Edition corrected.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Robert Milbourne. 1635.

GOOD CONSCIENCE, OR, A TREATISE SHEVVING THE Nature, Means, Marks, Benefit,
and Necessity thereof.

BY IER: DYKE, Minister of Gods Word at Epping in Essex.

The Sixth Edition corrected.

LVKE 10. 42. One thing is necessary. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Robert
Milbourne. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir FRANCIS BARRINGTON, Knight and Baronet, a Patron
and pattern of Piety and good Conscience.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
THat which the Apostle Paul speaks of a man's desire of the office of a
Bishop, may be truly spoken of every one who desires to gain men to the love
of a good Conscience, that he desires a worthy Work: Yea, it is the work
which is, and ought to be made the scope and drift of the worthy work of the
Ministry. And therefore it is, that he, that desires the calling of the
Ministry, desires a worthy work, because of this worthy work of bringing
mento Vnicuique liber est propria conscientia, and ad hunc librum discutiendu^
and emendandum omnes alij inventi sunt, Bern. de Cons.
good Conscience, A work at which all works and books should specially aim:
Conscience is a book, one of those books that shall be opened at the last day,
and to which men shall be put, and by which they shall be judged. Therefore to
the directing, informing, and amending of this book should all other books
specially tend. Yea Solomon seems to call men off from all other books, and
studies, to the study of this so necessary a point, the keeping of a good
Conscience: Of making many books, (says he) there is Eccles. 12. 12, 13.
no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh; Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this
is the whole duty of man. As if his advice tended to this, to neglect all
studies in comparison of that study which aims at the getting and keeping of a
good Conscience. It would be exceeding happy with us, if this study were more
in request amongst us. We seem to live in those days foretold by the
Prophet, wherein the earth should be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. We
Isa. 11. 9.
are blessed that live in so clear a Sunneshine of Gods truth, but yet the
grief is, that through our own default, our Sunshine is but like the winter
light, all light, little or no heat, and we make no other use of our light,
but only to see by, not to walk and work by. In the first re-entrance of the
Gospel amongst us, how devout, holy, zealous, and men renowned Antiqua
sapientia nihil aliud quam facienda and vita^da praecepit, and tu^c long
meliores erant viri. Postqua^ docti prodierunt, boni desunt. Simplex enim illa
and aperta virtus in obscuram and solertem scientiam versa est, docerumque
disputare non vivero, Seneo. epist. 56. Romans 15. 14
for Conscience were our Martyrs, and our first Planters, Preachers, and
professors of Religion? They had not generally the knowledge and learning, the
world now has, nor the world now the Conscience they then had. There be now
better Scholars, there were then better Men: they were as excellent for
Devotion, as our Times are for Disputation. It is an excellent sight to see
such Christians as were the Romans; Full of goodness, filled with all
Knowledge. It is pity that ever so lovely a pair should be sundred. Yet if
they be parted, it is best being without that which with most safety may be
spared. A good Conscience is sure to do well, though it want the
accomplishment of Learning, and greater measures of Knowledge and
Understanding. But take Learning from a good Conscience, and it is but a Ring
of gold in a Swines snout; or that which is worse, A thorn in a Drunkards
hand. Learning Prove. 26. 9.
is to be highly apprized; Riches, Honors, and all other earthly blessings
are vile to it. But yet though it take place of all other things, yet must it
give good Conscience the wall and upper-hand, as that which is far before it
in worth, use, and necessity. As Solomon of wisdom, so may it be said of good
Conscience, She Prove. 3. 15.
is more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to
be compared to her. Gold and Rubies cannot so enrich a man as good Conscience
does, and yet alas the blindness of men, how willing are they in this case,
with a wilful poverty? Not Rubies, but handfulls of Barley, morsels of Bread,
and Crusts are preferred before the invaluable treasure of a good Conscience.

After the many worthy endeavors therefore of so many as have bin before me in
this work of laboring men to a good conscience: I have adventured also to
lend my weak strength to the same work. If one or two witnesses prevail not,
yet who knows what an whole cloud may do? Though Eliah and Elisha be the
Horsemen and Chariots of Israel, yet the Footmen do their service in the
battle, and Apollo may without offense water, where Paul has planted.

Now these my poor endeavors such as they are, I am bold to publish under
your Worshipful name, and to put them forth under your Patronage, entreating
you to countenance that in a Treatise, which you have so long countenanced in
the practice. None so fit to be a Patron of a Treatise of good Conscience, as
he that has bin a religious both professor, and protector of the practice
thereof. To have a Nail fastened in a sure place, the antiquity Isa. 22. 25.
of a long standing Name, and Family, to be hewn out of the Quarry of the best
Stocks of Parentage, to have fair Lines, and a fair lot in outward
possessions, to be blessed with a fruitful Vine, and Olive plants, fairly
grown and planted round about a man, all these are to be held high honors,
and great favors from the God of heaven. And with all these has the Lord
honored your self. But yet your greatest honor that has given luster to all
the rest, has bin your love to the Truth, Religion, and a good Conscience.
Augustine repented him that he attributed more to Mallius Theodorus, to
Displicetaute^ illic quod Mallio Theodoro, adquem librumipsum scripsi, qua^vis
docto and Christiano viro plus tribui quam deberem. Aug. Retr. lib. 1. cap. 2.
whom he wrote a book, than he should have done, though otherwise he were a
learned and Christian man. A man may easily overshoot himself in the
comme^dation of a good man, especially, if a great man. It shall suffice
therefore to have said so little, and that to this end, that hereby, the World
may know the reason of my choice of your Patronage of this Treatise. It would
have bin an incongruity to have had the name of a person of an evil
Conscience, prefixed before a book of good Conscience. I desired a Patron
suitable to my subject. I presume the very subject shall make the Treatise
welcome to you: Be you pleased to afford your acceptance, as I will afford you
my poor prayers, that the Lord who has already set upon your head the crown
of the Elders, Prove. 17. 6.
Childrens Children, and one Crown of glory here one earth, Age found in the
Prove. 16. 1.
ways of righteousness, would also in his due time give you that incorruptible
crown of righteousness, and eternal glory in the heavens, which that righteous
Judge shall give to you, and to all those that in the ways of a good
Conscience wait for the blessed appearance of the Lord Jesus.

Your Worships in all Christian observance: IER: DYKE.

The Contents of this TREATISE.
The Text contains thee Maine Heads.
The first maine head. Paul's Protestation of a good Conscience, where five
things are considered.

1. What Conscience is. 2. What a good Conscience is. It is good with a twofold
goodness. 1. With the goodness of Integrity, and this integrity is
threefold. 1. When being rightly principled by the Word, it sincerely judges
and determines of good and evil. 2. When it does excuse for good, and accuse
for evil. 3. When it urges to good, and restraines from evil.
2. With the goodness of Tranquillity, and Peace. Here are three sorts of
Conscience discovered not to be good, viz. 1. The Ignorant Conscience.
2. The Secure 3. The Seared

3. The means of getting and keeping a good Conscience. 1. To get and keep the
Conscience good, peaceably, or with the goodness of peace, three things
required, 1. Faith in Christ's blood. 2. Repentance from dead works. 3. The
conscionable exercise of Prayer.
2. To get and keep the Conscience good with the goodness of integrity, and
to have it uprightly good, five things required, viz. 1. VValking before God.
2. Framing ones Course by the Rule of the Word. 3. Frequent examination of the
Conscience. 4. Harkening to the voice of Conscience. 5. In cases of
questionable nature, to take the surest and the safest side.

4, The marks and notes of a good Conscience: and they be seven. 1. To make
Conscience of all sins and duties. 2. To make Conscience of small sins, and
duties. 3. To effect a Ministry that speaks to the Conscience. 4. To do
duties, and avoid sin for Conscience sake. 5. Holy boldness. 6. To suffer for
Conscience. 7. Constancy, and Perseverance in Good.
5. The Motives to a good Conscience, and they are five. 1. The incomparable
comfort and benefit of it in all such times and cases as all other comforts
fail a man, and wherein a man stands most in need of comfort. The Cases or
times are five. 1. The Time, and case of Disgrace and Reproach. 2. The Time of
common fear, and common calamity 3. The Time of sickness, or other Crosses.
4. The Time of Death. 5. The Time and day of Judgment.
2. That a good Conseience is, 1. A feast for 1. Contentment and satisfaction.
2. Joy and Mirth. 3. Society.
2. Better than a feast for 1. The Cotinuance. 2. Independency. 3.
Universality.

3. Without a good Conscience, all our best duties are naught. 4. It is the
Ship and Arc of Faith. 5. The misery of an evil one 1. In this world in
respect of 1. Fear. 2. Perplexity. 3. Torment.
2. in the world to come.


The second Maine Head Ananias his insolent injunction Whereout is observed,

1 What is the respect a good Conscience finds in the world. 2. The impetuous
injustice of the enemies of good conscience 3. Who commonly be the bitteest
enemies of good conscience 4. That Usurpers are Smiters. 5. What is a sad
forerunner of a Nations Ruin.
The third maine head. Paul's Answer and Contestation Whereout is observed.

1. That Christian patience muzzels not a good Conscience from pleading its
own Innocence. 2. The severitie of Gods Judgments upon the Enemies and
Smiters of good Conscience. 3. The equity of Gods administration in his
execution of Justice.
GOOD CONSCIENCE.
ACTS 23. 1. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, said, Men and brethren,
I have lived in all good Conscience until this day.

2. And the high Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by, to smite him on
the mouth.

3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee thou whited wall.


CHAP. I.
The Introduction of the Discourse following.
THere is no complaint so general as this, that the world is naught. His
experience is short and slender, which will not justify the truth of this
complaint. And what think we, may the Cause be of the general wickedness of our
Times? Surely nothing makes Ill Times, but Ill men, and nothing makes Ill men,
but Ill consciences. Ill Conscience is the source, and fountain Hominum sunt
istae non Temporum. Sonec. ep. 98.
from whence comes all iniquities, which makes times here so ill. How well
should he deserve that could amend ill times? There is a course if it would be
taken, that would do the deed, and so cease the common complaint. Elisha's
course in healing the waters of Jericho must be taken. They said of their
waters, as we of our times, The water is naught, and the ground barren 2 King.
2. 19. What course now takes Elisha for healing of the waters? He went out unto
the spring of the waters, and cast the Salt in there, ver. 21. So the waters
were healed, ver. 22. The spring and fountain of all actions good or evil is
the Conscience, and all actions and courses of men are as their Consciences.
Out of the heart are the issues of life, Prove. 4. 23. the heart and Conscience
is the fountain, every action of a man's life is an Issue, a little rivelet,
and a water passage thence. Are these waters then that issue thence Naught? The
way to heal them No^ erit fructus bonus nisi arboris bonae. Mutacor, and
mutabitur opus, Aug. de ver. Dom. Sermon. 12.
is to cast the Salt into the spring. Mend the Conscience and all is mended.
Good Consciences would make Good men, and Good men would make Good Times. Lo
here a project for the reformation of evil times.

Were this Project set on foot, and a good Conscience set up, how should we see
profanation of Gods holy Name, and Day, Injustice, Bribery, Oppression,
Deceit, Adulteries, and Whoredoms, and all other Iniquities, how should we
see all these as our Savior saw Satan, falling down like lightning from
heaven? How should we see them come tumbling down like so many Dagons before
God's Ark, yea tumbled down, and broken to the stumps? The only Arc that
must dash, and ding down these Dagons, is a good Conscience.

And if we would well weigh the matter, what is there equally desirable with a
Ecce quid prodest plena bonisarca cum sit inanis Conscientia Bona vis habere,
and bonus non vis esse, tum quid est, quod vis habere malu^? Nihil omnino, non
uxorem, no^ filium, non ancilla^, villam, tunica^; postremo no^ caligam, and
tame^ vis habere malam vitam. Rogo te, praepone vitam tuam, calige tuae (sic
Conscientiam.) Aug. Ibid.
good Conscience? What is that men would have, but they desire to have it Good?
And yet amongst all other things they desire to have Good, what little care to
have the Conscience such? Wife, children, servants, houses, lands, air, food,
raiment, who would not have these good? And yet that without which none of all
these are good, nor will yield us any true good, that alone is neglected; and
whilst men would have all other things good, yet their consciences and
themselves are naught. Now alas, what good will all other goods do us whilst
this one, and this maine Good thing is wanting! How excellent is this Good
above all other good things. A good wife, good children, good land, etc. these
Vbi supra. Ipsae ergo divitiae bonae sunt, sed ista omnia bona a bonis and
malis haberi possunt. Et cum bona sint bonos tamen facere non possuut. Aug. de
verb. Do. Sermon. 5.
may a man have, and yet he himself not Good; these find men sometimes Good,
but make none so; these goods may a man have, and yet himself be naught. Not
so with good Conscience, which no evil man can have, which whosoever has, it
makes him and all he has Good. So great and so good a Good, why is it so much
neglected?

Try we therefore and let us assay if by any means, Gods good blessing giving
assistance, we may be able to stir up men, and to work them to regard so great
and excellent a good. It may be at least some few may be persuaded, and may set
upon this work of getting a good Conscience. If but some few, if but one be
wrought upon, the labor is not in vain. If none, yet our work is with our
God, to whom we are a sweet savor in Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them that perish, 2 Cor. 2. 15

This portion of Scripture then which I have chosen for the ground of the
following Discourse consists of three parts.

1. Paul's sober and ingenious Profession, and Protestation, ver. 1. 2. Ananias
his insolent, and impetuous Injunction, ver. 2. 3. Paul's zealous Answer and
Contestation, ver. 3.
1. The first is Paul's Protestation in these words, Men and brethren I have
lived in all good Conscience until this day. With this Protestation of a good
Conscience Paul begins his Plea. And however to distinguish our selves from
Papists, we bear the name of Protestants, yet we shall never be sound and good
Protestants indeed till we can take up Paul's Protestation, that our care,
endeavor, and course is to live in All good Conscience. A Protestant with a
loose and a naughty Conscience has no great cause to glory in his desertion of
the Romish Religion. As good a blind Papist, as a halting Protestant. The blind
and the halt were equally abominable unto the Lord.

Paul was here brought forth to answer for himself before the chief Priests
and the Council: And his Preface, as I said, to his intended Apology, if he
had not been injuriously interrupted, is a Protestation of the goodness of his
conscience, and this his good Conscience, or the goodness of his Conscience he
sets forth;

1. From his Conversation (...), I have lived or conversed. A good conversation
is a good evidence of a good Conscience indeed, there can be no good
conscience, where there is not a Conversing in good. It is not some moods and
fits in some good actions and duties, from whence conscience gains the
reputation of goodness; but a good conversation, godly and religious in the
general tenor thereof, proves the conscience worthy such an honor, as to be
holden good. He may be said to have a good conscience that can be said to live
in a good conscience. Many a man is frequent in the City, and yet cannot be
said to live there. There a man lives where he has his Converse and Residence.
A man's life is not to be measured by some few actions, in which at sometime he
may be found, but by his general course and conversation. God will judge every
man not according to his steps, but according to his ways. It were over-rigid
censoriousnesse to condemn a righteous man, and to question whether his
Conscience were good, because some steps of his have bin beside the way. We
know for the general, his way is good wherein he walks, and therefore
according to his good way we judge his Conscience good. Contrarily when we see
a man's way for the general to be evil, though sometime he may tread a right
step or two, and chance to chop into the fair road for a rod or two, for this
to judge a man's Conscience good, were a bottomless and a boundless Charity:
Every man's Conscience is as his life is.

2. From the Generality of his care and obedience, In all good Conscience. It
must be All good, or it is no good Conscience at all. There be that live in
some good Conscience; yea Herod seems to have much good Conscience, he did
many things gladly, but yet Paul goes further, and lives not in some, not in
much, but in All good Conscience.

3. From the Sincerity and Integrity of it before God. Before men how many have
their consciences exceeding good, and yet their consciences are far short of
goodness, because they are not good before God, the judge of Conscience. Whilst
Conscience is made only of the Capitals of the second Table, or of the
externals and ceremonials of the first, which duty is not done out of obedience
to God and his Commandments; but a man's self either in his gain, or in his
praise is sought, and base ends are the first movers to good duties, here the
Conscience, what ever applause it has from, or before men for it goodness;
yet, of God shall not be so esteemed. For that is not a good conscience which
is one outwardly, but which is one inwardly, whose praise is not of men but of
God. And that has its praise of God which is before God.

4. From his continuance and constancy until this day. To begin a good life
and course, and to live in all good conscience, and that before God, are
excellent things; but yet one thing is wanting to make up this goodness
complete. To be so for a day, or some days will not serve, but when a man can
say at his last day, I have lived in all good Conscience until this day, that
man may be safely judged to have a good Conscience indeed. Thus in these four
particulars does the goodness of Paul's Conscience appear. It is not my purpose
to confine my self, and to keep me within those bounds alone: but to take a
larger latitude, within the compass whereof I will bring both those forenamed,
and all other material points which this Protestation does afford.

CHAP. II.
Conscience described.
THe maine subject of this Protestation, and the aim of this following
discourse being concerning a good Conscience, for the more orderly handling
thereof, consider these specialls.

1. What Conscience is. 2. What a good Conscience is. 3. How a good conscience
may be gotten and kept. The means of it. 4. How a good Conscience may be
known. The marks of it. 5. The Motives to get and keep a good Conscience.
1. What Conscience is: It may be thus described: Conscience is a power and
faculty of the soul taking knowledge, and bearing witness of all a man's
thoughts, words and actions, and accordingly excusing or accusing, absolving or
condemning, comforting or tormenting the same. I know there be other
definitions given by others more succinct, and neat, but I rather choose this,
though it may be not altogether so formal to the rules of Art. The rules of
love and profit many times may make bold to dispense with rules of Art. So I
may be profitable, I care the less to be artificial. It may suffice that this
description is answerable to that Auditory for whose sake it was first
intended. A plain familiar description agrees well enough with such a people.
For the better conceiving of it, let it be taken in pieces, and every parcel
viewed severally.

It is a faculty or power of the soul. It is therefore called the Heart, 1
Ioh. 3. 20. If our heart condemn us, Eccl. 7. 22. Thine own heart knows that
thou thy self likewise have cursed others, that is, thine own Conscience
knows. It is also called the spirit of man, 1 Cor. 2. 11. For what man knows
the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him. And Romans 8. 16.
The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that is, with our
Conscience. Not that Conscience is a spirit distinct from the subject of the
soul, as Origin mistook, but because it is a faculty of the soul, therefore
the name that is often given to the soul, is given to it. If it be asked in what
part of the soul this faculty is placed, we must know that Conscience is not
confined to any one part of the soul: It is not in the understanding alone,
not in the memory, will, or affections alone, but it has place in all the
parts of the soul, and according to the several parts thereof has several
Offices or acts.

Taking Knowledge: Eccl. 7. 22. Thine own heart knows. Conscience is placed
in the soul, as Gods spy, and man's superior and overseer, and inseparable
companion that is with a man at all times, and in all places, so that there is
not a thought, word, or work that it knows not, and takes not notice of. So
that that which David speaks of God himself, Psa. 139. 3, 4. Thou compassest
my heart, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways, for there
is not a word in my tongue, but lo thou know it altogether. Whither shall I
go from thy spirit? If I ascend up to heaven, etc. The same may be also said
of conscience, Gods deputy; it is acquainted with al our ways, not a motion in
the mind, nor a syllable in the mouth, to which it is not privy: yea it is thus
inseparably present with us not only to see, but also to set down, to
register, and to put down upon Record all our thoughts, words, and works.
Conscience is Gods Notary, and there is nothing passes us in our whole life
good or ill, which Conscience notes not down with an indeleble character,
which nothing can raze out but Christ's Nam quocu^que me verto vitia mea me
sequuntur ubicunque vado conscienscia mea me non deserit, se praesens adsistit,
and quicquid facio scribit. Idcirco qua^quam humana subterfugiam judicia
judiciu^ propriae cons. ^ugere non valeo Et si hominibus celo quod egi, mihi
tamen (qui novi malu^ quod gessi) celare nequeo. Bern. de inter. Com. cap. 31.
blood. Conscience does in this kind, as Job wishes in another, Job 19. 23, 24.
Oh that my words were now written, Oh that they were printed in a book, That
they were graven with an iron pen, and laid in the rock for ever. Conscience
prints, and writes so surely, so indelebly, yea it writes men's sins as Judah
his sin was, with a pen of iron, with the point of a Diamond, and they are
graven upon the Table of their hearts, Ier. 17. 1. Conscience does in our
pilgrimage as travelers in their journey, it keeps a Diary, or a journall of
every thing that passes in our whole course, it keeps a book in which it has
a man's whole life pend. In regard of this office conscience is placed in the
memory, and is the Register and Recorder of the soul.

And bearing witness. This we find. Romans 2. 15. Their conscience also bearing
witness. Romans 9. 1. My conscience also bearing me witness. 2. Cor. 1. 12. This
testimony of our conscience. And this the end of the former office of the
conscience. For therefore it is exact and punctual in setting down the
particulars of a man's whole life, that it may be a faithful witness either
for him, or against him. For a faithful witness cannot lie. Prou. 14. 5. This
office it is ready to do, at all times Peccata mea celare non possum, quoniam
quocu^que vado co^sc. mea mecum est, secum portans quod in ea posui sive bonum,
sive malum, servat vivo, restituet defuncto depositum quod servandu^ accepit.
Bern. Med. de vot. cap. 14.
of trial, affliction, and most of all at the last day, the day of judgment,
when it shall be more solemnly called in to give in evidence. Romans 2. 15. 16.
Their conscience bearing witness, etc. In the day when God shall judge secrets
of men. At that day it shall especially witness either for or against a man, if
our life and actions have been good, it will then do like the true witness,
Pro. 14 25. A true witness delivers souls. If wicked and ungodly, it will deal
with it as Job complains God did with him. Job 10. 17. Thou renewest thy
witness against me. It will testify according to every man's deeds. And this
testimony of conscience is without all exception, for in the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word shall stand, and conscience (as our common saying
is) is a thousand witnesses: for it is an eyewitness of all our actions, yea
a pen-witnes, bringing testimony from the authentic Records and Register of
the Court of Conscience. Concerning this testifying office of Conscience that
place is worth the noting, Esa. 59. 12. For our transgressions are multiplied
before thee, and our sins testify against us, for our transgressions are with
us, and as for our iniquities we know them. By which place we may know the
meaning of the word Conscience. Conscience is a knowledge together. How
together? First, a knowledge together with another person, namely with God when
God and a man's heart know a thing, there is Conscience, knowledge together Romans
9. 1. My conscience ((...)) Co-witnessing, witnessing together. How together?
God knows it and witnesses, and my conscience together with him knows and
witnesses. Secondly a knowledge joined together with another knowledge; for
there is a double act of the understanding, First, that whereby we think or
know a thing. Secondly, there is a reflecting act of the soul whereby we think
what we think, and know what we know, and this is the action of the
Conscience; and this joining of this second knowledge to the first, gives it
the name of Conscience: As here in this place, As for our iniquities we know
them, that is, we know that we have had evil thoughts, and our knowledge tells
us, and witnesses to us, that we have done so. This agrees with Bernards
definition, that Conscientia est cordis scientia; Conscience is the knowledge
of the heart, namely passively. It is the knowing of what the heart knows:
which others in better terms have expressed thus, Conscience is the recoiling
of the soul upon it self; Suitable to that of the Apostle 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know
nothing by my self. As if he had said, I know not any thing that I know
against my self, my Conscience does not witness against me. And this second
office of Conscience in bearing witness is also in the memory.

And accordingly accusing or excusing, absolving or condemning] These acts of
Conscience we find Romans 2. 15. Their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another. Romans 12. 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that he
allows. The ground of these acts is this; Conscience, before actions are to be
done, determines of their lawfulness, and unlawfulness; judges of them
whether they be good or evil. And if it judge them good, it inuites, stirs
up, vrges, and binds to the doing of them. Romans 13. 5. Ye must be subject for
conscience sake; that is, because Conscience determines it to be good, and
vrges and binds thereunto. Hence that phrase in common speech, my conscience
urges me to it, or he was urged in conscience to do it, and I am bound
inconscience to do it. Certainly if it judge and determine actions to be evil
and unlawful, then it binds from them. So much that speech implies, 1 Cor. 10.
27. Eat, asking no question for conscience sake. So that conscience has a
power to bind to, and to bind from.

Now then when a man in his particular actions does follow the Prescriptions,
Dictates, Injunctions, Prohibitions, and Determinations of Conscience, and
hearkens to the incitements thereof, then conscience excuses him, acquits and
absolves him. But if in his actions he go against any of these, then Conscience
accuses him of offense, and condemns him for that offense. The accusation of
conscience has respect unto a man's guilt, the condemnation of it unto a man's
punishment. Accusation is an act of Conscience passing sentence upon a man's
action, as when conscience tells him, This was ill done, this action was
sinful. Condemnation is an act of conscience, passing sentence not only upon
a man's action, but upon a man's person, as when it tells him, Thou deservest Gods
wrath for this Sin. Conscience in accusing shows what is the quality; in
condemning what is the desert of a man's actions. And these actions of
conscience are in the mind, and understanding part of the soul. The act of the
conscience in the memory determins de facto, and tells us what we have done, or
not done. The act of Conscience in the understanding determines de jure, and
tells us whether we have done well or ill, and so accordingly either excuses or
accuses, acquits or condemns.

Comforting or tormenting the same] these be the last acts of conscience
following the former. If Conscience determining, prescribing, and inciting to
good, be hearkened unto, then it excuses, acquits, and thereupon follows
comfort, joy, hope, 2 Cor. 11. 2. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
Conscience. Contrarily, if Sic in domo propria and ^ propria familia habeo
accusatores, testes, judices, and tortores, Accusat me conscientia testis est
memoria, volu^tas carcer, timor, tortor oblectamentum tormentum. Bern. Med. de.
vot. cap. 13.
the dictates of Conscience be not regarded, it accuses and condemns, and then
torments with fear, grief, despair, and violent perturbations, in all which
is that worm, Mar. 9. 44. And these actions of the conscience are in the will,
and in the affections. And thus according to the diverse parts of the soul, the
acts and office of conscience are diverse. In the memory it has the office of a
Notary, Register, and Witness. In the understanding it has the office of a
Judge, and an accuser, of a Felix and a Tertullus. In the affections either of
a Comforter, or Tormenter.

The sum of all may be thus knit up. Conscience contains three things: 1.
Knowledge practical. 2. Application of that knowledge to our particular
estates, and actions. 3. Those affections which arise thereupon.


Now the special work of Conscience consists in the second, in the applying
our knowledge to our estates and actions. Now in this application it looks on
things past, or present, simply as things, and so it witnesses of them to be
done, or not done, Eccl. 7. 22. Or else it looks at the good or evil of things
past, present, and to come. Super nos etiam posuit ad custodie^dum si
deliquissent qui accusarent, qui testificarentur, qui judicarent, qui punirent:
consc. quippe est accusatrix, memoria testis, ratio judex, timor carnifex.
Bern. hom de vill. iniq.
If things past, or present, seem good, it excuses; if evil, it accuses, and
bites, Romans 2. 15. If things to be done seem good, it excites, urges, and
binds to the doing thereof. If evil, it urges, and binds therefrom. Now
according to these several acts there follow in us diverse affections, joy,
hope, fear, grief, and the like. The whole process of the work of
Conscience falls within the frame a of practical Syllogism, as for example.

Every one that sins in betraying innocent Conscientia Synteresisest qua victi
voluptatibus vel furore ipsaque interdum rationis decepti similitudine nos
peccare sentinuis. Hieronym. in Eccl. ca. 1. Synteresis est promptuarium
principioru^ seu regularum practicarum ejus officium est regulas legis divinae
proferre, and co^sc. subministrare, ut illarum open possit censorem agere de
propriisactionibus. Alsted. Theol. Cas. cap. 2.
blood, is worthy of Gods wrath.

But I (says Judas) have sinned in betraying innocent blood, therefore I am
worthy of Gods wrath.

Here the Major is knowledge practical, the rule and law by which conscience
keeps her Court. This is Synteresis.

The Minor that is Syneidesis, the proper work of Conscience applying that
knowledge, and general rule for a man's particular estate, or action. Here
Conscience witnesses concerning the fact, judges of the quality of it, and
accordingly accuses or excuses.

The Conclusion is the sentence of conscience absolving or condemning, and
accordingly cheering or stinging, comforting or tormenting a man.

CHAP. III.
A good Conscience what it is: false ones discovered.
What Conscience is we have seen; The second thing considerable, is what a
good Conscience is. The Conscience that is good, must be good with a double
goodness.

1. With the goodness of Integrity. 2. With the goodness of Tranquillity.
Uprightness, and Peace; these two are required to the constitution of a good
Conscience.

First, it is good with the goodness of Integrity, when it is an upright
conscience. This is that which Paul calls A pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. which
Phrase a man would almost think in his conscience that the Holy Ghost used on
set purpose, to stop the mouth of the iniquity of the latter times, that should
seek to disgrace all good Conscience with the sarcasme of purity. Now the
conscience is good with the goodness of Integrity and Purity three ways.

1. When it being informed and rightly principled by the word of God, the only
rule and binder of Conscience, it does truly and sincerely judge and determine
evil to be evil, and good to be good. As contrarily, the conscience is
sinfully evil, when it does not determine that to be evil which is evil, nor
that to be good which is good, but call evil good, and good evil. Such as are
the consciences of Ignorant persons, who wanting the knowledge of Gods Word,
and having their consciences blinded through ignorance, are not able to judge
of good or evil, nor to discern and determine which is which. So that
knowledge is necessarily required to the goodness of conscience. Romans 15. 14.
Ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge. The conscience cannot
be good where the soul is naught, and that the soul be without knowledge, it
is not good, Prove. 9. 2.

2. When it does excuse for that which is good, and accuse for that which is
evil, being sanctified by the spirit of grace: for the accusation of
conscience, though it follow upon sin, yet it is not sinful and evil in it
self, but only painful and troublesome, and so opposed to the goodness of
peace, not to the goodness of uprightness, according to that trite
distinction of Bernard of a good Conscience, and not quiet, and a quiet
conscience, and not good. It is the property of a conscience uprightly good to
accuse upon any sin committed. As contrarily the conscience is sinfully evil,
when it does not excuse for good, nor accuse for evil. The superstitious
person, omitting his fopperies, should be excused by his Conscience, whereas he
rather receives blame from his Conscience, therefore his Conscience is sinfully
evil. The secure persons conscience is naught, because he having committed
sin, his Conscience is silent, and lets him alone, and brings in no accusation
against him, therefore it is sinfully evil. It is a witness that has seen,
and known evil, and does not utter it, therefore it shall bear its iniquity,
Levit. 5. 1.

3. When it does incite and urge us to do good, and does stay and hinder from
evil. It is uprightly good when it spurs to good, and bridles from evil, Heb.
13. 18. For we are assured that we have a good Conscience: viz. A conscience
that is neither silent to persuade to that which is good, or dissuade from that
which is evil. If a man go about or be ready to yield to any thing that is
sinful, how will it muster up legions of Arguments? how will it wrestle and
struggle with a man? It will say as Abner to Ioab, 2 Samuel 2. 26. know thou
not that it will be bitterness in the later end? or as Abigail to David, 1 Samuel
25. 31. It shall be no grief, nor offense of heart unto thee another time, not
to have done this evil. If a man be negligent, or careless and drowsy in
good duties, it comes to him with that voice, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that
sleep; or with that, Isa. 30. 21. This is the way, walk in it. When it does
thus, it is uprightly good. Contrarily, it is sinfully evil, when it does not
incite us to that which is good, nor hinder us from doing evil. This is a
dead, and a seared conscience, 1 Timothy 4. 2. Having their consciences seared
with an hot iron.

2. It is good with the goodness of Tranquillity. And that is when the
conscience is at peace, and does not accuse us, because it has not wherewith
to accuse us, either because not guilty of such or such a particular fact, 1
Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self; or else because it is assured of pardon
in the blood of Christ, by which we come to have no more Conscience of Sins,
Heb. 10. 2. That is, no more Conscience to accuse or condemn for Sin, it being
done away in the blood of Christ: and this is the purged Conscience, Heb. 9.
14. which brings Hope, Joy, Comfort, and confidence with it, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This
is our rejoicing, the testimony of our Conscience. Then is the Conscience good,
when it is peaceable. As contrarily, then it is evil, painfully evil, when it
is turbulent, and troublesome in the accusations thereof, and binds over to
judgment, and so leaves us in shame, fear, perplexity, and grief, 1 Ioh. 3.
20. If our heart condemn us. This is a wounded, a troubled conscience. This is
often the evil conscience of evil men, Isa. 57. 21. There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God. Yet may a man have his Conscience uprightly good, which
is painfully evil; for a good man's Conscience may be unquiet and troubled.
Thus then we see what a good conscience is, that which is uprightly honest,
and quietly peaceable. This being so, it serves to discover the dangerous
error of diverse sorts of people, that are in a dream of having good
consciences, and yet having nothing less. There be three sorts of consciences,
which because they are in some sort quiet, and sting not, their owners would
have to go for good ones, and yet are stark naught, and they are, the
Ignorant, the Secure, and the Seared Conscience.

1. The Ignorant Conscience, Men judge of their ignorant consciences, as they
do of their blind, dumb, and ignorant Ministers: Such neither do nor can
Preach, can neither tell men of their sins, nor of their duties. Ask such a
blind guides people, what their conceit is of him, and what a kind of man
their Minister is, and ye shall have him magnified for a passing honest
harmless man, and a man wondrous quiet amongst his neighbors. They may do
what they will for him, he is none of those troublesome fellows that will be
reproving their faults, or complaining of their disorders in the Pulpit; oh,
such a one is a quiet good man indeed. Thus judge many of their Consciences. If
their Consciences be quiet, and lie not grating upon them, and telling them
that their courses are sinful, and damnable, and that their persons are in a
dangerous condition; but rather by their silence, ignorance, and vain
pretenses do justify them, and tell them all will be well enough. Oh then
what excellent good Consciences have these men! They make no Conscience of
Family duties, once in the year to come to the Sacrament serves the turn;
they are common swearers in their ordinary communication, make no conscience of
sanctifying Sabbaths, etc. and their consciences let them alone in all these,
do not give them one syllable of ill language, oh what gentle, and good
natured Consciences think these men they have? But alas, what evil consciences
have they? A good Conscience must be upright as well as peaceable. And an
upright Conscience is enlightened with the knowledge of the Word, and by that
light judges what is good, and what evil, and when it finds men's actions not to
be good and warrantable, deals plainly, and lets them hear of it. A good
Conscience has good eyes, and is able to discern between good and evil. Now
these men's Consciences are quiet, and have their mouths shut, but whence is it?
Because their eyes are shut, and they are dumb, because they are blind. Right
Idol Consciences, they want mouths to speak, because they want eyes to see.
So that it may be said of such Consciences as the Prophet speaks of those
Watchmen, Isa. 56. 10. His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant, they are
all dumb dogs, they cannot bark. Their blindness bred dumbness, and their
ignorance silence. Thus it is with ignorant Conscience. What is the reason they
bark not, but are dumb, and are thus quiet? Merely because they are blind and
ignorant.

But yet as good as men account these consciences now, the time will come that
it shall fare with them as it did with Adam and Eve after they had eaten the
forbidden fruit, Then their eyes were opened. So the time will come when these
Consciences shall have their eyes opened, and then also shall their mouths be
opened, yea wide, and loud opened, and these now quiet consciences shall both
bark and bite too. Do not therefore flatter thy self in thine ignorance, as
if thy condition and Conscience were good, because quiet. Never account that
true Peace which is not joined with uprightness. Integrity and ignorance can
no more stand together than light and darkness. Integrity of Conscience may be
without Peace. Peace can never be without Integrity. Dumb Ministers go in the
world for good Ministers, because quiet ones, but the day will come that men
shall curse them for having been so quiet. So ignorant and tongue-tyed
consciences go for good ones, but the time will come that men will curse this
peace of their Conscience, for bringing them so quietly to hell. The Mass goes
for an excellent good Service, because Missa non mordet, honest toothlesse
devotion, it never fastens fang in the hearers flesh. So many have Masse-like
Consciences, toothlesse, and tonguelesse Consciences, but yet the time will
come, that as Masse-mongers shall curse their toothlesse Mass, so ignorant
persons that now glory in their peace, shall curse their toothlesse Conscience,
yea they shall gnash their teeth, because Conscience had no teeth, and shall
gnaw their tongues for anguish of heart, because their consciences wanted
tongues to tell them of the danger of their wicked ways, that have brought them
to so miserable a condition.

2. The Secure Conscience. As the blind Conscience was like the dumb Minister,
so the secure Conscience is like the flattering Minister, that (Ier. 6. 13.)
heales the hurt of his people with sweet words, and cries, peace, peace, where
there is no peace. This Conscience wants not an eye, but only a good tongue in
the head. It sees its master to do evil, and knows it to be evil, but either
cares not to speak, or else is easily put off from speaking; sometime it cares
not to speak, being sleepy, heavy, and drowsy, like those Prophets, Isa. 56.
10. They are all dumb dogs, they cannot bark. What is the Reason? Sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber. A sleepy, and heavy-eyed Curre, though he see
one come into his masters yard, or house, that should not, yet barks not, as
loath by his barking to disquiet himself. A sleepy secure conscience sees many
a Sin to enter the soul that should not, and yet lies still and says nothing,
is loath to break his sleep. And yet such Consciences men count good.

Sometimes it may be it offers to speak, as a sleepy dog may open once, or
twice at a strangers entrance, yet is soon snibd, the least word of the master
of the house makes him whist, and quiet. So secure Consciences upon the green
wound begin to smart, and upon the fresh commission of Sin begin to mutter, and
to have some grudgings, but their master answers them as the friend in his bed
did his neighbor desiring to borrow three loavs, Luke 11. 17. Trouble me not,
for I am in bed. I pray thee be quiet, let us have no wrangling and brawling,
it shall be so no more, I will cry God mercy, I will hereafter find a time for
repentance, etc. and so Conscience being secure is easily put off with a few
good words, and so closing her eyes and mouth again, gives her master liberty
to take his rest. And thus the secure Conscience, because it is so easily
hushed, and stilled, is counted a good Conscience, as Nurses counted them good
children which though they are ready to cry at every turn, yet are easily
quieted with some toy.

But this Conscience is as far from a good Conscience, as Security is from
Integrity. Sin indeed sleeps, but yet it sleeps but dogs sleep, yea though it
sleep soundly, yet it cannot sleep long. Genesis 4. 7. Sin lies at the door.
Sin lies asleep in the Conscience as a Mastife lies at the door. A place
where a dog cannot sleep long. The door is the common passage into and out of
the house, every one is passing to and fro that way, and keep such a clattering
with the opening and shutting of the door, that there can be no sound, or at
least, no long sleep. No better is the sleep of secure Consciences, which at
length like mad band-dogs and fell mastifes, will fly in the face of the
sinner, ready to pluck out the very throat and heart of him.

The secure conscience can be no good Conscience, because it has neither
uprightness nor peace, both which were before required to the temper of a good
one, Uprightness has it none, for it is not faithful in its office, it does
not witness, it does not accuse, as it becomes an honest upright conscience to
do. Peace it has none. There is a great difference between a peace, and a
truce: in peace there is a total deposition, both of Arms and Enmity, all
hostile affections are put off: In a truce, there is but a suspention, and a
cessation of Arms for a season, so as during the same there is still provision
of more Force, and a preparation of greater strength. A truce is but a
breathing time to fit for fiercer impressions. The truce being ended, the
assaults are rather fiercer than they were before. The secure Consciences are
quiet, not because there is peace, for there is no peace to the wicked, Quomodo
tranquilla? cum mundi hujus prosperitas alludit, and illudit, cum laudatur
peccator in desiderijs animae suae. Born. de Conse.
says my God, Isa. 57. 21. But because there is some truce, the world smiles
upon them and they have outward hearts ease, and this brings them asleep, but
if any affliction, cross, or sickness come, then they see how far they are
from peace. Conscience is sometime at truce with secure sinners, but during
this truce, Conscience is preparing Arms, and Ammunition against them, is
levying of fresh forces against them, and as soon as the truce is ended, be it
sooner or be it later, have at them with more violence, fury, and fiercenes
than ever before. And the truce once ended, it will easily appear what a wide
breadth of difference there is between a secure and a good Conscience.

3. A Seared Conscience. That which Paul speaks of, 1 Timothy 4. 2. A cauterized
Conscience. That is, as Beza translates and expounds it. A Conscience cut off,
as it were with a Chirugions Instrument. An arm, or a leg cut off from the
body, stab it, gash it, chop it into gobbets, do what you will with it, it is
insensible, it feels it not. Or else as our translation has it, Having their
Consciences seared with an hot iron. A comparison borrowed from Chirurgerie.
When a limb is cut off, Chirugions use to sear that part of the Body from
whence the other is taken, with an hot iron, and sometimes they do cures by
searing the affected parts with hot irons. Now these parts upon their searing
have a kind of crusty brawninesse, which is utterly insensible, which though it
be cut, or pricked, it neither bleeds, nor feels. Thus is it with many men's
Consciences, commit they whatsoever sins they will, yet their hearts are so
hardened through long custom in sin, that they feel no gripings, pinches, or
bitings at all, but are grown to that dead, and dedolent disposition, Ephesians.
4. 19. Who being past feeling, etc. It is with such men's consciences, as with
laboring men's hands, which through much labor have a brawny hardness growing
upon them which is without any feeling. One may thrust pins into it, pare it
with a knife, and yet without any trouble or grief at all. Such callous
Consciences have many, that though they be wounded, and gashed with never such
foul sins, yet their consciences shrink not, feel not awhit. Their
Consciences are like Gally-slaves backs, so bebrawned over with often lashing,
that an ordinary lash will not make them so much as once shuck in their
shoulders. You have many that can swear, not only your more civil oaths, of
faith and troth, but those ruffianly and bloody oaths, of blood and wounds,
and it never wounds their hearts awhit. You have many that can commit foul
sins with less touch than others can hear of them. You shall have black
Smiths that are used to the frequent and daily handling of hot iron, hold an
hot firecoale in their hands, and laugh, whilst another would roar out. There
be those that can be drunk day after day, that consecrate whole Sabbaths to
Venus and Bacchus, and give themselves up to foul villainies, and yet not one
twitch at the heart, not a snib, not a cross word from their Consciences.
Estrich-like they can concoct iron and put it off as easily as another weak
stomach can do gelly. They have brought their hearts to that pass the
drunkards body is in, Pro. 25. 35. They have stricken me, and I was not sick;
they have eaten me, and I felt it not. Their seared Consciences have no more
feeling than our sotted Drunkards have in their drunkenness, who though they
have many a knock, and sore bruise, yet feel it not. To this fearful
condition, and senseless and seared stupiditie of Conscience many grow, and
when they have thus crusted and brawned the same, then they have their
Consciences at a good pass, because they hear them not brawling within them.
Alas how far are such from goodness of Conscience? In some sense, those have
worse Consciences than the Devil himself, who believes and trembles, whose
Conscience yet is not so seared, but it trembles at the thoughts of his
deserved damnation.

And howsoever these seared Consciences are quiet, yet there will come a day
that this seared crustinesse shall be scaled off, and those Consciences which
were not sensible of sin, shall be most sensible of pain: though they were
past feeling in the committing of sin, yet they shall be all feeling in
suffering punishment for sin. God will pare off that brawninesse from their
Consciences, and will pare them so to the quick, that they shall feel, and
most sensibly feel, that which here they would not feel. Tremble therefore at
the having of such a Conscience, in which there is neither uprightness, nor
peace, neither integrity, nor tranquillity; but a senseless and fearful
stupidity. Thus we have seen what a good Conscience is.

CHAP. IV.
Peace of Conscience how gotten.
IT follows now to know how a man may get and keep a good one, which is the
third point which was propounded to be handled. A point well worth our
inquiring after. A good Conscience is the most precious thing that a Christian
can have: a thing of that esteem that where it is wanting, we account a man
without a Conscience. So of a man that has an ill Conscience we use to say, he
is a man of no conscience. Not that he has no Conscience, the Devils
themselves have a conscience, and happy it were for them they had none; but
when a man has not a good one, we esteem of him as having none at all. There
is no greater good we can seek after than a good conscience. Let us enquire
then how we may get, and keep this so great a good.

A good Conscience then consisting in Peace and Integrity, these two being
gotten and kept, we shall get and keep a good Conscience.

First then to make the Conscience peaceably good, these things are required.

1. Faith in Christ, and his blood. The conscience cannot be at peace till it
be purged from its guilt. An impure conscience cannot but be an unquiet
conscience, and every guilty Conscience is impure. Guilt is the same to the
Conscience that the winds are to the seas, Isa. 27. 20. 21. The wicked are like
the troubled Sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, there
is no peace to the wicked. Now that which makes the sea so troublesome and
ragingly restless, is the violence of the blustering winds that trouble and
toss it to and fro. The winds are not so troublesome to the sea, as guilt is
to the Conscience. Therefore as the way to calm the Sea, is to calm the
winds; so the way to quiet and calm the Conscience, is to purge and take away
the guilt. Guilt is in the Conscience as Jonas in the Ship, out with him, and
Sea and Ship are both quiet. But how then shall the guilt be purged out of the
Conscience? That we find, Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of Christ
purge our Consciences from dead works? We cannot have a good conscience till we
be freed from an evil one. The way to be freed from an evil Conscience, is to
have our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10. 22. But what is
that wherewith the conscience must be sprinkled to be made good with peace and
quietness? the same which we find, 1 Pet. 1. 2. The sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, and Heb. 12. 24. The blood of sprinkling which speaks better
things than that of Abel.

So then the Conscience sprinkled with Christ's blood ceases to be evil,
becomes good and peaceable. The same Christ that calmed the rage of the Sea by
stilling the winds, Mar. 4. 39. He arose and rebuked the wind, and said unto
the Sea, peace, and be still, and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm;
the same Christ it is that stils the rage of the conscience, by taking and
purging away the guilt thereof, with the sprinkling on of his blood. His blood
speaks, Heb. 12. 24. And speaks not only to God, but speaks to the
conscience. The voice which it speaks, is Peace and be still, the same voice
which to his Disciples after his resurrection, Peace be with you; and then
follows a great calm, and peace makes the Conscience good.

But hear the Conscience will inquire how it may come to get this blood
sprinkled upon it, to make it thus peaceably good, and what is it that applies
this calming blood of Christ? I answer therefore, That it is the grace of faith,
therefore it was said before, that faith in Christ's blood makes peace in the
Conscience. Faith is the hand of the soul, and as the hyssope sprinkle, by
which Christ's blood is sprinkled upon our Consciences, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw
near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil Conscience. And being justified by faith we have peace
toward God. Romans 5. 1. Hence that conjunction of faith and a good Conscience,
1 Timothy 1. 5. of a good Conscience, and of faith unfayned, and ver. 19. Holding
faith and a good Conscience. For faith it is that makes a good conscience, by
making a quiet conscience. Faith is not only a purifying grace, Act. 15. 9. but
it is also a pacifying grace, Romans 5. 1. It not only purges our corruption, by
applying the efficacy of Christ's blood, but specially purges our guilt by
applying the merit of his blood. So that no faith, no peace; and no peace, no
good Conscience. A defiled Conscience can be no good Conscience, and what
defiles the Conscience? See Tit. 1. 15. Unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, nothing is pure, but even their mind and Conscience is defiled.
They that be defiled have their consciences defiled, but how come they and
their Consciences so? To them that are defiled and unbelieving. Therefore an
unbelieving Conscience is a defiled conscience, and a defiled conscience is no
good conscience, because it can have no peace so long as it is clogged with
defiling guilt. But contrarily, faith purifying not only from corruption, but
from guilt, by the application of Christ's blood makes the conscience pure and
peaceable both.

There can be no peace of conscience but where there is the righteousness of
the person. There is no peace to the wicked, Isa. 57. 21. as if he should say,
an evil unrighteous person cannot have a good conscience: where the person is
evil, there the conscience cannot be good. Now faith in Christ's blood makes a
man's person good, and so the conscience becomes good. It makes the person
righteous, and the person being righteous, the conscience is at peace; for the
work of righteousness, is peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness, and assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17. with which that of the Apostle
sweetly suits, Revel. 7. 2. First King of righteousness, and after that King
of peace. Our persons must first find Christ a King of righteousness, by
justifying them from their guilt, before our consciences can find him King of
Salem, pacifying them from their unquietness. Our persons once justified by
Christ's blood from their guilt, and unrighteousness, our consciences are
pacified and freed from their unquietness.

Would thou then have a good conscience? Get the peace of conscience. Would
thou have Peace in thy conscience? Get faith in thy soul; Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and get thy soul sprinkled with his blood, and then Heb. 10. 2. Thou
shall have no more conscience of Sin, thy Conscience shall be at quiet, no more
accusing thee, nor threatening thee condemnation for thy Sin.

2. Repentance from dead works. Though Christ's blood be that which purges the
conscience from dead works, and so works peace; yet that peace is not wrought
in our apprehension; neither do we get the feeling of this faith without some
further thing. Therefore to our faith must be joined our repentance, though not
in the making of our peace, yet for the feeling of it. Many are ready to catch
at Christ's blood, and if that will make a good conscience they are then safe
enough. But as thou must have Christ's blood, so Christ will have thine heart
also bleed by repentance, ere he will vouchsafe the sense of peace. A conscience
therefore that would be a conscience having peace, must not only be a
believing, but a repenting conscience, Mat. 3. 2. Repent ye, for the Kingdom
of heaven is at hand, the Kingdom of heaven shall be yours if you will repent,
ye shall have it immediately upon your repentance. But wherein stands this
kingdom offered to repentant consciences? The Kingdom of God stands in peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Repent, and ye shall receive the gift
of the holy Gbost, Act. 3. 38. And what may that gift be. The fruits of the
Spirit are love, joy, peace, Gal. 5. 22. Which though it be to be understood of
peace between man and man, yet also that peace which is between God and man
is the fruit of the spirit, and the love of God shed abroad into our hearts by
the holy Ghost, Romans 5. 5. is the gift of the holy Ghost, which he gives to
all, that by repentance seek to get a good conscience. Blessed are they that
mourn, that is, which repent, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5. 4. they shall
have the peace of a good conscience, which is the greatest and sweetest comfort
in the world.

Many do trust all to their supposed faith, as a short cut and compendious way
to a good conscience, but he whose faith does not as well purify the heart as
pacify it, has neither faith nor a good conscience. It is idle to hope for
peace by faith, whilst thou live impenitently in a sinful course. Thou can
have no peace of conscience so long as thou have peace with thy sins. Peace
with conscience will be had by war with sin, in the daily practice of
repentance. It it is but a dream to think of a good conscience in peace,
whilst a man makes no conscience of sin. They that have a good conscience by
Christ's blood, may be indeed said to have no conscience of sin, as Heb. 10. 2.
But yet there is a great difference between having no conscience, and making
no conscience of sin. To have no conscience of sin, is to have a peaceable good
conscience, not accusing of sin, being sprinkled with Christ's blood. To make no
conscience of sin, is for a man impenitently to live, and ly in any sin. Now
let any judge whether these two can stand together, that a man may live as he
list, and make no conscience of any sin, and yet have such peace by faith as
that he has no Conscience of sin. It is an unconscionable thing in this sense
to lay all upon Christ, an unconscionable request to have him take away our
guiltiness, and yet we would wallow in our filthiness still. How shall faith
remove the sting, when repentance removes not the Sin?

Men seeking peace by faith in Christ's blood, and yet living and lying in their
sins without repentance, God will give them Iehues answer to Iehoram, 2 King.
9. 22. What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezebel, and her
witchcrafts are so many? So what peace of conscience, so long as thine oaths,
Sabbath-breaches, whoredoms, drunkenness, etc. do remain, and remain,
unrepented of, and unreformed. It is true of all Sin, which is spoken of Romish
Idolatry, Apoc. 14. 11. They have norest day nor night; that is, no peace of
conscience to any of that religion; so of all that live in any Sin, they have
no true rest day nor night; that is, as Isaiah interprets it, There is no peace
to the wicked. Peace and wickedness live not together under one roof. Would
thou then have a peaceable heart? Get an humbled, a mourning and a repentant
heart for Sin. The less peace with Sin, the more peace with God and our own
Consciences.

3. The constant and conscionable exercise of prayer. An excellent means to
help us to the sense of that peace which makes the conscience good. He that
has a good conscience will make conscience of prayer. And prayer will help to
make a good conscience better, Phil. 4. 7. In every thing by prayer and
supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, and
mark what shall be the fruit thereof, And the peace of God that passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Jesus Christ. See Job
33. 26. He shall pray unto God, and he will be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy. It is many times with men's consciences, as it was
with Saul, he was vexed and disquieted with an evil spirit; but David's Harp
gave him ease: Prayer is a David's Harp, the music whereof sweetly calmes,
and composes a distempered and disquieted conscience, and puts it into frame
again. As in other disquiets of the heart, after prayer David bids his soul
return unto her rest. Ps. 116. 4. 7. So we may in these disquiets of
conscience do no less.

The way to get a good peaceable conscience, is to have acquaintance with God;
and when we have acquaintance with him, then shall we have peace, Job 22. 21.
Acquaint thy self now with him, and be at peace. Now acquaintance is gotten
with God by prayer. Zech. 13. 9. They shall call on my name, and I will hear
them; I will say, it is my people; and they shall say, the Lord is my God. Lo
how in prayer acquaintance is bred between God and his people, and
acquaintance breeds love, and peace; and peace a good Conscience. Judge then
what pitious conscience they must needs have, that make so little conscience of
seeking God in this duty; of wicked ones the Psalm speaks, They call not upon
God, Psalm. 14. as much as Isaiah says, There is no peace to the wicked, they
are utterly void of good Conscience.

CHAP. V.
Integrity of Conscience how procured.
ANd thus we have seen how the conscience may be good for peace. It follows to
consider how it may become uprightly good, with the goodness of Integrity. The
goodness of Integrity is gotten and kept by doing five things.

1. Walk and live as Paul in this Text, Before God. Set thy self ever in all
thy ways, as in the sight and presence of God, who is the Judge and Lord of
conscience. Of Moses it is said, that he saw him that was invisible, Heb. 11.
27. Therefore it is that men walk with such loose and evil consciences,
because they think they walk invisibly. And they think that God sees not them,
because they see not God. An upright conscience is a good conscience, and this
is the way to get an upright one, Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, and be upright.
To have God always in our eye, will make us walk with upright hearts. So
Psalm. 119. 168. I have kept thy precepts, and thy testimonies, that is in
effect, I have kept a good Conscience; but how came he to do it? for all my
ways are before thee. Conscience, as we saw before, is a knowledge together,
that is, together with God. Now then this is an excellent means to get and
keep a good conscience, to be careful to do nothing, but that which we would
be content God should know as well as our selves. Think with thy self before
every evil action: Am I content that God should know of this? But how then may
a man bring himself to this? Set thy self always in Gods presence, and see the
invisible God, and see thy self visible in his eye, and know that thou do
nothing which he takes not notice of. This well thought upon, and laid to
heart, would make men make much conscience of their ways. The contrary to this
is rash walking, Lev. 26. when a man walks so loosely, and heedlesly, as if
there were no eye upon him to view him in his actions.

2. Frame thy whole Course by the Dirige gressus secundu^ verbum tuum. Quid
est, Dirige secundum verbum tuum. Virecti sint gressus mei, quia rectum est
verbum tuum. Ego, inquit, distortus sum sub pondere iniquitatis, sed verbum
tuum est regula veritatis, me ergo distortum a me corrige tanquam ad regulam,
hoc est, ad verbum tuum. Au. de ver. Apo. ser. 12.
rule, and shape it by the directions of the word of God. Gods Word is the Rule
of conscience, Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this Rule. Men must
then walk by rule, and the Word must be this rule, Ps. 30. 23. To him that
orders his conversation; all Christians must be regulars, and must live
orderly. But what is that Rule by which their conversation must be ordered?
That same, Ps. 119. 133. Order my steps in thy Word. He that orders his course
by that rule, which is the rule of conscience, shall be sure to keep and get a
good conscience. He that will make good work will work by his rule, whereas
he that works by guess must needs make but ill work. Whatsoever is not of
faith is Sin, Romans 14. 23. That is, whatsoever a man does, and has not warrant
for it out of, and from the rule of the Word, makes a man's conscience in that
particular to be evil. And therefore, v. 5. Let a man be fully persuaded in
his own mind. How happy should men be in getting and keeping good consciences,
if they would lay their lives and actions to the Rule. The want of this is it
that makes men, men of so ill consciences. Some live by no Rule, some by false
Rules; and hence come men's consciences to be so Anomalous. Some live by no
Rule, but do whatsoever seems good in their own eyes, go as their lusts
lead them, and follow his beck that rules in the Air. This is also to walk
rashly, Lev. 26. He that does things without rule, goes rashly to work. He
that walks irregularly, walks rashly, and no marvel if men have crooked
ways, and crooked consciences, when they will not live by Rule. Some again
live by false Rules, and that not only Popish fictitious Regulars that live by
superstitious Rules of their Dominick, Francis, etc. But amongst our selves
many have a Rule they do live by, but that Rule is not the Word, but some
false Rules of their own devising. Such as are these; Great men's practice, or
some learned Inter causas maloru^ nostrorum est, quod vivimus ad exe^pla, nec
ratione co^ponimur, sed co^suetudine. Quod si pauci facerent nollemus imitari,
cum plures facere coeperunt, quasi honestius sit, quia frequentius sequimur:
and recti apud nos locum tenet error, ubi publicus factus est. Sen. Ep. 124.
man's opinion, the custom of times and places wherein they live, the example
of the multitude, or some secret, blind and self-conceived principles which
they keep to themselves, and by which they live. All which being crooked
Rules, must needs make crooked Consciences, whereas if men would live by David's
Rule, Ps. 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path,
and in every action would have an eye and a respect unto the Commandments, as
he had, Psalm. 119. 6. then should they make straight paths for their feet, Heb.
12. 13. and keep upright Consciences in every spiritual action; therefore
have an eye to the Word, question it whether it be justifiable and warrantable
by the Word or no, and meddle no further than that will authorize, and bear
thee out. If this course were taken, such a good course would make and keep a
good Conscience. And why should not men be willing to take this course; why
will we not make that Word our Rule, which must be made our Judge? The word
which I speak shall judge you in the last day, Ioh. 12. 48. The Word shall
judge our consciences, therefore let it rule, and order them. And if it have the
ruling of our consciences, it will make them good consciences, and when they
are good they need not fear what Judge they come before, nor what judgment
they undergo. In sum, if we would have good consciences, we must make more
conscience than is commonly made of reading, and searching the Scriptures. The
ignorance and neglect of this duty is it which banes so many consciences in the
world. Integritatis tuae curiosus explorator vitam tuam in quotidiana
discussione examina. Attend diligenter qua^tum pro^icias, vel quantum
deficias, qualis sis in moribus, qualis sis in affectibus, quam simili^ sis
Deo, vel quam disimilis, qua prope, vel quam long etc. Read ergo te tibi, and
si non semper vel saepe, a^ saltem interdum. Bern. med. de vot. cap. 5.


3. Keep a daily and a frequent Audit with thy conscience, often examination of
the conscience conduces much to the goodness of it. The Prophet complains of his
people, Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle,
Ier. 8. 6. Here were men far from a good conscience; but what was the reason of
it? He gives it in the former words, No man repents him of his wickedness,
saying, what have I done? There was no examination of their consciences and
courses, what they were, nor how they were, and from hence comes this
mischief. This was David's course. Psa. 119. 51. I considered my ways and
turned my feet unto thy testimonies. When a man's feet are in the ways of Gods
testimonies, then he walks with an upright conscience, and mark how David
came to do so, I considered my ways, he used to examine his Conscience.

The first step to get a good conscience, is for a man to know that his
conscience before reformation is evil. How shall that be known without a
search? When a search has discovered what it is that makes the conscience, and
course evil, then will Conscience be ready to labor a man to the reformation
of that which is amiss, and will not cease to urge, and ply a man till it be
done. Frequent examination as it helps to the making of Scholars, so to the
making of Consciences good. Hence men's lying in so gross neglects of good
duties, in so many great evils, because men and their consciences never reckon.
Men take not themselves aside into their closets and chambers, and there set
not up a privy Sessions to make inquiry into their own hearts and ways, and
therefore are their ways and consciences so much out of order. Many a man
thinks his estate in the world to be very good, and thinks he grows rich and
wealthy, when his estate indeed is weak, and grows every day worse than other.
Now what is it that causes so great a mistake? Nothing but this, that he never
looks over his books nor casts over his reckonings. If he had done this, he
should have seen that his estate was not answerable to his conceit, and the
knowledge of his misconceit would have made him have lived at a more wary, and
thrifty rate, and have kept himself within such a compass as might have kept
up his estate, whereas now the not examining his books, puts him into a conceit
of wealth, and this conceit beggars and undoes him. It fares no better with too
many in their Consciences. Laodicea thought well of her self, Thou say, I
am rich. If she had examined her conscience, she should have seen that which
Christ saw, that she was poor, blind, naked, and miserable, and the sight of
this would have made her to have sought after that counsel which Christ there
gives her, Revel. 3. Men would have far better consciences if they knew in what
ill case their Consciences stand, and examination would help them to the
knowledge of this. If men would but over-looke the book of their Conscience,
and see how many omissions of good, how many sinful co^missions stand
registered there, it would both make them mavelous sollicitous how to get them
wiped out, and wondrous wary how any more such Items came there. Often
reckonings Omni die cum vadis cubitu^, examina diligenter quid cogitasti, and
quid dixisti; indie, and quomodo utile tempus and spatium quod datum est ad
acquirendu^ vitam aeternam dispensasti. Et si been transavisti, lauda Deum: si
male vel neglige^ter, lugeas, and sequenti die non differas confiteri. Si
aliquid cogitasti, dixisti, velfecisti, quod tuam conscientiam multum
remordeat, non comedas antequam confitearis. Bern. form. vit. honest. Suavius
dormiunt qui relinquunt* curas in calceis.
would blot out, and keep off the score. Here is then wisdom for such as
desire to keep good consciences. Do with the works of thy conversation as
God did with the works of his Creation. He not only surveyed at the sixth days
end the whole work of the week, but at each days end made a particular
survey thereof. Do thou so, not only at the weeks end, at thy lives end,
search thine heart, and examine thy course, but at every days end look back
into the day past, and examine what thy carriage and behavior has been. This
being done, a man shall find his works either good or evil. If good, how
shall his conscience cheer him with its peace? If evil, then if conscience
have any life, or breath in it, it will make a man fall to humiliation, and to
a godly resolution of watching over his ways for the future, so shall
conscience be much helped for integrity. David's counsel is good, Ps. 4. 5.
Examine your hearts upon your beds; and his resolution is also good, verse. 8.
of the same Psalm, I will lay me down and sleep in peace. Who would not be glad
so to sleep, and to take his rest so? would we sleep upon David's pillow, sleep
in peace? then hearken we to David's counsel, to examine our selves upon our
beds. There is nothing makes a man's bed so soft, nor his sleep so sweet as a
good conscience. It is with Sins as with Cares, both trouble a man's sleep, both
are troublesome bed-fellows, as they therefore sleep sweetly that leave their
cares in their shoes, so they sleep with most peace that let not sin ly down
to sleep with them, who are so far from lying down in their sins, that by
their good will, will not let the Sun go down upon their sin, but by
examination ferret out the same. This being done, it may be said, as Prove. 3.
24. Thou shall ly down, and thy sleep shall be sweet. Nay further, examine thy
conscience upon thy bed, and thou shall not only sleep in peace, but thou
shall awake and arise the next morning with an upright frame of heart, disposed
to the more caution against Sin the day following. So much David seems to
intimate in that forenamed place. Tremble and sin not. That is, be afraid to
sin, take heed ye sin no more. But what course may one take to come to that
integrity of conscience, as to fear to sin? Take this course, Examine your
hearts upon your beds.

But alas how rare a practice is this, and therefore are good consciences so
rare. Many think this an heavy burden, and a sore task, and count the remedy
a great deal worse than the disease, there is nothing they tremble at more
than a domestical Audit, and this reckning with their consciences. They say of
conscience as Ahab of Micaiah, and care as little to meddle with conscience as
Ahab with Micaiah. I hate him; for he never speaks good to me, 1 King. 22. So
they think the conscience will deal with them. They know their conscience
will speak as Job says God wrote, Thou writest bitter things against me.
Conscience has such a stinging waspish tongue, that by no means they dare
endure a parley with it. It is with many and their consciences, as with men that
have shrewish wives. Many a man when he is abroad, has no joy at all to come
home, nay he is very loath to come within his own doors, he fears he shall
have such a peale rung him, that he had rather be on the house top, as Solomon
speaks, or in some out house, and lodge as our Savior at Bethlem in a cratch,
or a Manger, than come within the noise of her clamorous, and chattering
tongue. So many think conscience has such a terrible shrewish tongue, that if
they shall but come within the sound thereof, they shall be cast into such
melancholy dumpes, as they shall not be able in haste to claw off again. How
much, and how seriously are they to be pitied that to prevent a few hours, or
days supposed sorrow, and sadness, by which they might come to procure both
peace and integrity of Conscience, will adventure the rack and eternal torture
of conscience in Hell. Remember that there is no melancholy to the melancholy
of Hell.

CHAP. VI.
Two further means to procure integrity of Conscience.
IN the fourth place, deal with thy conscience as God would have Abraham do
by Sarah, Genesis 21. 12. In all that Sarah shall say unto thee, hearken unto her
voice. So here, if we would get and keep a good conscience, in all that it
shall say unto us, being enlightened and directed by the word, hearken unto it.
Conscience being enlightened has a voice, and no man but sometime or other
shall hear this voice of conscience. Conscience is Gods Monitor to speak to
men when others cannot, or dare not speak. Sometimes men cannot speak as not
being privy to other men's necessities and failings. Sometimes they may not be
suffered to speak, as Ahab will not endure Micaiah to speak to him. Sometime
if a man speak, he may have rough and angry answers, as the Prophet had from
Amaziah, 2. Chron. 26. 16. Art thou made of the Kings Counsel? forbear, why
should thou be smitten? God has therefore provided every man even great men
which may not be spoken to, he has provided them a bosom Chaplein, that will
round them in the ear, and will talk roundly to them, one that will be of
their counsel in despite of them; one that fears no fists, dreads no
smiting, yea, one that fears not to smite the greatest, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And
David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. It may be many
there were about David that had not the hearts to smite David with a grave
reproof, though he gives leave to the righteous to do so, Ps. 141. Let the
righteous smite me, but yet whilst others, it may be, are fearful and
timorous to do him that good office, conscience is at no demurre upon the
point, that fears not, but smites David for sin.

Gods Ministers are often slighted, and light set by, preachers cannot be
regarded, but God has given men a Preacher in their own bosom, and this
Preacher will make many a curtain sermon, will take men to task upon their
pillow, and will be preaching over our Sermons again to them. And though many
will not be brought to repetition of Sermons in their Families, yet they have a
Repeater in their bosom, that will be at private repetitions with them in spite
of them, and will tell them, This is not according to that you have been
taught, you have been taught otherwise; you have been reproved for, and
convinced of this sin in the public Ministry, etc. Why do not you
hearken and reform? Thus then conscience having a voice, and doing the office
of a Preacher unto us, if we would have conscience good, then in all things
that conscience enlightened shall say unto us, hearken unto it. More distinctly
conscience has a twofold voice.

1. A voice of direction, telling us what is good or evil, what is lawful and
unlawful, Isa. 30. 21. And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying,
This is the way, walk ye in it. That is understood of Ita enim desuper in
silento sonat quidam non auribus sed mentibus. August. in Psalm. 42.
the voice of Gods spirit in the secret suggestions thereof, and such is the
voice also of conscience within us, dictating to us, and directing us what
duties are to be done, what courses to be avoided. How many times does
conscience press us to repentance and to reform our ways? how often does it
call upon us to settle to such and such good courses? and so with David, Psalm.
16. 7. Our reins do teach it in the night season.

2 A voice of correction and accusation, checking and chiding, taking up and
shipping us when we do amiss. So Psalm. 42. 5. 11. and Ps. 43. 5. Why art thou
cast down O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? And Ps. 77. 10.
whilst in the foregoing verses he was complaining, and using some speeches that
might savor of some diffidence, see how Conscience does her office by a
correcting voice: And I said, this is my infirmity; as if he had said, whilst
I was using such different expostulations, mine own conscience told me, I did
not do well. Conscience so speaks to us, as the Lord to Jonah, Ion. 4. 4. 9.
Do thou well to be angry? So says conscience often, Do thou well to be thus
earthly, thus eager upon the world, thus negligent and formal in holy duties?
thus conscience gives her privy nips, and her secret checks. This is that of
which Job speaks, Job 27. 6. My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
Implying that conscience after sin has a reproching voice, as when it befooles
a man, as fool that thou art to do this, to lose thy peace with God for a base
sinful pleasure. Thus David's conscience reproched him, 2 Samuel 24. 10. I have
don very foolishly; yea, Ps. 37. 22. it puts the fool and the beast both upon
him, So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee. This is the
smiting of the conscience, 2 Samuel 24. 10. Conscience first points with the
finger and gives direction, if that be neglected, it smites with the fist, and
gives correction.

Now then that which I aim at, is this; If we would get and keep a good
conscience, then neglect not, nor despise conscience when it speaks. Does thy
conscience press thee to any works of piety, to the care of family worship,
and private devotion, to the reading of the Scriptures, sanctification of the
Sabbath, etc. In any case be so wise as to hearken to the councels, to the
urgings, and to the injunctions which come out of the Court of Conscience.
Hearken in any case to this Preacher, whom thou can not suspect of
partiality, malice, ill will, as thou do others, thereby giving way to satan's
policy, that hereby stops up the passages of thine heart, that the Word may not
enter. Here can be no such suspicions; conscience cannot be suspected to be set
on by others; though Jeremy be charged to be set on by Baruch, Ier. 43. 3.
Therefore hearken to the voice of this Preacher, and this will help thee to a
good conscience. Ideo quantu^ potes, teipsum coargue, inquire in te,
accusatoris primum partibus sungere, deinde Iudicis novissime deprecatoris:
aliquando off^ndete. Senec. epist. 28.


Again, does thy conscience rebuke thee, does it chide and check thee, does
thy heart reproach thee for thy ways? does it say, do thou well to live in
such and such Sins? Does it punctually reprove thee for thine evils? Do not
answer conscience, as Jonas answered God, frowardly, Yea I do well, but even
close with conscience, and do thou accuse thy self as fast as it accuses,
acknowledge thy folly, yield, promise, and covenant with thy conscience a
present and speedy reformation. This if it were done, how happy should men be
in getting and keeping a good conscience.

But alas, how few regard the voice of Conscience, and once hearken to it, and
the very want of this duty is it which breeds so much ill conscience in the
world. Men in this case are guilty of a double wickedness. Either they deal
as the Jews with the Apostles, Act. 4. 18. and 1 These. 2. 16. They either stop
consciences mouth, and labor to silence this Preacher, or else they deal with
conscience as the Jews did with Stephen, Act. 7. 57. They stopped their ears.
If they cannot stop consciences mouth, they will at least stop their own ears.

1 They labor to stop consciences mouth. If conscience begin to take them
aside, and to say to them, as Ehud to Eglon; Judge. 3. 19. I have a secret
errand unto thee: they answer, but in another sense, as he did; Keep silence.
If conscience offer to be talking unto them, they shufflle it off as Felix did
Paul, they are not at leisure, they will find some other time when their
leisure will better serve. Yea many when their consciences reproach them, they
again reproach and reprove it, and answer it as the Danites did Micah, Judges
11. 23. What ayleth thee? and are ready to give reproachful language to their
own conscience, that it cannot be quiet and let them alone.

2 But yet Conscience will not of entimes be thus posted and shuffled off, will
not be gagged, or suffer her lips to be sown up, but will deal with a man as
the woman of Canaan did with our Savior, Math. 15. She would not be put off
with neglect, or cross answers, but she still presses upon our Savior, and
grows so much the more importunat. So oftentimes conscience when she sees men
shuffle, grows the more importunate, and will dog and haunt men so much the
more. Yea it deals like the blind men, Math. 20. 31. who when the multitude
rebuked them, they cried the more. Now then when conscience grows thus
clamorous, and will not be silenced, then they will stop their own ears, that
if it will needs be prating, it shall but tell a tale to a deaf man. To this
end men put a double trick upon their consciences.

1 Saul's trick. Saul is vexed with an evil spirit, what must be the cure?
seek him out a minstrell. Thus many, when the cry of conscience is up, betake
them to their merriments and jollities. They try whether the noise of the
Harps, and Viols, and the roarings of good fellows will not drown the voice
and noise of conscience. They will try whether the dinne of an Alehouse, or
the rattling and clattering of the Dice and Tables cannot deaf their ears
against the clamours of conscience. Thus do many in the accusations of
conscience, give themselves wholly up to all manner of pleasures and delights,
that so their minds being taken up with them, there might be no leisure to
give conscience any the least audience.

2 Cains trick. Cain had a mark of God upon him, Genesis 4. 15. And what might
that mark be? Chrysostom thinks it was a continual shaking and trembling of
his Chrysostom. in ^. ep. Cor. Hom. 7.
body. If that were his mark, why might not that trembling come from the
horror of his guilty conscience, following him with a continual hue and and
cry for murder, and reproching him for a bloody murderer. How-ever, no
question but his conscience continually haunted him, and the cry of blood was
ever in his ears. Now then what course takes he? ye shall see Genesis 4. 17. That
he falls a building of Cities, betakes himself to a multitude of employments,
that the noise of the sawes, axes, and mallets, might be louder then the noise
of his Conscience. If Conscience be out of quiet with them, and will not cease
to urge and pinch them, then have among their sheep, and oxen, that their
bleating, and bellowing may keep under the voice of conscience, they do so
possess their heads and their thoughts, and so overload them with much
dealings in the world, that there is no spare time wherein their ear can be
free to hear the voice of conscience. The clutter of their many businesses
make too great a noise for Conscience to have audience. They deal with their
consciences as the Ephesians dealt with Alexander, Act. 19. 33. 34. And
Alexander beckned with the hand, and would have made his defense unto the
people. But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one voice about the
space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. If Alexander
had had never so good lungs, and strong sides he might have strained his voice
till he had crazed the organs of language, and might have spoken till he had
been hoarse again, before he could have been heard to have spoken one
syllable, though he had spoken all the reason in the world. Such a noise of an
outrageous bellowing multitude had bin almost enough to have drowned the voice
of a Canon. Thus deal men with their conscience, if she but prepare to speak
and give but a beck with the hand, presently thrust themselves into a crowd of
business that may outcry and over-cry the bawling noise thereof. It was an
hideous noise that the shricking infants of Israel made when they were offered
up alive in fire unto Moloch. Now lest their parents bowels should earne with
compassion, and be affected with the shrickes of their poor babes, therefore
they had their drums and trumpets struck up and sounded in the time of
sacrifice, to make such a noise, that in no case the lamentable cries of the
infants should be heard. The same trick do too many put upon their consciences,
if they will be clamouring, they will have some Drum or other, whose greater
noise may deaf their ears from hearing the cries of conscience.

But alas what poor projects are these? The time will come when men shall have
neither pleasures nor profits, neither delights nor business, to stop their
ears. Though now men beat upon these Drum-heads, and with the noise of their
pleasures and profits keep conscience voice under from being heard, yet the
day will come, when God will beat out these Drum-heads, and then the cries and
horrid and hideous shrickes of conscience shall be heard: God will one day
strip thee of all thy pleasures and employments, and will turn thee single and
loose to thy conscience, and it shall have full liberty to bait thee, and bite
thee at pleasure. Oh how much better is it to be willing to hearken to the
voice of Conscience here, than to be forced to hear it in hell, when the time
of harkening will be past and gone. Hearken to it now, and thou shall not hear
it hereafter. Hearken to the admonitions and reproves of it now; and thus
shall thou get Integrity here, and shall be free from hearing the doleful
clamours of it in hell hereafter.

5. To get and keep a good Conscience ever in cases of a doubtful and
questionable nature, be sure to take the surest side. Many things are of a
questionable nature, and much may be said on either side; in such cases, if
thou would have a good Conscience, take the surest side, that side on which
thou may be sure thou shall not sin. As for example. There be diverse games
and recreations whose lawfulness are questioned, yet much may be said for
them, and possibly they may have the judgment of diverse reverend and learned
men for their lawfullnesse. Now what shall a man do in this case? Take the
sure side. If I use them it is possible I may sin, it may be they are not
sinful, yet I am not so sure of it that I shall not sin if I use them, as
I am sure I shall not sin if I do not use them. I am sure that not to use such
sports breaks none of Gods commandments, a man may be bold to build upon
that. Tutiores igitur vivimus si totum Deo daraus, non autem nos illi ex part,
and nobis ex part committimus. Aug. de dono persev. cap. 6.
He that lives by this rule, shall keep his Conscience from many a flaw. He
that sails amongst Rocks it is possible he may escape splitting, but he is
not so sure to keep his vessel safe and whole as he that sails in a clear
sea where no rocks are at all. It is good in matter of life and practice, to
do as Augustine speaks in case of doctrine. We live more safely, says he,
if we attribute all wholly to God, and do not commit our selves partly to
God, and partly to our selves. In doctrines it is good to hold the safest side
wherein there can be no danger, yea, Bellarmine himself after his long dispute
for justification by Propter incertitudinem propriae Iustitiae and periculum
inanis gloriae, tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere. Bellar. de Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7.
merit, comes to this at last, That by reason of the uncertainty of our own
righteousness, and the danger of vainglory, it is the most safe way to
repose our whole confidence in the mercy and goodness of God alone. Which way
soever Bellarmine is gone himself, or any of his religion, I think common
reason will teach a man so much wisdom to go the safest way to heaven, and
that the safest way is the best way. The Lord that would have us make our
calling and election sure, 2 Peter 1. 10. would not have us put so great a
matter as the salvation of our souls upon Bellarmines hazard, and confessed
uncertaintie of our own righteousness. Now as in case of doctrine, so in case
of practice it is great wisdom, and a great means of keeping a good
conscience, to do that wherein we may Tutioris vivere, and to take to that
which Tutissimum est, to follow that which is safest, and to take to that side
which is the surest, and the freest from danger.

CHAP. VII.
Two marks if a good Conscience.
THus we see how a good conscience may be had; it follows we consider how it
may be known, and be discerned to be had. The marks and notes by which a good
conscience may be known, are seven.

1. This in the Text. In all good conscience. 1. Note of good conscience.
Conscience in all things.
It is a good note of a good conscience, when a man makes conscience of all
things, all duties, and all Sins. There be that have natural consciences
principled by some general grounds of nature, and it may be, so far as
these rules carry them, may make some conscience, but their principles coming
short, they must needs also come as short of a good conscience: I have lived,
says Paul here, in all good conscience, and Heb. 13. 18. We trust we have a
good Conscience in all things. It is a good conscience when a man's life, all
his life is a life of conscience, when in all his life, and the whole tenor
thereof he makes conscience of all that God commands, and forbids, Psalm. 119.
6. Then shall I not be ashamed, (what breeds shame but evil conscience?) when
I have respect unto all thy Commandments. When all are respected there is no
shame, because where all are respected there is good conscience, and where good
conscience is, there is no shame. That argued David's good conscience, Psalm.
119. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way.

Try men's consciences by this, and it will discover a great deal of evil
conscience in the world. Many a moral man makes conscience of doing his
neighbor the least wrong, he will not wrong or pinch any man, pays every man
his own, deals fairly and squarely in his commerce, there is no man can say
black is his eye, you shall have him thank God that he has as good a
conscience as the best. These are good things, and such things as men ought to
make conscience of, but yet here is not enough to make a good conscience. A
good conscience must be all good conscience, or it is no good conscience. Now
indeed these men may have good consciences before men, but my Text tells us that
we must live in all good conscience before God. And Paul joines them two
together, Act. 24. 13. And herein I do exercise my self to have a good
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men. Now be it that these
have good conscience before men, yet what have they before God? Alas they are
miserably ignorant in the things of God, no consciences to acquaint themselves
with his truth, no conscience of prayer in their families, of reading the
Scriptures, no conscience of an oath, and as little of the Sabbath, and the
private duties thereof. How far are these from good conscience?

Others again seem to make conscience of their duties before God, but in the
mean time no conscience of duties of Justice in the second Table, make no
conscience of oppression, racking rents, covetousness, overreaching, etc.
these are no better consciences then the former, neither are good because they
live not in all good conscience. Thus may ^ man discover the naughty
consciences of most. Iehu seems wondrous zealous for the Lord, and seems to
be a man of a singular good conscience in the demolishing the Temple of Baal,
and putting to death his Priests. I, but if Iehu make conscience of letting
Baals Temple stand, why does he not as well make conscience of letting
Ieroboams Calves stand? If Iehu had had a good conscience, he would as ill
have brookt Ieroboams as Iezebels Idolatry; he would have purged the land of
all Idols.

Herod seems to make some conscience of an Oath. Mark 6. 26. For his Oaths
sake he would not reject her. It is joy of him that he is a man of so good
conscience. I, but in the mean time why makes he no conscience of incest and
murder? He fears, and makes conscience to break an unlawful Oath, but
makes no conscience to cut an holy Prophets throat. Who would not have thought
Saul to have been a man of a very good conscience? see how like a man of good
conscience he speaks. 1 Samuel 14. 34. Sin not against the Lord in eating
with the blood. He would have the people make conscience of eating with the
blood; and indeed it was a thing to be made conscience of. I, but he that makes
conscience of eating the flesh of Sheep and Oxen with the blood, like a bloody
hearted tyra^t, as he was, he makes no conscience of sucking and shedding the
blood of fourscore and five of Gods Priests. Just the conscience of his
bloodhound Doeg. 1 Samuel 21. 7. Doeg was there that day detained before the Lord.
How detained? either out of a religious conscience of the Sabbath, or by
occasion of a vow, the man made conscience of going before the Sabbath were
ended, or the days of his vow finished. A thing indeed to be made conscience
of, men ought not to depart from Gods house, till holy services be finished, a
duty that even the Prince must make conscience of, Ezekiel. 46. 10. Who therefore
would not judge this Edomite a conscionable Proselyte? I, but why then makes
he no conscience of Lying? Psalm. 25. Why no conscience of being isntrumental
to Saul's injustice in that barbarous villainy of slaying, not only innocent
men, but innocent Priests of the Lord? such were the Consciences of the Chief
Priests, Matthew. 27. 6. How like honest conscionable men they speak: It is not
lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood.
Sure it is, great conscience ought to be made of bringing the price of blood
into the Temple treasury; Are they not then men of good conscience, It is not
lawful, ye see they will not do that which is not lawful. It is well, but
tell me, is it not lawful to take the price of blood, and is it lawful to give
a price for blood? Ought there Qualis haec innoce^tiae simulatio; pecunia^
sanguinis non mit^^e in Ar^^^, et ipsum sanguinem mitie^e in Conscientia^
August.
not a Conscience to be made of blood, as well as of the price of blood? They
make a Conscience of receiving the price of blood into the Treasury, but make
no Conscience of receiving the guilt of blood into their Consciences. Just such
Consciences as they had, Ioh. 18. 28. They would not go into the Judgment
Hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover.
Indeed a man should make great Conscience of preparation to the Sacrament, and
take great heed that he come not thither defiled; but see their naughty
Conscience, they make Conscience of being defiled by going into the judgment
Hall, but make no Conscience of being defiled with the blood of an Innocent.
Such was the conscience of the Jews, Ioh. 19. 31. they make Conscience of the
body of Christ hanging on the Cross on the Sabbath, but with what conscience
have they hanged it on the Cross at all? This was just like to those that
Socrates speaks of, who made great conscience of keeping Holidays, yet made no
conscience of uncleanness, that was but an indifferent thing with them. As if
conscience were not rather to be made of keeping our vessels in holiness, our
bodies, then days holy? Remarkable in this kind is that dealing of the Jews
with Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save
one. If we look into the Law, Deuteronomy. 25. 1, 2, 3. it runs thus, If there be a
controversy, etc. and it shall be if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten,
the Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face,
according to his fault, by a certain number, forty stripes he may give him,
and not exceed. Now see the good consciences of these Jews, they might give
forty stripes, but not beyond that number might they go. Now they make so much
conscience of exceeding the number of forty; that they give Paul but nine and
thirty. Thus they make conscience of the number, but no conscience of the fact;
They make conscience of giving above forty, but with what conscience do they
give him any at all? The Text not only prescribes the number of stripes, but
the condition of the person, namely, that he be worthy to be beaten, and he
must be punished according to his fault. Now see these men make Conscience of
the law for the number, but make no conscience of the Law, that will have only
wicked men, and such as are worthy to be beaten, to be so used. These be the
consciences of wicked men, they make seem of making conscience in some one
thing, but make no conscience of ten others, it may be, of far greater weight
and necessity, and herein discover they the naughtiness of their consciences.
The conscience therefore is not to be judged good for one, or some good
actions. Ioab turned not after Absalom, but he turned after Adoniah. 1 King.
1. 28. Whereas a good conscience that turns neither to the right hand not the
left, would have turned neither after Adoniah nor Absalom. A good conscience
and a good conversation must go together. 1 Pet. 3. 16. Having a good
Conscience, that they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation.
One good action makes not a good conversation, nor a good conscience, but then
a man's conversation may be said to be good, when in his whole course he is
careful to do all good duties, and to avoid all sins, and such a good
conversation is a sign of good Conscience. Nunc autem in hoc mayor offensa est
quod partem sententiae sacrae pro commodorum nostrorum utilitate deligimus,
parrem pro dei iniuria praeterimus, Et maxim cum and terrestres domini
nequaquam aequo animo tolerandum putent si iussiones suas serui ex part
audiant and ex part contemnant. Si enim pro arbitrio suo servi dominis
obtemperant, ne ijs quidem in quibus obtemperaverint, obsequuntur, etc. Savian.
de Provid.


To do some good things, and not all, is no more a sign of good conscience,
then to do some things only which his master requires, and to neglect other
some, is no sign of a good servant. A good servants commendation is to do all
his Masters business he enjoynes him. We would hold him but an holy day
servant, and an idle companion, that when his master has set him his several
works to do, he will do which him pleases, and leave the other undone. This
were not to do his masters, but to do his own will, and to serve his own
turn rather then his masters: So for a man to make choice of duties, and to
pick out some particulars, wherein he will yield obedience to God, and to
pass by others as not standing with his profits, pleasures, and lusts, this
will never gain a man the commendation of a good conscience, whose goodness
must be known by making conscience of all things. Then have Gods servants
good consciences, when it can be said of them, as Shaphan speaks of Josiah his
servants. 2 Chronicles. 34. 16. All that was committed to thy servants, they do it.

2. To make conscience of small Duties, and small sins. This also rises out
of the Text. All good Conscience. If of all things, then of small things. It
might have been comprehended under the former, but yet for Conviction sake I
distinguish them. The good conscience makes not conscience only of great
duties and sins, but even of the least, knowing that as Gods great power and
omnipotence is the same in the making of an Angel and a worm, so Gods
authority, wisdom and holiness is the same in the least Commandments, as in
the greatest of them all. It makes conscience specially of Judgment, and the
weighty matters of the law, but yet does not therefore think it self
discharged of all care in smaller things, does not thereupon challenge a
dispensation from obedience in meaner matters, as if it were needless
scrupulosity, as too much preciseness to ty the Mint, Anise, and Cummin. A
Cummin-seede indeed is but a small thing, a very toy, but yet as small a
thing, and as light as it is, yet will it ly heavy upon a good conscience,
being injuriously and fraudulently detayned from the Levites. The Pharisees
tythed Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but they neglected the weighty matters of the
Law. It is no good conscience that looks to small, and neglects great duties,
neither is it a good conscience on the other side, that looks after the great
and weighty duties, and makes no reckoning of Mint and Anise. Our Savior says
both ought to be done. Pharaoh could be content that the people should go
Sacrifice, but he cannot abide that Moses should be so peevishly precise,
that not an hoof should be left behind. Alas, an hoof is but a toy, not worth
the mentioning, what need Moses be so strict as to stand upon an hoof? Yet a
good conscience will stand upon it, having Gods Commandment, and will make
conscience as well of carrying away hoofes as of whole bodies of Cattle. It is
with a good conscience as it is with the apple of the eye, of all the parts of
the body it is the most tender, not only of some great shives, or splints
under the eyelid, but even the smallest hair and dust grieves and offends it.
It is so with a tender good conscience, not only beams, but also moates
disquiet the eye of a good conscience, and not only greater, and fouler
Sins, but even such as the world counts venial trifles do offend it. A good
conscience strains not only at a Camel, but at a Gnat also. Neither does our
Savior blame the Pharisees simply for straining at a Gnat, but for their
hypocrisy, who would pretend conscience in smaller things, and mean while
made none in the greater; for otherwise a good conscience indeed has a narrow
passage for a Gnat, as well as for a Camel. The least corn of gravel galls
his foot that has a strait shoe, but he that has a large, wide shoe,
slopping about his foot, it is no trouble to him. It is just so with
consciences good and evil.

A Gnat is but a small thing, yet Pope Bol. page of Popes page 97.
Hadrian the fourth was choakt with a Gnat, and one Fly, though but a small
thing to a whole box of ointment, yet dead Flies, as small things as they are,
cause the ointment of the Apothecarie to send forth a stinking savor, Ec. 10.
1. and so does a little folly, though but little, do a great deal of hurt.
And therefore a good conscience lives by Salomons rule, Give not water passage,
no not a little. And take not only the Foxes, but the little Foxes, which
spoil not only the Vines, but the tender Grapes. Cant. 2. 15. It knows a
little will make way for much. Pharaoh is content that the people, the men
should go sacrifice, Ex. 10. but their little ones should not go; he knew if
he had but their little ones with him, he should be sure enough of their
return; therefore Moses will not only have the men go, but their little ones
also. And therefore a good conscience deals with Satan, as Marcus Arethusius
dealt with Putantes pauperem vel medietatem petebant pecuniarum, novissime vel
paueum aliquid exigebant. Quibus ait nec obolum unum pro omnibus dabo. Hist.
Tripart. lib. 6. cap. 12.
his tormentours, who having pulled down an Idolatrous Temple, and being urged
by them to give so much as would build it up again, refused it; They urged him
to give but half, he still refused, they urged him at last to give but a
little toward it, but he refused to give them so much as one halfepenny, No
not an halfe-penny, says he, for it is as great wickedness to confer one Ad
impietatem inquit obulum confer unum perinde valet, ac si quis co^ferat
omnia. Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 7.
half penny in case of Impiety, as if a man should bestow the whole. What was
a poor halfe-penny? it was a very small matter; specially considering in what
torture he was, from which an halfpenny gift would have released him. Indeed
an halfpenny is but a little, but yet it is more then a good Conscience dares
give to the maintenance of idolatrous worship. A good conscience will not give
so much as a farthing token to such an use, as little a thing as it is. For he
that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much, and he
that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16. 10. Even the
least things are as great trials of a good conscience, as the greatest. A good
Conscience will not greatifie Satan, nor neglect God, no not in a little.

Put men's consciences now upon this trial. Who crakes not of his good
conscience? there be none, if they may be believed, but they have good
Consciences. But why are they good? They can swallow no Camells. Well, yield
them that, though if their entrals were well searched, a man might find huge
bunch backed camells, that have gone down their gullets. They can swallow no
camells, but what say they to gnats, can they swallow them? Tush, Gnats are
nothing, whole swarms of them can go down their throats, and they never once
cough for the matter. Foul and gross scandalls, such as are infamous amongst
mere heathen, such Camells they swallow not, but what say they to unsavorie
and naughty thoughts which their hearts prosecute with delight, what say they
to them? Gnats do not swarm more abundantly in the fennes, then such vile
thoughts do in their hearts. The prodigious oaths of wounds, blood, the damned
language of Ruffians, and the Monsters of the earth, Oh their hearts would
tremble to have such words pass out of their mouths, but yet what say they to
the neater, and civilified Complements of Faith and Troth? Tush these are
trifles, mere Gnats, alas, that you shall stand upon such niceties. To rob a
man upon the high way, or to break up a man's house in the night, this is a
monstrous Camel, but in buying and selling to overreach a neighbor a
shilling or two, a penny or two, what say they to that? Oh God forbid they
should be so strictly dealt withal, that is a small thing, their throats are
not so narrow, but these Gnats will go down easily enough. To bear false
witness in an open Court of Justice, or to be guilty of pillory-perjury, these
be foul things, but to lie a little for a man's advantage or to make another
man merriment, what think they of this? This is a very Gnat, they are ashamed
to strain thereat. Tell many a man of his sin in which he lies, that his
sin and a good conscience cannot stand together, what is his answer, but as
Lot of Zoar, Is it not a little one. Genesis 19. 20, But the truth is, that these
little ones are great evidences of evil conscience. It is but a dream to
think our consciences good, that make no conscience of small sins and duties.

The conscionable Nazarite, now, did not only make conscience of guzling and
quaffing whole cups of wine, but of eating but an husk, and a kernel of a
Grape. What a trifle is the kernel of a Grape, and yet a good conscience will
care to please God as well in abstinence from the kernel, as from the cup.
Indeed when David had defiled and hardened his conscience with his adultery,
then he could cut Vriahs throat, and his heart smites him not for it, but when
under his affliction his conscience was tender and good, his heart smites him
but for cutting Saul's coat, 1 Samuel 24. 5. See the nature of a good conscience,
it will smile not only for cutting Saul's throat, but for cutting Saul's coat,
but for an appearance, upon a suspicion, and but a jealousy of evil.

Paul speaks of a pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Now it is with the pure
conscience as it is with pure Religion, Iam. 1. 17. Pure religion and
undefiled, is to keep a man's self unspotted of the world. It hates not only
wallowing with the Sow in the mire, but is shie of very spots, and hates not
only the flesh, but the garment, not only that is grosely besmeared, but which
is but spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. according to that Ceremonial, Levit.
15. 17. And this is that which differences civility and a good Conscience,
Civility shunnes mire, but is not so trim as to wash off spots, this is the
pure Religion of a pure Conscience. Pure Religion and nndefiled is to keep a
man's self unspotted, therefore they who are not unspoted, are not undefiled,
but if their consciences be but spotted, yet are they defiled. Men's consciences
are as their Religion is, and pure Religion is spotless.

Yea to close this point, the greatest evidence of a good conscience is in
making Conscience of small things. Whilst Probat enim etiam in majoribus si res
exigat executorem se idoneum fore a quo minora compleantur. Salvian de provid.
l. 3.
men fear great sins, or are careful of maine duties, it may be their
reputation and credits may sway them, which otherwise would be impeached. So
that in them it may be a question, whether it be Conscience or Credit that is
the first mover, but in smaller things where there is no credit to be had, nay,
for scrupling whereof, a man may rather receive some discredit from the world,
here it is more evident that good Conscience sets a man on. This then is a note
of a good Conscience, to make Conscience, as of small duties, so of small
sins; as he that fears poison, fears to take a drop, as well as a draught,
and men fear not only when a firebrand is thrust into, but when a spark
lights upon their thatch.

CHAP. VIII.
Three other notes of a good Conscience.
A Third note of good conscience may be this. It loves and likes a Ministry and
such Ministers as preach, and speak 3. Note of good conscience: To love a
Ministry that speaks home to the conscience.
to the Conscience. It likes such a dispensation of the Word as comes home to
it, whether for direction or reproof. The Word is the rule of conscience, and
a good conscience is desirous to know the rule it must live by. The Word must
judge the conscience, this every good conscience knows, and therefore grudges
not to be reproved by it, as knowing that if it will not abide the Words
reproof, it must abide the Words judgment. Therefore a man with a good
conscience speaks as Samuel, Speak Lord, thy servant hears. He can suffer
the words of exhortation, and not count himself to suffer whilst it is done.
He is of David's mind, Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a kindness;
let him reprove me and it shall be an excellent oil which shall not break
mine head. Psalm. 141. 5. It is with good conscience as with good eyes that can
abide the light, and can delight in it, whereas sick and sore eyes are
troubled and offended therewith. A sound heart is like sound flesh that can
abide not only touching, but also rubbing and chafing, and yet a man will not
be put into a chafe thereby; whereas contrarily if the least thorn or
unsoundness be therein, Tu scis Deus noster, quod tunc de Alipio ab illa
peste sanando non cogetaverim. At ille in se rapuit meque illud non nisi
propter se dixisle credidit, and quod alias acciperet ad succensendum mihi*
accepit honestus adolescens ad succensendum sibi, and ad meardentius
diligendum. Aug. conf. lib. 6. ca. 7.
a touch at unawares provokes a man, if not to smite, yet to angry words and
language of displeasure. Unsound flesh loves to be stroakt, and to be handled
gently, the least roughness puts into a rage. That is the ingenuity of a good
conscienence, which was the good disposition of Alipius, when he was
unwittingly taxed by Augustine for his Theatricall vanities; he was so sarre
from being angry with him, though he conceived him purposely to aim at him,
that he was rather angry with himself, and loved Augustine so much the better.

Put men's consciences upon this trial, and we shall see what the consciences
of most men are. Let a man preach in an unprofitable manner, let him spend
himself in idle curiosities and speculations, let him be in combat with
obsolete or foreign heresies, so long their Minister is a fair and a good
Churchman. But let him do as God commands Ezekiel to do, Ezekiel. 14. 4. Answer
them according to their Idols, preach to their necessities, let him call them,
and press them to holy duties, and reprove them for their unholy practices,
and make known unto them what evil consciences they have: what then is Scio
me offensurum quam plurimos qui generalem de vitiis disputationem in suam
referunt contumeliam, and dum mihi irascuntur suam judicant conscientiam,
multoque prius de se quam de me judicant. Hieron. ad Rustic. Monach.
their carriage and behavior? Even that, Amos. 5. 10. They hate him that
rebukes in the gate; and they abhor him that speaks vprighly. This Ministry
that comes to the conscience will not down with them. It lets in too much
light upon them, and Ahab hates Micaiah for drawing the curtains so wide open,
he cannot endure such punctual and particular preaching that clappes so close
to his conscience. A plain sign that Ahab has a rotten and an unsound
Conscience. Micaiah could not be more punctual with Ahab, then Isaiah was with
Hezekiah, Isa. 39. 6, 7. And yet what says Hezekiah? Good is the word of the
Lord which thou have spoken; as if he had said, a good Sermon, a good Preacher,
all good. Whence comes this good entertainment of so harsh a message? Hezekiah
had a good Conscience, and therefore though the message went against the hair,
yet he could give good words, Let the righteous smite me, and it shall be a
kindness, Psalm. 141. I, but that is when the righteous smites the righteous,
what if the Prophet smite Amaziah? he will threaten to smite him again, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. Forbear, why should thou be smitten? Why if Paul preach of a
good Conscience, and so make Ananias his Conscience to smite him? Ananias will
command the standers by to smite him on the mouth. Now let all the standers by
judge whether Ananias have any good Conscience in him, who cannot brook the
preaching of good Conscience. Let men profess they know God as long as they
will, yet if they slight the word, or swel at it, or be disobedient to it when
it is laid to their Conscience, Paul makes it a manifest sign of a defiled
conscience, Tit. 1. 15, 16. Their mind and their conscience is defiled. How
appears that? They profess they know God, but they are disobedient. When
therefore the Ministry of the Word shall charge thee with duty, or reproove
thee for sin, and then thou shall charge the Minister with railing, and
girding, and that this Sermon was made for the nonce for thee, and thou likest
not that Ministers should be so particular, etc. In Gods fear be advised to
look to thy Conscience, and know it that thou have a naughty conscience: when
the Ministry of the Word smites thy conscience, then for thee to smite the
Minister with reproachful and disgraceful terms, to smite him with thy
mouth: How is thy conscience better then Ananias his, that commands to smite
Paul on the mouth? he that cannot brook that Gods Ministers should not
discharge a good conscience in preaching to the conscience, be bold to
challenge that man for a man of an evil conscience.

4. That is a fourth note of a good conscience, 4 Note of a good conscience. To
do duty for conscience sake.
Romans 13. 5. ye must be subject for conscience sake. To do good, or abstain
from evil merely for conscience sake, is a note of a right good conscience
indeed. Conscience, as we saw before, does excite and stir up, and bind to
the doing of good, and bind from the doing of evil. Now when the conscience
upon just information from the Word, shall press, and forbid, and then a man
shall, because conscience forbids, forbear, or because it presses, perform
obedience: thus to do good, or not to do evil, for conscience sake, is a
note of a good conscience. It evidences a good conscience when the maine weight
that sets the wheels on work is conscience of Gods commandment. When it is
that, Ps. 119. 4. that sets a man on work, Thou have commanded us to keep thy
precepts diligently. The end of the commandment is love, 1 Timothy 1. 5. and love
is the fulfilling of the commandment, Romans 12. But what love? From a pure
heart, and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 5. When conscience of the commandment
carries a man to the fulfilling of the end of it, then does such love come from
a good conscience. Salomons description of a good man, Eccl. 9. 2. is that he
fears an oath. He says not, that swears not; but that fears an oath. For a
man not to swear may be the fruit of good education, and of the awe a man has
stood in of his Governors, but to fear an oath, argues that a man fears the
commandment, Prove. 13. 13. and to fear the commandment is the note of a good
conscience.

Here let men's consciences be tried. Thou prayest in thy family, hear the
Word, keep the Sabbath, etc. Now search thine heart, and make inquiry what
it is that carries thee to these duties. Do thou do them for conscience
sake? Do thou find conscience to urge and press thee, and to give
satisfaction of the conscience, and obedience to the injunctions thereof. Are
these things done? If so, it is a sign of a good conscience. But this
discovers the naughtiness of men's consciences, who though they be sound in
some good duties, or in the avoiding of some evils, yet is it not conscience
that works them thereto. Ye must be subject, not only for wrath, that is,
for fear of the Magistrates wrath and revenge, but for conscience sake, Romans
13. 5. It is no good conscience when a man will be subject for his skins sake,
and lest he smart by the Magistrates sword, but then a man's conscience is
good, when in obedience to Gods Word, and in conscience of his commandment he
subjects. The like may be said of all by-ends. Ye must do good duties, not for
profit, not for credit, not for vainglory, not for ^aw, but for conscience
sake; or else evil consciences ye have in that ye do. The Shechemites receive
circumcision, Genesis ^4. And is not circumcision Gods Ordinance? And is it not
joy of them that they will join to the Church, and profess the true Religion?
Yes surely, if it were done for conscience. I, but it is not done for
conscience sake. Alas no such matter, but for Hamors sake the Lord of the
Town, and for Shechems sake, their young Master, and for the hope of gains
sake: Shall not their cattle, and their substance, and every beasts of theirs
be ours? Genesis 34. 23. For the oxen sake, and not for conscience sake are the
Shechemites circumcised. Shechem for Dinahs sake receives the Sacrament. Oh the
zeal and forwardness that some will profess on a sudden. What frequenters of
holy exercises? But what, is it for conscience sake? No such matter, but
Shechem is in hope of a match with Dinah, and all these shows of Religion are
neither for Gods sake, nor conscience sake, but all for Dinahs sake, all under
hope of preferment by a rich marriage. They were goodly shows of zeal, Ioh.
6. 22. 24. in seeking and following after Christ, but it was neither for
Christ, nor conscience sake, but ver. 26. for the loaves, and the bread, and
their bellies sake.

Many of the heathens, Esth, 8. 17. turned Jews. Was there not joy of such
Proselytes? not a whit, for not the fear of God, but the fear of the Jews
fell upon them; as many frequent the public assemblies more for fear of the
statute, then for fear of the commandment. The officers of the King helped the
Jews, Esther 9. 3. Was it for conscience sake? Nothing less, but for wrath
sake, and for fear, because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.

If the Pharisees had done all that (Mat. 6.) for conscience sake, which they
did for vainglory sake, they had had the glory of good consciences. Many
preached the Gospel in Paul's days, Phil. 1. Does not so good a work argue a
good conscience? Yes, if it had been done for conscience sake; but that was
done for contention sake, not to add souls to the Church, but to add
sorrows to Paul's afflictions.

It is a note of a good conscience, when that which we do is done with a
respect unto the commandment of God, Psalm. 119. 6. and not with a squint
respect unto our own private, for praise or profit. It Vtrine majores
heretici? illine qui pictas and ligneas, an qui aureas and argenteas imagines e
templis exigerent, and ad conflandam monetam igne adurerent? Dubro. hist. Bohe.
l. 24.
was a good argument of those Bohemians good consciences in plucking down
Images, that they beat down only painted and wooden Images, whilst Sigismund
the Emperor pulled down silver and golden ones, to melt into money for pay of
his Soldiers, as they plead for themselves, when they were held Heretics for
their fact. If they had pulled down such Images as he did, they might have
been thought to have done it for gain, and not for conscience sake.

How great is often the zeal of many against fashions, and such vanities? How
well it were if it were for conscience sake, and not for envy against some
particular person, whom they do distaste, and so for the person, the vanity
For if it be for conscience sake, how is it that those vanities, such great
offenses to their consciences found in some distasted persons, are yet no
trouble to their consciences, being the very same, if not worse in their own
favorites, and associates? Judge whether such zeal come from conscience, or
from corrupt affection, whether it be not more against the person, 5. Note of a
good conscience. Holy boldness. Bona conscientia prodire vult and conspici,
ipsas nequitia tenebras timet. Senec. ep. 98. Qui non deliquit decet audacem
esse and confidenter prose, and proterve loqui. Plaut. in Anth.
then against the sin.

5. We have a fifth note of a good conscience in the Text. And Paul earnestly
beholding the Council. Here is a mark of a good conscience in his looks, as
well as in his words; in his face, as well as in his speech. Paul is here
convented before the Council, with what face is he able to behold them? And
Paul earnestly beholding the Council. A good conscience makes a man hold up
his head even in the thickest of his enemies. It can look them in the faces,
and outface a whole rabble of them assembled on purpose to cast disgrace on
it. That may be said of a man with a good conscience, which is spoken of some
of David's men, 1 Chronicles. 12. 8. Whose faces were like the faces of Lions, for
the righteous is bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. Now might Paul truly have said,
as David, Ps. 57. 4. My soul is among Lions, I ly among them that are set on
fire. And now how fares he? what is he all amort? looks he pale and blanke?
does he sneake or hang down his head, or droope with a dejected countenance?
No, Paul is as bold as a Lion, and can face these Lions, and earnestly fix his
countenance upon the best of them. A good conscience makes a man's face as God
had made Ezekiels, Ez. 3. 8, 9. Behold I have made thy face strong against
their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. As an Adamant
harder then flint have I made thy forehead, fear them not, neither be dismayed
at their looks. Such hartening and hardening comes also from a good
conscience. A good conscience makes a man go, as the Lord in another sense
tells Israel he had done for them, Levit. 26. 13. I have made you go upright.
A good conscience erects a man's face, and looks, it is no sneaking slinker,
but makes a man go upright. As contrarily, guilt dejects both a man's spirits,
and his looks, and unless a man have a Sodomiticall impudency, Isa. 3. 9. or
an whores forehead, Ier. 3. 3. which refuses to be ashamed, makes him hang
down the head.

Paul fixes his eyes here, and looks earnestly upon them, but what if they had
looked as earnestly upon him? yet would not his good conscience have been
outfaced. See Act. 6. 15. All that sat in the Council looked steadfastly on
him; namely on Steven. If but the high Priest alone had faced him, it had been
somewhat, but all that sat at the Council looked steadfastly on him. Surely
one would think such a presence were able to have damped, and utterly to have
dashed him out of countenance. But how is it with him? Is he appalled? Is he
damped? They saw his face as it had been the face of an Angel, says the
text. As wisdom, Eccl. 8. 1. so a good conscience makes the face to shine. A
good conscience has not only a Lions, but an Angels face; it has not only a
Lion-like boldness, but an Angelical dazzling brightness, which the sick and
sore eyes of malice can as ill endure to behold, as the Israelites could the
shining brightness of Moses face. The face of a good conscience tells enemies
that they are malicious Liars. And no wonder that a good conscience has such
courage and confidence in the face, standing before a whole Council, when it
shall be able to hold up it head with boldness before the Lord himself, at
that great day of the general Judgment. Even then shall a good conscience
have a bold face.

CHAP. IX.
Two other, and the last notes of a good conscience.
A Sixth note of a good conscience follows, namely that which we have, 6. Note
of conscience. To suffer for conscience.
1 Pet. 2. 19. When a man for conscience toward God endures grief, suffering
wrong. A good conscience had rather that Ananias should smite, then it self
should. Ananias his blows are nothing to the blows of conscience. Ananias may
make Paul's cheeks glow, but conscience gives such terrible buffets, as will
make the stoutest heart in the world to ache. That will pinch, and twitch and
gird the heart with such griping throws, that all the blows, and tortures
that Ananias his cruel heart can invent are nothing to them.

Now therefore a man that sets any store by a good conscience, will not part
with the Peace or Integrity thereof upon any terms. He rates the goodness of
his conscience far above al earthly things. Wealth, liberty, wife, children,
life it self, all are vile, and cheap in comparison of it. And therefore a
man of a good conscience will endure any grief, and suffer any wrong to keep
his conscience good toward God. Such a good conscience had Daniel, Dan. 1. 8.
He proposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion
of the Kings meat. That is, he was fully settled and resolved in his conscience,
come what would come, he would not do that which would not stand with a good
conscience. But what if it could have gotten no other meat? without all doubt
he would rather have starved than have defiled his conscience with that meat.
He would have lost his life, rather than have lost the Peace, and Integrity of
his conscience. It seems a question of great difficulty, which was put to the
three Children, Dan. 3. Whether they will give the bowing of their bodies to
the golden Idol, or the burning of their bodies to the fiery Furnace. But yet
they find no such difficulty therein, they were not careful to answer in that
matter, ver. 16. Of the two fires they chose the coolest, and the easiest. The
fire of a guilty conscience is seven times hotter, and more intolerable than
the fire of Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, though it be heated seven times more then
it is wont to be heated.

If the question come between life and good conscience, that one of the two
must be parted withal, it is an hard case. Life is wondrous sweet and
precious. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life, Job
2. 4. What then should a man do in such a hard case? Hear what is the
resolution of a good conscience, Act. 20. 24. My life not dear unto me, so
that I may fulfill my Ministration with joy. And wherein lay his joy, but in
his good conscience, 2 Corinthians. 1. 12. It is all one as if he had said, I care
not to lose my life to keep a good conscience. A good conscience in that
passage of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 19. is secretly compared to a ship. Now in a
tempest at Sea, when the question is come to this, whether the goods shall be
cast out, or the Ship be cast away, what do the Mariners? See Act. 27. 18.
38. They lightened the Ship, and cast out the wheat into the Sea. The Mariners
will turn the richest Commodities overboard to save the Ship, for they know if
the Ship be cast away, then themselves are cast away. Thus it is with a man
that has a good conscience, when the case comes to this pinch, that either his
outward Comforts, or his inward Peace must wrack, he will cheerfully cast the
wheat into the sea: will part with all earthly commodities and comforts, before
he will rush, and wrack his conscience upon any rock. He knows if the ship be
wrackt if his conscience be cracked, that then himself, and his soul is in
danger of being cast away, and therefore he will throw away all to save
conscience from being split upon the rocks, and being swallowed up in the sands.

There is as great a difference between a good conscience, and all outward
things even unto life it self, as is between the arm, and the head or heart.
The brain and the heart are vital parts, therefore when the head is in danger
to be cleft, or the heart to be thrust through, a man will not stand
questioning whether he were best adventure his hand, or his arm to save his
head, or his heart, but either of these being in danger, the hand and the arm
presently interpose themselves to receive the blow, and put themselves in
danger of being wounded, or cut off; rather than the head or heart should be
pierced. A man may have his hand, or arm cut off, and yet may live, but a
wound in the brain or heart is mortal. It is so in this case. A good
conscience values its own peace above all the world. It is that wherein a
Christians life lies, therefore he will suffer the right hand or foot to be cut
off, and lose all rather than expose conscience to danger. A man may go to
heaven with the loss of a limb, and though he halt, Math. 18. 8. but if a man
lose his life, if conscience be lost, all is lost. A man may go to heaven
though he lose riches, liberty, life, but if a good conscience be lost, there
is no coming thither. All things compared to conscience are as far beneath it,
as the least finger beneath the head. He were a mad man that would suffer his
skull to be cleft to save his little finger, nay but the paring of his nail.
And yet the world is full of such mad men, that suffer conscience to receive
many a deep wound and gash, to save those things which in comparison of good
conscience, are but as the nail parings to the head.

Try men's consciences here, and we shall find them exceeding short. A good
conscience will endure any grief, and suffer any wrong rather then suffer the
loss of its own peace. God commands Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. to put away Israel,
oh! but what shall I do for mine hundred Talents? Tush, what are an hundred
Talents? A good conscience in yielding obedience to God is a richer treasure
than the East and West Indies. And yet how many be there that will craze their
conscience an hundred times before they will lose one Talent by obedience to
God, out of a care to keep a good conscience. A talent; nay, that is too
deep, never put them to that cost, they will sell a good conscience, not for
gaining, but for the taking of a farthing token. God and good conscience say,
Sanctify the Sabbath. Possibly some halfe-penny customer comes to a Tradesmans
Shop on a Sabbath, and asks the sale of such, or such a commodity. Now the
man's conscience tells him of the commandment, tells him what God looks for,
tells him it cannot stand with his peace to make markets on that day, etc. But
then he tells conscience, that if he be so precise, he may lose a customer,
and if he lose his customers, he may shut up his Shop-windowes. An
Inne-keepers conscience tells him that it is fitter that he should be
attending Gods service at his house on his day, than that he should be waiting
on his guest. But then he replies to conscience, that then his takings will be
but poor, and this is the next way to pluck down his sign. So here lies a
dispute between Conscience and Gain, which of these two must be parted with.
If now in this case a man will grow to this resolution; By Gods help I am
resolved to keep a good conscience in keeping Gods Commandment and Sabbath, I
will rather lose the best customer I have, and the best guest I have, then the
peace of a good conscience. If I beg, I beg; I will say of my customers as
Jacob of his children, Genesis 43. 14. If I am bereaved of them, I am bereaved. I
will trust God with my estate, before I will hazard my conscience; Give me such
a man, such a Tradesman, and I will be bold to say he is a man of a good
conscience. But contrarily, when men are so set upon gain, that so they may
have it, they care not how they come by it, they will dispense an hundred times
with their obedience to God if any thing be to be had, if these have good
consciences let any judge. How would such lose their blood and lives, that will
not lose such trifling gains for the safety of their conscience? We have not
yet resisted unto blood, the more we owe to God, that know not what that
resistance means. Alas, how would those resist unto blood that set conscience
to sale upon so base prices as they do.

Peter speaks of a fiery trial, 1. Pet. 4. 12. If God should ever bring that
trial amongst us, that a company of drossie consciences would it find out? We
have no fiery trial, we have but an airy trial only, and yet how many evil
consciences it discovers. Many a man could find in his heart to pray in his
family, to frequent good exercises, and company, he is convinced in his
conscience, that thus he should do, and conscience presses him to it. But why
then are not these things done? A Lion is in the way. He shall lose the good
word and opinion of the world, he shall have so many frowns, and frumps, and
censures, and scoffs, that he cannot buckle to this course. Many are in
Zedekiah his case; he was convinced in his conscience, that he ought, and it
was his safest course to go out to the Chaldeans, questionless his conscience
pressed him to it, and bids him go out. Why then goes he not? He is afraid, Ier.
38. 19. that he shall be mocked. Such consciences as will not prefer their
own good word, a comfort before the good or ill words of the world; Such
consciences as more fear the mocks and flouts of men on earth, then they do
the grinning mocks of the devils in hell; Such as will not prefer the peace
of conscience before all other things, are mere strangers to good conscience.

The seventh and last note remains. 7. Note of a good conscience. Constancy
in good.
And that is in the Text, Until this day. Constancy and Perseverance in good,
is a sure note of a good conscience. Paul had been young, and now was old, and
yet was old Paul still, still the same holy man he was. Time changes all
things but a good conscience, and that is neither changed by Time, nor with
Time; Age changes a man's favor, but not a good man's faith; his complexion, not
his religion; and though his head turn gray, yet his heart holds vigorous
still.

Until this day.] And this day was not far from his dying day. And how held
he out to his last day? Hear as it were his last and dying breath, 2 Timothy 4.
7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. He says not, I have finished my faith, I have kept my life, as many
may, but I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. He kept his faith
till he had finished his course, not only here, until this day, but there
until his finishing day. So long he kept the faith, and therefore so long a
good conscience, for as the losing of them go together, 1 Timothy 1. 19. so the
keeping of them go together, therefore keeping the faith, he also kept a good
conscience till he finished his days.

Until this day.] And yet one would wonder that he should keep it to this
day, considering how hardly he had been used before, until, and now at this
day, the most of those things, 2 Cor. 11. 23. were before this day. Often under
stripes, in prisons often, and yet stands constant in the maintenance of the
liberty of his conscience, verse. 24, 25. Thrice I suffered shipwreck, etc. and
yet made no shipwreck of a good conscience, verse. 26, 27. in a number of
perils, in peril of false brethren, and yet his conscience plays not false
with God, neither is it weary of going on in a religious course.

Here then is the nature of a good conscience, and the trial of it.

A good conscience holds out constantly in a good Cause, without Deflection,
and in a good Course without Defection.

1. In a good cause. Let a good conscience undertake the defense of a good
Cause, and it will stand rightly to it, and neither grow weary nor corrupt. It
will not make shows of countenancing Paul's cause till he come before Nero, and
then give him the slip, and give him leave to stand upon his own bottom,
and shift for himself as well as he can. A conscionable Magistrate, and a
Judge, who cut of a conscience of the faithful discharge of his place, takes
in hand the defense of a good, or the punishment of a bad cause, will not leave
it in the suddes, will not be wrought by fear or favor, to let Innocence be
thrust to the walls, and Iniquity hold up the neb, but will stand out stiff,
and manifest the goodness of his conscience in his Constancy.

2. In a good Course. A man that is once in a good course, having a good
conscience, will neither be driven, nor be drawn out of that good way to his
dying day. There be tentations on the right hand, and there be tentations on
the left, but yet a good conscience will turn neither way, Pro. 4. 27. but
keeps on fore right, and presses hard to the mark that is set before it; Try
it with tentations on the left hand. Try it by the mockings and derisions, of
others whom it sees in good ways will this stagger or stumble it, and make it
start aside? not a whit, but it will go on with so much the more courage rather
Job 17, 6, 7, 8, 9. He has made me also a byword of the people, and aforetime
I was a Tabret. Was not this enough to shake others, to see such a prime man as
Job thus used, thus scorned and mocked? not a whit; for all this, The righteous
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands, be stronger and stronger.

Try it by mockings and derisions personal, Si reddere beneficium non aliter
quam per speciem injuria potero, oequissimo animo ad honestum consilium pe^
medium infamiam ^endam. Nemo mihi videtur pluris virtutem, nemo illi magis esse
devotus quam qui boni viri famam perdidit ne conscientiam perderet. Senoc. epi.
82.
by personal infamy and reproach, let a man's own self be derided, be
defamed, this will go nearer than the former, what, will this move him out of
the way? No: He will lose his good name, before his good conscience. See Ps.
119. 51. The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet have I not declined
from thy Law. And though Michol, 2 Samuel 6. play the flouting fool, yet David
will not play the declining fool, but if to be zealous, be to be a fool, he
will be yet more vile. And though Jeremy was in derision daily, and every one
mocked him, yea, and defamed him, yet he was rather the more than the less
zealous, Ier. 20. 7, 9, 10. The righteous Psalm. 135. 1. are like Mount Sion
that cannot be removed, but abides for ever. What likelihood that a puff of
breath should remove a Mountain? When men can blow down Mountains with their
breath, then may they scoff a good conscience out of the ways of godliness
and sincerity. Mount Sion, and a good conscience abide for ever.

But these happily may be thought lighter trials, put a good conscience to some
more smarting, and bleeding trials, then these pettier ones are, and yet there
shall we find it as constant as in the former.

Let the Lord give the Sabeans, Chaldea^s, and satan leave to spoil Job of his
goods, and children, will not then Job give up his Integrity? do ye not think
that he will curse God to his face? So indeed the devil hopes, Job 1. 15. But
what is the issue? what gets the devil by the trial? only gives God argument
of triumph against him in Jobs constancy, Job 2. 3. And still he holds fast
his integrity. As if he had said, See for all that thou can do, in spite of
all thy spite, and mischievous malice, he holds fast his Integrity until this
day. See the terrible trials, to which they were put, Heb. 11. 37. They were
stoned, sawne asunder, etc. and yet all could not make them shake hands with a
good conscience. The rain, floods, and winds, could not bring down the house
founded upon the rock, Mat. 7. Notwithstanding all trials, a good conscience
stands to it, and holds it own, and speaks as once Father Rawlins did the
Bishop, Rawlins you left me, Acts and Mon.
Rawlins you find me, and Rawlins by Gods grace I will continue.

Try yet a good conscience farther, with the tentations on the right hand,
which commonly have as much more strength in them above the other, as the right
hand has above the left, and yet we shall find the right hand too weak to
pluck a good conscience out of its station.

It was a sore tentation wherewith Moses was assaulted. The treasures, and
pleasures, the honors, and favors of the Egyptian Court, and Princess. All
these woo him not to go the people of God. Had that people been settled and at
rest in Canaan, yet had it been a great tentation to prefer Egypt before
Canaan. But the people are in Egypt, in affliction, in bondage, therefore so
much the more strength in the tentation What will you be so mad to leave all
for nothing, certain honors for certain afflictions? who can tell but you
may be raised to this greatness to be an instrument of good to your people!
You by your favor in the Court may be means to ease them of their bondage,
and so you may do the Church service with your greatness, etc. Here was a
tentation on the right hand, and with the right hands strength. Well, and how
speeds it? Is Moses able to withstand it? See Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. He refused
to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, etc. All would not do, nor stir him
a whit. Those faithful Worthies before mentioned, could not be stirred with
all the cruelties their adversaries could invent. I, but it may be a tentation
on the right hand, might have made them draw away the right hand of fellowship
from a good conscience. Well, their enemies therefore will try what good they
can do that ways, Heb. 12. 37. They were tempted, that is, on the right hand
they were solicited and enticed, and allured with fair promises of honors,
favors preferments, as Bonner used to deal with the Martyrs, he had
sometimes butter and oil, as well as fire and faggot, in his mouth. Thus were
they tempted, but yet what availed these tentations? Just as much as their
stones, sawes, swords, prisons, all a like. They for all these tentations keep
a good conscience to their dying day, and hold fast the faith and truth unto
the end.

A good conscience is of the mind of those trees, in Iothams parable, Judge. 9.
It will not with the Olive lose its fatness, nor with the Fig Tree lose its
sweetness, nor with the vine its wine of cheerfulnes, to have the fattest, and
sweetest preferments and pleasures of the world, no though it were to reign
over the trees.

It was an excellent resolution of Benevolus Benevolo Iustina praecepit ut
adversus fidem patrum imperialia decreta dictaret; Illo vero se impia verba
prolaturum abnuente, celsiorem honoris gradum spopondit, si ma^data perficeret:
cui Benevolus, Quid mihi pro impietatis mercede altiorem promittis gradum? hunc
ipsum quem habeo auferte, dunt in^gram fidei conscientiam tuear. Ac protonus
cingulum ante pedes ejus abjecit. S^gon de occid. Imp. l. 1. page 200.
in his answer to Iustina the Arrian Empress, profering preferments to him to
have been isntrumental in a service which could not be done with a good
conscience. What do ye promising me an higher degree of preferment for a
reward of impiety? yea even take this from me which already I have, so that I
may keep a good conscience. And so forthwith he threw at his feet his girdle,
the ensign of his honor. Thus does a good conscience throw and trample honor
and preferment under foot, to maintain its own integrity? Thus can nothing
corrupt a good conscience. I have been young, and now am old, and yet never
saw I the righteous forsaken, to wit, of God, Psalm. 37. David out of his
experience could have said as much in this point, I have been young, and now
am old, yet never saw I God, and godliness forsaken by the righteous, by the
man that had a good conscience. But the man that had a good conscience when he
was young, will hold out and have it when he is old. It is the great honor and
grace of a good Conscience, which Walden thinks he spoke to the disgrace of
Wickliffe, Ita ut cano placeret, quod inveni complacebat, He was young and old,
one and the same man. Old age decays the body, the strength, the senses, but
conscience it touches not, that holds out sound to death. As of Christ in
another sense. Heb. 13. So may it be said of a good conscience in this,
Yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. A good conscience is no
changeling, but let a man's estate change from rich to poor, from poor to
rich, or let the times change from good to evil, or from evil to worse; or a
man's days change from young to old, let his hairs and head change, yet among
all these changes a good conscience will not change, but hold it own until its
last day.

Now put men's consciences upon this trial, and their inconstancy either in
good causes, or courses, will discover their naughtines. In a good cause how
many are like Darius? his conscience struggles a great while for Daniel, he
knew he was innocent, he knows the action to be unjust, and therefore labors
all day till the setting of the Sun for his deliverance, Dan. 6. 14. but yet
overcome with the Presidents and Princes urgencie, ver. 16. he commands him to
the Lions den. Here was a natural conscience standing for equity and justice,
but yet no good conscience, it holds but till Sun set, and his conscience went
down with the Sun. His conscience yields and is overcome, though it know the
act to be unjust.

Pilats conscience makes him plead for Christ. In his conscience he acquits
him, and thrice solemnly professes that he finds no fault in him, and
therefore cannot in conscience condemn him, yea withal seeks to release him,
John 19. 12. Is not here now a good conscience? Indeed it had been so in this
particular fact, if his conscience had been inflexible, and had held out. But
when Pilate hears them say, that if he be his friend, he is no friend to
Caesar, John 19* 12. and whilst withal he is willing to content the people,
Mark 15. 15. Now that there is fear on the one side, and desire to curry
favor on the other, where now is his conscience? Now he presently delivers
him to be crucified, though he knows in his conscience that there is no fault
in him. What a good conscience has many a Judge, and Lawyer? How stiffely will
they stand in, and prosecute a just case, till a bribe come and puts out the
very eyes of their conscience. Their consciences are of so soft a temper, that
the least touch of silver turns their edge presently. They hold out well till
there come a tentation on their left hand, that is, in their right hand, Psalm.
144. 8. Whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood. If once the right hand be a right hand of falsehood, the mouth will
soon speak vanity, though before it speak conscience. Who would not have
thought Balaam to have been a man of an excellent conscience? If Balak would
give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the
Lord my God, to do less or more, Number. 22. 18. But yet besides that faltering
in those words I cannot go, whereas the language of a good conscience would
have been, I will not go; besides that I say, before he ends his speech, see
how the hope of promotions works, and works his conscience like wax before the
fire, ver. 19. Now therefore I pray you tarry here also this night, that I may
know what the Lord will say unto me more. A faltering inference: If his
conscience had been good, it would have inferred strongly thus; Now therefore
I pray get you gone, and trouble me no longer. He knew in his conscience the
people ought not to be cursed, and that he ought not to go, and yet comes in
with I pray tarry all night, etc. Truly Balak needed not to have been so
lavish and so prodigal, as to offer an house full, one handful of his silver
and gold will frame Balaams conscience to any thing.

The like trial may be made of men's consciences, by their inconstancy in good
courses, and this will condemn three sorts, as guilty of evil consciences.

1. Such as sometimes being convinced of the necessity of good courses, do set
upon the practice of them, and begin to look toward Religion, and religious
duties, till meeting with some of their supposed wiser neighbors, they be
advised to take heed, they may bring themselves into greater note then they are
aware of, they will incur sharper censures then they think of, etc. and
suddenly all is dashed, all is quasht and quenched. There is a disease among
beasts they call the Staggers, and it is a disease too frequent in men's
Consciences, who sometimes are on, sometimes off, one day begin, and next day
cease good courses. That may be said of many men's conscices, which Jacob
speaks of Reuben, Gen, 49. 4. Unstable as water. The water moves as the winds
blow. If the wind blow out of the East, then it moves one way; if out of the
west, then it moves another, the clean contrary, and upon every new wind a
new way. So many, let them hear a convincing, and a good persuading Sermon
moving to good duties, then they will set upon them; let them again hear
either some mocks, or reproaches for those ways, or some sage advise from one
they count wise, against the way of conscience, they are as far off again as
ever. These staggering, irresolute, and watery Consciences are far from good
ones.

2. Such as in their youth, or when the world was low with them, were very
zealous and forward; But what are they now at this day? True downeright
Demasses, zealous when they were young, but now old and cold: zealous when they
were mean, but now the world is come upon them, Demas-like they have forsaken
goodness, and embraced the world, have gotten now worme-eaten, and world-eaten
consciences. The zeal of Gods house was wont to eat them up, but now the world
has eaten up them, and all their good conscience.

3. Those that have made good the profane Proverb, Young Saints and old
Devils, whose hatred of Religion and good conscience is greater then ever was
their love thereto, as Ammon was toward Thamar, 2 Samuel 13. 15. They were
zealous and forward frequenters of Gods house and Ordinances; zealous enemies
against Swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, etc. But what are they at this day?
yesterday indeed zealous professors of holiness, but what are they to day? to
day malicious scoffers of godliness, haters and opposers of goodness, the only
swearers and drunkards in a country. What kind of consciences are these? none
of Paul's conscience, I have lived in all good conscience until this day. What
then? just the consciences of Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. They
once made great profession of conscience, but now enemies to Paul, and
blasphemers, men, as Paul speaks, that had put away good conscience, they did
not through want of watchfulness let it slip, or steal away; but as if it
would never have been gone soon enough, they put, and drove it away, (...),
Beza translates it, Qua expulsa. They used their consciences as Ammon did
Thamar after his lust satisfied, 2 Samuel 13. 15, 17. Arise, be gone, says he
to her, and when she pleads for her self, he calls his servant, and says
unto him, Put out this woman, and bolt the door after her, put her out so, as
she may be sure not to come again. They dealt with their Consciences as
Colleges deal with Rake-hels, expelled them without all hope of re-entry. Thus
many profane Apostating backsliders cannot be content to lose good conscience,
unless Ammon-like they may put it away with violence, and expel it. And how
can they have good conscience that have put it away? He has not his wife,
that has put her away, and given her a bill of divorce. In the days of Popery
and darkness, the Devil it seemed walked very familiarly amongst them, and
hence we have so many stories of Fayries, and of children taken out of cradles,
and others laid in their rooms, whom they called Changelings. Since the light
of the Gospel, these Devils and Fayries have not been seen amongst us, but
yet we are still troubled with Changelings. Some, Priests and Jesuits have
changed; some, the world has changed; some, Good-fellowship and the Alehouse
has changed. These have played the Fayries, have taken and stolen away goodly,
forward, and fervent Christians, and have laid in their rooms Earthlings,
Worldlings, Popelings, Swearers, Drunkards, Malicious scorners of all
goodness. Thus have these Fayries in stead of fair and comely children,
brought in these lame, blind, deformed and wrizzled faced Changelings, that any
one may easily see them to be rather the births of some Hobgoblins, then the
Children of God. If therefore we would evidence our consciences good, labor to
hold to the last, and rest not in youth, but labor to have age found in the way
of righteousness. This is a Crown of glory, and this is right good conscience
to live therein until our dying day. All the former six are nothing without
this last.

CHAP. X.
The comfort and benefit of a good conscience, in the case of Disgrace, and
Reproach.
We are now come to the fifth and last point which was propounded: The Motives
to persuade us to get good consciences. The Motives thereunto may be many, I
will keep my self within the compass of five.

1. Motive, The incomparable and unspeakable 1. Motive to a good conscience.
comfort, and benefit thereof in such cases and times as all other comforts
fail a man, and wherein a man stands most in need of comfort. These cases or
times are five.

1. The Time and Case of Disgrace and Reproach. 2. The Time of Common fear,
and Common calamity. 3. The Time of Sickness, or outward crosses in a man's
goods. 4. The Time of Death. 5. The Time and Day of Judgment.
In all these, or in any of these times it is good to have such a friend or
companion that will stick to a man, and be faithful Interim elige socium qui
cum omnia subtracta fuerint fidem servat dilectoribus suis nec recedit in
te^pore angustiae. Bern. de Consc.
to him when all other things fail him. Such a friend, and such a companion,
is a good conscience. A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for
adversity. Proverb. 17. 17. But in some of these cases a brother and friend
may be false, and will not, or may be weak and cannot help nor pleasure a
man, but a good conscience is better then all friends and brethren whatsoever;
when they will not, or cannot, or may not, yet then will a good conscience
stick close to a man, and be a sure friend to him. Let us see in the
particulars the truth of it.

1. In the time and case of Disgrace, Infamy, Reproach, and wrongs of that The
comfort of a good conscience in case of disgrace and reproach.
kind, the comfort and benefit of a good conscience is unspeakeable. When a
man shall be traduced, slandered, falsely accused and condemned, then in such
wrongs will a good conscience do the office of a faithful friend, will stick
to, and stand by a man, and will comfort and hearten him against all such
injuries. Paul is here convented before the Council as a Malefactor, he has
an whole Council bent against him. What now is his comfort, and his defense
against such an heap of accusers as do affront him? This it is, Men and
brethren, I have lived in all good conscience. As if he had said, Impeach,
traduce, accuse and condemn me as you please, yet be it known unto you, that
I have a good conscience, and this my good conscience is it which shall comfort
and uphold me against all your injurious and unequal proceedings. You may
bring forth false witnesses against me, but my conscience does, and will
witness for me, you may condemn me, yet my conscience acquits, and absolves
me. And thus does Paul shelter himself under his good conscience.

The like we may see in the next Chapter. Ananias and the Elders come and bring
Tertullus, and he is feed to be Paul's accuser, and he lays heavy and heinous
things to Paul's charge, verse. 5. We have found this man a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, a ringleader
of the sect of the Nazarens, etc. Here be foul things, what will Paul be able
to say to all this? Will not this be enough to sink him down utterly, to see
so many banded together, and such great ones combined to countenance such an
accusation? How will he be able to subsist? Now then behold the benefit, and
comfort of a good conscience. He holds up his former buckler, and smites
Ananias, and the rest with his former weapon, verse. 16. Herein do I exercise
my self, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward
men. Ananias and the Elders have a mercenary Tertullus to accuse him, Paul has
no man dares be seen to plead for him, none will be retained in his cause, but
yet now conscience steps out, and stops the foul mouth of this slanderous
Orator, and puts spirit, and heart into Paul to plead his own Cause against
them all. Conscience seems on this manner to animate him; Fear not Paul the
accusations of this Tertullus, I witness for thee thine Innocence. I justify
it to the teeth of Tertullus, that he is one whose malice and covetousness
has made him set his conscience to sale; stand up therefore, and speak boldly
for thy self, dread them not. Well fare a good conscience yet, that will
speak comfort to Paul, and make Paul speak with courage, when none else dare
be seen in his cause.

It was an ill case David was in, Psalm. 69. 20. 21. Reproach has broken mine
heart, and I am full of heaviness, and I looked for some to take pity, but
there was none, and for comforters, but I found none: they gave me also gall
for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. A very hard case
indeed. Where was now David's familiar friend, his acquaintance with whom he
was wont to take sweet counsel, what was become of him now? Possibly some of
his acquaintance were at this time like a broken tooth, and a foot out of
joint, Prove. 25. 19. Confidence in an unfaithful man is like a broken tooth,
and a foot out of joint Others it may be that had professed him love, were ready
to fasten a poisoned tooth in him. This was David's case, and this may be any
man's case; but now at such a time, and in such a pinch appears the excellency
and benefit of a good Gonscience. Though all a man's friends should prove Jobs
friends, like the Winter brooks of Teman, that in winter overswell the banks,
but in the scorching heat of Summer prove dry ditches yet then, even then well
fare a good conscience. That will heal David's heart broken with reproach, that
will cheer him up in his heaviness, that will sweeten the gall, and take away
the sharpenes of the vinegar, which his enemies have given him to drink.

There is a generation, Prove. 30. 14. whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw
teeth as knives; and Pro. 12. 18. that generation speaks as the piercing of a
sword. There is a generation, whose words are wounds that go down into the
innermost parts of the belly. Pro. 18. 8. These be dangerous generations. But
what generation are they? Generations of vipers. Psalm. 140. 3. Adders poison is
under their lips. Iunius translates it, Venenum ptyados, The poison of the
spitting Serpent. They be then generations of spitting serpents, even of fiery
serpents, that have their tongues set on fire from hell, and so they spit fiery
poison in the faces of Innocents. Now there is no man can live in this world,
at whom these adders will not spit, no man can be free from the sprinckling of
their poison. The disciple is not above the master; If these snakes have hissed
at the Lord of the house; and if these spitting Serpents have cast their poison
in his face, why would they fear to do it to the servants? But is there then
no balm against this poison? No buckler against these swords? Yes, there is
the sovereign balm, and the impenetrable buckler of a good conscience. It is
a balsome that will allay the poison of these Adders, that it shall never burst
a man's heart, or if these swords pierce the very innermost bowels, yet this
will so salve these wounds, that they shall not ranckle, nor become mortal?
Oh! how mortal is this adders poison, how fatal are these swords, how keen
their edge, and how full of pain their wounds, where inward guilt gives
strength unto them? But integrity and goodness of conscience, is a precious
balm of Gilead, that takes away the venom of this poison, and the stinging
smart of the wounds of these swords.

Let Paul live with ever so good a conscience before God, and man, Act. 24. 16.
yet Tertullus will play the spitting adder, and he will spit, yea, spue forth
his poison in his face, and in the face of an whole Court will not spare openly
to slander him for an arrant varlet, a lewd, pestilent, and a villainous fellow.
Such drivel will the malicious world spit in the face of Godliness. But mark
now the benefit, and comfort of a good conscience* Either a good conscience
with Stephens Angelical face will dazzle, and shame the devils Orators, 1 Pet.
3. 16. Having a good conscience that they may be ashamed, or else like Paul it
can shake off those vipers without swelling or falling down dead. Yea, if
Satan's orators, will needs be opening their mouths against Paul; yet so good
is his conscience, that as John Hus appealed from Pope Alexander to Pope
Alexander, namely, from him in his anger to him in his cold blood, and better
advised, so dares Paul appeal from Tertullus to Tertullus, David from Shimei
to Shimei, from enemies to enemies, from their tongues to their hearts, from
their mouths to their Consciences, as knowing their own integrity to be
such, as that their enemies own hearts give their tongues the ly, and tells
them that against their Conscienses possessed with mere malice they are
hurried on in Satan's service. Tertullus knows he lies, and his own Conscience
tells him he lies in his throat, that Paul is an honester man that himself,
yea, and the comfort is, that Paul's Conscience comforts him, and assures him
that Tertullus his Conscience assures him all this, So unspeakably sweet is the
comfort of a good conscience.

David complains of a great affliction, Psalm. 35. 11. False witness did rise
up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not. What should a man do in such
a case, if he had not the comfort of a good conscience witnessing for him? But
now at such a pinch appears the benefit of a good conscience; Let ever so many
rise up falsely to witness against him, yet his conscience will witness as
fast for him. My friends scorn me, says Job, Job 16. 20. They witnessed
against him to be a wicked person, and an hypocrite, they censured and
condemned him, but what was Jobs comfort? That same, verse. 19. Behold my
witness is in heaven, and my record is on high. That was one comfort, but that
was not all, he had also a witness on earth, and his record below. Upon whose
record, and witness, see with what solemnity and with what confidence he
stands, Job 27. 2, 6. As God lives who has taken away my judgment, and the
Almighty who has vexed my soul, All the while my breath is in me, and the
spirit of God is in my nostrills, my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my
tongue utter deceit; God forbid that I should justify you, till I dye I will
not remove mine integrity from me, my righteousness I will hold fast, and will
not let it go, mine heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. As if he
had said, As the Lord lives, whilst Nam si in his in quibus me criminantur,
testimonium Conscientiae meae non stat contra me in conspectu Dei, quo nullus
oculus mortalis intenditur, non solum contristari non debeo, verumetiam
exultare and gaudere, quia merces mea multa est in coelis. Neque enim intuendum
est quam sit amarum, sed quam falsum sit quod audio, and qua^ verax pro
cujusnomine hoc audio. Aug. contra. lit. Petil. l. 3.
there is breath in my body, I will not yield unto your accusations, nor yet
acknowledge my self guilty of that you do charge me withal. Urge me and
press me what you will, yet I will never let go mine hold. Why what is it
that makes Job thus stiff, and resolute, what is it that supports him with
such an excellent spirit? that ver. 6. Mine heart shall not reproach me so long
as I live. Indeed you reproach, censure, and condemn me, you lay heavy
things to my charge; But I have searched the records of my conscience, I have
called that unpartiall witness to testify the truth, and I find conscience
witnessing strongly on my side, and therefore do what you can, you shall never
bear me down. Jobs friends may prove fickle, and false, but his own
conscience will prove true to him, that will plead for him, animate him, and
comfort him against all their calumnious and injurious reproaches, and give him
cause of much joy and triumph. Job then had his witness in heaven, and Job had
his witness on earth, God and his own conscience, two witnesses beyond all
exception; and in the mouth of two witnesses every truth shall stand.
Conscience is a thousand witnesses, and God is above conscience. And what
Consciences witness concerning matter of fact, God himself will justify the
same. He that has a good conscience, has a sure friend, that will never
slinke nor shrink at any hand. Nay he has two good friends, and two
substantial witnesses, whose testimonies, though secret, yet are such as
sweetly solace the heart of man against open reproaches, slanders, false
witnesses, and all wrongs and injuries of that kind whatsoever. The testimony
of conscience is full of comfort, because of the undoubted certainty, and the
unquestioned infallibility thereof, so that it voycing on a man's side,
strangely cheares his heart, Pro. 27. 19. As in water face answers to face, so
does the heart of a man unto man; That is, as some expound it, As a man may see
his face by looking in the water, so a man may set himself, and what he is by
looking into his conscience. If a man should be told that he had some filth or
bloach on his In speculo Conscientiae status interioris hominis and exterioris
cognoseitur. Non immorito Conscientiam speculo comparavit, quoniam in e^
tanquam speculo rationie oculus tam indecens quam quod decens in se ^st, claro
aspectu appredere potest. Ber. de Consc.
face, if he would go look into the water, or specially into a
looking-glass, he should easily see whether it were so or no. And if looking
into the water, or glass, he could not see any such filth in his face, though
an hundred should offer to bear him down to the contrary, yet would he
believe his own eyes before them all. So here when at any time foul mouths
are open, and spare not to cast aspersions upon innocence, and to lay
scandalous things to a man's charge, then a man by looking into his conscience
can see himself, and can find whether he be guilty or not, and seeing himself
in that water; or in that glass to be clear from that dirt and filth which
malice would cast in his face, it so fills his heart with comfort, and
confidence, as makes him tread all reproach, and false judgment of man under
his foot.

This appears by the contrary. Let man be praised, and magnified ever so, ^et
ever so much good be spoken of him, and ever so much worth be attributed to
him; yet if his own heart tell him, that all is falsely spoken of him, and
there is indeed no such matter in him, he Non ideo bona est co^scientia mea
quia vos illam laudatis Quid enim laudatis quod non videtis? Aug. de ver. dom.
ser. 49. Si autem no^ aure^ solam percutit iracundia criminantis, verumetiam
co^scientiam mordet veritas criminis, quid mihi prodest si me co^tinuis
laudibus totus mundus attollat. Ita nec malam co^scientiam sanat praeconium
lauda^tis, nec bonam vulnerat conviciantis opprobrium. Aug. contra. lit. petil.
l. 2. In omni quod dicitur semper tacit occurrere debemus ad mentem and
interiorem testem, and judicem requirere. Quid enim prodest si omnes laudant
and conscientia accusat? aut poterit obesse si omnes derogent, and sola
conscientia defendit? Greg. sup. 125. hom. 6.
has at all no true comfort in all the good words of the world, Prove. 27. 21.
As the sining pot for silver, the furnace for gold, so is a man to his praise,
that is, a man is to try his praise that is given him, and if his conscience
tell him it is undeserved, he is to separate this dross of flattery from
himself. All the commendations, and admirations of the world what comfort can
they yield, whilst a man's conscience tells him, that they are all but lying and
glavering flatteries: what though the poor multitude feeling the swette, and
refreshment of a Pharisees alms, do canonize a Pharise for a Saint, yet what
is he the better, or what comfort has he the more, whilst his own
conscience reproaches, and reproves him, and tells him that he is a
vainglorious hypocrite, and that though these whom he feeds, send him to
heaven, yet he shall have his portion with hypocrites, and unbelievers. What
is a man the better for a flattering Funeral commendation, whilst in the mean
time he is under the reproach, and torture of his conscience, in the place of
torment? How many a man is there that has the good word of all men, no man
speaks well of him, but yet in the mean time, his own heart gives him bitter
words; and rates him to his face? How well contented would such a one be, and
what an happy exchange would he hold it, to have all the world rail on him,
and slander him, so his own conscience would but speak friendly and kindly to
him? so he could find honey from his conscience, he would not care what gall he
had from the world.

Experience lets us see that such as have been malevolent and injurious
against others innocence, though they have been abetted and borne out by their
umpires, and advocates, that for handfulls of barley, and scraps, and crusts,
have labored to maintain ill Causes, and worse persons, yet they have had no
peace nor rest of heart. Their advocates have bid them, sit down with rest and
victory, the day is theirs, they have cheered them, and striven to deserve
their fee, and yet their guilty Clients being netled with the inward guilt of
their consciences, have still been haunted with a restless and perplexed
unquiet spirt, which others made guilty, and censured for offenders by such
mercenarie umpires, have possessed their souls in patience, and have been
cheerful and merry-hearted, from the comfort of their own innocent and clear
consciences.

So that look as the naughty conscience can speak no comfort, though all the
world speak well of it; so contrarily, though all the world reproach, censure,
slander, etc. yet a good conscience Foelix conscientia non sibi in aliquo
conscia, quae non proprium judicium nec alienum veretur. Bern. de Consc. Beata
plane quae non alienis aestimatur judiciis, sed domesticls percipitur sensibus
tanquam sui iudex. Neque enim popularis opiniones pro mercede aliqua requirit,
neque pro supplicio pavet. Ambros. de offic. l. 2. c. 1. Non possunt aliena
verba crimen affigere quod propria non recepit conscientia. Ambros. in Psalm. 38.
can, and will speak peace, and comfort to a man's heart.

The Corinthians did exceedingly slight Paul, He was this, and he was that,
but how was he affected with it? See how, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. But with me it is a
very small thing, that I should be judged of you. I know full well what your
censures are, and what sentence you pass upon me, but know ye that I no whit
at all regard the same, I make no reckoning thereof at all. Why? might the
Corinthians say, do ye count us so silly, and so injudicious? Nay, says Paul,
I speak it not as if you were sillier than others, with me it is a small thing
to be judged of you, or of man's judgment, let them be the most wise, and
judicious that are in the world, or of man's Day, though by men convened in
solemn manner for judgment; I pass not what their censure is, I regard not
their mis-judgings of me. I, but what makes Paul thus slight men's judgment of
him? That in the fourth verse, I know nothing by my self, mine own conscience
judges me not, nor sentences me, that lays no such thing to my charge, and
therefore so long as my conscience is on my side, I regard not a whit what the
world judges.

Now then see what a Motive this is to get and keep a good conscience. As we
would be glad to have comfort and confidence against the malice of opprobrious
tongues, as we would have a counterpoison against their venom, so get a good
conscience. Here is that which may make us in love with a good conscience.
Reproach must full often be the portion of Gods dear children. Israelites
shall be for ever an abomination to Egyptians. And though the Egyptian dogs
moved not their tongues against Israel, Exodus 11. 7. yet dogged Egyptians
will move their tongues and their teeth too. The Apostles must be counted the
filth of the world, and the offscowrings of all things, 1 Corinthians. 4. 13. The
Lord Jesus himself drank of this cup, Psalm. 22. 6, 7. I am a worm and no man,
a reproach of men, and despised of the people. All they that see me, laugh me
to scorn, etc. The way to heaven is a narrow way, and this narrow way is beset
with snakes, spitting adders, barking, and biting, and mad dogs, and a man must
pass to heaven through good and evil report, 2 Corrinth. 6. 8.

Well then, it being so hard a passage Currentem attrites super aspidas and
basiliscos decl^naresenem vipera non poterit. Prosp. do Aug. Conscia men's recti
fama mendacia ridet, Sed nos in vitium credula turba sumus. Ovid.
how may a man get himself so armed that he may pass cheerfully through all
these? get a good conscience, and thou shall regard these snakes, serpents,
vipers, and dogs, no more than a straw under thy foot. If thou have a good
conscience, thou shall laugh at the reproaches of enemies, as Eliphaz speaks
of destruction. Job 5. A good conscience will say unto thee, Go on cheerily in
the ways of God, what ever discouragements the Devil raises by reproaches and
slanders, fear them not, behold I acquit and excuse thee, I will bear thee
out, I will witness at Gods tribunal for thee. Lo, I give thee balm against
their poison, a buckler against their swords. Let them curse, yet I will bless
thee; let them reproach, yet I will comfort; let them condemn, yet I will
absolve thee; let them defame thee, yet I will be thy compurgator; let them
cast dirt in thy face, yet I will wash it off; let them disquiet, yet behold, I
am ready to cheer thee. Oh the sweet and unconceivable comfort that a good
conscience will speak, even in the middst of the cruel speakings of ungodly
men, Jude 15. that will speak comfortably when they speak cruelly, and most
comfortably, when they speak most cruelly. Such is the benefit of a good
conscience in case of reproach and disgrace.

CHAP. XI.
The comfort and benefit of a good conscience in the times of common fears and
calamities, in the times of personal evils, as sickness, and afflictions, for
conscience sake.
IN the second place, let us see what 2. The comfort of a good conscience in
the times of common fears and calamities.
the benefit and comfort of a good conscience is, in the times of Common
fears, and Common calamities. When the world is full of fears and dangers,
and calamities break in, how fares it then with an evil conscience, in what
taking are they that want a good conscience? They are absorpt with fears, and
the very tidings puts them to such perplexities, Isa. 7. 2. Ahas is told of a
confederacy between Syria, and Ephraim, and see in what fears he and his
people were, His heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of
the wood are moved with the wind. So deeply do reports and and evil tidings
affect them, the trees in the wood are not so shaken with the blustering
winds, as evil consciences are with evil tidings. When ill news, and ill
consciences meet, there is no small fear. The signs that prognosticate
sorrowful times, see how deeply they affect evil consciences, Luke 21. 25.
There shall be signs in the Sun and the Moon, and in the stars, and upon the
earth, distress of Nations with perplexity, men's hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming in the earth. But
when calamity indeed comes, and not ill news, but ill times, and ill
consciences meet, how are they then? They are then either in the case the
Egyptians were in the famine, Genesis 47. 13. They were at their wits end; or as
those in a storm at Sea, Ps. 107. 26, 27. Their soul is melted because of
trouble, They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and all their
wisdom is swallowed up. Excess of fear puts them into as great distempers,
as excess of wine, it utterly stupifies them, and they by fear, are as much
bereft of the use of their senses, wit, and wisdom, as a drunkard is in his
drunkenesse. Yea, their fears make them not only drunk, but stark mad,
Deuteronomy. 28. 34. Thou shall be oppressed and cursed always, so that thou shall be
mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see. The perplexities of an
evil conscience in evil times, are unspeakably grievous. Isay does exceeding
lively describe them, Isay 31. 7, 8, 9. Therefore shall all hands be faint, and
every man's heart shall melt, And they shall be afraid, pangs and sorrows shall
take hold of them, they shall be in pain as a woman that travells, they shall
be amazed one at another, their faces shall be as flames, etc. Hence that same
strange question of the Prophet, Ierem. 30. 6, Ask ye now, and see whether a
man does travel with child? A strange question, what should make the Prophet
ask it? Because he foresaw such strange behavior amongst them, carrying
themselves in the same fashion in the day of calamity, that women use to do
in the extremity of the pangs of childbirth. Wherefore do I see every man with
his hands on his loins as a woman in travel, and all-faces are turned into
palenesse? Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the
time of Jacobs trouble. When such woeful days befall a man, all his riches
will not yield him a jot of comfort, Pro. 11. 4. Riches avail not in the day
of wrath. No, that will no whit cheer a man at such a time, They shall cast
their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be removed, etc. Ezekiel. 7. 19.
This shall be the miserable pickle a man shall be in at such a time, that
wants a good Conscience.

But now look upon a man with a good conscience in such times, and how fares
it with him? Let evil tidings and times come, how is he affected therewithal?
He will not be afraid of evil tidings, for his heart is fixed, Psalm. 112. 7.
Fe re he may, but yet his Heart shall be free from those restless, and
perplexing distractions, wherewith all others are vexed, Luke 22. 9. When ye
shall hear of wars and commotions, be not terrified. And Prove. 3. 25. Be not
afraid of sudden fear. There is nothing so arms and resolves the heart
against fears and evil tidings, as does the peace and integrity of a good
conscience. For let there be outward peace abroad in the world, and freedom
from all fears of wars and combustions, yet little joy and comfort can a man
have therein, whilst his conscience proclames war against him, and as Gods
Herald summons him to battle. Those inward wars, and rumors of wars,
woefully distract him in the midst of his outward peace. So contrarily let there
be peace within in the conscience, and all wars, and fears of wars hushed
there, and then what ever fears and troubles are like to be without, yet there
will be a calm, a serenity, and a sweet security within.

Be careful, and so fearful, for nothing, Phil. 4. 6. To be fearful in
nothing, is indeed an excellent happiness of a well composed mind. How might
one attain thereto? How might a man bring his heart to that fixed and
stablisht temper? See verse. 7. The Peace of God that passes all understanding
shall guard your hearts and minds, (...), shall keep with a guard, as Kings
have their guards about them, to save their persons from violence; shall guard
your hearts, that is, your affections, that they run not into extremities of
impatience, distraction, desparation; when fears and terrors shall come, ye
shall not be transported with such distracting thoughts as shall deprive you of
the freedom of your minds, but that you shall have them to attend upon God in
the greatest of your dangers. So that a man with a good conscience in the
middst of all fears and combustions can sing with David, Psalm. 116. 7. Return
unto thy rest, O my soul. The peace of a good conscience is like the ballast
of a Ship. Let a Ship go to Sea without ballast in the bottom, and every
blast of wind is ready to overturne it, but being well ballasted, though the
winds blow strong, yet it sails steddily and safely. Every blast of ill news,
and tidings of fear, how full of terrible apprehensions it fills an ill
conscience, it miserably unsettles and distracts it, whilst a good conscience,
what blasts soever blow, has its heart steady and at good command.

Me thinks when I consider Noah in his Cabbine, or nest in the Arc, with
what security and quiet of heart he sits there, notwithstanding the clattering
of the raines upon the Arc, the roaring of the waters, and the hideous howling
and outcries of those that were drowned in the flood, I see the Emblem of a
good conscience. Tubalcain,-Lamech, Iabal, Iubal, with what horrid perplexities
are their souls distraught. Some climb up this house top, some this high
tree, others flee to some high mountain, and there in what horror and
amazement are they, whilst one sees his Children sprawling, another his wife
struggling for life upon the face of the merciless waters, but especially
whilst they behold the waters rising by little and little, and pursuing them to
the house tops, and threatening to sweep them off from the heads of the
Mountains, to which they had betaken themselves. These fears and amazements
were worse then an hundredth deaths. But now all this while how is it with
Noah, he sits dry in his cabin, and literally was the saying of the Psalm
verified of him, Surely in the floods of great waters they came not nigh unto
him, Ps. 32. 6. He has his Ark pitched within, and pitched without, neither can
the raines from above beat in, nor the waters from beneath leake in, let all
fountains of the great deep be broken up, and the floodgates of heaven be
opened, yet not one drop of water comes at him, and though the waters prevayle
fifteen Cubits above the high hills and mountains, so that they be covered,
yet Noah he is out of all fear, let them rise as high as they will, yet shall
he keep above them still. Just such is the condition, and happiness of a man
with a good conscience in sad times. Whilst the high hills, and mountains are
covered, the great and brave spirits of the world are overwhelmed with fear,
are possessed with dreadful apprehensions, so as they know not which way to
look, nor which way to take, even then a man with a good conscience has a
strange quiet of heart, is full of sweet security and resolution, and amids all
the shrikes, howlings, and wringing of hands of earthly men, by patience
possesses his soul, is master of himself, and composes his soul to rest. His
Arc is pitched within and without. The peace of God, and the peace of a good
conscience, keeps the water-floods from coming into his soul. The rain and
the waves they beat upon the Arc, but yet they pierced it not. A man with a
good conscience may fall into, and may be swept away with common calamites: yet
how ever it fare with his outward man, yet his soul is free from that horror;
and those madding perplexities wherewithal wicked ones are overtaken. The
peace of a good conscience shall keep off these distracting fears from his
mind Though he cannot be free happily from the common destructions, yet shall
be free from the common distractions of the world. There be two things in
common calamities, The sword without, and terror within, Deuteronomy. 32. 25. and the
latter of the two, is the worse by far. Now here is the benefit of a good
conscience, though it does not save always from the sword without, yet it
delivers always from the terror within; which gives a terrible edge to the
sword, and which being removed the sword is nothing so terrible. When the
Canaanites were destroyed by Israel, there was a double sorrow and smart upon
them. The sword of the Israelite, and Gods Hornet, Josh. 24. 12. What was that
Hornet? Nothing else but that distracting and perplexing fear and terror
wherewith God filled their hearts, as appears, Exodus 23. 27, 28. There is no
Hornet can so vex with his sting, as these terrors vex evil consciences in
evil days. Now here is the privilege of good consciences, though they may
smart with the sword, yet the Hornet shall not sting them, nor fill their hearts
with that throbbing anguish, that these terrors in times of calamity put evil
consciences to.

A sweet motive to make any in love with a good conscience. Whilst we look
upon the evils of the times, we cannot but look for evil times. Look we
upon our sins, and Gods administration abroad; upon the malice and policies
of the adversaries of Gods grace, and what do these but prognosticate heavy
things. Now suppose a flood should come, would we not be glad of an arc, and
such a cabin therein, as should keep out the waters from our souls? Get then
the pitch of a good Conscience, and thou shall fit like Noah, if not free from
the waters, yet free from the fears of Lamech, and Tubal-cain, which are worse
than the waters. For the fears of such evils are more bitter and insufferable
than the evils themselves. Suppose, I say, a flood should come, who would not
give a kingdom for an Arc well pitched? Suppose calamity should come, who
would not give a world for a good Conscience then? Iabel, Genesis 4. 20. he is
busy in building of tents, and he is among his flocks and cattle; and Iubal,
Genes. 4. 21. he is wholly upon his merry pins, as his Harp and Organs; He
and his take the Timbrel and the Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ,
Job 21. 12. And these jolly joviall lads give poor Noah many a dry flout,
many a scornful scoff, whilst he is building his Arc, and ask what this
brainsicke and mad fellow means to make such a vessel, whether he meant to
sail on the dry land, or to make a sea when he had made his ship? I, but when
the flood is come, and the waters begin to be chin deep, then ask Iabel
whether building of tents, or building of an Arc be the wiser work? then
whether is better Noah's Arc, or Iubals Pipes? Now that the flood is come, and
these come perhaps wading middle deep to the Arc side, and bellow and howl to
Noah to open the arc to them: Now would not Iabel give all his tents, and all
his cattle, but to be where Noah's dog lies? would not Iubal now give all his
pipes and merriment, to have but the place that an hog had in the Arc. Now
Iubal, let us hear one of your merry songs, pipe now and make your selves
merry with gybing at Noah's folly, in making a ship to sail on dry land. What
ailest thou Iubal to howl and wring thine hands thus? where is thine Harp and
Organs now? cheer up thy soul now with these vanities. Now the Flood is come,
now Noah is in the Arc, now Sirs, you that are such men of renown, Genesis 6. 4.
you that were the brave gallants of the earth, now tell me who is the fool,
and who is the wise man now?

How many in the days of peace make light of a good Conscience; yea if they
see others to be but careful in rigging of their Ship, and pitching, and
trimming up such an Arc, how ready are they to spend their biting scoffs, and
their tart jests upon them, but if ever times of trouble and calamity, and a
fire flood of Gods wrath, Nah. 1. 6, 8. should break in, then would a good
Conscience hold up the head with much comfort, and resolution, whilst those
that formerly made a jest of a good conscience should have aching, and quaking
hearts, by reason of those unmeasurable fears that shall seize upon them. A
good conscience will make a man music; when Iubal shall be glad not only to put
up, but with indignation and anguish of heart to throw away and curse his
pipes. Well fare a good conscience in evil days. Pitch and trim up this Ark,
there is no such provision against evil days, as is a good conscience. It
will do a man service, and support him, when all the brave spirits of the earth
shall be blank, and at their wits end.

In the third place, the benefit and comfort 3. The comfort of a good
conscience in time of Sickness.
of a good conscience, is conspicuous in the time of sickness, or a man's
private and personal crosses in his estate, etc. A sick man with an hayle
conscience, is a cheary and a comfortable man, Prove. 13. 14. The spirit of a
man will sustain his infirmity; that is, the spirit it self being hayle, and
sound, it will enable him to bear any bodily sickness. But a wounded spirit who
can bear; yea a wounded or a sick body, who can comfortably bear, if the
spirit or conscience be sick? But let the conscience be good and sound; and
it helps a man with great ease and comfort, to bear the sickness of the
body. It is a shrewd burden to bear two sicknesses at once, to have a sick
body, and a sick conscience. A man shall find enough of the easiest of them
single and alone. But yet an hayle conscience in an infirm body, sweetly
helps our infirmity. Let a man have ever so hayle and heathfull a body, yet
if the conscience be naught, and withal awakened, falls to galling and griping,
he shall find but little joy in his bodily health; so contrarily, let a man's
conscience be good; and though his body be sick and weak, yet it is a great
deal of sweet refreshment that it shall receive from the conscience.

Sickness in it self is exceeding uncomfortable, and in the time of sickness
commonly all bodily comforts, the comforts of meats, drinks and sleep,
fail; yea but then here is the benefit of a good conscience, that will not
then fail, but as it is said, Eccl. 10. 9. Money answers all things, so a good
conscience answers all things, the comfort of it supplies the wants of all
other comforts. When in sickness the comfort of meat, drink, and sleep is
gone, they are all found again in the comfort of a good conscience; that will
be meat, and drink, that will be rest and sleep, that will make a man's
sickbed soft, and easy, that shall be as the Angels were to Christ in his
hunger in the Wilderness, they ministered unto him, and so will a good
conscience minister comfort in the want of all other comforts, so that a man
may say of a good conscience, as we use to say of some solid, substantial
dish, that there are Partridge, Phesants and Quails in it; so though outward
comforts cease their office, and their work be suspended, yet a good
conscience comes in its room, and in it are meat, drink, sleep, ease,
refreshment, and what not? A good conscience is an Electuary, or a Cordial
that has all these ingredients in it. There is no such Cordial to a sick
man, as the cordial of a good conscience. All Physicians to this Physician are
but such Physians as Jobs friends, Job 13. 4. Yea are Physicians of no value. A
motive of great weight to make men in love with a good conscience. Who can be
free from sickness, and how tedious and wearisome a time is the time of
sickness? Now who would not make much of a Cordial that might cheer him
then, of a receipt that might feed him then? As then we would be glad of a
cheerful and comfortable spirit upon our sick beds, so make much of a good
conscience. Whence is it that most men in their sicknesses have such drooping
spirits, lie groaning altogether under their bodily pains, or lie sottishly
and senslesly, no sense of any thing but pain and sickness? Merely from the
want of a good conscience, they have laid up no Cordial, no comfortable
Electuary for themselves in their health time against the day of sickness.
Indeed you shall have the miserable comforters of the world on this manner
cheering them; why, how now man, where is your heart? Pluck up a good heart
man, never fear for a little sickness, etc. True indeed, they should not need
to fear, if they could pluck up a good heart. But they that will pluck it up
when they are sick, must lay it up when they are well. He that has a good
conscience to get when he lies upon his sick bed, is like a man that has his
Aqua-vitae to buy when he is fallen into a swoune; A wise man that fears
swouning, would have his hot-water-bottle hanging always ready at his
beds-head. But as in other crosses by sickness and the like, so is the comfort
of a good conscience, never more sweet, then when a man is under the cross for
conscience sake, and suffers affliction and vexation to keep a good
conscience. Then above all other times will conscience do the office of a
Comforter, and will stand to him that will stand for it. When Nebuchadnezzar
hears his Furnace seven times hotter than at other times, then a good
conscience will speak comfort seven times sweeter than at other times.

Are Gods Saints for good conscience ^on Acts and Mon. Omnis nobis vilis est
poena, ubi pura comes est conscientia. Tiburt. apud. Baren. An. 168.
sake in prison? Good conscience will make their prisons delectable hort-yards.
So does Algerius an Italian Martyr date a comfortable Epistle of his, From the
delectable hortyard of the Leonine prison, a prison in Venice so called. So
that as he said, that he had rather be in prison with Cato, than with Caesar
in the Senate house, so in this regard it was more comfortable to be with
Philpot in the Colehouse, than with Bonner in his Palace. Bonners conscience
made his Palace a Cole house, and a Dungeon, whilst Philpots made the
Cole-house a Palace.

Are Gods Saints in the Stocks? Better it is, says Philpot, to sit in the
Stocks of the world, then in the stocks of a damnable conscience. Therefore
though they be in the Stocks, yet even then, the righteous does sing and
rejoice, yea, even in the Stocks, and prison; Paul and Silas sang in the
Stocks. Sing in the Stocks? Nay Hinc est quod e contrario innocens etiam inter
ipsa tormenta fruitur conscientiae securitate, and cum de poena metuat de
innocentia gloriatur. Hieron. ad Demetti. ad ^^. 1.
more; they can sing in the flames, and in the middst of the fires, Isay. 24.
15. Glorify God in the fires. And worthy Hawks could clap his hands in the
middst of the flames. So great and so passing all understanding is the peace
and comfort of a good conscience. So that in some sense that may be said of it
which is spoken of faith, Heb. 11. 34. By it they quenched the violence of
fire. Gods servants were so rapt, and ravished with the sense of Gods love, and
their inward peace of conscience, that they seemed to have a kind of happy
dedolencie, and want of feeling of the smart of outward torments.

Who knows what trialls God may bring him to? We have no patent for our
peace, nor his free liberty in the profession of the Gospel. Suppose we should
be called to the stake for Christ's sake. Would we be cheerful, would we sing in
the flames? Get a good conscience. The cause of Christ is a good cause, now
with a good cause get a good conscience, and we shall be able with all
cheerfulness to lay down our lives for Christ, and his Gospel sake.

CHAP. XII.
The comfort and benefit of a good conscience in the days of Death and
Judgment.
IN the fourth place, The time of death is a time wherein the benefit and
comfort of a good conscience is exceeding great. Death has a ghastly look and
4. The comfort of a good conscience at the day of Death.
terrible, able to daunt the proudest and bravest spirit in the world, but then
has it a ghastly look indeed, when it faces an evil conscience. Indeed
sometimes, and most commonly, conscience in many, is secure at the time of
death. God in his justice, so plaguing an affected security in life, with an
inflicted security at Death. And the Lord seems to say as once to the Prophet,
Go make their consciences asleep at their death, as they have made it asleep
all their life, lest conscience should see and speak, and they hear, and be
saved. God deals with conscience as with the Prophet, Ez. 3. 26. I will make
thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be dumb;
therefore they die, though not desparately as Saul, and Achitophel, yet
sottishly without comfort, and feeling of Gods love as Nabal. But if conscience
be awakened, and have its eyes, and mouth opened, no heart can imagine the
desparate and unsufferable distresses of such an heart, Terrors take hold of
him, as waters, Job 27. 20. Terrors make him afrai: on every side, Job 18. 11.
Then is that true, Job 25. 23, 24. He knows that the day of darkness is
ready at hand. Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid, they shall prevail
against him, as a King ready to the battle. And no wonder, for he is now
brought unto the King of Terrors, as Death is called, Job 18. 14. A man that
has an ill conscience, if his eyes be opened, and his conscience awakened, he
sees death in all the terrible shapes that may be. Sometimes he sees death
coming like a merciless Officer, and a cruel Sergeant, to arrest, and to
drag him by the throat to the prison and place of Torment, Psalm. 55. 15. Let
death seize upon them. They see it coming like that cruel servant in the
Parable to his fellow, Math. 18. catching them by the very throat.

Sometimes he sees death in the shape of some greedy Lion, or some ravening
Wolf ready to devour him, and to feed upon his carcass, Ps. 49. 14. Death
shall feed on them, even as a ravenous beast shall feed upon his prey. Imagine
in what a terrible plight the Samaritans where in when the Lions set upon them,
2 Kin. 17. and by it imagine in what case an ill conscience is, when it beholds
the face of death. It puts an ill conscience into that case in good earnest
that David was in, in the case of trial, Ps. 55. 4, 5. My heart is sore pained
within me, and the terrors of death are fallen upon me, fearfulness and
trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me.

Sometimes again he sees death as the Israelites the fiery serpents with
mortal stings; Sometimes as a merciless landlord, or the Sheriff coming
with a Writ of Firmae ejectione, to throw him out of house and home, and to
turn him to the wide Common; yea he sees death as Gods executioner and
messenger of eternal death, yea, he sees death with as much horror as if he
saw the Devil. In so many fearful shapes appears death to an evil
conscience upon the deathbed. So as it is indeed the King of terrors to such
an one that has the terrors of conscience within. There is no one thought so
terrible to such an one, as the thought of death, nothing that he more wishes
to avoid. Oh, how loath, and unwilling is such an one to dye.

But come now to a man that has lived as Paul did in all good conscience, and
how is it with him upon his deathbed? His end is peace; so full of joy and
comfort; so is he ravished with the inward and unspeakable consolations of his
conscience, that it is no wonder at all that Balaam should wish to dye the
death of the righteous, the death of a man with a good conscience.

The day of a men's marriage, is the day of the joy of a man's heart, Can. 3. 11.
and the day of marriage is not so joyful a day, as is the day of death to a
good conscience. There are but few that can marry with that joy wherewith a
good conscience dies.

It enables a man not only to look Ananias and the Council in the face, but
even to look death it self in the face, without those amazing terrors, yea,
it makes the face of death seem lovely, and amiable. He whose conscience is
good, and sees the face of God reconciled to him in Christ, he can say as
Jacob did when he saw the face of Joseph, Genesis 46. 30. Now let me dye, since I
have seen thy face. It is the privilege of a good conscience alone, to go to
the grave, as Agag did to Samuel, and to say that truly, which he spoke besides
the book, 1 Samuel 15. 32. He came pleasantly, and he said, Surely the
bitterness of death is past. He was deceived, and therefore had no such cause
to be so pleasant, but a good conscience can, yea, cannot choose but be so
pleasant, even when going out of the world, because the guilt of sin being
washed away in Christ's blood; it knows that the bitterness of death is past,
and the sweetness of life eternal is at hand.

A man whose debts are paid, he dares go out of doors, dare meet and face the
Sergeants, and the conscience purged by the blood of Christ, can look as
undauntedly on the face of death. He that has forgotten the sting, that is,
the guilt of conscience, taken away by faith in Christ, he looks not upon
death as the Israelites upon the fiery Serpents, but looks upon it as Paul
does, 1 Cor. 15. O death where is thy sting? Who fears a Be, an Hornet, a
Snake, or a Serpent, when they have lost their sting. The guilt of sin is the
sting of conscience, its the sting of death that stings the conscience. The
sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15. Pluck then sin out of the conscience, and
at once the conscience is made good, and death made weak, and disarmed of his
weapon. And when the conscience sees death unstinged and disarmed, it is freed
of fear, and even in the very act of death, can joyfully triumph over death,
oh Death where is thy sting?

A good conscience looks upon death, as upon the Sheriff that comes to give
him possession of his Inheritance, or as Lazarus upon the Angels that came to
carry his soul into Abraham's bosom, and therefore can welcome death, and
entertain him joyfully. And whereas an ill conscience makes a man see death as
if he saw the Devil, a good conscience makes a man see the face of death, as
Jacob saw Esau's face, Genesis 33. I have seen thy face, as the face of God; they
see the face of death with unspeakeable joy, ravishment of heart, and
exultation of spirit.

Well now, what a motive have we here, to make us labor for good conscience.
Even Balaam himself would feign make a good end, and die in peace: and who
wishes not his deathbed may be a mount Nebo, from whence he may see the
heavenly Canaan? Lo here, Balaam, the way to dye the death of the righteous, I
have lived in all good conscience until this day. They that have conscience in
their life, shall have comfort at their death; they that live conscionably, they
shall die comfortably; they that live in all good conscience till their dying
day, shall depart in the abundance of comfort at their dying day.

There will come a day wherein we must lay down these Tabernacles, the day of
death will assuredly come. How lamentable a thing will it then be, to be so
destitute, and desolate of all comfort, as to be driven to that extremity, as
to curse our birth day? oh! what would Comfort be worth at our last hour, at
our last gasp, whilst our dearest friends, shall be weeping, wringing their
hands and lamenting; then, then what would inward comfort be worth? Who would
not hold the whole world an easy price for it then? Well then, would we then
have Comfort and Joy, oh then get a good conscience now, which will yield
comfort, when all other comforts shall utterly fail, and shall be life in the
middst of death. How happy is that man, that when the sentence of death is
passed upon him, can say with Hezekiah, Is. 38. 3. Remember now O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. Indeed the text says, that
Hezekiah wept sore, but yet, not as fearing death, for he could not fear
death, who had thus feared God, but because the promise was not yet made good
to him in a Son and Heir of his kingdom; hence came those tears. It is
otherwise an unspeakable joy, that such a conscience as Hezekiahs was, will
speak to a man upon his deathbed.

Every one professes a desire to make a good end: Here is the way to make good
that desire, to live in all good conscience. Alas how pitiful, and miserable
a condition live most men in; All the days of their life and health, they have
no regard of a good conscience. Notwithstanding that men are pressed
continually to this one care, by the instancie and importutunitie of Gods
Ministers, yet how miserably is it neglected? Well, at last the day of death
comes, and then what would not they give for a comfortable end? If the gold of
Ophir would purchase comfort, it should fly then. Then poast for this
Minister, and run for the other, as in the sweating sickness in King Edwards
days, then for Gods sake but one word of comfort, then O blessed men of God,
one word of peace. Now alas what would you have them to do? Are they or your
own courses in fault, that you want comfort at your death? What would you have
us do? We must refer you to your own consciences, we cannot make oil of
flint, nor crush sweet wine out of sour Grapes, we dare not flatter you
against your consciences. If you would give us a world, we cannot comfort you
when your own consciences witness against you, that such comforts belong not
to you. Do not idely in this case hope for comfort from Ministers, be it
known unto you, you must have it from your own consciences. Many on their
deathbed cry to the Minister, as she did to the King, 2 King 6. 26, 27. Help
my Lord O King. But mark what he answers, If the Lord do not help thee,
whence shall I help thee, out of the barn floor, or out of the Wine press?
So must we answer to such as cry, Help, help, O man of God: If God and your
own consciences help you not, whence shall we help you? If there had been
Corn within the barnes, the King could easily have helped her, but he could
not make corn: So if men have carried any thing into their consciences, if
they themselves have inned any provision and comfort, by being conscionable in
their lives, then we can help and comfort them, but otherwise do not think
that we can make comforts, and make good consciences upon your deathbeds. If
your consciences can say for you, that you have been careful in your life
time to know God, to walk holily and religiously before him, etc. then we
dare be bold to comfort and cheer you, then dare we speak peace confidently
to you. But if your consciences accuse you of your ignorance, your oaths,
Sabbath-breaches, worldliness, rebellion, uncleanness, oppression,
drunkenness, etc. and finally, impenitencie: What is it you would have us to
do? What can we say, but as the Prophet to Zedekiah, Ier. 37. 19. Where are
now your Prophets that prophesied unto you, saying, the King of Babylon shall
not come against you? So, where be those that in your life time told you, ye
need not to be so careful and precise to keep good consciences, less ado will
serve the turn, now what think ye of them? now what peace have you in those
ways, what comfort can these give you now? Or else what can we say when men in
anguish of conscience lie tossing upon their beds, but what Reuben said to his
brethren when they were in distress, Genesis 42. 21, 22. Did not I warn you,
saying, Sin not, etc. So must we, what do ye call to us for comfort? did not
we warn you many a time and often, saying, Sin not, nor live in those
dangerous courses? Did not we warn you? Oh to have our consciences and Gods
Ministers thus to grate upon us, what an uncomfortable condition will this be?
Would we then prevent such sorrow, and be cheerful, and cheered at our latter
ends? lay up a good conscience, then, lay in somewhat for conscience, and Gods
Ministers to work upon, and from which they both may be able to raise comfort
to you. Get a good conscience, and live in it all thy days, and then though
thou should want the benefit of a comforting Minister, yet thy conscience
shall do the office of a comforting Minister, and shall be the same unto thee
that the Angel was unto Christ in his agony, Luke 22. 43. and shall minister
such comfort unto thee, as shall make thee ready to leap into the grave for
joy. This shall be as another Jacobs staff for thee to lean and rest upon,
when thou shall be upon thy deathbed. If men knew but the worth of a good
conscience at the hour of death, we should need no other motive to work men's
hearts to be in love therewith.

Fifthly and lastly, the benefit and comfort 5. The comfort of a good conscience
at the day of Judgment.
of a good conscience is great at the day of judgment. Oh the sweet comfort
and confidence of heart that a good conscience will yield unto a man at that
day. What will become of all the Gigantean spirits, and the brave fellows of
the earth then? Alas for their yellings, and cursing of themselves, and their
companions! what howling and crying to the mountains, as they did, Revel. 6.
Hide us, Cover us, yea, dash and quash us in a thousand pieces. When an ill
conscience is awakened, it is not to be imagined how small a thing will gastre
it. The sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, and they shall fly, as flying
from a sword, and they shall fall when none pursues, Levit. 26. 36. A dreadful
sound is in his ears, Job. 15. 21. He hears nothing, but he thinks he
hears always some terrible and dreadful noise. And then if a shaken leaf
shall chase, and shall put them into a shaking fear, what case will such be
in, when as Job speaks Job 26. 11. The pillars of heaven shall tremble, and
when the powers of heaven shall be shaken, Luke 21. 26. When the heavens shall
shake and flame above them, when the earth shall quake, and tremble under them,
what case will they be in then? If mere imaginations fill their ears with
dreadful sounds where there is no sound at all: Oh what a dreadful sound
shall be in their ears when the Sea shall roar, Luk 21. 25. when the last
trumpe shall sound, 1 Cor. 15. when they shall hear the shout and voice of an
Angel, 1 These. 4. 16. what dreadful sounds will these be in the ears of ill
consciences? How will these dreadful sounds confound their souls with horror
and amazement.

But now for a good conscience, how is it with it then? Even amiddst all these
dreadful sounds it looks up, and lifts up the head, Luke 21. 28. and enables
a man with a cheery confidence to stand before the Son of man, Luke 21. 36.

The Malefactor who looks for the halter, how dreadful is the Judges coming to
the Assizes, attended with the troops of halberds, in his eye; but the
prisoner that knows his own innocence, and that he shall be quit and
discharged, his heart leaps at the Judges approach, how terrible soever he come
atte^ded to the bench, it glads his heart to see that day, which shall be the day
of his liberty and release. An hypocrite shall not come before him, Ioh. 13.
16. much less, shall look up, and lift up his head, or stand before him, Ps. 1.
5. But the righteous, and the man with a good conscience, he shall hold up, and
cheerfully lift up his head, when all the surly, and proud Zamzummins of the
earth, that here lifted up their heads and nebs so high, shall become howling
and trembling suitors to the deaf mountains to hide them from the presence of
the Lamb on the throne. Oh! they that fear the Lamb on the throne, how
dreadful unto them will be the Lion on the throne?

It will be with good and evil consciences in that day, as it was with
Pharoahs Butler, and Baker, on Pharaohs birthday. The Butler he knew he
should be restored to honor, and go from the Prison to the Palace, therefore
he comes out of the prison full of joy, and jollity, he holds up his head, and
outfaces the proudest of his enemies. But the Baker he knows his head shall
be lift from off him, and therefore when Pharaohs birthday comes, wherein all
others are in jollity, yet he droopes and hangs down the head, he knows it
would prove an heavy day of reckoning with him.

Such will the apparition of Christ unto judgment be, unto good and evil
consciences, as was the apparition of the Angel, Math. 28. 2, 3, 4, 5. There
was a great earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from heaven, his
countenance was like lightening, and his raiment white as snow. Here was a
terrible sight, but yet not alike terrible to all the beholders. For, for fear
of him the keepers did shake, and became like dead men. But the Angel said unto
the women, fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus. So at the last day when
Christ shall come to judgment, evil consciences shall be as the Keepers,
whilst all good consciences shall hear that comfortable voice, Fear not ye,
for I know that you have sought for God, and all your days ye have sought to
keep a good conscience. How effectual a motive should this be, how strongly
should this work with us. As we should be glad to hold up our heads, when the
glorious ones of the earth shall hang them down, to leap for joy, when others
shall howl for bitter anguish of spirit, so now whilst we have the day of
life and grace, labor we to get and keep good consciences.

CHAP. XIII.
A second motive, A good conscience is a continual feast.
THus have we seen the first motive, The second motive to a good
conconscience.
from the benefit and comfort of a good conscience, in such cases, and times,
as a man stands most in need of comfort. A second motive follows, and that is
that we find, Prove. 15. 15. A good conscience is a continual feast. 1. It is a
feast. 2. Better than a feast. It is a continual feast.

1. It is a feast. The excellency of a good conscience is set forth by the
same Quo enim melius epulantur animi quam bonis factis? aut quid aliud tam
facile potest explere justorum mentes qua^ boni operis co^scientia? Ambro. de
offic. l. 1. c. 31.
thing, by which our Savior sets forth the happiness of heaven, Luke 14. And
well may both be set forth by the same Metaphor, considering what a near
affinity there is between heaven and a good conscience, and that there is no
feasting in heaven, unless there be first the feast of a good conscience here
on earth. But why a feast? A feast for three regards.

1. For the self sufficiency, and sweet satisfaction and contentment that a
good conscience has within it self. Feasting and fasting are opposite. In
fasting upon the want of food there is an emptiness and a griping hunger,
which makes the body insatiably to crave. But at a feast there is abundance,
and variety of all dishes and dainties, ready at hand to satisfy a man's
appetite to the full, he can have a mind to nothing but it is before him. The
very best of every thing that is to be had is at a feast. A feast of fat
things, Isa. 25. 6. of fat things full of marrow. Such is the sufficencie of
satisfaction, the abundance of sweetness, and contentment that is to be found
in a good conscience. It is a table richly furnished with all varieties, and
dainties. There is no pleasure, comfort, or contentment that a man's heart can
wish, but it may be abundantly had in a good conscience; as at a feast there is
a collection of all the dainties and delicacies that sea and land can afford.

2. For the mirth and joy of it. A feast is made for laughter, Eccl. 10. 19. At
a feast there is mirth, music, and delight in the comfortable use of the
creatures. Heaviness of heart, pensiveness, and sorrow, these are banished
from the house of feasting. Fasting and feasting are opposite, in fasting
indeed there is weeping, mourning and sorrowing; but in a feast contrarily,
there is mirth, merriment and joy.

There were under the Law appointed solemn holy feasts anniversarily to be
celebrated, and at those solemn feasts were the silver trumpets sounded, Number.
10. 10. and the sound of the trumpets was a joyful sound, Ps. 89. 15. For
their Festivities were to be kept with special joy, Deuteronomy. 16. 10, 11, 13, 14,
15. Thou shall keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord, etc. and thou shall
rejoice before the Lord, etc. Thou shall observe the feast of Tabernacles seven
days, etc. And thou shall rejoice in the feast, etc. Therefore thou shall
surely rejoice. And that extraordinary feast on the fourteenth and fifteenth of
Adar, in memorial of their deliverance from Haman, see how it was kept Esth. 9.
19. 22. They kept them days of gladness and feasting, of feasting and joy.
Even such is the excellency of a good conscience. All the merriment and
music, wine and good cheer, will not make a man's heart so light and so merry,
as the wine which is drunk at the feast of a good conscience will do. This
takes away all heaviness and sadness of spirit, and has the like effects
with natural wine. It makes a man forget his spiritual poverty, and remember
that misery no more, Pro. 31. 7. Nay, as wine not only takes away sadness, but
withal brings a natural gladness with it, Ps. 104. 15. Wine that makes glad
the heart of man: so does this wine at this feast, Psalm. 97. 11, 12. Light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, Rejoice in the
Lord ye righteous. None so glad an heart, as the upright in heart. Nay, such is
the vigor and strength of this wine, at this feast, that it not only glads a
man's heart, but makes a man as not able to contain, even to shout for joy,
Psalm. 32. 11. Shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart, yea shout aloud
for joy, Psalm. 132. 16. That look as it is said of the Lord, Ps. 78. 65. The
Lord awaked like a mighty man that shouts by reason of wine. So such is the
plenty, abundance, sweetness, and strength of the wine of this feast, that it
makes men in a holy jollity, even to break forth into shouting, and singing.
This wine being liberally drunken, wherein there is no excess, fills a man's
heart with such an overflowing exuberancie of joy, as he cannot hold, but he
must needs show it in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs; and hence it is
that the righteous do sing and rejoice, Pro. 29. 6. So that what joy a feast
can yield, that can a good conscience yield much more, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is
our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience. Yea and that joy commanded,
Deuteronomy. 16. at the feast of Tabernacles what was it but a Type of that spiritual
joy, that the faithful under Christ should have in keeping the feast of a good
conscience? The feast of a good conscience is the true feast of Tabernacles, in
which as in the other, there shall need no charge to rejoice, and be merry,
this feast will put such spirit and life into a man, as shall make him sing,
skip, and shout for joy.

The feast of a good conscience is not like a funeral feast, where mirth and
joy are unseemely, and unseasonable guests, there are heavy hearts and looks,
tears, and mourning, (which by the way how well they suit with feasting let
the world judge) but the feast of a good conscience is a nuptial feast, a
marriage feast, and the day of marriage is the day of the joy of a man's heart,
Cant. 3. 11. Such a feast, even a joyful marriage feast does a good conscience
make.

Oftentimes these bodily feasts are but heavy feasts, many for all their good
cheer, company, and music, cannot put away the heaviness of their hearts,
but even in their feast are sad hearted, and Sampsons wife wept all the days
of the feast, Judge. 14. 17. yea though a marriage feast. But in this feast of a
good conscience here is no sorrow, heaviness, or sad melancholy, but all joy
and gladness.

3. For the society and company. A feast is a collection, and a convention of
many good friends together, whose society and friendship is sweet each to
other. There is no feast can afford the like company that a good conscience
has. Woe to him that is alone, Ecc. 4. that is the woeful and solitary
condition of evil consciences. But a good conscience has ever good company,
is not alone, for the Father is with it, Ioh. 16. 23. yea, the Son is with it:
and Christ, and the man with a good conscience, they sup, and feast together,
Revel. 3. 20. yea, and the spirit is with it, 1 Cor. 13. 13. The Communion of
the Holy Ghost be with you. What feast in the world can show such company? And
good company is the chief thing in a feast. Thus a good conscience is a feast.

2. It is better than a feast. And that in three regards.

1. In regard of the continuance and perpetuity of it, A continual feast.
Nabal made a feast, a feast like a King, 1 Samuel 25. but that feast lasted but
one day. Sampson at his marriage had a feast that lasted seven days, Judge. 14.
17. but yet that feast had an end. Ahashuerosh his feast was the longest feast
that ever we read of, Esth. 1. 4. He made a feast many days, an hundred and
fourscore days. But yet v. 5. it is said, And when those days were expired.
So this long feast had an end. It was continued for many days, but yet no
continual feast, it had an end. The feast of a good conscience is not like an
University Commencement feast. Great exceedings, and extraordinary good cheer
and company for one night, but the next morrow to their bare Commons again.
Not like the feast of the Nativity, at which time there is great feasting, and
great cheer every where for twelve days, but when those days are over, many
a man is glad of bread and cheese, glad to skip at a crust. But this is a
continual feast all the year long, all a man's life long. Therefore 1 These. 5.
16. Rejoice evermore, keep open house, and feasting all the year long. The joy
of a good conscience was figured by the joy at the feast of Tabernacles. That
feast lasted seven days. The joy must be as long. Seven the number of
perfection, denoted the whole course of a man's life, and so their seven days
joy, the continual joy and jollity of this continual feast of a good
conscience.

Conscience and a wife, as they agree in many things, be they good, be they
ill, so in this also. If the conscience be evil, it is like an evil wife, and
she a continual evil, Prove. 27. 15. A continual dropping in a very rainy
day, and a contentious woman are alike. The contentions of a wife are a
continual dropping, Prove. 19. 13. A shrewish waspish wife, is a continual
vexation and disquiet. Such is an evil conscience, a continual sorrow.
Contrarily, a good conscience is like a good wife, a good wife is a continual
comfort, a comfort in health, in sickness, in peace, in distress, Pro. 31.
12. She does him good and not evil all the days of her life. Not some good,
and a great deal of evil withal, but all good, good and not evil. Not good
at sometime, and none at other times, but all the days of her life, she is a
continual comfort. So is the comfort of a good conscience. It keeps holy day
and feasting every day. It is all feast; a feast for ever; there is no Lent, or
fasting days that interrupt this feast. This is the peculiar privilege of this
feast to be continual; belly feasting cannot be so: for 1. A man cannot
always feast though he would, a man's revenues would be exhaust, his expenses
would soon sink his estate. Continual feasting would soon beggar and undo a
man of good estate, Pro. 21. 17. He that loves Wine and Oil shall not be
rich. It is not so here; the revenue of a good conscience is bottomless, it
cannot be spent, and therefore is able to keep a rich and a full furnished Table
all the year long. Here is a mystery in this feast, the larger expenses to
day, the more laid in to keep the feast the better to morrow; a man grows
rich by feasting.

2. Suppose a man might be able to feast always, or might feed at another man's
Voluptas tune cum maxim delectat extinguitur. Nec multum loci habet; iatque
cito implet and taedio est, and post primum impetum marcet. Seneo. de vir.
beat. c. 7.
Table continually, yet would it weary a man beyond measure. It would but gug
and cloy a man. All earthly pleasures have a satietie, and breed a loathing by
frequent use. But this is the admirable excellency of this feast of a good
conscience, here a man may feed and eat with continual delight. At this
continual feast, here is a continual fresh appetite, and fresh delights; here
is continual feasting without loathing and satiety.

3. Neither may belly feasting be continual. There be some times wherein it is
inconvenient and unlawful. To speak with the fairest, that day which God has
sanctified for his service, is not so convenient for feasting. It may be no
less dangerous to devour sanctified time, than sanctified things. And in this
case has that saying a truth, It is not meet that we should leave the Word of
God, and serve Tables, Act. 6. 2. But now this feast without any doubt may be
on the Sabbath, yea, it is the special festival, and high day of the week,
wherein this feast is best kept. Again, there be times wherein God calls to
solemn fasting and humilation, as when the Church is either in danger or
distress; but this feast is not hindered by fasting, it will stand well with
it, and many a special dainty dish is served in to this feasting from a fast.

4. Suppose a man could and might, feast always, yet were it a brutish thing,
and hog-like always for a man to be cramming and crowding in belly cheer,
always to be pauncing and gutting. It is that for which the rich Glutton is
taxed, Luke 16. That he fared deliciously every day. But here to feast at this
Table every day, is that which makes a man every whit as Angel like, as
belly-feasting every day makes a man swine-like. Here it is a man's happiness
to be a holy Epicure.

2. It is better then other feasts, in regard Nunquam credideris faelicem qui
adventitio loetus est, exibit gau dium quod intravit. Se^^^. ep 9^.
of the Independencie of this feast upon any other out-ward thing. This feast
is able to maintain it self of it self, and within it self. A man that has
a good conscience, has a feast, though he have nothing else but it. A good
conscience, though it have nothing but brown bread and water, yet this hard
fare marres not the feast; For this feast stands not in meats, and drinks, but
in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. Quietness
and a dry morsel is better then an housefull of good cheer with strife, Pro.
17. 1. Though it be but outward quietness, when a man is free from unjust
vexations, and the molestations of froward and contentious disposition, even
such quietness makes a dry morsel good cheer, makes a feast of a crust. But
when there is inward quietness of a good conscience, and a man's heart is at
quiet from his peace with his God, what excellent cheer is a dry morsel, then?
Though a man have ever so good fare, yet to have it sawced with the bitterness
of contention, and to live in a continual wrangling with pevish people, what
poor content would a well furnished Table afford such a man? And what poor
cheer, especially, would all these feasts in the world make, where there is
brawling and contention from the conscience? Here then is the excellency of
this feast above all other feasts. This feast is able to subsist, and to
maintain it self without other feasting; other feasting is nothing without
this of a good conscience. Other feasting often hurts and hinders this feast,
whilst men by their vain and licentious carriage therein, Feasting without
all fear, Jude. 12. Do make the conscience fast and starve; and whilst their
Quails are between their teeth, Leanness enters into their soul. Psalm.
106. 5. So far is bodily feasting from helping, that it hinders this feasting
rather. Conscience, can have mirth enough without a feast, but little is the
comfort and content that a feast can give, where the Conscience is not good.
Men may Sed non est ista hilaritas longa. Observa, videbis cosdem in exiguum
tempus atergime ridere, and acerrime rudere. Senec ep. 92.
set a face upon it and brag, laugh, and be jolly in their feasting, but yet
in the midst of their laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that
mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14. 13. Conscience awakened even in the midst of
the greatest jollitie, gives men many a bitter twitch at the heart, and in the
midst of all their revellings, gives them Vinegar and Gall to drink. A good
conscience is it that sweetens and seasons all the dishes of a feast, that is
the sauce that makes meat savoury, the sugar that sweetens Wine, that is the
music that makes a man's heart dance.

But let a man go to the most sumptuous, and delicious feasts without a good
conscience, and how is it with him then? Just as with Belshazzar, Dan. 5. Where
the hand writing on the wall marred all his mirth; or else it is in such a
case, as it was with Haman. The fool brags that he alone is invited to Esters
banquet with the King, Esth. 5. 12. Oh how happy a man was he, under how
fortunate a Planet was he borne, to be the King and Queens Favorite both? But
see what little reason he had to brag, Chap. 7. 2. Even at the banquet of
Wine, Esther gives him a cup of gall: at the banquet of Wine does she accuse
Haman to the King. Oh! how many glory in their banqueting, and their feasting,
but how often do their consciences put Esthers trick upon them, even accuse
them to God, and gall and gird them in the midst of their wine? conscience
serves many, as Absoloms villains served Amnon, when his heart was merry at
Absoloms feast, then they stabd him to the heart. Conscience deals with them,
as the Israelites were dealt withal in their quail feast. They had their
Quails, and their dainties, but a man would rather want their good cheer,
than have their sauce. Their sweet meat had sharp sauce. Whilst the flesh was
between their teeth, Gods anger brake in upon them. So whilst many are chewing
their dainties, conscience fills their mouth with gravel, and so sawces and
spices their dishes, that they find but little content therein. So miserable
are all feasts and merriments of this world, when a man wants the independent
feast of a good conscience. So happy also are they that have the feast of a
good conscience, although they never taste bit of other feast whilst they live,
although they be denied the crumbs that fall under the feasting Gluttons table.

3. It is better in regard of the Universality of it. As for belly feasts, it
stands not with every man's condition and purse, to make them. It belongs only
to the richer and abler sort to feast. Feasting is a matter of charge and cost,
and so is out of the reach of the poorer sort. But here is the excellency of
this feast. The poorest that is may make it, and the poor have as good
privilege to make it as the rich, and the poor in this respect may keep as
good an house as the best Nobleman, yea, for the most part the poorer sort keep
this feast best. Nabal makes a feast like a king, but wretched man, in the mean
time what feast keeps his conscience? It may be many a poor Carmelite
neighbor of his that went in a poor russet coat, and lived in a poor thatcht
cottage, kept that feast abundantly and richly, whilst he poor sot had not the
crumbs that fell from their tables. Lazarus could not have the crumbs that fell
from the gluttons table, but how happy had it been with the glutton if in stead
of this delicious fare he might have had but the reversions of Lazarus board.
Lazarus may not come to his feast, no nor yet to his fragments, neither will
Lazarus condition permit him to feast it as the glutton did, but yet this feast
of a good conscience, Lazarus may make as well as he, and can, and does keep
it, whilst the glutton feels many an hunger-biting gripe. What an excellent
feast is this above all other feasts, wherein the russet has as much
privilege as the velvet, the beggar as the King, the poor tenant, as the rich
Landlord? The rich Landlord often so feeds upon, and eats up his poor tenant
by oppression, that the tenant is kept low enough for feasting; It is well with
him if he have food, he had not need think of feasting. But lo now the
excellent feast of a good conscience: here may the Tenant keep as good cheer
as the Landlord, yea, and it may be may feast, whilst the rich Landlord is
ready to starve for want of this provision.

Now then all this considered, what a Motive should it be to make us in love
with a good conscience. How powerfully should this persuade us thereto? when God
would persuade men to come to the joys of heaven, he uses no other argument
than this, to invite them to a feast, as in the Parable, Luke 14. Behold, here
is the same argument, to move you to be in love with a good conscience, behold
the Lord invites you to a feast, and to a feast where ye shall have
sufficiency, without want, or loathing, where ye shall have wine, mirth,
music, and good Company, to the full. The twelve days feast of the Nativitie,
how is it longed for before hand, and how welcomed when it is come? And what
may the reason be? But only because it is a feasting time. This is counted a
blessed good time: and why a blessed good time? As Christ was a blessed good
man, and the prophet that should come into the world, and therefore should be
made a King, because he had fed and filled their bellies, John 6. So the most
make that a blessed time, not for the memorial of Christ's Incarnation, but
because of the loaves Christ shall be a King, and because of the feast, the
time is blessed. Well then, and is the world so desirous, and so glad of
feasting? Are feasting times such blessed times? Lo then I invite you to a
feast, to a blessed good feast indeed, that will make you blessed and truly
happy. Not to a feast of twelve days, but to a feast that lasts all the twelve
months of the year, to a continuing, and a continual feast. How glad are
many when they may go to a feast? Lo a way to make feasts for your selves.
What a credit is it counted in the world for a man to keep a good, and great
house, to keep feasting and open-house for all comers, during the Festivity of
the twelve days? Would we have this credit of good houskeeping, not for twelve
days but for all the year long? Get good consciences, keep good consciences.
There is no such good housekeeper, as is the good conscience-keeper; for a
good conscience is a feast, a continual feast.

There is nothing that men desire more then to live merrily, and how many
stumble at Religion, and keeping of a good conscience, under an idle conceit
that it is the way to mar all their mirth, and to make a man lumpish and
melancholy. Do not believe the devil, do not believe his lying agents? It is
a profane Proverb, that Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus melancholicus. A
good conscience is a feast, a feast with all dainties, music, and wine. Can a
man be melancholy at a feast, at so joyful, and so sweet a feast? does
feasting make men melancholy, or make men merry? make men weep, or laugh? If
a man should cry down feasting with this argument, That it makes men
melancholy, would not all men laugh him to scorn? And why then should a man
fear melancholy more from a good conscience, than from a feast? There is none
lives so merry a life as he that keeps a good conscience, he is every day at
a feast, he is always banqueting. Yea, the worst dishes of this feast, even
those at the lower end of the Table, are better than the most choice rarities
of other feasts. The very tears that a good conscience sheds have more joy and
pleasure in them, than the worlds greatest joys. And if the tears of a good
conscience be such, what is the mirth and laughter of it? If weeping be so
sweet, what is singing? If the courser dishes be so dainty, what are the best
services? Would we then live merrily, and pass our days jocundly indeed? Get
a good conscience and thou keep a continual feast, and that continual
feast will keep thee in continual mirth, and continual joy. Yea, though thou
be in affliction, and under crosses, so as thy days unto the world may seem
exceedingly evil, shall thou live merrily as at a feast. Yea, this is the
scope of the Scripture, All the days of the afflicted are evil, namely, in
the eye and judgment of the world: but a good conscience, namely, to the
afflicted, is a continual feast. A good conscience feasts then, and turns
fasting days into feasting days. A good conscience feasts a man in his
poverty, in his sickness, in the prison, and cheeres up a man with many a
dainty bit. The wine of this feast makes them forget all their sorrow.

Now then that we would be so wise as to hearken to Gods invitation to this
feast, Let us keep the feast with the bread of sincerity and truth, 1 Cor. 5.
8. Take heed now that we put not off God as those did, Luke 14. invited to the
feast, with the excuses of Farms, Oxen and the like. So do many, urge them to
the keeping of a good conscience, and their answer is, If they should be so
precise, how should they live, they shall have but poor takings if they take
such a course, I pray have me excused, I must live. Thus they answer, as many
good husbands, when invited to frequent feastings, do, No believe me it will
not hold out, if I go every day a feasting, I may go one day a begging, I
must follow my business, and let feasting go. And so say men here. But take
heed of putting off God thus. The time will come that thou would give all
thine oxen to have but the scraps and crumbs of this feast, and thou shall not
have them, God will serve thee as he did them, Luke 14. 24. None of those men
which were bidden shall taste of my supper. Those that care not to keep the
feast of a good conscience, shall never come to Gods feast in heaven. If you
refuse to come to his feast now, God will at the last day thrust you out of
doors, when you will be pressing and crowding in, and shall say to you, Get
you hence ye despisers of a good conscience, you scorned the feast of a good
conscience, and therefore now the feast and guests of heaven scorn you, here
is no room for such to feast here, who have made their consciences fast
heretofore.

CHAP. XIV.
A third and a fourth motive to a good conscience.
Come we now to a third motive, that The third motive to a good conscience.
may yet help to stir up our minds to this necessary duty of getting and
keeping of a good conscience. Besides what has been said, it is worthy of our
consideration, that without a good conscience all our actions, yea our very
best services to God are so far from goodness and acceptance, that they are
abominable and distastefull unto the Lord. The formal goodness of every man's
actions is to be judged and esteemed by the goodness of his conscience, which
being evil and defiled, makes all a man's actions to be such, 1 Timothy 1. 5. The
end of the commandment is love. But what kind of love does the commandment
require, will any shows or shadows of obedience serve the turn? will the bare
dutydoing pass for current? No, but such love to God and man, and such
performance of obedience, as proceeds from a pure heart and a good conscience.
So that let a man do all outward actions of obedience, yet if a good
conscience be wanting, all is nothing, For the end of the Commandment is love
out of a good conscience. As is a man's conscience, so are all his works, and
therefore nothing acceptable that a wicked man does, because he does it with
an ill conscience. To the pure all things are pure, but to the defiled their
conscience is defiled, and that being defiled, it defiles all it meddles with,
as under the Law the Leaper defiled all he touched. The best meat, disht and
dressed with defiled and dirty hands, is loathsome to us.

The honest works of a man's calling are good works in themselves, but no good
works to him that does them without a good conscience, Pro. 21. 4. An high
look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked is Sin. The calling of
Husbandry is counted the most honest calling of all others, yet where a good
conscience is wanting, a man's very plowing is Sin. Come to holy duties of
Religion and Gods service, and how is it with a man wanting a good conscience
in them? That curse of David's, Psalm. 109. 8. Let his prayer be turned into Sin,
lies upon the services of all evil consciences. See Pro. 15. 8. The sacrifice
of the wicked, that is, of him that has an evil conscience, is an
abomination: but the prayer of the upright, that is, of a man that has a good
and upright conscience, is his delight. Observe the opposition. He says not
the prayer of the wicked, and the prayer of the upright, nor the sacrifice of
the wicked, and the sacrifice of the upright; but the sacrifice of the wicked,
and the prayer of the upright. A sacrifice had prayer with it, but yet it was
more sumptuous and more solemn then single prayer. Now who would not think but
such cost should make a man welcome, yet the single prayer of the upright is
accepted, whilst his sacrifice is an abomination, yea, and that a vile
abomination, Is. 66. 3. A man of evil conscience delighting in his
abominations, makes his holiest services such. Let such an one come to the
Sacraments, and how will it be with him there? even as in the former, To the
impure, even the pure Sacraments are impure. Simon^ Magus rather defiles the
waters of Baptism, then they cleanse him, and it is not carnal baptism that
availes any thing, without the answer and stipulation of a good conscience, 1
Pet. 3. 21. And for the Sacrament of the Supper, whether does it profit an
unclean conscience, or such a conscience pollute it? It may be judged by a
like case resolved, Hag. 2. 11, 14. The unclean person by a dead body touching
the Bread, or Wine, or Oil, makes these to be unclean. The ceremonial
uncleanness by the touch of a dead body, typified the moral uncleannes of an
evil conscience, unpurged from dead works. God looks specially at the
conscience in all our services, and if he finds that foul and filthy, he
throws the dung of men's sacrifices in their faces, that come with the dung of
their filthy consciences, before his face. See therefore how Paul serves God, 2 Timothy 1. 3. Whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience. It is an
impure service that is not performed with a pure conscience, as slight as the
world make of purity. How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your
consciences from dead works, Heb. 9. 14. But to what end are they purged? To
serve the living God. Therefore mark, that till the conscience be purged and
made good, there is no serving of God. So Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near, that
is, in prayer, and the like duties; But how? Having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience. Otherwise it is but a folly for us to draw near, for God
will not be near when a good conscience is far off. And therefore we are bid to
purify our hearts, when we are bid draw nigh to God, Iam. 4. 8.

Behold here then a special motive to make a good conscience beautiful in our
eye. As we would be loath our services of God, our prayers and holy
performances, should be abominable in Gods eye, so labor for good consciences.
As we would have comfort in alour duties of obedience, so labor to make our
conscience good. It is a great deal of confidence that silly ignorant ones
have in their good prayers, and their good serving of God, as they call it, yea
it is all the ground of their hope of salvation, when they are demanded an
account of their hope: now alas your good prayers, and your good serving of
God! why what do you talking of these things? Has Christ purged your
consciences from dead works? Have you by faith got your consciences sprinkled,
and rinced in Christ's blood, and so have ye made them good? If not, never talk
of good prayers, and good serving of God: your prayers cannot be good whilst
your consciences are naught. An evil conscience before God, and a good service
to God cannot stand together. But would you have your prayers good indeed, and
your service acceptable indeed? then let your first care be to make your
conscience good.

Fourthly, let this work with us as a The fourth motive to a good conscience.
maine motive to a good conscience: That it is the Ship and the Arc wherein
the faith is perserved. The faith is a rich commodity, a precious fraught, and
a good conscience is the bottom, and the vessel wherein it is carried. So long
as the ship is safe and good, so long the goods therein are safe; but if the
ship split upon the Rocks, or have but a leake therein, then are all the goods
therein in danger of being lost and cast away. So long as a man keeps a good
conscience, there is no fear of losing the faith, the integrity and soundnes
of the doctrine thereof. Constancy in the truth, is a fruit of good conscience,
Psalm. 119. 54, 55. I have kept thy Law; he had not declined from, nor forsaken
the truth of God, but what held and kept him? This I had, because I kept thy
precepts. Keeping of a good conscience will keep a man in the truth: It is
that which is the holy preservative to save from all errors, heresies, and
false doctrins. The better conscience, the sounder judgment, the sounder heart,
the sounder head. As the better digestion in the stomach, the sreer the head is
from asce^dent fumes that would distemper and trouble the same, John 7. 17. If
any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God.
How shall a man come to have a sound and a good judgment, to be able to judge
what is truth, and what is not? Let him get a good conscience, and make
conscience of doing the will of God, John 14. 21. He that has my
commandments and keeps them, etc. such a man has, and keeps a good
conscience. And what benefit shall such a one have by keeping of a good
conscience? I will love him, and I will manifest my self unto him. And Ps. 50.
23. To him that orders his conversation aright* will I show the salvation of
God. God does communicate himself and his truth to such as make conscience of
their ways. The pure in heart shall see God, and the secret of the Lord is
with them that fear him.

So that he that has a good conscience, has the only Antidote, the most
excellent Amulet and plague-cake at his breast that is in the world, to save him
from the pestilence, and infection of Popery, Arminianisme, Brownisme,
Anabaptisme, etc. So long as the Ship of conscience is whole, so long the
Jewel of faith is safe. Paul would have a Bishop to hold fast the faithful
Word, and to be sound in doctrine, Tit. 1. 9. But yet mark it, that he would
first have him be a man of a good conscience in the two foregoing verses. And 1 Timothy 3. 9. he would have the Deacons hold the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience.

Contrarily, nothing so endangers the loss of the faith and truth, and
soundness of doctrine, as does the loss of good conscience. A corrupt
conscience soon corrupts the judgment, 1 Timothy 1. 19. Holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck.
If the ship of conscience crack, how soon will the merchandise of faith
wrack? If once the conscience crack, the brain will soon prove crazie; and an
unsound conscience makes a fearful way for an unsound and rotten judgment, 2 Timothy 3. 8. They resist the truth, there is their corrupt conscience: what
follows upon it? Men of corrupt minds, unsound in their judgment concerning
the faith. How frequent a thing is it in experience to see men when they lose
good conscience, together with it either to lose their gifts, as the
unprofitable servant his Masters talent, or else, to lose the truth, and to fall
into pestilent and dangerous errors. So those Prophets that made not
conscience in faithful and holy execution of their office, see what was the
fruit of their evil conscience, Micah 3. 5, 6, 7. Therefore night shall be
unto you that ye shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that
ye shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the day
shall be dark over them, etc. Their darkness in life shall be plagued with
darkness in judgment. To which purpose that is notable, Zach. 11. 17. Woe to
the idol shepherd that leaves the flock. There is an unconscionable
shepherd, a man that makes no conscience to attend his ministry. What becomes
of him? The sword shall be upon his right eye, his best eye. And his right eye
(shall not be pore-blind, or dimmed, but) shall be utterly darkened. The loss
of good consciences brings upon men of knowledge and learning that reproach
that Nahash the Ammonite would have brought upon all Israel, 1 Samuel 11. 2. It
thrusts out the right eyes. Ill consciences not only make men look asquint, but
it blinds them, and takes away their sight.

And what is the reason that Popery gets ground so fast, and so many turn
Papists so easily? Surely it is no wonder, how should it be otherwise, when men
either having lost all good conscience, or making no conscience of their ways,
but living loosely, viciously, and licentiously, have thereby prepared a way
for Antichrist, and his Religion, to enter withal success. No wonder that men
turn Papists so fast, when long since they have turned good conscience going.
For that which Bellarmine speaks, is in the Cum ariae ventilari incipiunt, non
frumenta sed paleae vento abripiente separantur ab area. Ita prorsus cum
Ecclesia per Ethuicorum persecutiones, vel Haereticorum deceptiones, Deo
permittente cribratur, aut ventilatur a Satana: non very sancti, and garves,
sed improbi leves, curiosi, lascivi ab Ecclesia avolantes ad Ethnicos
haereticosue transfugiunt, nec fe^o solet accidere ut ante circa fidem aliquis
naufraget, quam naufragere, caeperit circa mores. Bellarm. Orat. prefix. tom. 4.
general certainly true, though by him falsely, and maliciously applied, That
they be not holy and grave men, but wicked, light, curious, wanton ones, that
turn Ethnickes, or Heretics, and that it seldom comes to pass, that any
man makes shipwreck concerning the says, that first makes not shipwreck
concerning manners. See the truth of it in many of our backsliders to Popery,
especially such as have been zealous propugners of the truth. Where began the
first declension, where the first flaw? Had not their consciences first brusht
upon some rock? was not the first leake there? and when they had first put
away good conscience, then there was a speedy banishing of truth, and a ready
entertainment of error. And for the common sort of their converts, consider if
many times they have not been the very riffe-raffe of our Church, swearers,
gross profaners of the Sabbath unclean and debauched drunkards, such as our
Church was sick of, and desired even to spue forth, and then when they have
become a prey to all vicious courses, through want of conscience, through Gods
just judgment they have become a prey to Romish Locusts, whose commission is
only to hurt such, and not those whom the sap of a good conscience keeps fresh
and flourishing as the green grass, and trees of the earth, Apoc. 9. 4. For
as Solomon speaks of the bodily harlot, Eccle. 7. 26. so it is true of that
spiritual Whore of Babylon. Her heart is snares and nets, her hands as bands,
her delusions strong; who so pleases God, and has a care to keep a good
conscience shall escape from her; but the sinner, and he that makes no
conscience of his ways, shall be taken by her.

Well, let us think well upon this motive, we live in dangerous and declining
days, wherein men with a greediness turn to their Romish vomit again.
Besides the Factors of Antichrist are exceeding busy and pragmaticall to draw
men from the faith of Christ, and the Holy Ghost tells us they shall come with
strong delusions. Now then all you that be the Lords people, save your selves
from this dangerous generation, all you that have or would be known to have
the seal of God on your foreheads, save your selves from the seduction of
these Locusts. I, but how may that be done? The delusion is strong, and it may
be, we are weak. Lo then here is a remedy against their danger. Get, and keep,
a good conscience, live as Paul did, in all good conscience, and thou shall be
safe from all their delusio^s, I have kept the faith, says Paul, oh! let it
be the care of us, that that may be our closing voice at our last day, and if
we would keep the faith, let us keep a good conscience; He that in his life
time can say, I keep a good conscience, he at his death shall be able to say,
I have kept the faith. Faith, and a good conscience are both in a bottom. Hold
one, and hold both.

As therefore thou would fear to turn Papist, or any other Heretic; so,
be sure to hold a good conscience, to hold on a good, honest, and a
conscionable man. So long as thou stand upon that ground, thou art
impregnable, and the gates of hell shall not be able to draw thee from the faith
of the Lord Jesus, Prove. 6 20, 22, 24. My Son, keep thy Fathers commandment,
etc. And it will keep thee. So I may say here, keep a good conscience, and it
will keep thee, it will keep thee sound in the faith, it will keep thee from
being drawn away by the error of the wicked, and it will keep thee from the
Wine of the fornications of the Whore of Babylon.

CHAP. XV.
The last Motive to a good conscience; The misery of an evil one.
THe last Motive remains, and that is, The fifth motive to a good conscience.
The horror and misery of an evil Conscience. If men did but truly know what
the evil of an evil conscience were, and how evil a thing, and bitter it
will be when conscience awakens here, or shall be awakened in hell, a little
persuasion should serve to move men to live in a good conscience. We may say of
the evil conscience, as Solomon speaks of the drunkard, Pro. 23. 29. Who has
woe? who has sorrow? who has contentions? who has wounds, but not without a
cause? Even the man whose conscience is not good, even he that lives in an
evil conscience.

An evil conscience, how miserable it is, we may see by considering the
misery thereof, either in this world, or the world to come.

1. In this life. When an evil conscience is awakened in this life, the sorrow
and smart, the horror and terror is, as the joy of a good conscience,
unspeakable. An evil conscience in this life is miserable, in regard of fear,
perplexity, and torment. To live in a continual fear, and to have a man's
heart always in shaking fits of fear, is misery of miseries. And such is the
misery of an evil conscience. Prove. 28. 1. The wicked flees when none pursues.
Only his own guilt pursues him, and makes him flee. His own guilt causes a
sound of fear in his ears, Job 15. 21. Which makes Proprium autem est
nocentium trepidare. Male de nobis actum erat, quod multa seelera legem and
judicem effugiunt, and scripta supplicia nisi illa naturalia and gravia de
presentibus, solverent and in locum patientiae timor cederet. Sonec. ep. 91.
him shake at the noise of a shaken leaf, Levit. 26. 36. yea, that so scares
him that terrors make him afraid on every side, and drive him to his feet, Job
18. 11. Yea, there are they in great fear where no fear is, Ps. 53. 3. So
that a man with an evil conscience awakened, may be named as Pashur is, Ier.
20. 3. Magor-Missabib, fear round about, as being a terror to himself, and to
all his friends, ver. 4.

An evil conscience, even makes those fear fearful fears, of whom all
other stand in fear. How potent a Monarch, and how dreadful a Prince was
Belshazzar, who was able to put him into any fear, whom all the earth feared?
And yet when his guilty conscience looks him in the face, awakened by the
palm writing on the wall, see where his courage is then, Dan. 5. 6. Then the
Kings countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. Who
would have had his fear to have had his kingdom? Let him now cloth himself
with all his Majesty, let him look and speak as terribly as he can, let him
threaten the vilest vassal in his Court, with all the tortures that tyranny
can inflict, and let him try if he can for his heart put his poorest subject
into that fright and fear that now his conscience puts him into, in the ruff,
and middst of his jollity. But I pray what ails he to be in this fear, in
this so extraordinary a fear? He can neither read, nor understand the
writing upon the wall. Indeed it threatened him the loss of his kingdom, but
he cannot read his threatening, he knows not whether they be bitter things
that God writes against him, why may he not hope that it may be good which is
written, and why may not this hope ease, and abate his fear? No, no. Though he
cannot read nor understand the writing, yet his guilty conscience can comment
shrewdly upon it, and can tell him it portends no good toward him. His
conscience now tells him of his godless impieties, in profaning the vessels of
the Temple of the true God, and that for this his sacrilegious impropriation,
and abuse of holy things, God is now come to reckon with him. Thus can his
conscience do more than all his wise men. All the wise men came in, but they
could not read the writing, nor make known to the King the interpretation
thereof. Dan. 5. 8. But his conscience is wiser than all his wise men, and when
they are as puzzeld, that interprets to him, that this writing means him no
good, and though he cannot read the syllables, yet his conscience gives a
shrewd near guess at the substance of the writing; and therefore hence comes
that ecstasy of fear, and those paroxysmes of horror.

It was better with Adam after his fall. After his Sin committed, we find him
in a great fear, Genesis 3. 8, 10. and he hides himself for fear. Now observe
how his fear is described from the circumstance of the time. They heard the
voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of the day. Luther
lays the Emphasis of the aggravation of his fear, upon this word, the wind or
cool of the day. The night indeeed is naturally terrible; and darkness is
fearful, whence that phrase, Ps. 91. The terrors of the night. But the day and
the light, is a cheerful and a comfortable creature, Ec. 11. 7. Truly the
light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the Sun. How
is it then that in the fair day light, which gives courage and comfort, that
Adam fears, and runs into the thickets? Oh, his conscience was become Gravis
malae conscientiae, luxest. Senec. ep. 123.
come evil, and full of darkness, and the darkness of his conscience turned
the very light into darkness, and so turned the comforts of the day into the
terrors of the night. So that in this sense it may be said of an evil
conscience, which of the Lord is said in another, Ps. 139. 12. Unto it the
darkness, and the light are both alike. As full of fear in the light as in
the dark. And besides, the Lord came but in a gentle wind, the cool breath of
the day, now what a small matter is a cool wind, and that in the day time to,
to put a man in a fear? Such small things breed great fears in evil
consciences. In what a woeful plight would Adam (think we) have been, if the
Lord had come to him, at the dead, and dark midde-night with earthquakes,
thunder, and blustering tempest?

We may see the like in Cain. After he had defiled his conscience with his
brothers blood, in what fears, yea, what idle fears lived he? He is so
haunted with fears, that though he had lived in Paradise, yet had he lived in
a land of Nod, in a land of agitation, yea, of trepidation. Judge what case his
evil conscience made him in, by that speech, Genesis 4. 14. It shall come to
pass, that every one that finds me shall slay me. Surely there could not be
many yet in the world, and those that were in the world, were either his
parents, brethren, sisters, or near kindred, his fear seems to imagine
multitudes of people that might meet him, yea, and that every one he meets
would murder him. What, will his Father or Mother be his executioners? What if
any of his sisters meet him, shall they slay him? is not such a swash-buckler as
he, able to make good his party with them? Lo what fearful, and terrible
things a guilty conscience projects.

As an evil conscience is miserable in its fears, so in those perplexities
which this fear breeds. These perplexities do miserably and restlessely
distract a man. Isay. 57. 20. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. What is the reason of these
trouble some perplexities? The want of peace of a good conscience, verse 21.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. The winds make the sea
restless, and stir it to the very bottom, so as the waters cast up mire and
dirt. See in the troubled Sea, the Emblem of a troubled conscience.

But the Torment exceeds all, and the maine misery of an evil conscience lies
in that. It is a misery to be in fear, a misery to have inward turbulencie,
and commotions, but to be always on the rack, always on the Strapado, this
is far more truly the suburbs of Hell, than is the Popish purgatory. Oh! the
gripes, and girds, the stitches, and twitches, the throws, and pangs of a
galling, and a guilty conscience. So sore they are, and so unsufferable, that
Judas seeks ease with an halter, Poena autem vehemens, and multo saevior illis.
Quas and Ceditius gravis inven^ and Radamanthus. Nocte dieque suum gestare in
pectore testem. Iuvenal. Satyr. 3.
and thinks hanging ease in comparison of the torture of his evil conscience.
All the racks, wheels, wild horses, hot pincers, scalding lead powered into
the most tender, and sensible parts of the body, yea, all the merciless,
barbarous, and inhumane cruelties of the holy house, are but flea-bitings,
mere toys, and May-games, compared with the torment that an evil conscience
will put a man to, when it is awakened. It is no wonder that Judas hangs
himself, it had been a great wonder rather if he had not hanged himself.

The Heathen fabled terrible things of their hellish furies, with their snakes
and Nolite enim putare que^admodum in fabulis saepenumero videtis, eos qui
aliquid impie scelerateque co^miserint agitari and perter^ori furiarum taedis
ardentibus. Sua quemque fraus, and suus terror maximevexat, suum que^que scelus
agitat amentiaque afficit. Suae malae cogitationes, conscientiaeque animi
terrent. Hae sunt impiis assiduae, domesticaeque furiae, quae dies noctesque
parentum poenas a consceleratissimis filiis repetant Cicero pro Rosc. Amor.
Suum quemque facinus, suum scclus, sua audacia de sanitate, ac mente deturbat
Haec sunt impiorum furiae, flammae, hae faces. Idem. L. Pison.
fiery torches, vexing and tormenting heinous, and great offenders. These their
furies were nothing else, but the hellish torments of guilty conscience,
wherewith wicked persons were continually haunted, as some of the wiser of
themselves have well observed. All snakes and torches are but idle toys, and
mere trifles, to the most exquisite torment of a guilty and accusing
conscience.

The sting of conscience is worse than death it self, Apoc. 9. 5, 6. Their
torment was as the torment of a Scorpion when he strikes a man; And in those
days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye,
and death shall flee from them. Popish ones tormented in their consciences by
the terrible and uncomfortable doctrines of satisfactions, Purgatory fire, etc.
which those Locusts do so terrify them withal, should rather choose death,
than live in such an uncomfortable condition: The sting of death not so smart,
as the sting of a Scorpion in the conscience. The sting of an accusing
conscience, is like an Harlot, Pro. 7. 26. More bitter than death. And as
Solomon there speaks of the Harlot, so may it be said of a tormenting
conscience, Who so pleases God shall escape from it, but the sinner shall be
taken by it.

Gods dear children themselves, many of them are not freed from trouble in
their consciences, but they have their hels in this life, Ion. ^. 2. Out of the
belly of hell I cried unto thee. God for their trial speaks bitter things unto
them, and not only denies them peace, but causes their consciences to be at war
with them. Now when God puts his own children to these trials, and disquiets
of conscience, they are so bitter, and so biting, that had they not the grace
of God to uphold and preserve them, even they could not be saved from dangerous
miscarriage. Job was put to this trial, and his conscience apprehended Gods
anger, and we shall see what a case he was in, Job 6. 8, 9. O that I might have
my request, and that God would grant me the thing I long for, even that it
would please God to destroy me, that he would let loose his hands, and cut me
off. Nay, worse, Job 14. 15. Thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions, so that my soul chooses flrangling, and death rather than
life. Gods grace preserves his Saints from selfe-murther, but yet not always
from impatient wishes; Job wishes strangling and chooses it of the two, but goes
no further. What wonder then that Judas does strangle himself, when his
conscience stares him in the face, when as Job, with whom God is but in jest in
comparison, chooses strangling. If Job wish it, what wonder that Judas does the
deed. Conscience does chastise the godly but with whips, but it lashes the
wicked with scorpions. Now if the whips be so smarting to Job, as makes him
choose strangling, what wonder that the scorpions be so cutting, as makes Judas
seek relief at an halter.

Yea, and that which adds to the misery of an evil conscience, being awakned,
it is such a misery as no earthly comfort can assuage or mitigate. Diseases and
distempers of the body though they be terrible, yet Physic, sleep, and rest
upon a man's bed, yields him some ease, and some comfort. Sometime in some
griefs the comfortable use of the creatures, yields a man some refreshments,
Prove. 31. 6, 7. Give wine unto those that be of heavy hearts, let him drink,
and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. But conscience being
disquieted, finds no ease in these. Darius against his conscience suffers
innocent Daniel to be cast into the Lions den. What cheer has he that night?
He passed the night in fasting, Dan. 6. 18. Not in fasting, in humiliation for
his Sin, but conscience now began to gall him, and he having marred the feast
of his conscience, conscience also marres his feasting, none of his dainties
will now down, his wine is turned into gall and wormwood, no joy now in any
thing. He had marred the music of his conscience, and now he brooks not other
music. The Instruments of music were not brought before him. His guilty
conscience was now awakened, and now he cannot sleep; His sleep went from
him. So Job in his conflict for conscience hoped for ease in his bed, Job 7.
13. My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint. But how was it
with him? Either he could not sleep at all, ver. 3. 4. Wearisome nights are
appointed unto me. When I lie down, I say, when shall I arise, and the night be
gone? and I am full of tossing to and fro unto the dawning of the day. Needs
must he toss, whose conscience is like the Sea waves tossed with the winds, or
else if Job did sleep, yet did not conscience sleep, ver. 14. but even in his
sleep presented him with ghastly sights and visions, When I say my bed shall
comfort me, then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through
visions.

At other times when conscience has been good, Gods people though their
dangers have been great, yet neither the greatness, nor neernesse of their
dangers have broken their sleep, Ps. 3. 5. 7. I laid me down and slept, I
will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against
me round about. And yet if we look to the title of the Psalm, A Psalm of
David when he fled from Absalom his Son; one would think David should have had
little list, or leisure to have slept. Peter thought to have been executed the
next morrow by Herod, and though he also lodged between a company of
ruffianly soldiers, that happily one would fear might have done him some
mischief in his sleep, yet how soundly sleeps he that night, Act. 12. And holy
Bradford was found a sleep, when they came to fetch him to be burnt at the
stake. These fears brake not these men's sleep. How might this come to pass?
They did as Ps. 4. 8. I will lay me down in peace and sleep. He that can lie
down in the peace of conscience, may sleep soundly, whatsoever causes of
fear there be otherwise. But contrarily, he that cannot ly down with the
peace of conscience, will find but little rest and sleep, though his heart be
free from all other fears. Evil conscience being awakened, will fill the
heart with such fears, as a man shall have little liberty to sleep. Oh the
sweet sleep that Jacob had, and the sweet dream, when he lay upon the cold
earth, and had an hard stone under his head for his pillow. An hard lodging,
and an hard pillow, but yet sweet rest, and sweet communion with God. A good
conscience makes any lodging soft and easy; but downe-beds, and down-pillowes,
if there be thorns in the conscience, are but beds of thorns, and beds of
nettles. The bitterness of an evil conscience distastes all the sweets of
this life, as when the mouth and tongue is furred in an hot Ague, all meats
and drinks are bitter to the sick party. This is the misery of an evil
conscience awakened in this life.

2. But it may be many never feel this misery here, there is therefore the
more misery reserved for them in hell, in the world to come. Indeed more by
many thousands go to hell like Nabal, than like Judas; more die like sots in
Security, than in despair of conscience. Death it self cannot awaken some
consciences, but no sooner come they into hell, but conscience is there awakened
to the full, never to sleep more; and then she lashes and gashes to the quick,
and lets men learn that forbearance was no payment. Tell many men of
conscience, and they are ready to slap one on the mouth with that profane
proverb, Tush, conscience was hanged many years ago. But the time will come,
that they who have lived in evil conscience, shall find the conscience which
they have counted hanged, shall play the cruel hangman, and tormentor with
them. They shall find conscience unhanged, when it shall hang them up in hell,
when day and night it shall stretch them there upon the rack.

The torments which an evil conscience puts the damned to in hell, are beyond
the expression of the tongue, and the comprehension of man's conceit. There be
two special things in the torments of Hell, we have them both thrice repeated
together, Mark. 9. 44, 46, 48. Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. There is an ever-living worm, and never-dying fire. And mark that
in all the three verses the worm is set in the first place, as it were to
teach us, that the prime and principal torment in hell is the worm, rather
than the fire. And what is the worm, but the guilt of an evil conscience,
that shall lie eternally gnawing and grasping, twitching, and griping, the
heart of the damned in hell? Men talk much of hell fire, and it were well they
would talk more of it; but yet there is another torment forgotten, that would
be thought on too. There is an Hell worm, as well as there is an Hell fire. And
it may be a question whether of the two is the greatest torment. And yet no
great question neither. For as the Heaven of Heaven, is the peace and joy of a
good, so the very Hell of Hell, is the guilt and and worm of an evil
conscience. A man may safely say, it is better being in hell with a good
conscience, than to be in heaven, if that might be, with an evil one. Heaven
without a good conscience, what is it better than hell? Paradise was an heaven
on earth, but when Adam had lost the Paradise of a good conscience, what joy
did paradise, and the pleasures of the garden afford him more, than if he had
been in some sad and solitary Desert? A good conscience makes a Desert a
Paradise, an evil one turns a Paradise into a Desert. A good conscience makes
Hell to be no Hell, and an evil one makes Heaven to be no Heaven. Both the
happiness, and misery of Heaven and Hell, are from the inward frame of the
conscience. The Hell of Hell, is the worm of Hell, and that worm is the worm of
an evil conscience, which if it be not wormed out, and so the conscience in
this life made good, it will be an immortal worm in Hell.

The hellish despair wherewith the damned are overwhelmed, comes rather from
this worm, than from the fire. Whose worm dies not, and whose fire is not
quenched. The fire of Hell never quenches, because the worm of Hell never
dies. If the worm of Hell would die, the fire of Hell would go out. For if
there were no guilt, there should be no punishment. So that the very Hell of
Hell, is that self-torment which an evil conscience breeds.

Now then all this considered, how powerfully should it move us to labor for a
good conscience. Thou that go on in thine evil courses, and hate to be
reformed and reclamed, do but bethink thy self, if God should awaken thy
conscience, in what misery thou should live Vt ex cruditate febres nascuntur,
and vermes qua^do quis cibum sumit intemperanter, ita si quis peccata peccatis
accumulet, nec deco quot ea poenetentia, sed misceat peccata peccatis,
cruditatem contrahit veterum and recentium delictorum igne adu^etur proprio,
and vermibus consumetur. Ignis est que^ generat moestitia delictorum, vermis
est eo quod irrationabilia animi peccata, mentem pungunt, and viscera exedant,
vermes ex unoque nascuntur tanquam ex corpore peccatoris, hic vermis non
morietur, etc. Ambr. lib. 7. in Luke c. 14.
here, what an hell to have a palsy conscience? what a hell on earth to be
always under the accusations, inditements, and terrors of conscience, and to
live Cain. like in the land of Nod, in a continual restless agitation.

But especially as thou fear that everliving and ever grabbing worm, so
have a care to get a good conscience. Green and raw fruits breed Chestworms,
which if heed be not taken, will eat the very maw through. A dead body and a
putrified corrupt carcass, breeds worms that ly gnawing at it in the grave.
The forbidden and raw fruits of Sin, are those which breed Chestwormes in the
conscience. The corruptions of the soul, and dead works are those that breed
this living worm, take heed therefore of meddling with these fruits that will
breed this worm, and get thy conscience purged from dead works, get this worm
killed with the soonest, for if thou let it live till thou dye, it will
never die at all, and will put thee to those exquisite torments, from which to
be freed, thou would willingly suffer ten thousand of the most cruel deaths
that the wit of man were able to invent.

As then I say thou fear this worm of Hell, so get a good conscience. Drink
down every morning a hearty draught of Christ's blood, which may make this
worm burst. And when once this worm is burst and voyded, and the conscience
well purged by Christ's blood, take heed ever after of eating those raw fruits
that will breed new worms. Lead so holy, so upright, and so conscionable a
life, that thou may not by thy fresh Sins clog thy conscience with fresh
guilt. Get thy conscience purged by Christ's blood, and thy conversation framed
by Gods Word. Thy words were found by me, and I did eat them, Ier. 15. 16. Do
thou so, eat no more the unwholesome and worme-breeding fruits of Sin; but
drink Christ's blood, and eat Gods Word, and they both shall purify and
scour thy conscience from all such stuff, as may breed and feed the
Hell-worme of an evil conscience.

CHAP. XVI.
The portion and respect that a good conscience finds in the world.
ANd thus have we hither to seen Paul's Protestation. The second point follows,
namely, Ananias his insolent and impetuous Injunction. Verse 2. And the high
Priest Ananias commanded them that stood by him, to smite him on the mouth.

Paul had begun his defense in the former verse, and that by authority and
special command, as appears in the former Chapter, at the 30. ver. But he had
no sooner begun, but he is interrupted and cut off, and has not only his
mouth stopped, but stopped with Ananias fist, He commanded to smite him on the
mouth. Out of which carriage and violence of his, we may observe diverse
things. First learn;

What is the Reward and portion of a good conscience from the world. It is the
portion of a good conscience full often to be smitten, either on the mouth, or
with the mouth. Blows either with the fist, or with the tongue. To be smitten
one way or other, is full often the lot of a good conscience. Smite him on the
mouth, says Ananias. But let us a little expostulate the matter with Ananias.
Smite him on the mouth? But yet as Pilate speaks in Christ's case, But what
evil has he done? or what evil has he spoken? Smite him on the mouth? But
as our Savior answers, Ioh. 18. 23. If he have spoken evil, take witness of
the evil, and proceed legally and formally: If he have spoken well, or no
manner of evil, why command thou him to be smitten? What, has he spoken
any treason against Caesar, or the Roman government? If he have, then as the
town-clark of Ephesus speaks, Act. 19. 38. The Law is open, and there are
Deputies, let them accuse him; and bring him to his answer. It is a base usage
of an ingenuous person, to be smitten on the mouth in a Court of Justice, a
dishonorable usage of a Roman. Surely it should seem by such base and bitter
usage, that Paul has some way or other foully forgotten and overshot himself,
that Ananias his spirit is thus embitered and provoked against him. What, has
Paul given him any exasperating and disgraceful terms, has he given him any
open and personal girds, before the whole Council? No, no: No such matter at
all. Why what then is the matter that Paul must be thus basely, and thus
despitefully used? Will ye know the cause? Men and brethren, I have lived in
all good conscience? Lo here is the quarrel. He has made a profession of a
good conscience and for his good conscience sake are Ananias fists about his
ears. There is nothing so mads men of wicked consciences, as the profession
and practice of a good conscience does. The very name and mention of a good
conscience makes Ananias half mad, and like one besides himself he falls not
only to foul words, but to blows also, and Paul must have it on the mouth
for good conscience sake.

Paul might have blasphemed the blessed name of Christ, and rayled upon the
odious Sect of the Nazarens, he might have been a drunkard, an adulterour, or
a murderer, and none of all these things would have stirred Ananias his blood,
for none of all these should Paul have been smitten; but let him but once
speak, or treat of, or any way meddle with good conscience, and Ananias his
blood is presently up, he cannot hold his hands, but Paul must have on the
mouth, there is no remedy. So odious a thing is good conscience and the
profession of it to wicked men. Therefore this is that which a good conscience
must expect, even Ananias his dole, fists, blows, smiting hard and injurious
measure from the world.

This is no new thing. It was our Saviors case before it was Paul's, Ioh. 18.
22. And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck
Jesus with the palm of his hand, etc. Lu. 22. 63, 64. And the men that held
Jesus, mocked him, and smote him, And when they had blind-folded him, they
stroke him on the face. He felt the weight of their fists for the same quarrel
that Paul did. So it was fore-prophecied of him, Isa. 50. 6. I gave my back to
the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair. It was the
kindness that Zidkiah could afford Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 24. He went near, and
smote him on the cheek, and it was the thanks the Prophet was like to have for
the discharge of a good conscience, 1 Chr. 25. 16. Forbear, why should thou
be smitten? It is that of which Job complained so long since, Job 16. 10. Mine
enemy sharpens his eyes upon me, they have gaped upon me with the mouth, they
have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully.

The same portion shall the Prophet Jeremy meet withal, Ier. 20. 2. Then
Pashur smote Jeremiah the Prophet. What was the quarrel? That in the former
verse. He heard that Jeremiah had prophesied these things. Only for discharging
his conscience, for the conscionable dispensation of Gods truth. And as
sometime they smote him on the mouth, so sometime they smote him with the mouth,
Ier. 18. 18. Come let us devise devices against Jeremiah, come let us smite him
with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words. And why would
they smite him with the tongue? Only for his conscience, and fidelity in his
Ministry.

There is mention made of two false Prophets, against whom an heavy judgment
is threatened, Ier. 29. 21, 23. Ahab and Zedekiah, two base scandalous debauched
persons, who committed villainy in Israel, and committed adultery with their
neighbors wives. The Prophet Jeremy he out of conscience fulfils his Ministry,
and see how light-fingred Pashur is, he has fists for Ieremies face, and
stocks for his heels; but in the mean time Ahab and Zedekiah they may whore,
and play the villains, and they feel not the weight of his little finger. If
his fingers must needs be walking, there is work for them, there he may
strike, and stock with credit. But there is no such zeal against them. No
such dealing with them. Zedekiah and Ahab may be in good terms of grace with
Pashur, whilst Jeremiah must have blows on the face, and ly by the heels. So
well can wicked men brook villainy, and any wretched courses better than they
can a good conscience: Pashur can better endure an aduletrous whoremaster, than
an honest conscionable Prophet: villains may wall at liberty, whilst a good
conscience shall sit in the stocks. Here then is the portion a good conscience
may look for from the world. The better conscience, the harder measure. For
which of my good works do ye stone me? says our Savior, Ioh. 10. 32. A
strange recompense for good works, and yet ofttimes the best recompense and
reward that the world can afford good works, and a good conscience, stones and
strokes. And if so be that fear of law, and happy government bind their hands,
yet then will they be smiting with the tongue: and if the law keep them in awe
for smiting on the mouth, yet then will they do what they dare, they will smite
with the mouth.

A fair Item to all that mean to undertake the profession and courses of good
conscience. Do as many do in case of marriage, before they affect the person,
they first consider how they like the portion. So here before thou meddle with
good conscience, think with thy self what is her portion, and if thou like
not that, it is but a folly to think of a good conscience. Do as our Savior
advises, Luke 14. 28. Sit down first and count the cost, and whether thou be
able to endure that cost or no. Ananias has a fierce spirit, and a foul
heavy fist, Pashur is a club fisted fellow, and the spitting adders of the
world will smite their sting deep. Suppose a good conscience may speed better,
as having the protection of Christian government, yet this it must reckon upon,
and it must account of the hardest. Therefore think before hand before you
meddle with it, how you can bear the fists and blows of smiters if ever you
should come under them.

I may say here as our Savior did to the Sons of Zebedeus, Mat. 20. 20, 21. Ye
know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of,
and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? Many say they
desire to enter the courses of a good conscience, but do not well know, nor
well weigh what they desire. Consider with your selves, Are ye able to drink of
the cup that a good conscience shall drink of? Can ye be baptized with the
baptism that a good conscience must be baptized with? Can ye endure the smart
of Ananias blows? Can ye bear the load of Pashurs club fist? Think upon this
aforehand, and weight it well, this is that you must make account of, that will
set upon the courses of a good conscience.

Is this the portion of a good conscience? see then what a good measure of
Christian Ephesians. 6. 15. Grow marveilous resolute to harden thy self, and to
harden thy face against all enemies fists, and blows whatsoever, that though
Ananias should dash thee on the face, yet he might not dash thee and thy good
conscience out of Countenance. Thus did our Savior, Is. 50. 6. I gave my back
to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, I hid not my
face from shame and spitting. But how was he ever able to endure all this? See
verse. 7. I have set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be
ashamed. So must thou do that meanest to keep a good conscience. Get a face,
and a forehead of flint, that enemies may as soon crack a flint with their
knuckles, as by their violence and injuries drive thee from a good conscience.
Get an Ezekiels face, Ezekiel. 3. 9. Make thy forehead as an Adamant harder than a
flint. Steel, and flint thy face with all heroical resolution. A face of
flesh will never endure, but a face of flint will hold Ananias fist tacke, let
him strike while he will, he shall sooner batter a flint with his fist, than
stir a resolved conscience out of its station.

But believe me, these be hard things to

1. Consider that conscience has fists Ananias, 1 Samuel 24. 5. and 2 Samuel 24.
10. David's heart smote him. And what are Ananias his blows on the face, to the
blows of conscience at the heart? One blow on the heart, or with the heart, is
more painful than an hundred on the face, and as Rehoboam speaks of himself,
1 King. 12. 10. so consciences little finger is thicker, heavier, and more
intolerable than both Ananias his hands and loins. Now then here is the case.
If Paul will stand to his conscience, then Ananias his fists will be about his
ears. If Paul do forsake or flawe good conscience for fear, or for the favor
of Ananias, then will consciences fist be about his heart. Now then if no
remedy but a man must have blows, it is good wisdom to choose the lightest
fist, and the softer hand, and to take the blow on that part that is best able
to bear it with most ease. The face is better able to abide blows than the
heart, and Ananias his blows are but fillips to the clubbing blows of
conscience. We would scarce judge him a wise man, that to avoid a cuffe on the
ear, would put himself under the danger of a blow with a club. Here is that
then that may make us to compose our selves to patience, and to grow to an
hardiness and a Christian resolution. Better ten blows on the face, than one
on the heart. Better an hundred from Ananias, than one from conscience, that
will lay on load; let the world smite, yet mine heart smites not, yea, that
strokes and comforts, whilst the world strikes and threatens. Therefore being
smitten in case of conscience, rather than give out, do as our Savior bids in
another case, Math. 5. 39. Whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek turn
to him the other also.

2. Consider that in the next verse, God shall smite thee. God has smiting
fists as well as Ananias. Let him smite, but yet there will come a time that
God shall smite him? God will call smiters to a reckoning.

3. Consider that of David, Psalm. 3. 7. Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon
the cheek bone, thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly. God will not only
smite the enemies of his people, but will smite them with disgrace, as it is a
matter of vile disgrace to have a box on the cheek, and he will give them
such a dust on the mouth as shall dash out their very teeth; he will lay heavy
and disgraceful judgments upon them, as he did upon Absalom, of whom David
speaks.

May it ever be thy lot to see good conscience under the fists of smiters, be
not discouraged, start not, stumble not at it. Be not ready to infer; It is
in vain to cleanse a man's conscience, and wash his hands in innocence. But
consider, that this has been ever the worlds madness, and the ancient lot of
a good conscience, either to be smitten with adversaries hands, or varlets
tongues.

CHAP. XVII.
The impetuous injustice, and malice of the adversaries of a good conscience.
AS we have seen the entertainment a good conscience meets withal in the
world, so we may here further see the inordinat violences that the enemies and
haters of a good conscience are carried with. Therefore out of this insolent
Injunction of Ananias, we may in the second place observe:

The heady violence, and impetuous injustice of the adversaries of good
conscience. Smite him on the mouth. A man would not imagine that hatred and
malice against goodness, should so transport a man as to make him run into so
much, so open, so gross Injustice. Do but examine the fact, and you shall see
a strange deal of injustice therein.

1. Who is he that bids smite? The high Priest. He had a better Canon to live
by, Mal. 2. 6. He walked with me in peace and equity. So Levi walked, and so
should Gods Priests walk also. And that Canon of Paul for the Ministry of the
Gospel, held no less good for the Ministry of the law, That he should not be
soon angry, no striker, Tit. 1. 7. How haps it then that the High Priest is
thus light fingred. Smite him on the mouth? Oh! shame that such a word should
come out of a Priests, especially the High Priests mouth.

2. Who must be smitten? Paul an Innocent. Foul injustice. Questionless if
Paul had offered such measure but to Ananias his dog, to have smitten him for
nothing, but out of his mere spite, Ananias would have judged him a dogged
fellow. And would Ananias use an innocent person as he would be loath a man
should use his dog?

3. Where must this blow be given? In open Court, where they were all convened
to do justice. Still the worse. If he had commanded him to have been smitten
in his private Parlour, it had been unjustifiable, but to smite him in open
Court, and to do injustice in the place of Justice, this is deep injustice.
The place he sat in, the gravity of his person, Gods High Priest, the
solemnity of the administration of justice, all these might have manacled his
hands, and have a little tempered and bridled his spirit. A foul indignity for
the Judge of Israel to be smitten on the cheek, Mic. 5. 1. As foul an
iniquity for a Judge of Israel to smite on the mouth wrongfully, and in an open
Court of Justice. What an indecent thing for a Judge to go to cuffes on the
Bench? What an intemperate and a vindictive spirit argues it? But what is the
Indency to the Injustice? And what Injustice to that which was done upon the
Bench? Of all wormwood that is the most bitter, into which justice is turned.

4. For what is the blow given? For a good conscience. What? And has Gods High
Priest no more conscience than so, his place teaches him to be a Protector,
Defender, and an Incourager of good conscience. His whole office is matter of
conscience, and will he that should teach, maintain, and encourage good
conscience, will he smite men for good conscience? What is this but Is. 58. 4.
To smite with the fist of wickedness?

5. When is the blow given? When he is beginning to plead his own innocence,
and to speak in his own defense. More injustice yet. Did not Nicodemus speak
reason, Ioh. 7. 51. Does our Law judge any man before it hear him? Nay, if
Ananias have no regard to Gods Law, as it seems he has but a little, that
will smite a man for good conscience, yet what will he say to Caesar's Law? Act.
18. 25. Is it lawful for you to scourage, and so to smite, a man that is a
Roman and uncondemned, and unheard? To judge and condemn a man unheard, is
deep Injustice, but far deeper to punish, and execute him. Will he hang a man,
and then try him? Lo here indeed a right unrighteous Judge, that fears neither
God, nor man, that regards neither Gods Law, nor Caesar's.

To have done by Paul as Gallio did, Act. 18. 14, 16. When Paul was about to
open his mouth, to drive him and the rest from the judgment seat, this had
been injustice, but when Paul opens his mouth to speak for himself, for
Ananias to stop his mouth, and to stop it with his fists, to stop his mouth,
and smite him on the mouth both, when he was to speak in his own defense,
what greater depth of Injustice can we imagine? An hundred to one but Ananias
was one of the Sanhedrim, which at the time when the officers not having
apprehended Christ, fell a cursing the people, Ioh. 7. 49. This people that
knows not the Law is cursed. Upon which speech Nicodemus seems to meet kindly
with them, ver. 51. Does our Law judge any man before it hear and know what he
does? As if he had said, Do you glory in the knowledge of the law, and are they
cursed that know not the law, what then are they that knowing the Law go
directly against it? are the people, Ananias, cursed that know not the Law,
what art thou thy self then who know both Gods Law and Caesar's, and yet
through malice against Paul sinnest against both? Unjust and malicious
proceedings, God will not let them have the honor so much as of the color of
formality, and legality in their courses. But they shall be so carried, that
the madness and malice of them, may ly manifestly open to the view of all the
world.

6. By what authority is the blow given? Ananias commanded them. Yea but Mal.
2. 7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law
at his mouth. And should they that should seek the Law at his mouth, against
all law at his command, smite men on the mouth? It was too much that Gallio
did, and the holy Ghost leaves a deep disgrace upon him for it, Act. 18, that
he would suffer others to smite Sosthenes, and not to care for it. It was too
much that Ahab suffers Zidkiah to smite Micaiah, and to break the kings peace
in the kings presence, he should have condemned him at least to lose his hand,
for striking before the King. But here is a worse matter, he not only suffers
it, but commands it to be done. Ananias commanded to smite. Injustice suffered
by authority is too much, but unjustice commanded by authority, that is far
worse.

It shows the truth of Paul's phrase, 2 These. 3. 2. Unreasonable men, or absurd
Non est crudelior in orbeterrarumira, quam Ecclesia sanguinaria and
hypocritarum: Nam in politica ira est aliquid humani reliquum. Nullus tam
immanis latro ad supplicium rapitur, quin aliqua commiseratione tanguntur
homines: Sed cum falsa illa and sanguinaria Ecclesia in filium verae Ecclesiae
inciderit, non s^^is ei est effudisse sanguinem, etiam male dicit, execratur,
devove^, and in miserum cadaver saevit, it^que ira falsae ecclesiae, and suror
pharisaicus est furor plane diabolicus Luther in Genesis cap. 4
men. Malice against the truth and the Gospel, so hurries adversaries, that it
transports them beyond all bounds of common equity, common honesty, the
gravity of their persons, and places; so as neither Law of God, nor law of man
can restrain their violence, and impetuousnesse. No bounds can keep a
malicious spirit within compass. It makes men forget common civility, and
carries men beyond all Decorum, even that Decorum their place and office calls
for. Bonner cannot content himself to judge, and condemn Gods servants to the
fire, it satisfies him not to be their judge, but he must be taking the
Beadles, or the Hangmans office out of his hand too, and must be whipping them
with his own hands; And malicious Story forgetting the gravity of his
Doctorship, must be throwing Faggots at the faces of the Martyrs, when bound to
the stake to be burned. What is to be absurd and unreasonable, if this be not?
Murderers, and bloody cut throats shall find more legal and formal
proceedings at their hands, than the maintainers of the Gospel, and Gods truth
shall do at their tribunals. To be sure, Barrabas shall find more favor; and
less hatred than Christ.

Judge by this what may be looked for, if Ananias should get head amongst us
again. Ananias his spirit lives still in that chair of pestilence. If ever
therefore we should come under his fingers, look neither for law, nor reason,
honesty, nor equity, look for nothing but the weight of his fists.

Thus have we seen the enemies impetuousnes in this point, and we may yet see a
little more in the next. Therefore further in the third place observe.

Ananias commands to smite Paul. A smites Micaiah, but that counterfeit
Enthusiast Zidkiah, 1 King. 22. Well might he come in with his horns. They were
emblematicall, and better signs of the malice of his heart, than of the truth
of his prophecy. There be no such horned beasts that push so dangerously
against Gods true Prophets, as Satan's false prophets are, Ier. 20. Jeremy is
buffeted and stocked, and who is the deed doer? Pashur the Priest. See Ier. 26.
8, 11, 16. The prophet finds more reason and fair dealing from the Princes,
and the people, than from the Priests, and the prophets. These were fiercely
bent against him, and nothing would quench the wolves thirst, but the prophets
blood. Pilate can find no fault in Christ; yea seeks to deliver him; but the
chief Priests and the Elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask
Barabbas and destroy Jesus, Mat. 27 20. How woeful a case was it, that more
justice and equity should be in an heathen Pilat, than in the Priests? How well
would it have become them to have sticked, and stood for Christ, if Pilate had
sought his life, rather than that an Heathen should plead for him, whilst those
that glory that they are the Priests of God, should seek the murder of Gods
Son. What a pitiful case that Pilate should be the Jew, and the Priests the
Heathens? Therefore is Paul's Preface in his answer before Agrippa worth the
noting. Act. 26. 2. I think my self happy King Agrippa, because I shall
answer for my self this day before thee. Why, what was Agrippa? He was an
heathen man. Why then should he think himself happy to answer before him? Had
he not been happier if he might have answered the matter before the high
Priest? No; for Agrippa gives him liberty to speak for himself, Act. 26. 1.
Then said Agrippa to Paul, thou art permitted to speak for thy self. But
Ananias the high Priest lays him on the mouth, when having leave he begins to
speak for himself. There is more hope of reason, and fair proceeding from
heathen Agrippa, than from Ananias. There be no such virulent, and violent
enemies against Gods truth and servants as are degenerate, and counterfeit
friends, and amongst those still they be the bitterest, whom it behooved to be
the best. The bitterest enemies against the Church, are those within her own
bowels.

Ananias was an usurper of the office of himself in the place. He commands
Paul to be smitten. Usurpers commonly are smiters, and usurpation is usually
attended with violence. Such as the entrance, such the administration. We see
it true in Abimelech Integritas praesidentisi est salus subditoru^, principatus
aute^ quem ambitus occupavit, etiam si moribus, atque actibus non offendit,
ipsius tamen initij sui est pernitiosus exemplo: and difficile est ut bono
peragantur exitu, quae malo sunt inducta principio, ex Decret.
and Athalia. That as it is said of Pope Bonif. the eight, that he entered like
a Fox, reigned like a Lion, etc. So was it with Ananias, he had a Foxes
entrance, he came not to the Priesthood by an hereditary succession, but as
the fashion then was by simony, bribery, and flattery, and now see how he
reigns like a Lion, and commands Paul to be smitten on the mouth. An ill
entrance into any place of office, in Church, or Commonwealth, cannot promise
any good in the administration thereof.

See what woeful times here were, what bitterness, what madness against a
good conscience. Jerusalem, and the Nation of the Jews. Ananias his deadly
hatred of goodness, and good conscience, was a bud of the fig tree, that the
particular Judgment of Jerusalem was even at the doors. When the rod is
blossomed, and pride has budded, and violence, specially against good
conscience is risen up into a rod of wickedness, then may it truly be said,
Behold the day, behold it is come, The time is come, the day draws near,
Ezec. 7. 10, 11, 12. By Bid describing the ancient destruction Odium in
veritatis professores tanqua^ subversores omnia tela and odium in hos. Bed.
hist. gent. Aug. l. 1. cap. 14.
of this kingdom of Britain, this is made a forerunner thereof, The hatred of
the professors of the truth, as of subverters, all the spite and hate was
against them. Our Savior tells his Disciples, Luke 21. 11. of fearful sights
and great signs that should be from heaven, before the destruction of
Jerusalem. And so there was a fearful comet, and many other prodigious things
before the same. Now if the Jews had had hearts to have considered it, this
cordial malignity on every hand against good conscience was as sad a
Prognosticator of their approaching ruin, as any blazing star, or terrible
sight whatsoever. It is an ill presage of a Nation going down, when once good
conscience is fisted down.

CHAP. XVIII.
The severity of Gods justice upon the enemies of a good conscience, and the
usual equity of Gods administration in his executions of justice.
THus have we seen Paul fisted, and laid on the mouth. How does Paul now take
this blow at Ananias hands? He smites not again, nor offers to repel one
violence with another, he had learned of Christ rather to have turned his other
cheek to him. But yet though he smite him not with the fist, yet he smites
with a check and a just reproof for his violence. And so may a man smite
without transgression, and without revenge, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous
smite me, it shall not break mine head. So may a man smite, and yet be a
righteous man. These blows are not to break heads, as Ananias his blows are,
but these are to break hard hearts. Thus Paul smites without transgression of
the bonds of meekness and patience. And so we are now come to the third maine
point in the text, Paul's zealous answer, and contestation.

Verse. 3. Then said Paul unto him, God shall smite thee thou whited wall.

The contestation is contained in the whole verse. And in this contestation we
have a denunciation of judgment, and that ha^ly by a Prophetical an
Apostolical spirit, prophesying to him what should befall him; not an
imprecation out of a private spirit stirred with a desire of revenge, God shall
or will smite, not, I pray God smite, or I hope to see the day when God shall
smite, but God shall smite. As if he had said, well Ananias, thou have smitten
me, hear now what thy doom from God is, I am sent to thee with heavy
tidings: God will call thee to reckoning for this blow, and Gods hand is over
thine head to pay thee in thine own kind. So then from the whole learn thus
much.

Christian patience, though it bind a man's hands, yet does it not always bind
a man's tongue. Though it lay a Law upon a man to forbear violence, yet lays
it not a Law upon him always to enjoyne him silence. Though a man in Paul's
case may not strike, yet he may speak. Though Religion pinion a man's arms
from striking, yet does it not sow and seal up a man's lips from speaking.
Ananias has smitten Paul on the face, and if it please him to have another
blow, he will not resist him, he has his other cheek ready for him, if his
fingers itch to be doing; but yet for all this, though Paul hold his hands, he
does not hold his peace. Indeed Christ's precept is well known, Math. 5. 39.
Turn the other cheek also, but yet for all that, see what his practice was
when he was smitten, Ioh. 18. 23. Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil,
bear witness of the evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? And yet his
precept and practice do not interfeire, nor cross shinnes. For though by his
precept he forbids us to retaliate, or recompense injury with injury, out of
the heat of a vindictive spirit, yet by his practice he warrants us in cases of
injury to make a manifestation both of our own innocence, and others
injustice. Religion binds no man to be a Traitor to his own innocence, and
the justice of his cause, and by silence to abet others injustice. With a good
conscience may a man speak, so long as he speaks as Paul did before Festus,
Act. 26. 25. The words of truth and soberness. So a man answer truly, soberly,
without tacks of gall, and impatient touches of revenge. Christ and Religion
say to a man convented, and injuriously proceeded against, as Agrippa did to
Paul, Act. 26. 1. Thou art permitted to speak for thy self. This in general,
more particularly, in this Denunciation, Consider the judgment denounced, that
is this, God shall smite thee. From which we may observe two things, First:

See Gods judgments, and the severity of his justice against the enemies of a
good conscience, and his faithful servants. Ananias smites Paul, and for his
good conscience, and what gets he by it? God will smite him, and give him as
good as he brings. God will smite smiters. Ananias smites Paul, and Gods will
smite Ananias; yea, and God did smite Ananias, for he was afterward slain by
Manaimus, one of the Captains of the Jews.

It is a dangerous thing not to smite when God commands, 1 King. 20. 35, 36. He
that would not smite a Prophet when God commanded, was smitten with an heavy
judgment. It is no less dangerous to smite when God forbids smiting; God has
an heavy hand for those that are so light fingred, and he will give them blow
for blow that will be smiting his for a good conscience.

Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, Ps. 105. 15. He that
touches them, touches the apple of Gods eye, Zach. 2. 8. So he that smites
them, smites the apple of his eye. The eye is a tender place, and sensible of a
little blow. God will not take a blow on the eye, nor bear a blow on his face
at the hands of the proudest enemies of them all, and though we must turn the
other cheek rather than smite again, yet the Lord to whom vengeance belongs,
will take no blows at their hands, but if they will be smiting, they shall be
sure to hear of him to their cost.

You find Ex. 2. 11. an Egyptian smiting an Israelite. It becomes none better
than Egyptians to be smiting Israelites. Moses spies an Egyptian smiting of
an Hebrew. What gets the Egyptian in the end? See verse 12. God stirs up the
spirit of Moses to smite him, and to slay him. Thus will God teach Egyptians
to be meddling. Pashur smites Jeremy, Ier. 20. 2. What got he by it? The heavy
stroke of Gods hand upon himself and all his friends, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. Herod
was a smiter too, Act. 12. 1, 2. He stretched forth his hands to vex certain
of the Church, and he killed James the Brother of John with the Sword. And what
became of him in the end? See ver. 23. The Angel of the Lord smote him, and he
was eaten up of worms, and he gave up the ghost. It is said of Jonas his gourd
that a worm smote it, and it withered, Ion. 4. That was much that a worm
should so soon smite the gourd. But when men will be smiting Gods people, and
his prophets for a good conscience, and when Herod will be so busy as to smite
Apostles, God can send not only an Angel, one of his most glorious creatures,
but even a base worm, even one of the weakest creatures to smite Herod, and
eat him both. Jeroboam stretches forth his arm against the Prophet, 1 Kin.
13. and his arm withers, he does but threate^ to smite, and God smites him. How
much more when Herod stretches forth his hand to vex the Church, and to smite
Gods Ministers, will God not only wither them, but smite him, as Sampson smote
the Philistims, hip and thigh, and make him a rotten and a stinking spectacle
to all malicious smiters to the worlds end.

Thus is that true which the Prophet implies in that speech, Isa. 27. 6. Has
he smitten him as he smote his smiter? Mark then Gods dealing, he uses to
smite smiters.

Neither is this true only of smiters with the fist, and with the sword, but it
is also true of those smiters, Ier. 18. 18. Come, and let us smite him with the
tongue. Even such smiters will God smite also, as we may see there, ver. 21,
22, 23. Thus God met with Nabal, David sends for relief to him upon his
festival day, and he in stead of an alms falls a railing on him, and calls him,
in effect, a Rogue, and a Vagabond, and a runaway. Thus he smote David with
his tongue. What follows? See ver. 38. And it came to pass about ten days
after, that the Lord smote Nabal. And how smote he him? That he died. So Zach.
14. 12. Their tongue shall consume away in their mouth. What might the reason
be of that judgment? Because happily many that cannot, or dare not fight with
their hands, for fear of the law, yet fight against Gods Ministers and his
servants with their tongues: Well, God has a plague to smite such sinners.
Though they smite but with the tongue, yet God will smite them, and give them
their portion with the rest of the adversaries of the Church. And if God will
not spare such smiters, how much lessewil he spare such as smite with the sword?

Terror to all smiters, either with hand Had Zimri peace who slew his master?
So said Iezabel to Iehu, and so may it be said in this case. Search the
Scriptures, search the Histories of the Church; Had ever any smiters peace,
which lifted up either hand, or tongue against any of the Lords people? Did
smiters ever escape scot-free? Had they any cause to brag in the end? Had they
ever any cause to brag of the last blow? Did Herod prosper that smote James
with the sword? did Ananias prosper that smote Paul? did the Egyptian prosper
that smote the Hebrew? Did Doeg prosper who was a tongue-smiter, as well as an
hand-smiter, Psa. 52. Oh consider this you that dare lift up your hands and
tongues against a good conscience, and be afraid of Gods smiting hand, tremble
to meddle in this kind. Learn to hold your hands and tongues, unless ye long
to feel Gods smiting hand. Especially take heed of smiting Gods Ministers in
any kind, Deuteronomy. 33. 11. Levi has a strange blessing, Bless Lord his
substance, and accept the work of his hand, smite through the loins of them
that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. God
saw, that of al others, Levi would be most subject to the blows of fists, and
tongues, and therefore he is fenced with a blessing for the nonce, to make
smiters fear to meddle with him, or if they will needs meddle, yet to let them
see that it were better to wrong any other tribe than that; God would smite
the^, and smite them to the purpose, that shall offer to smite him.

Here is that which may make Gods people comfortably patient under all the Pet.
2. 23. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; but committed himself to
him that judges righteously. It is best leaving them to the Lords hand. Pray
for thy smiters, that God would give them smiting hearts, that their hearts may
smite them for their smiting; pray to God if he see it good they may be so
smitten. This is a revenge will stand with charity. Yet if not, leave them to
God who best knows how to smite smiters.

It is great comfort against the sore afflictions when God will smite that
whited wall, that Romish Ananias, that scarlet Whore that animates and sets a
work those smiters. It was low with David when he fled from Absalom, and was
glad to receive relief from the children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 17. 27. But chap.
18. Ioab smites Absalom with three darts, and David returns in peace, and Ps.
3. 7. blesses God for smiting his enemies upon the cheek bone. How did the
Egyptians oppress and smite the poor Israelites, Ex. 2. 11. and Ex. 5. 14?
But at last Ex. 12. God smites the land of Egypt, and the first born, and Ex.
15. 6. dashes in pieces these smiters. See how hard it went with Israel, 1 Samuel
4. 10, 11. And the Philistims fought, and Israel was smitten, and there was a
very great slaughter; for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen, and the
Ark of God was taken. Behold what a terrible blow here was given: The Priests
slain, and the Ark captived, as if God himself had been taken prisoner, and
yet at last, 1 Samuel 5. 6. God smites these smiters, But the hand of God was
heavy upon them, and smote them with Emerods, yea as David sings, Psalm. 78.
66. He smote his enemies in the hinder parts, he put them to a perpetual
reproach. He smites them reprochfully. Sometimes he smites enemies on the
cheek bone, Psalm. 3. 7. Sometimes he smites them in the hinder parts, both are
disgraceful and reproachful, but the later the worse, a disgraceful thing to
be scourgd and whipped like boys. Antichristian smiters do prevail, and happily
may yet much more, and may give yet sorer blows, but yet as in Nebuchadnezzars
dream, Dan. 2. 34, 35. the stone cut out without hands smote the Image upon
the feet, and brake them in pieces, so that the iron, brass, clay, gold, all
became like the chafe of the Sommerthreshing flores; So will Christ in his good
time smite these smiters, so that their place shall be no more found.

God shall smite thee. Observe the mavelous equity of Gods administration in
the executions of his justice. God fits his punishments to men's Sins. Here we
see the truth of that, Math. 7. 2. With what measure ye mete, It shall be
measured to you again. If Ananias smite Paul, God will smite Ananias. Smiting
was his Sin, smiting shall be his punishment. Paul says not, God shall judge
thee, or plague thee, but God shall smite thee, to teach that God does not only
justice upon sinners, but that there is a Retaliation in Gods justice, a
recompensing with the like. That look as amongst the Judicials of the Jews
there was a law of retaliation, Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand;
that if a man wronged another with the loss of an eye, he was not only to be
punished, but to be punished in the selfsame kind, to lose an eye himself;
so the Lord for the most part follows the same course in dispensation of
justice. If men smite, God will not only punish, but smite.

That look as it is in the case of obedience, so is it in the case of Sin.
When men yield obedience to God, he not only rewards their obedience with a
recompense, but with a recompense of Retalation, Pr. 3. 9. Honoring God with
the increase of the fruits, is honored from God with the recompense of the
increase of the fruits. Abraham spares not his seed, therefore God will
multiply his seed, Genesis 22. 16, 17. It was in David's heart to build God an
house, therefore God will build him an house, 2 Samuel 7. 2. 5. 11.

Thus it is also in the case of Sin; this is the rule the Lord proceeds by
often in his Justice, to meet with wicked men in their kind. As with the
merciful he shows himself merciful, so with the froward he will show himself
froward; Ps. 18. 25, 26. And if men will walk contrary unto him, he will walk
contrary unto them. Lev. 26. And he will cross the^ that cross him. And those
that will not hear when he calls, he will not hear when they call, Pro. 1. 24.
28. For the better clearing of this point, we may see the truth of it in
diverse particulars.

1. Gods punishments are in the same manner. The same manner of Sin, the same
manner of punishment. Ananias smites Paul in a barbarous and a malicious
manner, he himself was cruelly smitten, and slain. The Sin of the Sodomites
was a Sin against nature, their punishment was after the same manner, fire
descended from heaven. It is unnatural for fire to come downwards. They Sin
unnaturally, fire comes down unnaturally. The Philistims not only smite Israel,
but they do it with a spightfull heart, and merely for Vengeance, Ez. 25. 15.
Therefore ver. 17. I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious
rebukes. Vengeance forvengeance, manner for manner. Such was the late remarkable
justice of God upon that Popish Conventicle in the City, many of that crew were
fallen from God, and fallen from the truth; the Lord slaughters them by a fall.
A fall was their Sin, a fall was their death, there was a fall for a fall.

2. Gods punishments are in the same kind. Look in what kind the Sin is, of the
same kind is the punishment. Sodomes Sin was in fiery lusts, they were in their
Sin set on fire from hell. Their punishment was of the same kind; God raines
down fire from heaven upon them. A fiery Sin, and a fiery punishment. Memorable
in this kind was the justice of God upon that notorious and fiery persecutor
Stephen Gardener, who would not sit down to dinner till the news came from
Oxford of the fire set to Ridley and Latimer; but before his meal was ended,
God kindled a fire in his body, which ere long dispatched him, and made him
thrust his tongue black out of his mouth. Such was Gods justice upon
Adonibesek, Judges 1. 7. in the cutting of his thumbes and his great toes.
Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbes and their great toes cut off,
gathered their meat under my Table. As I have done, so God has requited me.
God has met with me in mine own kind, he has paid me with mine own
coin. Thus was Gods justice diverse ways upon the Egyptians. They threw the
Israelites children into the waters, and stained the waters with blood,
therefore God turns their waters into blood. To which that place alludes, Apo.
16. 4, 5, 6. And the third Angel powered out his vial upon the waters, and
fountains of waters, and they became blood. And I heard the Angel in the water
say, Righteous art thou O Lord, etc. because thou have judged thus, for they
have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets; and thou have given them blood to
drink. Where not only the justice of God, but also the equity thereof is
magnified, not only because God had judged, but because he had judged thus.
Again, the Egyptians destroy the males of the children, God meets with them
in their kind, he smites the firstborn throughout al Egypt. The Egyptians
drown the Israelites Infants in the waters, God pays them in their kind, he
drownes the Egyptians in the waters of the Red sea, there is drowning for
drowning, and waters for waters. Nadab and Abihu, Sin by fire, and Levit. 10.
2. There went out a fire from the Lord and devoured them.

How many fires has the Whore of Babylon kindled, wherein she has consumed to
ashes the Saints of God, God will plague her with an end suting with her sin,
Apo. 17. 16. she her self shall be burnt with fire. They shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire. There is fire for fire, Apoc. 9. 12. she there
darkens the light of the truth, with the smoke of heresy and superstition;
There arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the
Sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit. And Apoc. 18.
9. 18. There we find the smoke of his burning. There is smoke for smoke. God
will make her smoke in the end that has brought such a deal of spiritual
smoke into his Church: and as that Emperor said, Let him perish with Fumo
pereat qui fumum vendidit.
smoke that sold smoke; so has she perished with smoke at the last, that has
put out the eyes of so many thousands with the smoke of heresy and
superstition. This was that justice of God which the Papists powder-Martyrs,
Catesbie, and some others of them were forced to acknowledge, when they who had
thought to have blown up the State with Powder, were themselves spoiled with
Powder, a spark of fire flying into it, as they were drying it, and preparing
for their defense.

Such is that Justice of God threatened, Hab. 2. 15, 16. Woe unto him that
gives his neighbor drink, that put thy bottle to him, and make him
drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness. Thou art filled with
shame for glory, drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered, the cup
of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto thee, and shameful spuing shall
be on thy glory. A good place for drunkards to think upon, especially such
whose glory is their shame, whose glory is to make others drunk. They shall
have cup for cup, nakedness for nakedness, spuing for spuing. As they have
made others spue and vomit, through oppression by drink, so will God give them
such a draught of the bitter dregs, of the cup of his wrath, that shall make
them spue their very hearts out, as Ier. 25. 27. Drink and be drunken, and
spue and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send amongst
you. Of this kind was that Justice of God upon David himself. He kills Vriah
with the sword, therefore the sword shall not depart from his house; He defiles
the wife of Vriah, therefore his Concubines are defiled by Absalom. This is that
Justice, Apoc. 13. 10. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity;
he that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. It was the most
righteous hand of God upon Saul, that he that put Gods Priests to the sword
should fall upon his own sword; and just with God that Elymas the Sorcerer,
that would have kept the Deputy in spiritual, should himself be smitten with
bodily blindness.

3. Gods punishments are often in the same part and member of the body, wherewith
men have offended. That look as renowned Granmer dealt with himself at his
Martyrdom; That hand wherewith he had subscribed to the six Articles, that
hand he first put into the fire, in an holy revenge upon himself; even so
deals the Lord very often in his justice; That which men have made the
Instrument of their Sin, God makes the subject of his Judgments. Absaloms
pride, and his weakness lay where Sampsons strength was. Absaloms hair was
Absaloms pride, therefore Absaloms hair, as it is conceived, was Absaloms
halter, and whilst he will needs spare the Barber a labor, he also spares
the Hangman a labor. Such was Gods justice upon Sampson himself. He can find
none to be the pleasure of his eyes, as the Prophet speaks of his wife, Ezekiel.
24. but Philistims, Judge. 14. 2, 3. and chapter 16. 1. and so in the love of a
Philistim, Dalilah, he abuses his eyes. What is the issue? At last the
Philistims put out his eyes. God punished the abuse of his eyes with the loss
of his eyes, and those eyes that loved Philistims, were plucked out by
Philistims.

Memorable in this kind was Gods justice upon that French King Henry the
second, who in a rage against a Protestant Counselor committed him into the
hands of one of his Nobles to be imprisoned, and that with these words, That
he would see him burned with his own eyes. But mark the justice of God within a
few days after, the same Noble man with a Lance put into his hands by the
King, did at a tilting run the said King into one of his eyes, whereof he dyed.

Of this kind was the Justice of God upon Zachary, Luke 1. Offending with his
tongue in that question, How can this be? he is punished with the loss of the
use of his tongue, and speech for a time. The rich gluttons tongue had denied
Lazarus a crum, therefore it is denied a drop of water. The same glutton had
abused his tongue in gluttony and therefore his tongue has a peculiar torment
in hell. So those Zac. 14. 12. had their tougues consumed in their mouths,
like enough as with their hand, so with their tongues they had fought against
Jerusalem.

Such was Gods Justice upon Jeroboam, he stretches forth his arm against the
prophet, and the Lord withers it. He with his arm threatens to smite, and God
smites him in his arm. Like that justice which was done upon the Emperor
Aurelianus, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 29.
who when he was ready to subscribe, and set his hand to an Edict for the
persecution of the Christians, was suddenly cramped in his knuckles, and so
hindered from it by the judgment of God.

I may not here omit that notable instance of Gods justice upon Rodolph, Duke
of Suevia, he whom the Pope stirred up against his lawful Lord and Sovereign,
against his Oath to usurp his Crown and Empire. This Rodolph in his wars for
the Empire, was wounded in the right hand, of which wound he dyed, and at his
death acknowledged Gods justice in these words; You see, says he to his
friends, here Videtis manum dexteram meam de vulnere sauciam. Hac ego juravi
Domino meo He^rico ut non nocerem ei, nec insidiarer gloriae ejus, Sed jussio
Aposto ica Pontificumque petitio me ad id adduxit ut juramenti transgressor
hono em mihi indibitum usurparem. Quis igitur sinis nos es caeperit, videtis
quia in manu unde juramante violavi mortale hoc vulnus accepe, etc. Morn. Mist.
Iniq. p 259.
my right hand wounded; with this right hand I swear to my Lord Henry the
Emperor. But the command of the Pope has brought me to this, that laying aside
the respect of mine Oath, I should usurp an honor not due to me. But what is
now come of it? In that hand which has violated mine Oath, I am wounded to
death. And so with anguish of heart he ended his days. An example so much the
rather to be marked, that men may see how God blesses the Popes blessings, and
his dispensation with Oaths, specially when they are given to arm men to
rebellion against their lawful Sovereigns.

4. The equity of Gods justice appears in that, Pro. 26. 27. Who so diggeth a
pit shall fall therein, and he that rolls a stone, it will return upon him.
Such was Gods justice upon Haman, he makes a gallows for his own neck.
Hitherto we may refer the justice of God, when God turns men's beloved Sins
into their punishments. Whoredom was the Levites Concubines Sin: Judges 19. 2.
and Whoredom was her death, ver. 26. The Lord, Deuteronomy. 28. 27. threatens the
botch of Egypt, and how frequently is the Sin of uncleannes smitten with the
French botch, the fruit of the Sin? How frequent are the examples of Gods
Justice upon drunkards: drunkenness their Sin, and drunkenness their death.
And so that Proverb is often verified, Prove. 5. 22. His own iniquity shall
take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his Sins.

5. The equity of Gods Justice appears in this, when he makes the place of
sin, the place of punishment. We have frequent examples of this in Scripture.
This was threatened Ahab, 1 Kin. 21. 19. In the place where dogs licked the
blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood. And this was made good, 2 Kin. 9.
26. In Tophet the place where they had slain their Sons and Daughters, would
God slay the Jews, Ier. 7. 31, 32. And as their houses were the places of their
sins, so should their houses be the places of their punishment, Ier. 19. 13.
And because the Sabbath was profaned in the gates of Jerusalem, therefore in
the gates thereof would God kindle a fire, Ierem. 17. 27. And remarkable is
that, Ezekiel. 6. 13. Their slain men shall be amongst their Idols round about
their Altars, and under every thick Oak, the place where they did offer sweet
savor to all their Idols. Such was the Justice of God in that late blow upon
the Popish company. In the very place where they used to dishonor God, the
hand of God was upon them, they were slain, and their carcasses crushed in the
place of their Mass-worship, the first floor falling into their Massing place,
and so they and their Crucifixes and Images, all dashed together, God doing
with them as with the Egyptians, Number. 33. 4. not only smiting them, but also
executing judgment upon their gods: yea not only so, but executed them and
their gods, in the self-same place, where God had been by them so much
dishonored.

6. The equity of Gods justice is to be seen in the time of his punishments.
God often makes that time wherein men have sinned the time of his judgeme^ts. At
the time of the Passover did the Jews crucify Christ, and at the time of the
Passover was Jerusalem taken. Heavy is the calamity that is befaln the
Churches beyond the seas, the time wherein the first blow was given is not to
be forgotten. The first blow was upon the Sabbath, upon that day was Prague
lost. What one thing have all those Churches failed in more, than in that point
of the religious observation of that day; that day they neglected to sanctify
by obedience, upon that day God would be sanctified in his justice upon them,
and in the time would have them read one cause of their punishment. Neither is
the time wherein God did that late justjce upon those popish persons to be
forgotten. It is somewhat, that after their Roman account, it was upon their
fifth of November. God would let those of that Iesuited brood see how good it was
to blow up Parliament houses, and happily would have them learn more loyalty
and religion, than to scoff at our new holyday.

Of this kind was Gods justice upon one Leaver, who railing on the worthy
Martyr and servant of Christ, Mr. Latimer, saying, that he saw that evil
favored knave, Latimer, when he was burned, and that he had teeth like an
Horse, his Son the same hour, and at the same time as near as could be
gathered, wickedly hanged himself. And the same was Gods justice seazing upon
Stephen Gardener, the same day that Ridley and Latimer were burned.

Since then there is such an equity in Gods administration of justice, let it
be our care and wisdom to observe the same. Learn to comment upon Gods works
of Justice, and to compare men's ways, and Gods works together. God is to have
the praise and glory of his justice upon others, as well as of his mercy to
ourselves, now we shall then be best able to give God this glory, when we so
observe his administration, that we may be able not only to say, The Lord is
just, but the Lord is just in this, and that particular, when we can say, as
Revel. 16. 5. not only Righteous art thou O Lord that judge, but righteous
art thou O Lord that judge thus. Thus they sinned, and thus are they
punished. It is good to observe all the circumstances of Gods justice, that so
not only the justice, but the wisdom and equity of Gods justice may be seen;
and this is to trace the Lord by the foot: Psalm. 68. 24. Especially we should
be thus wise in personal evils that befall our selves, that by our punishment,
and the circumstances thereof, we might be led to the consideration of our
sins, and so might say as Adonibesek; As I have don, so has God rewarded me.

Learn to give God the praise of his equity as of his justice. So does David,
Ps. 7. 15, 16, 17. I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness.

Tremble and Sin not. Take heed how and wherein we Sin, lest by our Sins we
teach God how to punish us. Take heed of abusing thy tongue in swearing,
railing, scoffing, lest God lay some terrible judgment upon thy tongue here, or
some peculiar torment upon thy tongue in hell hereafter. Take heed what measure
thou measurest to others, lest thou teach God to measure the same to thy self.
Take heed that thou make not thine house a den of spuing drunkards, lest God
make thine house to spue thee forth: Take heed how thou use thy wits, thy
strength; take heed of sinning in thy Children, or any thing else thou have,
lest God make the matter of thy Sin the matter of thy punishment.

FINIS.
A Table of the several Chapters of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction of the discourse following. Fol. 1 CHAP. II.
Conscience described. 9 CHAP. III. A good Conscience what it is. False ones
discovered. 19 CHAP. IV. Peace of Conscience how gotten 35 CHAP. V. Integrity
of Conscience how procured. 46 CHAP. VI. Two further means to procure
Integrity of a good Conscience. 57 CHAP. VII. Two marks of a good Conscience.
73 CHAP. VIII. Three other Notes of a good Conscience. 90 CHAP. IX. The two
last Notes of a good Conscience. 103 CHAP. X. The comfort and benefit of a good
Conscience, in the case of disgrace, and reproach. 128 CHAP. XI. The comfort
and benefit of a good Conscience in the times of common fears and calamities,
and in the times of sickness, and other personal evils. 147 CHAP. XII. The
comfort and benefit of a good conscience, at the days of Death and Judgment.
165 CHAP. XIII. A second Motive to a good conscience. That it is a continual
feast. 180 CHAP. XIV. A third and fourth Motive to a good conscience. 201 CHAP.
XV The last Motive to a good conscience, viz. The misery of an evil one. 213
CHAP. XVI. The portion and respect that a good conscience finds in the world.
232 CHAP. XVII. The impetuous injustice, and malice of the adversaries of a
good conscience. 243 CHAP. XVIII. The severity of Gods justice upon the enemies
of good Conscience, and the usual equity of Gods administration in his
execution of Justice. 253
FINIS.
THE MISCHIEF And Misery of Sandals Both Taken, and Given.

By IER. DYKE, Minister of Epping in Essex.

Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take heed least he fall. 1. Cor. 10.
12. Aug de verb. Dom. Sermon. 53. Imo vtinam terruerim, vtinam aliquid egerim
Vtinam qui sic filerat. vel quae sic fuerat non sit vlterius. Vtinam verba ista
infuderim and non effuderim. LONDON, Printed by W. S. for R. Milbourne, in
Paul's Churchyard at the Greyhound 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH, Countess of Winchelsey,
his Noble PATRONESS.
MADAM,
IT is not unknown unto your Honor, what first occasioned me to meddle with
this Subject. That which first moved me to preach it in mine own Charge, has
also induced me to make it more public. I conceived it might be a work
well worth the while to vindicate, as much as in me lay, the Honor of God
from that impeachment it commonly receives from Scandals, to heal the bleeding
wounds they usually give to the profession of Godliness, to stop the mouth of
iniquity which they set so wide open, and to give men notice of the great
danger that both the taking, and giving of Scandal may bring them into.

J observe, that men do with the Scandals of Professors, as the Leuite did
with the twelve parts of his Concubine, they send them Judge 19. 29.
thorough all the quarters of Israel. It were happy that such foul actions as
trench to the dishonor of God, and Religion might be buried in eternal
silence, and never be published, Publish it not in 2. Sam. 1.
Gath: But since that is impossible, but that they will be published in Gath,
What inconvenience is it that something be published in, and sent into the
Coasts of Israel, that may stop the mouths of the men of Gath, that may salve
the Honor of God, and Religion, and that may discover and prevent the danger
of Scandalous evils.

J confess, that when I considered how frequently Scandals have fallen out,
and what a world of mischief has been done by them, I wondered, that no man,
for ought I know, or can learn, had hitherto meddled with this Argument so
needful, and so useful, and therefore thought it would not be lost labor to
do something in this kind.

And what I have done, I now make bold to present unto your Honor, as
presuming that that shall be welcome to you that pleades for the Honor of God,
and his Truth. I acknowledge my self many ways deeply engaged to your Honor,
and the many favors I have received from you, bind me to a thankful
acknowledgement of them. May it please you therefore to accept of this small
Treatise as a public testimonial of my thankfulness. Which if you shall
please to do, I shall reckon it as a superadded favor to all the rest, and to
my thankfulness to your self, shall add my daily prayers to the God of all
Grace, for his blessing upon your noble Family, both root and branch, and that
he would not only continue to you the blessing of the left hand, Riches and
Honor, Prou. 3. 16.
but give you the blessing of the right hand also length of days, and with
them both, the best of his blessings, All spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. This shall be the daily suite of

Your Honors Servant in the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Jer. Dyke.

To the Reader.
THere is not any one thing that Satan the professed enemy of Mankind labors,
and endeauours more, then the hindrance of the salvation of man. There is but
one way to Heaven, that which Peter calls the way of Truth, 2. Pet. 2. 2. which
Solomon calls the way of good men, Prou. 2. 20. which Isaie calls the way of
Holiness, Isai. 35. 8. which Jeremy calls the old, and the good way, and the
ancient paths, Ier. 6. 16. 18, 15. Now Satan to keep men from Heaven, does
his utmost to make men stumble at, and from the ancient paths, that by taking
offense at the ways of God, disliking, and distasting them, the salvation of
their souls might become impossible.

To effect their stumbling at those ways Satan lays many and sundry kinds
of stumbling blocks in the ways of men. But yet amongst those many ones, I
find there be some more dangerous then others, and by which the Devil
preuayles much more then by the rest. And those I observe and conceive to be
specially these three.

1. The Reproach, Contempt, and Obloquie, that by some men is usually cast upon
Religion and the conscionable profession, and Professors thereof. Satan tells
men that if they will needs go this way they shall have a deal of filth and
dirt flung in the faces of them, that they must look to be scorned, and
Reproached, as if they were the very Of scourings of the earth. And this very
thing starts and stumbles not a few. Some will better abide a stake, then some
others can a mock. Zedekiah could happily have found in his heart to have
hearkened to the Prophets counsel, but that this lay in the way, I am afraid
of the Jews, least they deliver me into the Caldaeans hands, and they mock
me, Ier. 38. 19. It was death to him to be mocked. But all considered, we shall
see how little reason any have for this to stumble at Religion. For do but
consider who they are commonly that mock at Godliness. Do but observe their
Character in the Scriptures, and you shall find them such as these. A company
of Hypocrites. Hypocritical mockers, Psalm. 35. 16. A crew of Drunkards, Psalm.
69. 12. I am the song of Drunkards. A sort of vicious persons, following their
lusts, There shall come scoffers walking after their own lusts, 2. Pet. 3. 3.
A company of Abject persons, Psalm. 35. 15. Like those enemies, Acts 17. 5. Lewd
fellows of the baser sort. A rout of profane godless irreligious Atheists
that do no more know the Power, then Turks, and Heathens know the truth, of
Godliness, The fool has said in his heart there is no God, you have made a
mock at the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his trust, Ps. 14. 1.
6. It is a shrewd suspicion, that he that is a Mocker is an Atheist, It well
bacomes him to mock at Religion that denies a God, and it is a sign that he
denies a God, that mockes at Godliness, And will any wise man stumble at
Religion for such men's Mockes and Reproaches? What can be expected better from
them? It was a good answer that that Orator gave Salust, Neque enim Orat. in
Salust.
qui, ita vt tu, vixit, aliter quam tu loqui potest, It cannot be but that he
that lives thy life, should speak thy language, and it is an answer will
serve the turn in this case; To look for other language from men of so ill
life's, were to expect to gather grapes of thorns. Let no man for such men's
mockes and reproaches be stumbled at Religion, or think ever the worse of it.
A man would choose his Religion by such men's enmity, and it is the great
honor of Religion that it has such Adversaries. Consulite commentarios
vestros, illic reperietis primum Neronem in hanc sectam tum maximae Romae
orientem Caesariano gladio f^rocisse. Sed tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae
gloriamur Qui enim scit illum, intelligere potest no nni si aliquod bonum
grande a Nerone damnatum. Tentauerunt and Domitianus, etc. -- Tales nobis
semper Insecutores, Iniusti, Impij, Turpes quos and ipsi damnare consuestis, a
quibus damnatos restituere soliti estis. Tertull. Apol. cap. 5.
It was that wherein the Primitive Christians used to glory that they had Nero
their first Persecutor, and condemner of their persons and Religion, Inasmuch
as they that knew him could not but know that it must needs be some great good
which Nero did condemn. It was the honor of Christians, and their Religion
that Nero and such as he was, unjust, ungodly, filthy persons, whom the Heathen
themselves condemned were the sorest, and bitterest enemies they had. No wise
man would have stumbled at Christian Religion, because it had such an enemy as
Nero was, A wise man would have loved it the better. The case is the same here,
It is the honor of Godliness, and Religion, that it has Hypocrites,
Drunkards, vicious followers of their lusts, base and lewd fellows, godless
Atheists, for her scoffing Adversaries. It must needs be some great good which
they hate, and scorn, I know scarce a better argument to persuade men to love
and embrace it, then that such men hate and deride it.

2. The Poverty, the mean, and homely outside of such for the most part, as
receive and profess Christ, and his Gospel. What should you do looking this
way, says Satan; Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?
But this people, etc. John 7. 48. What a fond thing is it to follow this Christ
whom none but a company of the meaner sort of people follow? The greater, and
richer sort of the world they like not, nor look not this way, but only a few
of the lower rank, and condition of men. And how ever many are stumbled at
this, yet indeed little reason is there that any should in such a case be
scandalized. So much the less reason because our Savior has so fore-armed
and fenced us against this Scandal, Math. 11. 5. 6. The poor receive the
Gospel. Why then, might some say, we will not receive this Christ, and this
Gospel, which for the most part only the poorer sort receive. Therefore see
what our Savior adds to prevent such scandal. And blessed is he that is not
offended in me, that is in me a Christ received and professed by the poorer
sort. How could men like well of Godliness in gay apparel, and with a gold
ring, but the vile raiment makes it vile in their eyes, who consider not that
God has chosen the vile things of this world, to confound the things that are
mighty, that God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, heirs of
the kingdom which he has promised, Iam. 2. 5. When Iulianus dixit, and si
Philosophorum ego Senatu^ aduocau^ro tu continuo sellularios opisices, omneque
in nos vulgus acce^das, Augustinus dixit. Contumeliosus es in infirma mundi
quae elegit deus vt confunderet fortia. Aug contr. Julian. Pelag li. 1.
Julian the Pelagian gibed Augustine that he had not the wise sages, nor the
learned Senate of Philosophers, but only a company of mean tradesmen,
handicraftes men of the vulgar sort, that took part with him, he sweetly
answers, Thou reproachest the weak things of the world, which God has chosen
to confound the things that are mighty. That one thing may suffice to keep men
from stumbling at homely outsides. Specially if men had but an eye of faith in
their heads. Carnal eyes that are dazeled with the glittering outsides of
worldly glories are offended at such seeming baseness, but faith blindes it
self against such fleshly Scandals, and will not see them, when it sees them,
but looks thorough them, and sees glory thorough them. Ioh. 1. 14. And the
word was made flesh, and we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten son of the father, though his glory were obscured with the veil of
the flesh, yet this veil hides not glory from the eye of faith, faith did
look thorough this veil and easily discerned him the glorious, and only
begotten son of the father, even in the abasement of his Incarnation. The
wisemen that came from the East, when they saw Herod at Jerusalem, happily in
all his royal Robes, yet fall not down nor worship him; They come to
Bethlehem and find Christ in a poor fashion, happily in little better then
rags, and yet they fall down and worship him. Why fall they down before a
mean poor Christ, and not before a Magnificent, and glorious Herod? Why
rather are they not scandalized at Christ's baseness and poverty? This is the
excellency of faith, In Christ's Infancy it saw Antiquity, in his baseness
beauty, in his meannesse majesty, and more glory in Christ's rags, then in
Herod's Robes. So surely if men did live and walk by faith, and not by sight,
never would Christ nor his Truth be stumbled at for the homely and poor
outside of those that profess him. The purblind eye of flesh cannot pierce
through these vayles and clouds, And what wonder is it to see a blind man
stumble?

3. But yet the sorest and greatest stumbling block of all, is the scandalous
sins and falls of such as profess religion, certain it is that these of
all others are the most perilous stumbling blocks by which Satan causes
multitudes of men to stumble at religion, and works them to the dislike of the
ways of salvation. Afflictions and Persecutions for the Gospells sake are
dangerous stumbling blocks, and by reason of them many are so offended at
religion, as that they turn their backs upon it, Math. 13. 21. When
tribulation, or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
scandalized. So that Persecutions cause Scandal. But yet the Scandals that come
by the evil life's of professors are in some sense far more dangerous and
hurtful then those scandals that come from Persecutions. Though the scandal of
persecution stumble and beat off many, yet have very many been gained to a
love, and liking of Religion, by the Patience, Courage, and Constancy of the
Saints of God in Persecution. But never were, nor will be any gained thereunto by
the scandalous falls of professors. Persecutions keep men off by fear, but
Scandalous sins by Hardening men's hearts. There is far more hope, and
possibility of gayning a man that is kept off by fear, then of such as are
kept off by a settled, resolved Hardness of Heart. In scandals of the Cross men
may have some secret likings of the Truth, may have secret purposes in better
times to own it, but in scandals of evil example, men grow to an open, and
professed dislike thereof. In scandals of the cross, there is not always a
dislike of Religion it self, but only of the hard terms, with which it must
be received, but from scandals of evil life grows a dislike of Religion it
self. Notwithstanding the scandal of the cross men may have an Honorable, and
a good conceit of Religion, but scandals of evil life breed, and nourish a
base and a vile esteem thereof in the hearts of men. So that persecutions do
not do that mischief that scandalous falls do. Malicious persecutours in
some sense do not that hurt that scandalous professors do.

Now scandalous events being so mischievous and pernicious, and yet withal so
common, and so frequent, why may it not be a work of charity to counterworke
Satan, and to remove out of the way these dangerous stumbling blocks, at which
so many fall to their utter ruin, and destruction.

As Satan Balaam-like casts stumbling blocks in, so should it be our care to
take up these stumbling blocks out of men's ways. It is not enough for us that
we put not a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in another man's way, as
the Apostle aduises Romans 14. 12. But when others have done it, our endeavor
should be, to take such a stumbling block out of the way. It is Gods own
commandment we should so do, Isay 57. 14. Take up the stumbling block out of
the way of my people. It were happy if we could prevent scandals, but since
that cannot be (for it must needs be that offenses come) the next happiness
is to prevent their mischief, that though they do come, yet they may come
with as little hurt as may be. Esto quod alius mouerit scandalum, profecto
compescere vos potestis. Nolle compescere sine culpa erit? Aut velle compescere
sine gloria erit? -- Si ergo vos scandalum cum possitis non tollitis, plane non
impletis ministerium vestrum. Bernard. Epist. 200. ad vulgar. Episco. Audegav.
The which thing who so will not, nor cares not to do, shall not be without
blame, and who so endeauours to do shall not be without his reward. The which
work who so does not when occasion serves, fulfils not his ministry, and the
which work who so does, he does an excellent and a worthy work, even the
work of Angels. Annon denique ministerium est Angelorum tollere scandala de
regno Dei? Si dixeritis quid ad nos, etc. Bernard. ibid.
Is it not the work of Angels, says Bernard, to take scandals out of the
Kingdom of God? Yea we find it to be so, Mat. 13. 41. The son of man shall
send forth his Angels and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all scandals.
It is therefore not only a Charitable, but an Angelical work to gather out
scandals, and take up the stumbling blocks that Satan casts in men's way to
heaven.

The same spirit should be in all Gods ministers which was in Paul, 2. Cor. 11.
29. Who is offended, or Scandalized, and I burn not? In cases of scandal he
was all on fire, not only in regard of his grief for, but in regard of his
zeal against them. He burned with an holy zeal, to remove the scandal and to
prevent the mischief it might do. He burned with an holy fire of zeal to
keep others from burning in the fire of Hell, wherewith scandals did endanger
them.

Upon these grounds have I bin moved, and encouraged to the publishing of this
following treatise, to try if by any means, either preaching, or printing, I
might prevent the mischief of scandals. Were it that the fame of them did
spread no farther then the places where they happen, this labor might have
been spared, but Sicut quod de alto cadit grandem sonu^ facit vt ita audiant
omnes, sic and qui de alto gradu cadit ruina illius vbicunque auditur.
Chrysostom. in Matthew.
as that which falls from an high place (it is Chrysostomes comparison) makes
a great noise, so that all hear it; so men that fall from an high degree of
profession, their falls are not without such a noise as is heard far, and
near. It was needful therefore to proportion the remedy to the disease, that
the plaster should be as broad as the sore, and the medicine go as far as the
poison. When I saw, says Paul, that they walked not uprightly, according to
the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all. Gal. 2. 14. But
why before them all? Why had he no more regard to the Honor of Peter? Why was
it not spoken to Peter privately, and by himself alone? Why speaks he that
which might be to the discredit of Peter before them all? Hierome gives a good
answer, Dixi Cephaee Publicum scandalum non potuit private curari, Hieron. in
Gal. 2.
A public scandal could not be healed privately. It is very fit that
public evils, should have public remedies. If these endeauours of mine,
such as they be, shall thorough Gods blessing have such effect as to prevent
any scandals for the time to come, to save any from the danger of such as are
already come, or to bring any to repentance by whom offenses have come, I shall
have cause to think my time and pains happily bestowed.

The several Chapters of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THe Coherence, and Resolution of the Text. page 1. CHAP. II. The
Necessity of scandalous events in Gods Church. page 7. CHAP. III. An Apology
for Religion, and the Professors thereof, against the Scandal of Scandals.
page 26. CHAP. IIII. That Scandals are woeful and fatal to the Scandalized
World. p. 60. CHAP. V. How Scandals come to be so mortally Mischievous. page
77. CHAP. VI. What little reason men have to triumph at, and what great reason
to be cautelous in the event of Scandals. page 109. CHAP. VII. The sharp and
severe Justice of God upon such as give Scandal. p. 136. CHAP. VIII. Why God is
so smart, and so severe in his Justice against those by whom Scandals come.
page 170. CHAP. IX. The great care we should have of giving scandal, and sorrow
for them given, and the great cause of humiliation they have by whom offenses
come. page 206.
The Mischief and Misery of SCANDALS Both Taken and Given.
MATH. 18. 7. Woe unto the world because of offenses: for it must needs be
that offenses come: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes.
CHAP. I.
The Coherence and Resolution of the Text.
THE drift of our Savior in his former Discourse was to exhort to the
receiving of little ones. Verse 5. And who so shall receive one such little
child in my name, receives me. A strong motive to receive such. The Apostles
argument to hospitality, Heh. 13. 2 is strong. Be not forgetful to
entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. But
here the argument carries more strength, Be willing and ready to do all
Christian Offices of love, and show tender respect to little ones, and so
receive them, and you shall receive not Angels, but Christ himself. How
willingly would men receive Christ? Receive these, and you receive him. And if
little ones must be thus tenderly received and regarded, how wary should men
be of doing any thing that may offend them? Therefore our Savior does not
only advise to receive such, but also to take heed of doing any thing that may
prove unto young belieuers, matter of offense and scandal. And so he takes
occasion to enter upon a large discourse concerning scandal. This Verse is part
of that discourse, and in it there be two principal points.

1. The necessity of scandals. 2. The mischief of scandals.
1. The necessity of scandals, for it must needs be that offenses come. 2. The
Mischief and the misery that comes by them. And that is a twofold woe.
1. A woe to such as are scandalized, that do stumble and are offended; Woe to
the world because of offenses. Offenses shall come, and must come, but to the
sorrow, and smart of some men shall they come; They shall come to make way for
the greater woe to some persons. Such events shall be, but yet they will prove
events of woe to men of the world.

2. A woe to such as do cause and give the offense. But woe to the man by whom
the offense comes. As if he had said. It is necessary that offenses come,
and infallibly they will fall out, but yet this necessity of the event shall
no whit at all excuse, or protect the offender, but as a woe to them that take
the offense, so a woe to them that give the offense, Woe to him by whom the
offense comes.

To make way for what follows it is fit to consider what is here meant by
Scandal or Offense. That we call a scandal, which is or may be in it self an
occasion of falling unto another. Any thing whereby we so offend another, as
that he is hindered from Good, drawn into, or confirmed in evil, is a
scandal. Now a scandal may be. 1. First, in doctrine, and this is scandal given
in heresies, false doctrines. Secondly, by the abuse or the unseasonable use of
Christian liberty, of which kind of scandals the Apostle speaks, Romans 14. 1.
Cor. 8. 10. Thirdly, Scandal may be given by men's life's, when their life's and
actions are such as cross, and thwart the Religion professed by us, and
dishonours the Name of God, which we have taken up. As when a man professes the
Name and Faith of Christ, and professes it zealously, and yet falls into
uncleanness, drunkenness, into gross and notorious acts of fraud and
coozenage, these be scandals and offenses because they be occasions to make
others fall, they hinder some from coming toward goodness and Religion, and
they harden and confirm some in their sinful and evil courses. Thus David's
murder and adultery, Noah's drunkenness, the incestuous Corinthians marriage
were scandalous actions. Now though this text reach to offenses of all kinds,
yet I will only meddle with offenses of this last kind, such as be the
gross and foul courses and practices of any such as have taken upon them the
profession of the Gospel, and the Name of Christ.

To come then to the first point. The Necessity of scandals. It must needs be
that offenses come. There must and there shall assuredly fall out scandalous
and offensive actions in the Church of God, even amongst those that profess
Religion and godliness. For that our Savior speaks of the sins of those
that are in the Church, it is plain by that Verse 15. 16. 17. If thy brother
shall trespass, etc. therefore he speaks of the offenses of brethren. If he
shall neglect to hear them tell it to the Church. Now if not of the Church,
why should he be complained of to the Church. What has the Church to do to
judge those, and exercise discipline upon those that are without. And again
scandals properly so called can be no where but in the Church, and amongst such
as profess the Truth of God.

CHAP. II.
The Necessity of scandalous events in Gods Church.
THe point we have then first to handle is this. That there is a necessity of
scandalous events in the Church of God. That scandalous events, and offenses
shall assuredly and infallibly fall out amongst those that profess the Name of
Christ. It must be, and it must needs be that offenses come. So, Luke 17. 1.
It is impossible but that offenses should come. And as the Apostle speaks of
heresies, and of offenses given in that kind, 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be
heresies, so is it true of these kinds of offenses which are given by sinful
and foul actions, that there must be scandals.

This Necessity arises from a threefold ground:

1. From the decree and council of God, and his secret, but most Just
Judgment; for God that brought light out of darkness, can bring good out of
evil, and can work out his glory even from those things which in their events
seem to make exceedingly to the impeaching and obscuring thereof. God can
gather grapes of these thistles, and figs of these thorns, and therefore his
pleasure it is, and so will he have it that such thorns, and thistles should
grow, and come up in his garden. His ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts. He can make that which for the present, and in our
eye and apprehension is for the great dishonor and disgrace of his Name and
Truth, to turn at the last to the greater honor, and glory of both. He by
his permissiue decree orders all such scandalous events to work together to
bring him in a great, and a rich return of glory. Therefore, Ezekiel. 3. 20. God
is said to lay a stumbling block before a man, And I lay a stumbling block
before him. God has decreed that there shall be scandals. Not a Sparrow falls
on the ground without our Father, Math. 10. 29. And therefore not a Professor
of his Name falls into scandal without him. And therefore God having decreed
that scandals shall be, there is a necessity of the event, It is impossible
but that there should be offenses. But yet this decree does in no wise make God
the author of these evils, because his decree has no necessitating influence
into the wills of men. It is a necessity of infallibility, and certainty of
the event, but not a constraining, forcing necessity to make them to do that
which shall give scandal. Scandals shall necessarily, that is infallibly come
to pass, but yet such as give scandal, shall not be forced and necessarily
constrained by the decree of God to do that they do. They shall work freely
and voluntarily in that which they do, or else it were injustice in God to
bring a woe upon him by whom an offense comes, if he by a Superior power from
Heaven were forced and constrained to fall into scandal. What Gods holy ends
are in that his Decree, we shall see after in the opening of the next point.

2. From the malice of Satan. The malice of the Devil against Gods Truth, and
Man's Salvation is exceeding great, and out of his malice against both, he
endeavors nothing more then to make men sin. He goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. But yet though all be fish that comes to
his net, yet his special malice is against those of Gods Church, and those
therein that most zealously profess his Name and Truth. He knows that if he
can but draw such into his nets and snares, and make them fall into foul and
scandalous actions, this will in a great measure dishonor God and his Gospel,
disgrace Religion and Godliness, and startle such as are but looking toward
God, and wonderfully harden such in their sinful ways that are not so forward
in the zealous profession of the Gospel, and therefore of all others he has
such in his eye, and uses all his power and policy to ensnare and supplant
such more then a thousand others. He had rather catch one fish then a thousand
frogs, rather fell one Cedar then a whole wood of shrubs. Satan sees that the
sins and scandalous offenses of such will be exceeding aduantageous to the
advancement of his kingdom, and will conduce to the strengthening of his
party more then the falls of any other. Therefore he sets upon them with all
his might and malice above others. Thou art, say they of David, worth ten
thousand of us, And if the enemy had surprised David, it had been more
advantage to him then to have surprised ten thousand other Israelites. So
Satan reckons one zealous Professor of Religion if he can but entrap him
worth ten thousand others for his turn. Such a man's fall would more blemish the
Gospel, and make men more stumble at Godliness then if ten thousand others
should do the like. Therefore lives he by the King of Syria his principle,
Fight neither against small nor great, save only against the King of Israel,
for let the King of Israel fall, and small and great fall with him. His policy
therefore is to aim and level especially at such in whose falls he may ruin
many, and by whose ruins he may raise his own kingdom. Other men's sins
work nothing so much for his advantage. Numquid tam reprehensibilis ebrietas
Alamanni quam ebrietas Christiani? aut tam damnabilis rapacitas Albani quam
rapacitas Christiani? si fallat Hunnus, vel Gepida, quid mirum est? si peieret
Francus, quid noui faceret? Salu. de prou. lib. 4.
Who wonders or staggers at it to see profane and irreligious godless persons
to be vicious adulterers, to be brutish drunkards, to be artificial deceivers
and defrauders. It is no new thing, they do but their kind. The wonder were,
if they should be, or do otherwise. But when a man that professes Godliness
and Religion shall fall into any of these foul courses, how infinitely are
thousands staggered and scandalized at it? How fowly is Religion and Godliness
blurred? How many are there who resolutely determine never to meddle with such
Religion? And so the Devil has his end, has what he would have.

Consider to this end that example, 1. Cor. 5. 1. There is fornication amongst
you, and such fornication as is not once named amongst the Gentiles. Observe
the horrible malice of Satan against the Church of God, and such as are within
it, be they sound, or hypocritical professors of the Gospel. He labors to
bring of them into fowler, and more notorious offensive evils, then the very
heathens themselves are guilty of according to that, Jeremy 18. 13. Ask now
amongst the heathen who has heard such things. The Virgin of Israel has done
an horrible thing. At that time Christians were called out from amongst the
heathen, with whom they lived mingled together. Now the Devil did what in him
lay to keep those heathen from receiving the Gospel, and Christian Religion,
that by no means they might hearken to it. Now to bring this about what was
Satan's project? He lays about him to ensnare some one of the Christian
Corinthians, and to bring him into fowler fornication then was amongst the
heathen. This the Devil effects, and what think we followed upon it? Now
have the heathen occasion to cry down Christian Religion, and to say, Behold
these be your Christians that talk so much of holiness, where did they ever
see any of us whom they term heathens to commit so foul an act of Incest as
to marry his fathers wife. What are our Adulteries, and fornications they so
much judge us for to such foul uncleanness as this? This is your Christian
Religion, and these be your Saints forsooth, now God bless us from such a
Religion, never will we be of such a Religion. How much better is it to be
honest heathens, nay, Adulterous fornicating Pagans then Incestuous Christians?
And thus questionles was many a Pagan mouth opened, and many an heathen heart
stumbled, yea, many an one that before might be in some doubt of the evil
condition of paganism was by this scandal kept off from looking toward
Christian Religion. They liked not this Gospel, and new doctrine of these
Christians. Such men's scandals therefore being of so great advantage for Satan's
purposes, and he being so sedulous and industrious to seek and take all
advantages for his own turn, hence it is that it cannot be but that offenses
come.

How well did Satan foresee what he should gain by David's Scandal? Could he
but get David in, and bring him to commit Adultery with Bathsheba, it would
strike a greater stroke on his side, and do him more service then if a thousand
such as Doeg, Shimei, or Achitophel should do the like. How many men would
thereby be stumbled at David's zealous profession? How many hearts be thereby
hardened in their evil ways? How many men's ways be blockt up for going to
Heaven? How therefore in this case would, and did the Devil put on to get David
down; and to cause him to fall so fowly? The practices of the Carpocrasians,
and the Gnostickes were stupendiously, and prodigiously filthy and impure.
Never the like horrid Impurities practiced or once heard of amongst the most
godless heathen that ever were on the face of the earth.

The Apostle speaks of the heathen, that it was a shame to speak of those
things which they did in secret, but surely the most degenerate heathen that
had put off nature, could not but think it a shame to speak of those things in
secret which they did openly and familiarly, who took upon them the name and
profession of Christians. Quod hominum genus ad Ecclesiae Dei probrum, and
scandalu^ adornasse and submisisse Satanas videtur: quippe qui Christianorum
sibi nomen indiderint, vt propter illos ofsense Gentes a sanctae Dei Ecclesiae
vtilitate abhorreant, nunciatanique veritatem obimmania illorum facinora, and
incredibilem nequitiam repudient, vt inquam frequentibus illorum sceleribus
animaduersis, eos quoque qui e sancta Dei Ecclesia sunt, tales essesibi
persuadeant, atque ita a verissima Dei doctrina aures auertant, aut certe
paucorum improbitate conspecta in vniuersos eadem maledicta conijciant. Atque
ea demum causa est cur plerique Gentilium vbicunque istius sectae homines
deprehenderint, nullam nobiscum velint neque dati acceptique, neque consilij,
neque audiendi diuini verbi societatem coniungere, acne aures quidem
praeberesustineant, vsque adeo nefarijs illorum flagitijs consternati ac
deterriti sunt. Epiphan lib. 1. Haeres. 27.

Ad detrectationem diuini nominis and Ecclesiae a Satana praemissi sunt, vti
quae sunt illorum audientes homines, and putantes omnes nos tales esse auertant
auressuas a praeconio veritatis. Iraen. lib. 1. cap. 24.


Now what was the aim of Satan's malice in bringing those Carpocrasians and
Gnostickes tearming themselves Christians unto such more then heathenish
Impurities? Surely none other but this, that upon the sight of their loathsome
courses the heathen might abhor the Church of God; and might be so
scandalized thereby that they might utterly reject the truth of God preached
unto them. By their scandalous filthiness they took occasion to rail on
Christian Religion, and so to judge all Christians of the same stamp that they
would not only none of their Religion, but no manner of dealing with them, no
not in civil commerce. So strongly by their scandalous life's did Satan hedge
and fence up their way from coming into the Church, and unto Christ. With
these thorns did the Devil hedge up their way from entering into the Church.

3. From the corruption, falsenesse, hypocrisy and deceitfulness of men's
hearts. There be in the Church of God, and in the number of such as profess
the Name of God, two sorts of persons.

1. Such as profess his Name hypocritically, such as make Religion but a mask
and a cloak to hide and cover their rotten insides, and take upon them the
profession of Religion for base and by-ends, only to advance their credit, and
their profit, as the Shechemites would be circumcised for sheep, oxen, and
substance. Some put on a Quaenam sunt istae pelles ouium nisi nominis
Christiani extrinsecus superficies? Tertull. de praescript. aduers. Haeret.
Quae sunt vestimenta ouilia? species videlicet simulatae religionis, eleemosyna
simulata, oration simulata, ieiunium simulatu^ etc. Chrysostom. oper. imperf. in
Matthew. hom. 19
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. Now when Religion is thus
personated, and men do but act a part, corruption restrained will break out
at last. Yea, and God in his Justice will uncase, and discover such by giving
them up to foul and notorious gross evils. Judas under hope of some temporal
preferments both professed, and preached Christ, forsakes all, and follows
him, and was as forward as the best of them. But because all this was in
hypocrisy, therefore his corruption held in for a time under this violent
restraint at the last breaks fowly out, and because he fowly takes Gods Name
in vain, he is by divine Justice left to himself, and falls into that
fearful scandal of betraying Christ. Observe that Matthew. 7. 27. The house
built upon the sand fell, and the fall of it was great: When Hypocrites fall,
they fall not the ordinary falls of other men, Great was the fall of it, They
fall into great and heinous scandals. As Moses speaks of those, Numb. 16. 29.
If these men die the common death of all men, as every men dies, etc. So these
men fall not the common falls of all men, not as every man falls, but when they
fall their fall is great, with great and notorious scandal. Other men may fall
on the ground, but they fall into the kennell, the puddle, into the very mire;
The Sow that is washed to her wallowing in the mire. 2. Peter 2. 22. She lies
not down in the dust, nor in the dirt, but in the mire, and not only lies
down, or falls down into the mire, but wallowes in the mire, and so becomes
all over foul and filthy. It is so with Hypocrites, they so fall, as if a man
fell into and wallowed in the mire, so foul and scandalous are their falls.
Now, then, inasmuch as it cannot be avoided, and it is impossible, but that
there will and shall be Hypocrites in the Church of God, and Satan will be
standing amongst the children of God, Job 1. and in as much as it cannot be but
that rotten hypocrisy will break out, and in regard of Gods Justice must
sometimes be discovered in this life, therefore there must needs be scandals,
and therefore it is impossible but that offenses should come.

2. Such as profess sincerely, and in Truth. Now even in these there are yet
great remaynders of corruption, the very best bear a body of sin and death
about them. And because they are not so watchful as they should, to look so
narrowly to their own hearts as they ought, therefore comes it to pass also
that offenses must needs come. The heart of man is deceitful above all things,
Ier. 17. therefore should Christians be watchful over it above all things.
But because they trust their false and loose hearts to much, and grow remiss
in their watch, thence comes it frequently to pass that offenses must needs
come. When they keep not their own Vineyard, their mothers children are angry
with them, Cant. 1. 6. that is their natural corruptions Sic Iunius.
which they brought from their mothers womb with them, when they watch not,
and look not to themselves do rebel, and ouer-power them, and so oftentimes
carry them into offensive courses. David was a man after Gods own heart, and
yet David fell into a foul scandal. It is not always safe to judge a man to
be an Hypocrite, because he gives scandal. Gods dearest servants are not
always freed and secured from falling into scandalous sins. Well, but what
made David fall? All the while David was in his exile, and affliction all that
while David was free enough. Afflictions kept him awake. But afterward when
David came to be King, and lived in a full estate at his ease, then began he
to be more remiss, and therefore after his afternoones nap when he was walking
upon the roof, the Devil sets a snare, and his own remiss heart soon
catches at the bait, and he is presently ensnared. We find, Math. 13. 27, 28.
tares in the field amongst the wheat. Sir, did thou not sow good wheat in
thy field? Whence then has it tares? He said unto them, An enemy has done
this! These tares are Scandals, Verse 40, 41. They shall gather out of his
kingdom all scandals. We see whence these scandals come, Verse 28. An enemy
has done this. Satan has a great hand in sowing these tares. But observe when
this enemy sowes these tares, Verse 25. But whilst men slept the enemy came,
and sowed tares. The time of men's security is the Devils seeds time, their
sleeping time is his sowing time. So that because men sleep, even good men
oftentimes fall asleep, and are not so watchful as would become them, hence
comes it to pass, that tares must needs be sown, and that offenses must needs
come. Thus we see the grounds of the necessity of scandalous events in Gods
Church.

CHAP. III.
An Apology for Religion, and the professors thereof against the scandal of
scandals.
Give me leave now, for use of all that has bin said, to do that which all
the children of wisdom are bound to do. Wisdom, that is Religion, is and
ought to be justified of her children. Luke 7. 35. Give me leave to justify
her, by whom I hope to be saved. Open thy mouth for the dumb, open thy mouth
and plead their cause, Pro. 31. 8. 9. much more then open thy mouth, and plead
the cause of condemned Religion. Never do scandalous events come to pass, but
wisdom and her children do suffer, and Religion and religious ones are
instantly condemned and cried down. But let this that has been spoken serve
to teach us not to be offended at offenses, not to be scandalized at scandals.
It is true indeed, that God should never be offended but it should deeply
offend us. It should be a trouble to us when our brother is offended, 2. Cor.
11. 29. Who is offended and I burn not? How much more then when God is
offended, and that by gross scandals! But my meaning is this, that we should
not so take offense at the scandals of such as profess Religion, and
godliness, whether they do it sincerely or hypocritically, as to be offended
either at the Religion or the persons of all others professing the Truth and
power of godliness. Two things here may stay us in this case.

1. First, because our Savior has Vnde te admoneo ne granius peturberis his
scandalis quae ideo ventura praedicta sunt, vt quando venirent reminisceremur
esse praedicta, and non eis valde commoueremur. Nam haec ipse Dominus ita
praedixit, vae mundo a scandalis, etc. August. Epist. 209
foretold us that they should come, we are told of it before hand, and
therefore nothing in such events falling out but what was before told, why
should any start or stumble at them when they come to pass. Why should not
this prevent scandal in this case as well as in the case of the Cross. Thus
Christ preuents the scandal of the Cross and afflictions that should befall
his Disciples, John 16. 1. 2. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye
should not be offended, They shall put you out of their Synagogues etc. And thus
also the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3. 4. That no man should be moved by these
afflictions, for verily when we were with you, we told you before that we
should suffer tribulation. So here our Savior having Non te ista conturbent
fili dilectissime, haereses enim and scandala futura praedicta sunt, vt
interinimicos erudiamur, ac sic fides and dilectio nostra possit esse
probatior. Aug. Epist. 50.
told us before that scandals should come, why should we be offended thereat,
as if some strange thing that had never been thought of had fallen out. No man
Atqui plures, ait Tryho, qui se Iesum profiteri dicunt, and Christiani
nominantur audio simulachris mactata manducare***. Cui respondens eo quoque
inqua^, quod eiusmodi extent viri qui se profitentur Christianos, and Iesum
crucifixum and Dominum, and Christum laudant, sed non illius doctrinas docent,
nos qui purae and verae Jesus Christi disciplinae sectatores sumus in spe ab
ipso annunciata fide constantiores reddimur. Nam quae praedixit futura (...).
Dixit enim, etc. Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryphone Iudaeo.
should be moved with scandals so as to stumble at the event of them, because
Christ when he was with us told us before that they should come, and therefore
told us before, because we should not be stumbled and offended. Yea, these
things being foretold that they should fall out amongst those of the Church,
and of the true Religion, we should thereupon be so far from being stumbled,
that we should rather be so much the more stablished and confirmed in the truth
of our Religion and Profession, because we see those things so truly
fulfilled which the High Priest of our profession has foretold.

2. Secondly, because we see that there is a Necessity of them. Since there
must be offenses, and since there must be scandals, therefore should we not
for scandals be so stumbled as to conclude that Religion to be false, and that
profession to be naught where some Professors thereof give scandal. For to
speak properly and truly there can be no scandal given but by those that are
Professors of true Religion and godliness. A Turk, a Mohammedan, a Jew, a
Papist cannot in proper and strict phrase of speech give a scandal, for there
is scandal given where occasion of stumbling at the Truth and Power of
godliness is given. So that scandal is only properly given by the Professors
of Truth, whose sins are such as make the truth of God, and the saving
profession thereof to be stumbled at. And therefore there only are scandals to
be found, where Religion and Godliness are professed. And therefore when such
scandal is given, we must not take offense at Religion because we see there is
a necessity of scandalous events in the Church of God, and amongst such as do
profess true Religion.

Indeed when scandals do fall out this is the conclusion the Devil would have
men infer upon them, and it is the thing he aims at in bringing men into
scandals, to have men thereupon judge such Religion naught, and all of the same
outward profession to be alike. Ecce quales sunt qui Christum colunt, falsum
plane illud est quod aiunt se bona discere, se sanctae legis praecepta
retinere. Si enim bona discerent boni essent, talis profecto secta est quales
and sectatores, hoc sunt absque dubio quod docentur. Mimesis Paganorum apud
Salu. de Prou. lib. 4.
Do ye not see what they are? Are not of the very choicest and chiefest of
them scandalous? As they are so are they All, As they are, so is their Religion
they profess; Surely this Religion and the profession of it are not of God.
But this is the Devils Logic, and reasoning taught in the School of Hell.

Here be two things inferred.

First, Therefore their Religion is naught, and not to be trusted.

Secondly, Thus they are all. That men may not thus stumble at scandals,
consider the weakness of such inferences.

1. They that profess Religion, fall into scandals, therefore their Religion
and Profession is naught, etc. If this be a good reason the Religion that is
from Heaven, and which is taught by God himself, must be damned for a false
Religion, for here we see that amongst the Professors of true Religion, in
the very Church of God there must be scandals. So that if men shall go this
way to work, they will make but mad work of it. Let us but a little consider
this kind of reasoning what validity it has, or could have in such men's cases
whose religion and profession were without question on all hands of God?

Foul and fearful was the scandal of David, And what was the issue?
Presently the enemies of God and godliness began to lift up their heads, and
to fall foul upon David's religion. 2. Sam. 12. The enemies of God blasphemed
the Name of God. And that happily on this, or the like manner. Oh this is he
that was so grand a Zelot, that the zeal of Gods house did eat him up. Psalm.
69. 9. This is the man forsooth, that danced before the Arc out of his
transcendent zeal, 2. Sam. 6. 14. This is he that prayed thrice a day,
Morning, Evening, and at Noone, Psalm. 55. 17. This is he that was so strict,
and so precise in the government of his Family, Psalm. 101. This your great
precise Zelot, has defiled the Wife, and murdered the Husband. Now you see
what his religion is, Now you see what comes of this Profession of so much
Holiness, and Godliness. Such as he is, such is his religion, naught both.
Now was this think we fair reasoning? Was David's religion false because his
scandal was foul? Who dares justify David's fact, and yet who dares condemn
his Religion and Profession?

The fact of the Incestuous Corinthian was exceeding foul, he marries his
fathers wife, uncleanness unparalleled amongst the Heathen. And how wide now
think we were the Heathen Corinthians mouths opened? Certainly at that time
they did as those, Psalm. 59. 7. Behold they belch out with their mouth, and as
those, Psalm. 73. 9. They set their mouth against the Heavens, and their tongue
walks through the earth. So that Heaven and Earth seemed now to ring of them;
Vbi est lex catholica quam credunt? vbi sunt pietatis and castitatis praecepta
quae discunt? Euangelia l^gunt and impudici sunt, Apostolosaudiu^t and
inebriantur, Christum sequu^tur and rapiunt, vitam improba^ agunt, and proba^
legem haberese dicunt. Mimesis Paganotum apud Salu. de Prou. lib. 4.
Now see, say they, what the God and the religion of these pure Christians is,
These be the fruits of this Christian religion? Is not your religion a goodly
religion? A clear case that their religion is naught. Thus the Heathens, and
right like Heathens did they reason, and pity it is to hear such Heathen
Logic in Christians mouths. Was the Religion of Christ preached and
professed at Corinth naught, and false, because that Corinthian being a
Christian proved so foul? God forbid. Here that has a truth in this sense
which Tertullian spoke in case of Heresies, Quid ergo si Episcopus, si Doctor,
si etiam Martyr lapsus a regula fuerit? ideo haereses videbuntur veritatem
obtinere? ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? Tertul. de
praescript. aduers. Haeret.
Do we try faith by men's persons, or men's persons by their faith? Even in
this case may we not judge of faith by men's persons, as if because some persons
professing religion prove scandalous, therefore their religion should be proved
false. The religion of the Christian Corinthians was of God, though that man's
incestuous practice were from Satan. We find a case, Mal. 2. 8. But ye are
departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the law. It is
spoken to the Priests, they should have been examples of holiness, and
patterns of piety to the people, but they lived wickedly and scandalously, so
that many of the people stumbled at the Law of God. They began to call the Law,
and their Religion into question, and like enough were ready to say, Surely
this Law is not of God, nor this Religion which the Priests preach and
profess, is not from Heaven. For if this Law and Religion were from God, why
live these Priests so lewldy, and basely. Thus the stumbled people reasoned.
But was their reason good against the Law, and Religion, because the Priests
were scandalous? Was the Law to be cried down, because they lived not
according to that Law they preached and professed? Was the Law naught, because the
Priests were so? Wherefore, says the Apostle, the Law is holy, and the
Commandment is holy, and just, and good, Romans 7. 12. Though they were unholy,
yet the Law was holy, though they were unjust, yet the Law was Just, though
they were naught, yet the Commandment was good. So that it was the peoples
great sin to stumble at the Law, though the Priests departed out of the way.
It is not therefore a safe process to condemn, and cry down Religion from
the scandals and offenses of the Professors thereof. Is the Protestant
Religion false, because, as the Papists reason, so many Protestants are
scandalous Drunkards, Adulterers, etc. yea, let this reason stand good, and
show me that Religion in the whole World that can be true; by this reason
there is no true Religion at all on earth. For give me any Religion on the face
of the earth, Turkish, Jewish, Heathenish, Popish or Protestant, among the
Professors whereof there may not scandalous persons be found. If then I will
be no religion till I find one whose Professors are wholly free from
scandalous and notorious offenses, I must live and die an irreligious Atheist,
and renounce all religion.

I confess, there is a case wherein a religion may be cried down from the
wicked, and loose life's of the Professors thereof, and that is when the
principles and doctrines of it are such as open a gap, and give liberty to
loose and dishonest practices. When men do not only break the Commandments
of God, but according to the principles of their religiou teach men to do so,
Mat. 5. 19. As for example, when the Pharisees Disciples did swear, did seek
revenge, did hate their enemies, did neglect their parents in their
necessities, here a man might have said to them, This is your Religion, because
the principles of Pharisaisme taught men so. When I see a Papist profane the
Sabbath in hawking, hunting, bowling, carding, dicing, dancing, and going to
plays, here I may fall upon his religion, because the doctrine of their
religion is, that provided a man hear a Mass on the Sabbath he may spend the
rest of the day in those things. When I see a Papist give himself to all
lewdnes, and vicious uncleanness, I may lay the blame upon his religion,
because the principles thereof set open a gap thereto. For what need I care
for drunkenness whilst it is made but a Venial sin, and a Venial sin is
such, as our Rhemists say, is pardonable of it own nature, so slight Rhem. in
Romans 1. 32.
as a man need not make confession of it, such as makes no breach of friendship
between God, and us, so small a triffle as may be pardoned by a knock on the
breast, by the Bishops Blessing, by the sprinkling of holy Water, and saying a
Pater Noster, as they teach. Now I say if drunkenness be but a venial sin,
and venial sins be such nothings, why by the principles of his religion
should a Papist fear to be drunk. Profligata Christi pietas and extincta
quando quilibet pro modo pretij quod in merces illas expendit peccandi
impunitatem sibi pollicetur. Hinc stupra incectus, adulteria, per iuria,
homicidia, etc. originem traxerunt. Quod enim malorum amplius iam horrebunt
mortales quando sihi peccandi licentiam and impunitatem nedum in hac vita, sed
and post obitum aere licet immodieo comparari possepersuasum habent. Cent.
Grau. Germ. art. 3.
So what need he care what sins he runs into, so long as rheir Priests
have a iudiciarie power of Absolution, and the Church has a treasury of
Indulgences, and for small sums great Pennances and great sins may be
remitted. There is no religion wherein a man can sin so good cheap. Now
therefore if we see those of that religion take liberty to loose and sinful
courses, it is no injustice to lay the blame, and condemnation upon their
religion, whose Principles and Doctrines are such as give men liberty enough.

So if I should see a man of the Pelagian faith and profession to live
licentiously, in the neglect of the means of grace, and to deny himself no
carnal liberty, I would here condemn his religion from his life, because the
Grounds and Principles of his faith are such as give men liberty to live as
they lift. For if so be there be a power of Free will in me, that I may repent
and believe if I will, and when I will, what need I then care what courses I
take, what sins I run into, so long as I can be saved when I list, I will
try such and such sins, and when I have taken my fill, at my pleasure I will
repent and believe. So that in such a case it is not amiss to cry down a
Religion from the scandalous courses of the Professors thereof, and in such a
case a man may innocently say, This is your Religion. But on the contrary,
when a Religion is pure Religion, Iam. 1. 27. A Truth which is according to
godliness, Tit. 1. 1. and the doctrine thereof according to Godliness, 1.
Tim. 6. 3. When a religion teaches Godliness, Holiness, Purity, Fidelity,
Just and upright dealing, and binds the Conscience to these things upon the
pain of death eternal, if any Professor of such a religion fall into
scandalous sins, here to cry down a religion that is Holy, Just and Good,
because a Professor thereof does wicdedly, vilely and unjustly, this is the
greatest Injustice, and the most unequal, and injurious dealing in the world.
It is true that amongst the Professors of true religion scandals must be, but
must they needs be from the grounds and doctrines of that religion? Must
scandals needs be, because that religion teaches men to do so? Nay, does not
that religion teach the contrary, upon danger of Hell bind to tht contrary?
And why then is the religion condemned, and cried down? What foul Injustice
is this, that an innocent religion should suffer for a nocent Professor? If
the religion they profess do Quae si vera sunt, nulli vel sexui vel
aetatiparcite, ad poenas rapite, cum vxoribus and liberis funditus extirpate.
Athenag. legate. pro Christian.
principle and teach them to be Drunkards, Adulterers, to be Coozeners,
Cheaters, Defrauders; throw dirt in the face of that religion, yea, stones at
the head of that religion, and spare it not. Not reproaches, scoffs, squibs,
taunts, but even the stake, and the fire is too easy a punishment for such a
religion.

But if religion and its Principles teach nothing but Holiness, and
righteousness, nothing but Sanctity and Honesty, why must a good and holy
Mother be smitten and wounded, and have her face spitted on, for the
miscarriage of a degenerating, and ungracious child? If the Daughter play the
Whore, and the lewd Filth, will it stand with any justice, or equity that the
Mother a grave, sober, chaste Matrone that has instituted her better should be
carted, and have filth and dirt thrown at her? And yet this is the equity and
justice of the worlds dealings. Because sometimes some of wisdoms children
that should have been so wise by their godly and holy life to have honored,
and justified their Mother, because I say they do sometimes play the fools,
the scandalous and notorious fools, therefore they cannot be content to
scourge and cart these ungracious children, and to cast abominable filth upon
them, as they deserve, but they must needs fall foul upon the poor and good
Mother, and the keenest and sharpest of their teene must be wreackt upon her,
and she must be lasht with the Scorpions of men's malignant tongues, even to
the very bones.

What is this but the ancient Jewish Non vt principes vestri viuimus, etc. Quod
si quos etiam inter nos tales esse sciatis, non continuo ea de causa Scripturas
and Christum maledictis proscindite. Justin. Mart. Dial cum. Tryph. Iudaeo.
practice against Christian religion? Who if at any time any of the Christans
fell into any scandalous evil, fell a railing upon Christ, and the sacred
Scriptures? And will we call this Justice? Why rather as in other cases learn
we not to pity and lament the case of a good Mother in the miscarriage of a
lewd ungracious child? It should be the wisdom of men to set the saddle upon
the right horse, let every man have the blame and shame of his own evil
actions, but take we heed that we do not fly in Gods face by falling foul
upon religion for men's scandalous miscarriages. It is not the religions but the
man's fault, if one professing religion miscarrie, had he held him to the rule
of his religion, that had kept him from that evil.

That which was of ancient pleaded with the Heathen on the behalf of
Christians had a great deal of reason in it. They desired but the same equity
and moderation toward them which was used toward their Philosophers. Si
conuicti fuerimus punimur, non propter nomen sed propter crimen. Hoc modo illos
etiam qui philosophiam profitentur iudicari cernimus. Nemo eorum ante causam
iudicio cognitam propter scientiam vel artem suam bonus malusue iudici esse
videtur, sed postquam improbitas alicuius detecta fuerit paenas luit, nec vllum
ex eo in philosophiam redundat crimen. (...), Ille enim malus qui non legitime
philosophatur, professio autem crimine vacat. Hoc ex aequo and nobis fieri
cupimus. Athenag. legate. pro. Christian.

Quemadmodum nihil ad philosophiam crimen Sophistarum, Epicureorum,
Peripateticorum, aut quorumcunque falsa dogmata profitentium: ita in verum
Christianismum non cadit crimen deprauantium Euangilia. Origin contra Celsum.
lib. 2.

Si aliquis cui notum sit Jesus praeceptum docentis temperantiam, and dicentis,
Quicunque inspexerit mulierem ad concupiscentiam, etc. iam commisit adulterium
in cordesuo, videret paucos aliquot pro Christianis habitos libidinoso viuere
merito eis praeuaricatione^ impinget, sed iniquissime faceret, si doctrinae
Jesus imputaret eorum flagitia. Orig. con. Cells. l 3.


If any professing philosophy did commit any evil worthy punishment, after
conviction and detection he was punished according to the desert of his fact,
yet Philosophy received no impeachment thereby, and that was not presently
cried out upon, when a Professor of Philosophy miscarried. Because they thus
equally and wisely considered, That the wickedness was in him that was not a
Philosopher aocording to his rule, but the profession it self was blameless,
That it was the man's fault, and not his professions, that though the man were
naught, yet his profession was good. This equity did the Christians desire the
Heathen would show to them. And this equity I would Christians would show to
those of their own religion, that the Heathen showed to Philosophers. Does a
man professing religion fall into any scandal? Learn to distinguish between
the Man and his Profession, and let not the burden be laid upon religion and
his profession, which is to be laid upon his own black. Learn thus to judge?
that though the Man be deeply to be blamed, yet his Religion and Profession is
blameless. We may justly in such cases blame the man, but we shall deal
very unjustly to blame religion, because we know that nothing blames and
condemns such courses more then that religion which they profess.

We have a prophecy of the condition of the last times. 2. Tim. 3, 1-5 In
which place the Apostle speaks not of Pagans, Jews, Turks, but of
Christians, and such Christians, Verse 5. That should have an outward form and
profession of Godliness. Now will any conclude that the profession of godliness
is naught because some that profess a form of godliness are covetous,
boasters, proud, ungodly, etc. And shall I be ungodly because some that have a
form of godliness be so vile? or shall I distaste and condemn godliness,
and all profession of it, because many professing godliness prove such and
such? God forbid. Yea, the Apostle sufficiently preuents the scandal when he
says, Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, as if he
should say, Let no man for these things stumble at religion and the profession
of Godliness, for godliness and profession is not in the fault, but the fault
is because there is but a form without power. It is not to be denied, but a
man that has the power of Godliness may fall into a scandal, and by violence
of some strong tentation be rusht into some foul action, but yet in that
particular case, and at that time may want the power of Godliness. What is to
be done then? Surely writing is not to be condemned because some Writers
blot, and blurre; nor Godliness to be condemned for some men's scandals, but
formalitie and want of power. We may not resolve therefore that it is best not
to meddle with godliness, but never to meddle with the profession of it, but
joined with the power. Since therefore their must be scandals amongst such as
profess godliness learn we to be wiser the^ for sca^dals to cry down and
condemn religion.

2. Come we now to the second inference. Diverse zealous Professors fall into
scandals, therefore they be all such, all alike naught, and unsound, only
they are not discovered as some are.

This is no new thing, this was the old practice of the Ad quid enim aliud
sedent isti, and quid aliud captant, nisi vt quisquis Episcopus, vel clericus,
etc. ceciderit omnes tales esse credant, iactent, contendant, sed non omnes
posse manifestari. Cum de aliquibus qui sanctum nomen profitentur, aliquid
criminis vel falsi sonuerit, vel very patuerit, instant, saidgunt, ambiunt vnde
omnibus hoc credatur. Aug. Epist. 137
ancient enemies of the Church, and Gods people long ago. It is that which
Augustine in his time complains to have been their guise, That if any that
made profession of the holy Name of God did fall into any sin, if either some
true thing were discovered, or some false thing were reported, oh, how they
laid about them, and labored tooth and nail to persuade men, and make them
believe that they were All such, though they were not all discovered.

The same spirit lives in too many still, and nothing more usual then such
language, and such censures in the like cases. Now ye may see what these men
are, Never a barrel better herring, all naught, all alike. An Inference
miserably uncharitable, which must necessarily make the Church of Christ a
very den of Hypocrites. For here we see that in the very Church of Christ
there must necessarily be scandals and scandalous persons.

And if where some be such all be such, tell me what the Church of Christ
shall be but a collection and confluence of rotten and dissembling Hypocrites.
What is this but to do that which David in an other case was afraid to do?
Psalm 73. 15. If I say, I will speak thus: behold I should offend against the
generation of thy children. In speaking thus, let men consider how they can
wash their hands from that guilt. Far is such dealing from that sweet and
gracious dealing of the Lords, Is. 65. 8. that casts not away the whole
cluster, for some corrupt and evil grapes, far are men from that Spirit, who
because now and then some one grape proves rotten, and offensive, do thereupon
reject the whole cluster, and cry out upon the rest of the grapes of the bunch,
as if they were like Ieremies naughty figs. Ier. 24. 2. Which could not be
eaten they were so bad.

To stop the mouth of Iniquity, in such a case, let but these things be
seriously and sadly considered.

1. That there must be such amongst those that powerfully and sauingly
profess the Name of Christ. And therefore we shall never find the most holy
and happy Quantum libet enim vigilet disciplina domus meae homo sum et inter
homines viuo, nec mihi arrogare audeo vt domus mea melior sit quam arca Noe vbi
tamen inter octo homines reprobus vnus inuentus est, aut melior sit quam domus
Abrahae aut melior sit quam domus Isaac aut melior sit quam cohabitatio ipsius
Domini Christi, in qua vndecom boni perfidem et furem Iudam tolerauerint, aut
melior sit postremo quam caelum vnde Angeli cociderunt Aug, Epist 137.
societies to have bin so happy as to be free from such. In Noah's Arc were
but eight persons, yet one reprobate Cham, In Abraham's family, a bondwoman,
and her son to be cast out; in Isaacs family a profane Esau; in Jacobs family
an Incestuous Reuben; amongst David's children an Incestuous Amnon; a rebellious
Absalom, in the sacred college of Christ's Apostles a Judas a Theife. Ioh. 12.
6. a Traitor. Luke 6. 16. a Devil. Ioh. 6. 70. Even in headen Gods own house,
and habitation, were found such Angels in whom God found not steadfastness;
such Angels as kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, and
became Devils. Now then look back upon some of these Instances, and see if
this kind of reasoning be safe. In Noah's Arc there was a graceless Cham,
therefore all in the Arc were such as he. Amongst the twelve Patriarchs
Reuben was unclean, and Incestuous, therefore all your pillars of your Ancient
Church were such also. Among the twelve Apostles of Christ the great
professors, and preachers of his Name, Judas was a thief, a traitor, a
devil, therefore the whole company, is a college of thieues, traitors and
devils; Amongst the Angels in heaven, there were legions of Devils, therefore
all of the same stamp, all alike; would not all men spit in that man's face
that should thus reason? and yet how familiar is such reasoning in too many
men's mouths. It is a sure thing that as Simpliciter autem fateor charitati
vestrae -- quomodo difficile sum expertus meliores quam qui in monasterijs
profecerunt: ita non sum expertus peiores quam qui in monasterijs ceciderunt.
Aug. Epist. 137.
there cannot be found better men in the world, the^ amongst those in the
Church, professing Christ's Name, and Truth, so neither can there be found some
times worse then those that in the Church fall into heinous scandals. The which
since it must so be, why should the filth of some particular persons
miscarriages be flung in the faces of all. What is this but for the Nolite ergo
propter amurcam qua oculi vestri offenduntur, torcularia detestari, vnde
apothecae dominicae fructu olei luminosioris implentur Aug. Epist. 137.
lees, and the dregs to loath the presses from whence Gods storehouses are
filled with oil?

2. That though there be such, and that too many, yet far many more there
be of the same profession that are not such, what though Christ have one
disciple that becomes a thief, a traitor, a devil, that brings scandal upon
the Preaching, and profession, of his Masters Name, yet has he not eleven
others holy and right godly men, that live according to their profession, and
do their profession honor and credit? What though one Christian Corinthian
fall into the sin of Incest, yet why should the heathen Corinthians cast the
disgrace of that his sin, upon all the Christian Corinthians? Are they so
blind that they cannot see, that there be many Corinthians. Act 18. 8. and that
God has much people in that City. Act. 18. 10. Who are holy, gracious,
mortified, and renowned for the power of Godliness, that do every way make good
the religion they profess? what though, now and then we see a star falling
from Heaven, yet see we not millions of those glorious lights of Heaven, keep
their station and their luster? And why have not men an eye as well to look at
such, at the many such whose life's suite with their holy profession, as they
have an eye to look at such, at a few such as give scandal? why can they not
see that Quapropter and si co^tristamur de aliquibus purgamentis, consolamur
tamen de pluribus ornamentis. Aug. Epist. 137
there are that shine as lights in the midst of a froward, and a crooked
generation, and so shine that they be ornaments of the Church, as well as they
can see such, as are the disgracers and dishonourers of religion? Surely
because they are a froward and a crooked generation, and out of that
perverseness of Spirit for one, and by one will injuriously judge and condemn
all.

3. If all such, how is it that such more then all do condemn such scandalous
offenders. Who so sharp, and so severe against them, for their scandals as
such as profess the same truth with them. Others triumph over them, scorn and
deride them, but who so sadly, and so sharply reproues, censures, and
condemns them, as do they of the same profession? Who so discountenances, and
discardes them once lapsed till their public satisfactions, and their
unquestioned repentance, and humiliations do in some measure wash off the
blurre of their scandals. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was
inflicted of many 2. Cor. 2. 6. And sufficient was the infliction of that
punishment, by those many to acquit them from being all such. If they had all
countenanced him, held fellowship and communion with him, pleaded his cause,
and justified his practice, then had there been some color to have said they
had been all such. But now that the Corinthian Christians, deal so severely
with him, for his offense, it is clear that they are not all such, for if all
such as he, then should he have found more favor at their hands then so. And
this was Augustines answer unto, and defense against the Manichees. It was
their fashion it seems to disgrace the Church, and cast reproach upon it, and
to besmeare it with the mire of the foul actions of scandalous professors of
Christian religion. No lite mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, nec
professionis suae vim aut scientes aut exhibentes. Noui multos esse qui
luxuriosissime super mortuos bibent. Noui multos qui renunciauerint verbis huic
saeculo. Nunc vos illud admoneo vt aliquando ecclesiae catholicae maledicere
desinatis vituperando mores hominum quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos quotidie
tanquam malos filios corrigere studet. August. de moribus eccl. Cathol. 34.
He confesses that indeed there were many, that gave scandal by their lustful
and luxurious life's, by their drunkenness, vile wordlines and earthlines, but
yet gives them to understand that they were injurious, to reproach the Church
with the condemning of the manners of those men whom the Church her self did
condemn, and whom as evil children she daily endeavored to reform. If
indeed others of the Church professing the same Religion had winked at them,
had slighted their offenses, or had in any kind seemed to have countenanced
their persons, or approved their courses, then might the Manichees have had
some color to have for their sakes condemned all professors, that they were
all alike. But professors and the Church condemning and crying down their
courses it was but malignantly and peruersly done of the Manichees to twit and
reproach the Church with such men's manners.

CHAP. IIII.
That Scandals are woeful and fatal events to the scandalized world.
HItherto we have seen the Necessity, come we now to consider the Mischief
of scandals. That mischief is twofold. The first is a woe to such as are
scandalized that do stumble and are offended. Woe to the world because of
offenses. For the meaning of the words. To the world, that is to worldly and
carnal men. Because of offenses, or from offenses. (...), not (...), from
offenses, not for offenses, not as if scandals were the cause for which the woe
comes, as if God brought a woe upon men for their scandals, but that scandals
are the means and the Instruments by which, and from which God brings woe upon
some men's heads. So that these words are not to be understood as threatening of
woe to such as give offense by falling into scandalous sins, who are
threatened in the former verse, and in the end of this, but it is a threatening
of woe to men of this world, wicked and ungodly men taking offense at the
scandalous actions of such as profess Religion, that these scandals should
prove to such matters of woe and sorrow, and from, and by them should much
mischief come to worldly men. Which words so opened, afford us this point.

That the scandalous and offensive Actions of such as profess the Gospel and
Name of Christ are fatal, dismal, banefull and woeful events to wicked and
wordly men. God that has a providence in all events, has an all-wise and
ouer-ruling providence in events of scandal, and he in that providence of his
orders and appoints them so to come, that they make way for some great woe to
worldly men. Every scandal is a stumbling block, and when a scandal is given,
there is a stumbling block laid, and such a stumbling block, at which some
men shall not only break their shinnes, but their necks. But who lays this
stumbling block? This stumbling block God lays, Ezekiel. 3. 20. I laying a
stumbling block before him he shall die. When God in his Justice means to
make sure work with some men that they shall die, he first in his providence
disposes of a stumbling block to be laid in their way, at which they may
stumble so as they may fall, and be ruined, so as they may die. Amongst many
other stumbling blocks that God disposes to be laid in men's ways, this is a
very frequent, and ordinary one, the scandalous actions of some Professors of
Religion. And when such stumbling blocks are laid, woe to the world, they are
fatal, and mortal, I laying a stumbling block that he may die.

The word (...), a scandal, (...) significat proprie tigillum in instrumentis
quibus capiuntur lupi, aut vulpes, aut mures. (...) apud Hesych. Melancth, ad
Rom 14.
the Grammarians say it signifies the crooked piece in a trap to which the
bait is tied, at which a Mouse, Rat, Wolf, or any other vermin biting, the
trap falls down, ensnares, and catches the beast. So that in scandalous events
God sets up a trap, a gin, a snare, by which he purposes to catch and ensnare
such vermin as men in a reprobate condition be. That look as when a man sets
up and baits a trap he may say, Now woe to Rats and Mice, woe to the Foxes,
Wolves, and the baggage vermin, so when scandals fall out, woe to the world,
Gods trap is set up to ensnare such withal as are made to be taken, 2. Pet.
2. 12. And look as a man when he sets up a trap, he intends it purposely for
the woe of vermin, so when God in his providence disposes of the events of
scandals, he therein intends the woe, the ensnaring, the catching, killing,
and destroying of such who had been happy, if they had been made the vilest
vermin in the world.

That which Solomon speaks of a wicked man's own sin, is also true of the
scandalous sin of another, Prou. 29. 6. In the transgression of an evil man
there is a snare, though he take a great deal of delight, and pleasure in it,
yet it will prove a trhackling snare; so in the transgression, the scandalous
transgressio^ of a good man, or a seeming good man, there is a snare. Though
evil men take a great deal of Content, and make themselves much mirth, and
pastime at the false, and scandals of such as profess religion, yet in that
scandalous transgression there is a snare for them, a deadly, and a mortal
snare; woe to the world because of offenses.

As it is in the case of Passive, so is it in the case of active sca^dals. Now
in case of passive scandals it is true, woe unto the world from offenses. Such
offenses work to worldly men's great smart, and sorrow. The Apostle speaks of
Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 8. that he was (...), a rock of scandal, or offense. And
Is. 8. 14. 15. the Prophet foretold that he should be for a gin, and for a
snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. So that it may be truly said of such, woe
unto them that Christ the rock of scandal ever came into the world. For
Judgment and for woe, am I come into the world, John 9.

Thus also is it true in case of Active scandals, for Judgment do they come
into the world, and for Judgment unto the world. Woe be to the world for the
scandalous sins of Professors of Religion, for they be set up to be
stumbling stones and rocks of offense, against which men of the world shall
dash themselves, they be set for ginnes and for snares in which they shall be
taken. In the case of passive scandals, where offense is only taken, there the
trap is baited with the bread of life. In the case of Active scandal, where
offense is given, there the trap is baited with baine, and poison, with deadly
poison, death is in the trap. Now if woe to the world when the trap is baited
with the bread of life, how much more woe to the world, when it is baited with
rank, and deadly poison?

Scandals and offenses are dismal and fatal to wicked men, because God in his
intention and administration disposes and orders them as the means that shall
make way for the surer and sorer punishment of them for their unprofitableness
under, and their contempt of the Gospel, the means of grace and the holy
examples of such as are truly godly. Therefore are they fatal and woeful
events because they are sent as executioners of divine vengeance upon the
disobedient rebels against the Gospel. God gives men his word and the
Ministry of it to convert, and save them, the holy examples of his children
to guide, and lead them. Now neither one thing nor another will reclaim men of
the world, nothing will do them good, still will they go on in their
unbelief and hardness of heart, notwithstanding the light of the Word, and
the light of holy examples, notwithstanding the shining light of both, they
will love, and live in darkness still. So then God seeing this that nothing
will better them, but to Hell they will go, and damned they will be, let his
Ministers, and his people do what they can, he thereupon enters into a
resolution to make sure work with them, and to take such a course as shall
infallibly, and irreuocably make way for their eternal ruin, and to this end
in his providence disposes of these scandalous events, as stumbling stones, and
stumbling blocks; at which they may so stumble as they may fall, and be surely
ruined. As if the Lord should speak on this manner. I have given you my Word
and Gospel, it has been preached amongst you plentifully, and powerfully, all
the means notwithstanding, you have not been one whit the better, but rather
worse, ye are more stubborn, more rebellious, more malicious, and to Hell ye
will, do my Ministers what they can.

Well then since there is no remedy, since ye will go, I will take an order
to set you going surely. Behold, in my providence I will dispose of scandalous
events to fall out that shall lie as stumbling blocks in your way; at which,
stumble ye, and fall ye, and be ye remedilesly ruined. I gave you my word
that you might have risen, but you would not be raised by it, I will therefore
lay a stumbling block in your way, at which you shall be sure to fall. I gave
you my word that you might have lived, but now I will lay a stumbling block
that you may die, Ezekiel. 3. 20. You would not be drawn to Heaven by the holy
examples and life's of my Saints, therefore shall ye be head-longed another
way by the scandalous events that shall by my providence fall out. I sent my
Ministers, whom I made fishers of men, with their nets and baits to catch you,
but by no means would ye be caught in their nets, nor bite at their baits,
nor be caught with their hooks, therefore now will I dispose of scandalous
events, which I will set as traps, and snares and ginnes for you: greedily and
eagerly shall you come to them, and shall be ensnared and held fast for ever
getting out again. And thus do scandals come as messengers of wrath and death.

Gods dealing with wicked men in events of scandals, is clean contrary to his
dealing with good men. Such as love the truth of God, and subject unto it,
though scandals come shall not be ensnared by them, God will secure and save
them from being ensnared, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy
law, and nothing shall offend them, or, they shall have no stumbling block.
Such as love Gods truth have great peace, great security when scandals fall
out, they shall have no stu^bling blocks, God himself will keep them, that
they shall not dash their feet against these stones, they shall have no
stumbling blocks to hurt them. But now on the contrary great danger and
mischief shall they have that love not the Law, they shall have stumbling
blocks, and therefore because they love not Gods law shall they have them, that
God may be avenged upon them for the neglect and contempt of his truth. And
because they love not Gods Law, therefore shall scandals come, that shall be
fatal stumbling blocks for them. That look as Solomon speaks of the Harlot,
Eccl. 7. 26. I find more bitter then death the woman whose heart is snares and
nets, and her hands as bands, who so is good before God shall escape from her,
but the sinner shall be taken by her; So may it be said of scandals. Mare bitter
then death, (woe unto the world because of scandals) are scandalous events, for
they are as snares and nets, who so is good before God, an holy and a godly man
shall escape, and be delivered from being ensnared by them, but the sinner, the
neglecter and contemner of Gods grace shall be taken, and be ruined by them,
and therefore woe unto the sinners of the world because of scandals. It is in
this case between men of the world and scandals, as it was in Ahabs case
between him and his false prophets, 1. King. 22. 20, 21, 22. God had a purpose
out of divine Justice and vengeance that Ahab should fall, and be ruined. Now
God enters into counsel what course shall be taken to bring it about that he
may fall and perish, Verse 20. Who shall persuade Ahab that he may go up and
fall at Ramoth Gilead. There comes forth a spirit, Verse 21. and says, I will
persuade him. The Lord asks, Verse 22. How or wherewith? He answers, I will
go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And the Lord
said, Thou shall persuade him and prevail also, Go forth, and do so. The
case is the very same here. God bestows his Word, and the Ministry of it
upon a people, it works them not to Faith and Repentance. Hereupon is the Lord
provoked to anger, and upon that he enters into a consult of revenge. Here be
a company of men that have had the means of grace, but they will not be
converted, and raised up, I am therefore resolved they shall fall into Hell for
ever. But who will now take some course that they may fall. Then steps forth
Satan, I will take a course to make them fall fatally. And the Lord says what
course will thou take? Satan answers. I will go forth and draw some noted
Professor of Religion into some gross and scandalous sin. And that scandal
of his will be such a stumbling block at which they will so stumble, that I
will warrant them fall far enough, and deep enough for ever recovering out
of the pit. And the Lord answers, Thou shall effect it and prevail, Go forth
and do so. Go Satan, prevail with such, and such a Professor of Religion to
bring him into some foul scandal. And let that scandal be a fatal stumbling
block to make such fall, and assuredly perish, that would not be wrought upon
by the word.

So that look what the false prophets were to Ahab, that are scandals to the
world, means of their fatal falls and ruins, woe to Ahab because of the false
prophets, and woe to the world because of scandals that make way for their
mischief, as the false prophets did for Ahabs. So that by all this we see
that Gods disposal of scandals, is an Act of divine vengeance, and Justice
plaguing men's unprofitableness under the means of grace, that by this means
their righteous damnation might be sealed up, and made sure.

And therefore this is a point well worth our observation. That where God sends
most preaching, and the greatest means of grace, there commonly fall out the
greatest and foulest scandals, and where little or no means, little or no
scandal.

Now what may the reason of this be? Not that the preaching of the Gospel
makes men worse, as men of evil spirits are ready to slander and calumniate it
in case of such events, but amongst many other reasons that might be given of
it, this is one special one. Where God gives greatest means of grace, and
salvation, there men's sin in their unprofitableness, impenitencie, and
unbelief is the greater. The greater men's sins are, the greater is Gods
wrath, and therefore out of the greatness of his wrath against men's great
unprofitableness, God disposes it, that where the greatest means of grace are
neglected and contemned, there shall be the greatest scandals, that so he may
greatly plague great unprofitableness and contempt. God will have such as be
unprofitable under great means, to have great falls, that they of all others may
fall most lethally, and most dangerously, and fatally. Now a little stumbling
stone causes but a little and an easy fall, but the greater the stumbling
block is, the greater, and more woeful must the fall needs be. And therefore
where greatest means not profited by, are, there are greatest scandals to
bring the greater woe, and vengeance upon so great unprofitableness; therefore
there the greatest stumbling blocks to fall by, where the greatest means to
rise by, that such may not simply fall, but so fall that they may be dashed to
pieces.

CHAP. V.
How Scandals come to be so woeful and Mischievous.
NOw how Scandals make way for men's falls and ruins, and so for their woe will
appear in these following particulars.

1. In that they make way for their stumbling at Religion and godliness, the
powerful and saving profession thereof. When men stumble at Religion and are
so offended at Godliness as to dislike and reject it, and that with a
peremptory resolution of spirit never to receive and embrace it, it must needs
be confessed that such persons are in a woeful and miserable case. We find
some that stumbled at Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 8. Some that stumbled at the word, 1.
Pet. 2. 8. Some that stumble at the law, Mal. 2. 8. Some that stumble in their
ways from the ancient paths, Iere. 18. 15. Now to stumble at Christ, at the
word, at the Law, at the ancient ways, at religion, this is a woeful thing.
There is but one true religion in which a man can be saved, now therefore woe
to him that stumbles at true religion, for there is no way but infallible
damnation for such a man. There is no way of salvation but by Christ, There is
no other name under heaven to be saved by, Act. 4. 12. Therefore woe to that
man that stumbles at Christ, for that man puts himself out of possibility of
salvation. The word, is the word of grace, Act. 20. 32. the word of life, Ioh.
6. 68. the word of the kingdom, Mat. 13. 19. therefore woe to that man that
stumbles at the word, for he puts himself out of possibility of grace, eternal
life, and the kingdom of God. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting or
restoring the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. therefore woe to him that stumbles at the
Law, for he is out of possibility of being converted, and restored. The old
and the Ancient ways are the good ways wherein a man shall find rest to his
soul. Ier. 6. 16. Therefore woe to that man that stumbles at and from the
ancient ways, because what possibility has he of finding rest to his soul?

Now by scandals and offenses stumbling blocks are laid to make men stumble
at these, and so to bring woe upon their souls. When professors of religion,
of Christ, of the word, of the law, of the Ancient ways fall into foul
scandals, thereupon men of the world take occasion to stumble at that Religion,
at that Christ, at that word, at that law, at those Ancient ways which they
profess, and grow to a resolution never to make or meddle with these, and so
make way for their own woe by refusing, and resolving against the ways of
salvation: for look what the force of holy example and good life is to stop
men's mouths, and gain their hearts to a love and liking of the truth and
religion, of that force on the contrary, is evil and scandalous life to keep
men of Godly and holy life, good conversation makes evil speakers ashamed. 1.
Pet. 3. 16. Well doing puts to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1. Pet. 2.
15. that they cannot speak evil of Godliness and Religion. Religious
conversation winnes and gains those that are witbout and brings them to a love
of religion, 1. Pet. 3. 1. So contrarily, scandalous carriages embolden the
faces, and open the mouths of enemies, stumbles, and offends them, and works
in them such a disallowance of religion and dislike of the profession of
Godliness, that they utterly resolve against it.

And that scandals, do make men thus stumble at Religion, the word, etc. how
plain does daily experience make it? let such an one as professes Christ, his
word, his truth fall into any scandal, and what follows? Oh! Say men, this is
their religion, this is their profession, do ye not see what persons they are
that are of this same holy religion, and profession? Are there any worse then
these, more dishonest, and deceifull? If this be their religion, God bless me
from their religion, I am resolved never to be of such a religion, I now
plainly see that it is nothing but errant hypocrisy, lying, coozening, and
dissembling. And thus through divine vengeance punishing the^ for their
unprofitableness under the word, they so stumble at these scandals, as to fall
into an hatred, and dislike of saving religion, and saving powerful profession
of it. Into which who so falls, how woefully falls he?

That scandals do bring this woe upon the world, and prove ruining stumbling
blocks thus to make them fall, is further clear by that, Mal. 2. 8. Ye are
departed out of the way. It is a charge upon the Priests. The Misera eorum
conuersatio plebis tuae miserabilis subuersio est. Bernard in conuers. Pauli
ser. 1.
Priests that preached, and professed the law, they departed out of the way,
they committed gross and foul scandals what was the issue of it? A great
deal of mischief followed upon it, namely, a woe, an heavy woe, unto the
people from their scandals. But what was that woe? Ye have caused many to
stumble at the Law, that, is to stumble at true religion, and the ways of God.
When the people saw the Priests that professed and preached the Law, and who so
great Zelots for the Law as they, when they saw these Priests to live so
loosely, and so scandalously they began to start at it, and to question happily
whether this Law, this religion they preached, and professed were of God or no.
And if this were their law, and their religion, for their parts they were
resolved never to have to do with such a Law, with such a religion Thus their
scandals did stumble the^ And thus did their scandals bring an heavy woe upon
the people, for what a woeful condition was this, thus to stumble at the Law,
at the true religion of God? what was this, but to seal up, and make sure
their own damnation? for if they would none of the Law, they could none of
Heaven, if shut out of Heaven, what remained but Hell? The Lord had, it is
likely, a long while called upon the people by his Prophets, they would not
hearken nor repent, nor embrace the truth of God. The Lord therefore in his
Justice resolves to be revenged upon them, by bringing a woe upon them. And
what woe would God bring upon them! This woe of stumbling at religion that so
he might make sure work with them, that since they would not be saved, when
he offered them salvation, therefore now they should never be saved. But now
what course will God take to effect this, and bring this woe upon them. He will
in his wise providence lay the stumbling block of the Priests scandals in
their way, at which they shall so stumble as to dislike the Law, and to fall
into an utter distaste of religion, by which they should make sure work
against their own salvation. And so woe was unto the people from the Priests
scandals.

2. Scandals make way for woe in that they make way to occasion, men of the
world to fall into the foul and woeful sin of blapheming Gods holy Name. It
is a woeful thing to fall into that sin, especially so to fall into it, as
to make that the joy of our hearts which tends to the reproach and dishonor of
his Name. The Name of God is a glorious and a fearful Name. Deuteronomy. 28. 50. and
therefore how woeful and fearful a thing for a man to blaspheme that Name.
What does he better then cut himself off, from all communion with God that
blasphemes his Name, that flies in his face, and triumphs in his reproach. It
is said of the malicious Jews. Act. 13. 45. that they spoke against Paul's
doctrine contradicting, and blaspheming. And mark what follows, verse. 64.
Seeing ye put the word of God from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. See then when they blasphemed
what they did, They put away the word from them, they judged themselves
unworthy of life, they caused God to turue away the means of salvation from
them. Such a case is a woeful case, and to this case will contradicting and
blaspheming of God, and his truth, and Religion bring men. And therefore in
this regard are scandals woeful events because they occasion men to blaspheme
and speak evil of God and his truth. When David fell into that foul Scandal,
what followed upon it? See 2. Sam. 12. 14. By this deed thou have given great
occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme. Those amongst the people that were
haters of true godliness, and enemies to the powerful profession thereof and
so enemies of God when David fell into this sin, they fell into a woeful
case, they presently fall a blaspheming of Religion, and speaking evil of
godliness, and he that blasphemes godliness blasphemes God, and so by this
means causes God in wrath peremptorily to turn from them. So Romans 2. 23. 24.
thorough you the name of God is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles. So that the
scandalous sins of the Jews were stumbling blocks to the Gentiles that made
them fall into that foul sin of blaspheming, that must needs make them
unworthy of eternal life.

3. Scandals make way for woe, in that they make way for the hardening of the
hearts, and stiffening of the necks of sinful men in their evil ways. It
is a very dangerous thing, for a man to be in a sinful way, but for a man
to have his hand strengthened in his Iniquity, to be hardened in any sin,
this is a woeful condition. It is the greatest woe, and curse that can be to
have ones heart hardened. Lam. 3. 64. 65. Render unto them a recompense O Lord
according to the work of their hands, Give them obstinacy of heart, thy curse
unto them. Solomon speaks of the plagues in the heart. 1. King. 8. 38. The
plague in the body, is a woeful disease, and what then is the plague in the
heart. God threatens Pharaoh with this plague, Exodus 9. 14. I will at this time
send all my plagues upon thine heart, and see how God did it. Exodus 10. 2. Go
into Pharaoh for I have hardened his heart. Therefore the Hardness, or Hardening
of the heart is the plague of the heart. God sent ten plagues upon Pharaoh, but
this plague of his heart, in the hardening of it, was ten times greater then
all the plagues of Egypt. It is that which usually God premises, and
fore-sendes when he means to prepare men to temporal destruction. When God
means resolutely, to speed a particular person, or a whole nation, and to
bring inevitable destruction upon them, God first makes way for it, by the
hardening of men's hearts. Exo. 14. 17. When God would get himself honor in
the destruction of Pharaoh and the Egyptians. I will says he, harden their
hearts, and they shall follow them, and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh. So
Josh. 11. 19. 20. Not a City that made peace, with the children of Israel, save
the Hiuites the Inhabitants of Gibeon, They took all in battle. But why did
not other Cities, do as the Gibeonites, why did not they submit, and seek
their peace? Because God had a purpose, they should be destroyed, and to make
the surer way for it, gave them up to an hardened heart, for it was of the
Lord, to harden their hearts, that they should come out against Israel in
battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor
but that he might destroy them. So that when God means that a man shall have
no favor, but be utterly destroyed then God first gives men up to hardness of
heart. Nay, it is that which is a woeful preparatiue to eternal wrath, it is
that which locks men, and shuts them fast up, and keeps them sure for eternal
vengeance. When God is so angry, as that he is peremptorily resolved that a
man shall not be saved, but be damned without all peradventure, then God gives
him up to the hardness of heart, under which he shall be surele reserved unto
the day of wrath.

When a Prince is resolved to put a man to death, he commands him first to be
surely imprisoned, to be laid fast in fetters and irons. When Herod meant to
execute Peter, see what sure work is made, He is delivered to four
quaternions, of Soldiers to be kept, he lies between two Soldiers, bound
with two chains, and the keepers before the doors keeping the prison, Act.
12. 4. 6. So that in reason there was an impossibility of his escape from
death.

So when God will make sure work with a man, and is peremptory for his
execution, the Lord delivers him up to hardness of heart, and this hardness
of heart will be as quarternions of Soldiers, as Chains, and Keepers, Locks,
Bars, Boults, and Fetters, to reserve a man sure for damnation. A man has
had the means of grace offered him, he has slighted them, and he will go on,
and he will do this and that, say all the Preachers what they will, and can to
the contrary. When God sees this, he thus resolves. Here is a man that I
would have saved, I offered him the outward means of grace, but he has
stubbornly and rebelliously stood out against the means, I am resolved he
shall never be saved. I but perhaps the man lives still under the means of
grace, and so long there is a possibility of his conversion, and if he be
converted he must needs be saved. Therefore God to keep him from salvation
will take a course sure enough to keep him from conversion. Now what course is
that? God will have such a man's heart hardened. And if once the heart be
hardened there is no possibility of Conversion, and is no Conversion, no
Salvation. This process of Divine Justice and vengeane we have. Is. 6. 10.
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart, and convert and be healed. We see in the end of the Verse,
that Gods full and final resolution is that they shall not be healed, that
is, they shall not be saved, as appears, Mark. 4. 12. But how will God keep
them from being saved, they having, and hearing the Word? They shall not be
converted. But how will he keep them from Conversion? They shall not
understand with their heart, though they hear. But how will he keep them
from understanding with their heart? Go make the heart of this people fat,
that is, go harden their hearts. When the heart is hardened they cannot
understand with the heart, when they cannot understand with the heart, they
cannot be converted, when they cannot be converted, when they cannot be saved.
And so the hardening of the heart is nothing else but the locking, and the
shutting, and sealing of a man up, to keep him sure and fast for Hell. So that
for a man to be given up to hardness of hearr is a sign, and a woeful sign
that a man is such an one, as on whose soul God is resolved to show no mercy,
and that a man is in the woeful state of reprobation. Therefore see how the
Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 18. Therefore he has mercy, on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardens. See how hardenings, and showing mercy
stand in opposition. Whom he will he hardens, that is, he reprobates, and
shows no mercy to. But why says he not, to whom he will show no mercy, he
shows none, but it steed of that, whom he will he hardens? Because God makes
way for the execution of his counsel of Reprobation by Hardening men's hearts.
By all this then it is clear, that it is a woeful thing to be given up to the
hardness of heart, woe to that man that has his heart hardened.

Now then Scandals are woeful events unto men of the world, because they be
such snares and stumbling blocks, as make and occasion them to fall into this
woeful condition of hardening their hearts. Therefore woe to the world because
of scandals, because by scandals their hearts shall be hardened, they shall have
the woeful plague of the heart, they shall come under a woeful curse, be
brought into a preparatiue condition for temporal and eternal ruin. For when
men see such as make profession of godliness to fall into scandals, and
heinous evils, it occasions them exceedingly to harden their hearts, and to
bless themselves in their evil, and ungodly ways, as if their ways were
better then the ways of godliness, and their persons in a better estate and
condition then theirs that make such ado with their profession.

We may conceive the truth of this in the scandal of the Incestuous
Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5. There were multitudes of Heathen Corinthians that had
not yet received Christ, nor his Gospel. The Christian Corinthians had
questionless been dealing with the Heathen Corinthians, to bring them to
repentance for the sins of their Gentilisme. What those sins were we may
see, 1. Cor. 6. 10. Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, etc. nor Thieues, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, etc. And such were
some of you. Namely, when they lived in their Heathen condition. Now out of
these sins would not the Heathen residue be brought. Now when all means, and
endeauours for their reclaiming were in vain, God in his Justice would even
give them up to that woeful condition of being hardened in those their sins.

To this end in his providence a scandalous event is disposed to come to pass
in the sin of the incestuous Corinthian, which could not but turn to the
great hardening of the Heathens heart in their sins, Then began they to say
and think in their hearts, They told us our estates, and our ways were
dangerous and damnable, but to be sure, our ways are as good as theirs. We
are better yet then these professors of Christ, we are honester at the
hardest, then are they, The fornication and filthiness that is acted and
committed amongst them is not once named amongst us.

We will therefore even keep us in these ways, and go on in these courses
still. For if such as these profess themselves to be, if your holy and strict
Christians may do such vile things as these, then I trow it is not such an
heinous thing for us that make no such profession to be Drunkards, Adulterers,
Swearers, etc. And thus by occasion of this scandal did they confirm, hearten,
and harden themselves in their iniquities. Suppose any of the Christians had
after the falling out of this scandal, but offered to have reproved an Heathen
Corinthian for Fornication, Drunkenness, etc* what answer was he like to have
had but such an one as this. Oh Sir, it is no marvel, you should find fault
with me, though now and then I may be drunk, or commit fornication, yet I am
not such a beast, as such an one your fellow Christian, that made such ado
with his holiness that has now married his fathers Wife, I would you should
know it, I am as honest as he, and as good a liver as he for his heart. And so
shook they off all admonition and reproof, and hardened their hearts against
all remedies by occasion of that scandal. And so was there a woe to many an
Heathen Corinthian, from the scandal of that Incestuous Christian, because they
stumbled at it and were ensnared by it, so as to harden themselves in their
sinful courses, and so by that hardness were sealed up to assured wrath.

There is nothing hardens men in their Iniquity more, then to Justify them in
their sinful ways. There is a Instification of a sinner from his
ungodliness, and there is a Justification of a sinner in his ungodliness.

The first is a blessed thing, and makes a man happy, Psalm. 32. 1. 2.

The second is woeful, dismal, and dangerous. Justification of a sinner from
his sins is called a Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. But Justification of a
sinner in his sins is a Justification of death, that seals up a man to
damnation. Justification of a sinner from sin is an Act of Gods grace, and
mercy, and so he iustifies the ungodly, (Romans 4. 5. on him that iustifies the
ungodly) by acquitting, discharging, and absoluing him from the guilt of his
ungodliness. Justification of a sinner in his sin is an act of Gods woeful
vengeance punishing men for former ungodliness, and making way for the
infallible ascertaining of his damnation. And for Justification of a sinner in
his sins is way made by scandalous events. And that scandalous events do
justify ungodly men in their sins, and so harden them therein, may appear by
that, Ezekiel. 16. 51. Neither has Samaria committed half thy sins, but thou
have multiplied thine abominations more then they, and have justified thy
sisters in all their abominations which thou have done. Samaria was one of
Iudahs sisters; The Samaritans were an idolatrous wicked people, Judah she
professed her self the people of God. Now Judah that professed her self Gods
people, fell into foul, and scandalous abominations. Samaria committed not
half her sins. Upon this, Samaria begins to Saint her self, and to justify
her self, being justified by Judah. Which may be understood not only of the
event, that Samaria was less unjust, and unrighteous in comparison of Judah,
but also of the effect or consequent of that event, because Samaria in
comparing her self with Judah, finding her felfe more just, that is less
unjust, did thereby positiuely justify her self, as if she were in a good
case, and a good way, because Judah's abominations were so many and so great,
and because Judah is blacker then she, therefore she begins to imagine her
self Lilly white. I, says Samaria, it is no marvel that Judah is so godly,
so religious, so holy a people, and that I am so idolatrous, and so sinful, I
am sure I am not half so bad as she. For all their godliness, and Religion
they talk of, for any thing I see, my life, courses, dealings are as good, and
honest, nay, more justifiable then theirs. And if Judah that professes such
singular holiness, do thus and thus I hope my ways being better then hers,
my condition is better. I am therefore resolved to ride on in the old road
still, I will not change life's and ways with Judah for all her godliness and
Religion. Thus questionless, did Iudahs abominations occasion Samaria to
justify her self, and by such justifying of her self, she hardened and
strengthened her self in her sins, and so were Iudahs scandals and
abominations woeful events to Samaria, because thereby her heart was hardened
to her destruction.

It is with scandals as it was with those false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Ye
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his
wicked way. Men cannot be saved if they be not turned from their evil ways,
men cannot be turned from their evil ways, if their hands be strengthened in
them, and their hearts hardened. Now here was the mischief and the woe that
came by those false Prophets, they strengthened men's hands, and hardened their
hearts in their evil ways that they could not be saved. Such is the mischief
and the woe of scandals, men cannot be saved, unless they return from their
wicked way, they cannot return from their wicked way so long as their hands
be strengthened, and woe to the world because of scandals, for they strengthen
the hands of the wicked, and so make way for their fatal ruin.

Scandals are that to the World, that those things were to the Jews, Romans 11.
9. Let their table be made a snare, a trap, and a stumbling block, and a
recompense unto them. When no means of grace will soften hard hearts and bring
them to Repentance, God in his Justice disposes of scandals, and they are made
snares, traps, and stumbling blocks, and a recompense unto them that God may
recompense them for their unprofitableness; and by those scandals, occasion them
to harden their hearts to their ruin, that would not be softened unto life.

It is otherwise to the World from the scandals and falls of Professors, then it
was to the Gentiles from the fall of the Jews from Christ. The fall of the
Jews was for the happiness of the Gentiles. Romans 11. 11. 12. Have they
stumbled that they should fall? that is, fall quite and clean off, God forbid,
But through their fall, salvation is come unto the Gentiles, The fall of them
is the riches of the world. But now in scandalous falls of Professors into foul
sins it is contrary, Thorough their falls damnation comes to many, and they
are the mischief, misery and undoing of many. And that on this manner. God
many times vouchsafes the means of grace and repentance to a people, in those
means strives a long time with them, but strives in vain. Therefore he
resolves thus, My spirit shall strive no longer with them, but since they will
not, they shall not be saved, I will take a sure course for their damnation. I
am resolved they shall not be saved, and because they shall be sure never to be
saved, I will make sure they shall never be converted, And that they may be
made sure for ever being converted, I will take a course that they shall not
understand the word they hear with their hearts, and that they may not
understand the word they hear, I will take a course for the hardening of their
hearts, and for the thorough hardening of their hearts some professor of
religion shall fall into scandal, and thereby shall their hearts be hardened
seven fold more then ever, they shall justify themselves in their sins, and
so by an hard heart shall put themselves out of all possibility of Conversion,
and so out of all possibility of salvation. How often would I have had you
risen, and ye would not rise? therefore now shall you fall into hell, for he
that hardens his heart shall fall into mischief, Prou. 28. 14.

That therefore ye may fall into a mischief, and with a mischief; ye shall be
hardened, and that you may fall into greater hardness of heart, some man shall
fall into scandal; his fall into scandal shall make way for a woe to fall upon
your heads. His scandal shall harden you, that hardness shall make you fall into
mischief. And thus woe to the world because of offenses, because they come to
stiffen, and harden their spirits, and as messengers of wrath to bind them
sure, hand and foot, that they may be prepared, to be thrown out into utter
darkness.

Thus woe to the world, because of offenses, because the world is occasioned by
them, to reject the saving profession of Religion, to fall foul on Gods holy
Name, to justify themselves in their sinnefall ways, and so by these things
to make hell sure their own. So that the fall of a professor of religion, is
as the fall of an oak upon underwood, and smaller trees, that be near it: woe
to them, when the oak falls, because it mischieues, brushes and breaks them in
pieces by its fall. It is just in this case, at it was in the overthrow of that
Army. Ier. 46. 12. The mighty man has stumbled against the mighty, and they
are both fallen together, first one fell; he being fallen, another stumbles at
him, and so they both lay on the ground together. Thus falls it out in
scandals. First one falls into some great sin, others come and stumble at
him being fallen, and so both fall, and the first man's fall is the last man's
ruin. And therefore woe to the world because of scandals.

CHAP. VI.
What little reason men have to triumph at, and what great reason to be
cautelous in the event of scandals.
ALl this well weighed, and duly considered will give us to understand two
things: the little reason of joy, and the great reason of fear and caution in
case of such scandalous events.

1. It lets us see what little reason men of the world have to triumph, insult,
and (...). Just. Mart. Epist. ad Zen. and Seren.
rejoice as they use to do, in the falls and scandals of such as profess
religion. When my foot slippeth they magnify themselves against me. Psalm. 38.
16. If such an one do but tread awry, or his foot but slip, their enemies let
not their slips slip, but take occasion from small slips to make great
tryumphs, And if they be so ready to magnify themselves against them, when
they but slip, how much more when they fall, and fall into the puddle, into the
mire? How do they magnify themselves against them then? The reproach and
disgrace of their sinful falls yeeldes adversaries such content that they
project and lay on purpose for it. Neh. 6. 13. Therefore was he hired that I
should be afraid, and do so and sin, and that they might have matter for an
evil report, that they might reproach me. And therefore proiecting for their
falls, and laying plots before hand for them if it may, be no wonder that they
so rejoice and triumph if at any time they fall into such sins, whereby they
may have matter for an evil report that they may reproach them. So true is that
which Papistae calumniandi studio totam nostra^ conuersationem obseruant. Si
quid ergo humanipatimur, sicut profecto infirmi sumus, and patimur nostra
incommoda, ibi demum tanquam famelici porci immergunt se in stercora nostra,
and ex ijs delicias faciunt, dum infirmitatem nostram exemplo maledicti Ham
aperiunt and traducunt, vere enim esuriunt and sitiunt scandala nostra, Luth.
in Genesis 9.
Luther speaks that they hunger and thirst, after the scandals of the Godly,
and if at any time, through humane frailety they do fall into an evil, like
hungry hogs they nuzzle in their excrements, and feast upon them as upon
dainties, There being nothing that so glads their hearts, that so opens their
mouths with so much insolency and triumph. And as Luther compares them in this
regard to hogs, so Hos ergo de nostris doloribus suauitatem suae malae linguae
captantes; facile est vt illis canibus co^paremus, st forte in malo
intelligendi sunt, qui lingebant vulnera pauperis illius qui ante ianuam
diuitis iacebat etc. Aug. Epist 137.
Augustine to dogs, namely to the rich gluttons dogs that lay licking, and
sucking Lazarus his sores and wounds. It pleased not those dogs so much to be
licking Lazarus sores as it pleases some men to have their tongues in the
scandalous wounds and sores of such, as profess godliness. As it is the sorrow,
and grief of good hearts, and that which makes them droope and mourn to see
Christ, his Gospel, and truth reproached, and disgraced by scandals; so
contrarily, it is meat and drink to wicked ones, and the very joy of their
hearts, when such events fall out. Proinde charissimi in isto scandalo quo de
Bonifacio presbytero non nulli perturbantur, non vobis dico vt non dolcatis.
Qui enim ista non dolent, non est in eis charitas Christi, qui autem de talibus
gaudent, abundat in eis malignitas diaboli. Aug. Epist. 137.
As such as are filled with the love of Christ, do grieve and mourn, so they
that are filled with the malignity of the Devil, do rejoice in the event of
scandals. Any thing that makes to the disgrace of Gods Church, his cause, and
religion, that sets and puts them into ecstasies of rejoicing. 2. Sam. 1. 20.
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistims rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised
triumph. Why? what was it, that should make them triumph and rejoice? That
verse 19. How are thy mighty fallen? Saul and Jonathan were fallen, not by
scandal, but by the sword, but that fall such as it was, made to the disgrace
of Israel, to the reproach of the God of Israel, and hence their Joy, and
Triumph. Mark by the way, who they are that rejoice in such cases,
uncircumcised Philistims, the sons and daughters of uncircumcised Philistims.
And well becomes it such, and none but such to rejoice. And such do and will
rejoice. Now truly all before considered, we see what little cause they have
to be so ouer-ioyed, there is a great deal of Joy, and merriment more then
there is cause. All considered, we may truly say unto them, as Iam. 4. 9 Let
your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness. Woe unto
the world because ofscandals. When scandals come into the world, a woe comes
unto the world, messengers of vengeance to do executions of Justice are sent
by God. And will the world be so blind and witless, to rejoice and triumph in
that which comes to be their bane and ruin, their sorrow and their smart?
Has the silly beast any cause to leap and friske when he sees the trap set
up and bayted that will ensnare and murder him?

It is probably thought that when Noah fell so foul and shamefully in his
drunkenness that Canaan Chams son first Hebreus etiam id tradebat, and ratione
confirmabat, primum Chanaan verenda aui sui vidisse, suoque solum patri
narrasse tanqua^ de seen ridentem. Theodoret. Quaest. in Gens. 57.
saw his grandfather in that case, and so went and told his father Cham of it:
for else why should Noah curse Cham in his son Canaan rather then in any
other of his sons. He had other sons besides, Gene. 10. 6. And the sons
of Cham, Cush and Mizraim, and Phut and Canaan. Why therefore cursed be Canaan
rather then Cush, Mizraim, or Phut? Like enough that Canaan as the Jews
probably conjecture first espied Noah in that case, and he being an ungracious
youngster, one without all Religion, and possibly an hater of all goodness,
one that had like enough been often sagely admonished, and sharply reproved
by Noah. And little content did the holiness, austeritie and religious
carriage of Noah give either to Canaan or to Cham. Now therefore Canaan when
he sees him in his drunkenness, and in that shameful pickle in his nakedness,
he tells it to his father, and his father after to Shem and Iaphet, and that
with Joy and gladness, with mocking and derision: for otherwise for Canaan to
have seen it occasionally and to have told it his father, or for his father to
have seen it occasionally and have told it his brethren, had been no matter
of offense, but quest: unless they both told it with much joy, and rejoicing.
Like enough Canaan when he first espied it, came running to his father; with
much joy in his face, Oh father I can tell you excellent News, the brauest
News that can be, News that will do you good at the very heart, do but go
along with me; and I will show you such a sight as you never saw. Look where
that old Dotard lies drunk, and in what a base and shameful fashion? This is
he that always telling me of my swearing, censuring me for my want of
religion, this is he that was so holy, so full of his religion, and godliness,
see there how like a beast he lies. And surely if Canaan did tell Cham of it,
Chams fact was exceeding unnaturally villainous. the text says. Genesis 9. 22. And
Cham the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father, not occasionally and
at unawares, so might Shem, or Iaphet have done. But if Canaan did first tell
Cham of it, as very probably he did, then Cham like an ungracious varlet as he
was, could not be content to hear of it, but to rejoice, and glad his heart
the more, he must go see the sight, he must go feed his eyes with it, and
that he might be sure of it, and observing all the several circumstances he
might have the more to make up his mouth. And then after this in scorn, and
derision and with insulting insolency goes and reports it to Shem and Iaphet.
So that what between an ungracious son, and a graceless grandchild there
was sure no small Iubilation, and exultation in Noah's scandal, and drunkenness.
But now as merry and iocund as Cham and Canaan were, let us see a little what
cause they had for it, and consider if their were not that in it, that was
enough to mar their merriment, and to have turned their mirth into mourning.
Alas all considered, full little cause had they to be thus upon their merry
pinnes. It could not be but the scandal of Noah's drunkenness must come, but woe
to Cham and Canaan because of that scandal. God had a purpose to bring a woe,
and a curse upon Cham and Canaan and upon the Canaanites his posterity, that
they should be rooted out, and cut off by the sword of Israel. But how now
should way be made to bring this curse upon the heads of them? Noah shall fall
into a scandal, thereby shall they be occasioned by reason of their naughty
spirits to do as they did, and then no sooner shall Noah awake from his wine
but he shall awake with a solemn curse in his mouth, which should be as the
oracle of God, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren. And now I pray what cause have Sed O miser, Ham quam beat^s e^ qui
nunc d^mi^ inuenisti quod quaerebas venenum scilicet insaluberrima rosa, Luther
in Genesis 9.
Cham, and Canaan so to rejoice at their fathers fall? Woe be to them because
of this offense, because in this offense of his there is a trap, and a snare
set to catch them, and a way preparing to bring a sorrowful curse upon the^
both. And have they then think we any great cause of merrime^t? will any man
that is in his wits rejoice at that event, whose errand purposely is to bring
Gods curse upon him. So little cause had Cham and Canaan to rejoice at Noah's
fall. And every whit, as little cause has the world to rejoice when scandals
come, for then woe comes, God is setting his ginnes, and snares, and traps to
catch some, he sends forth his messengers of wrath, to do severe Justice upon
persons that have been unprofitable under the Gospel.

Suppose God should send the sword amongst men, would men rejoice and be glad
at it? See Ezec. 21. 9. 10. A sword, A sword is sharpened, and also fourbished,
It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, it is fourbisht that it may glitter,
should we then make mirth? I trow not. And why not make mirth in such a case?
Because the sword brought woe and mischief with it, because it came to be
dismal, and fatal, because it was a messenger of wrath and vengeance. And why
then make men mirth at scandals when they come? May we not truly say of this
laughter, Thou art mad, and of this mirth, what does it? Eccl. 2. 2. Come not
scandals with a woe as well as the sword? And it he not as mad that rejoices
at the coming of scandals, as he is that reioyces at the coming of a sword?
Say, a scandal a scandal, it is foul and heinous, it is come with woe, to make
a sore spiritual slaughter, should we then make mirth, and rejoice at it? God
forbid. Woe unto the world because of scandals, and shall we laugh, and sport
with Gods woes? This makes scandals doubly woeful.

That same is good counsel which Solomon gives Prou. 24. 17, 18. Rejoice not
when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbles. If
a man have an enemy that hates him, if any cross or calamity befalls him a
man may not rejoice at it, nor be glad of it not only when he falls, and God
utterly ruins him, but if he do but stumble, and God lay but some smaller
cross upon him. Now mark the reason, least the Lord see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him, and so turn it upon thee. So that
the sum of the reason is, least God should be angry, and his wrath should be
against thee. Mark then; If I may not rejoice at a man's outward stumbling and
fall, then how much less may I rejoice in a man's spiritual stumbling and
falling, how much more will that displease and anger God? If I may not rejoice
at his outward fall least God should be angry, then much less when in another
man's spiritual stumbling and fall God is angry with me, and out of his anger
against me disposes his fall. Little cause have I to rejoice at another
stumbling and falling, when God in wrath disposes of another man's stumbling to
make me stumble, and of another man's fall to make me fall. What cause have I
to rejoice at his stumbling and falling, who therefore stumbles and falls that I
may stumble and fall at him. And thus is the very case here. Such as do give
scandals do stumble that others may stumble at them, do fall that others may
fall at them, Ierem. 64. 12. The mighty man has stumbled against the mighty:
and they are both fallen together. It is spoken of the Egyptians ruined in war.
It may be that one Captain that hated his fellow might see him fall by the
sword of the enemy. Now though he were his enemy that he see fall, had he any
cause to rejoice? Not any at all. Why so? Because Gods providence disposed that
the fall of the first should make way for the fall and ruin of the next. He
that fell first shoud lie in his fellows way as a stumbling block at which
he should stumble and fall also. Thus we saw before that the falls of such as
profess Religion, are but as stumbling blocks in other men's ways to
precipitate them into ruin. And judge then what cause they have to rejoice
thereat. If a man should see a stumbling stone, or a stumbling block laid on
purpose at a pits brinke to topple him headlong over into the pit, would that
man rejoice that that block were laid there? I think not. This is the case
here. Scandals are stumbling blocks laid at hell pits mouth to precipitate,
and headlong worldly wicked men down into hell. So that to rejoice at
scandals is to rejoice at the matter, and instrument of their own sorrow to
rejoice at that which will surely send them to Hell. He that reioyces in such
a case, Much good may his joy do him, I envy no man such joy.

There fell out a scandal in the Church of Corinth, 1. Corinthians* 5. Now whereas
upon the event of it they should have been mourning and heavy, they were in
another vein, Verse 2. 6. They were glorying, and rejoicing. They did not
rejoice in, or at the scandal, that such a man that made such a profession was
fallen, but they rejoiced in their own gifts, in the gifts of their Preachers.
What Church had such Preachers, what people had such gifts? And rejoice they
might in these things, but now it was unseasonable, they should now rather have
been mourning, because of this scandal. Therefore the Apostle sharply takes
them up, Verse 2, 6. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, your
glorying, or rejoicing is not good. If then the Apostle reprooues them thus for
rejoicing when there was a scandal, though they reioiced not at the scandal,
how much more vehemently, and sharply would he have reproved them if they had
rejoiced at, and for the scandal? How much more in this case would he have
said, your rejoicing is not good. Woe to the world because of scandals, and yet
many make these matters of woe laughing matters, but woe unto them that in such
a cause laugh, for they shall weep, and after-time, and after-wit will teach
them, that never had they greater cause of weeping, then even then when they
were upon their merry pinnes, because that at which they made themselves so
merry, came with a woe unto them.

2. Secondly, this lets us see what great cause of fear, warines, and caution
there is in case of scandalous events. Since they be such dangerous events,
let men have a special care they be not ensnared, and entrapped by them. When
scandals fall out, we see there is a trap, and a snare set, there is a
stumbling block laid, therefore it should be a man's wisdom, and watchfulnes
that he be not caught in the trap, that he be not ensnared in the gin, that he
stumble and fall not at the block. We see that God has put that wisdom,
wariness, and shinesse into some creatures, that if a trap, or a snare be set
for them, they are very shie, and jealous of coming near it, or meddling with
the bait, and out of a fear of being taken, they will decline and shun the
snare, though tempted and allured thereto by such baits as otherwise they have
a full good mind unto. Such, much more should be the shinesse, and wary
jealousy of men in the case of scandalous events. Do we see at any time such
as profess religion to fall into any foul enils, then think thus with thy
self. I had thought that when such events had come to pass, the danger of
them had been only a personal danger to the party Delinquent, that it had
been only for the discouerse, and for the disgrace of him, I never dreamt of
any further matter, and therefore I thought I might have made a may game of
them, and have rejoiced and triumphed in their falls. But now I see there is a
further matter in them then I was aware of, I see that they come to pass by
Divine Providence, to bring a woe upon other men's heads. I see they come, that
some may be occasioned to stumble at Religion, at the Law, at the Word, and
from the ancient paths, that hereupon they should resoluedly reject and
renounce saving Religion, and the saving powerful profession thereof to their
own assured ruin for ever. I see now that they be disposed by a Divine
Providence, that some men being occasioned to blaspheme Gods Name, and Truth,
may feel the weight of Gods revenging hand. I now see there is a Divine finger
in them, and that they come to occasion some men to harden their hearts so, as
they may fall into mischeife; and be put out of possibility, and the reach of
mercy. These be great dangers and heavy woes, for I see now they be but
stumbling blocks, at which some men shall break their necks into Hell. I
confess, I did never conceive them to be half so dangerous events, I never
apprehended them such dangerous traps and snares, as now upon the opening of
this point I see they are. Believe it, I see it is good wisdom in such events
to look about me, and to take heed how I come within the reach of these
snares.

Since Divine Providence sets them to make way for Divine vengeance, though
such a man professing religion, have committed a foul scandal, Iuxta semitas
scandalum posuerunt mihi; no^ in semitis sed iuxta semitas. Semitae tuae
praecepta Dei sunt. Illi scandala iuxta semitas posuerunt: tu noli recedere a
semitis and non irrues in scandala: permisit Deus ponere scandala iuxta semitas
vt tu non recedas a semitis. Iuxta semitas scandala posuerunt mihi and quid
restat? Quid remedium inter tanta mala, in istis tentationibus, in istis
periculis? Dixi Domino Deus meus es tu. Aug. Psalm. 139. Ergo cum audis vae
mundo a scandalis, noli terreri, dilige legem Dei, non tibi erit scandalum --
teneamus indeclinabilem confessionem, diligamus legem Dei, vt euadamus quod
dictum est, vae mundo a scandalis. Aug.
yet I will by Gods grace take heed for all that of stumbling at Godliness, or
thinking ere the worse of the profession of Religion; Nay, I will be so far
from flying off, that I will cleave the closer and the faster to God, and the
ways of Truth. I will hold my profession so much the faster; and love that
Word so much the more, that so I may avoid this heavy woe. Do in this case
when scandals fall out, and so snares be set as David did when wicked men hid
a Snare for him, and laid Nets to catch him, Psalm. 140. 5. The proud have hid a
snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the way side, they have
set grinnes for me. And what does David now do in this case? See Verse 6.
Isaid unto the Lord, Thou art my God. So when scandals fall out, Snares and
Nets, and Grinnes are laid: What shall we do then? Shall we distate and
dislike Godliness and Religion? No, by no means, that is the way to be
ensnared and caught; But then specially say unto the Lord, Thou art my God, I
will cleave close to thee and to thy Truth, these events shall not cause me to
dislike of Godliness, and Religion, Say of wisdom, notwithstanding such
events, that she is and shall be thy sister.

Though Illa (scilicet Iobi vxor) scandalum erat sed illi non erat. Aug. in
Psalm. 141.
these persons be scandals, yet shall they be none to me, Non egrediar a
Christo, non incidam in muscipulam. Ibid.
I will not for all this go from Christ, Godliness, and Religion for then am
I caught in the trap. I will take heed for all this of blaspheming God and his
Truth, I will for all this take heed of justifying my self in any evil ways,
and how I harden my self in my sins, for if I do thus, then am I in the
trap, then I stumble at the stumbling block, then has the woe of the scandal
light upon and taken hold of me, God give me grace, and wariness to look to
one.

Because scandalous events are dangerous events, this should be therefore our
wisdom, wariness, and caution when they happen. Surely, the more dangerous
they are, the more cautelous should we be, and in their events be so far from
being staggered, as to stick closer to religion, and to persevere the more
resolutely. Scandala non defutura praedixit quibus fidem nostram exerceri and
porbari oporteret. Aitenim quoniam abundauit iniquitas, refrigescit charitas
multorum, sed continuo subijcit, Quiautem perseuerauit vsque in finem saluus
erit. August. Epist. 136.
Because Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, Math. 24.
12. It so commonly falls out that when iniquities, scandalous iniquities of such
as profess the truth fall out, that many that (it may be) had some good
affection to, and liking of goodness are started, and stumbled at religion, and
their love grows cold. But how should it be with us in such cases? But he
that endures to the end shall be saved, Verse 13. As much as to say, that even
great and foul scandalous inquities abounding, men's love, and liking to
religion should not be abated, but they should for all that cleave close to it,
and hold out and endure to the end, and not be started, and stumbled by
scandals.

Are scandalous events then woeful events? And when scandals come, does woe
come? Then be so wise, though thou could not prevent the scandal, yet to
prevent the woe, that the woe it brings with it, may none of it light upon
thine head. In every scandal there is a guilt, and a woe, a sin, and a curse.
The guilt and the sin is the persons that offends, but the woe, and the curse
falls upon others. Now when scandals do come, so look to thy self, that thou
may have as little share in the curse and the woe, as thou have in the guilt
and the sin. Adders, Snakes, Serpents how shie are men in meddling with them,
and all because they are venomous, and have a sting? Every scandal caries a
sting with it, a woe with it, and when they come they come to sting some men
mortally to the very death.

Scandals to many prove as those fiery Serpents to the Israelites, Numb. 21.
6. And the Lord sent fiery Serpents amongst the people, and they bit the
people, and much people of Israel died. Therefore concerns it men to carry
themselves as warily when they meet with scandals, as if they met with
Serpents, and be as much afraid of a Scandals woe, as of a Serpents sting.
Amongst the extraordinary signs the should follow them that believe, this is
one, that they shall take up Serpents, and they shall not hurt them, Mark 16.
18. Now, such should our wisdom, and warines be, that when these fiery
Serpents come, we might so take them up as they might so not hurt us, that we
might see the Serpent, but not feel the sting.

Scandals are like Ezekiels roll. Ezekiel. 2. 10. There was written therein
lamentations, and mourning, and woe. Ezekiel he was commanded to eat the
roll. Had it been a matter left to his own choice, like enough he would
scarce have meddled with it. See how it fared with him when he had eaten it,
Ezekiel. 3. 14. I went in bitterness; in the heat of my spirit. All Scandals when
they come are roules of woe, it is great wisdom for a man to take heed how he
eats such roules, least a man get away with bitterness in the end. A wise man
sees a plague, and bides himself, but fools go on and are punished, Prou.
22. When the plague comes how wary are men, how cautelous, and careful to
look to themselves? And what makes them so, but only because it is a woeful,
and a fatal disease. By the same reason should men be no less cautelous, and
wisely wary in the event of Scandals, because when they come a woe comes with
them, and therefore should people be as fearful of the woe that comes with a
Scandal, as they would be of the infection that is in the plague.

CHAP. VII.
The sharp and severe Justice of God upon such as give Scandal.
ANd thus have we seen the first Mischief and Woe that comes by scandals,
namely, that which comes to the scandalized World: now follows the second
mischief and woe, that which is to the parties sca^dalizing, and to such as
give the offense, But woe to the man by whom the offense comes, that is, A
necessity there is of scandalous events, but that necessity shall be no excuse,
or protection to the offender, but as there is a woe for the taker, so there is
a woe for the giver of the offense, woe be to him by whom the offense comes.

In which words take notice of.

The severe and smart Justice of God upon all Scandalizers of the Gospel and
Religion. God will assuredly be meet with such persons as break out, and fall
into foul notorious scandalous Actions, and will meet with them sharply, and
severely. Woe unto him by whom the offense comes. God threatens Eli very
sharply, I have told him that I will judge his house for ever, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
But why would God deal so severely? Because (say some Translations) his sons
run into a scandal, and he restrained them not, or frowned not upon them. If
God would punish Eli for not punishing scandals, how much more will he punish
them that give scandals. The practices of Elies sons were monstrous
scandalous, 1. Sam. 2. 22. and what did they by so doing? Because his sons
bringing a curse upon themselves, So Iunius. So that by those Scandals they
brought a curse upon themselves, A woe came upon them by their scandal.

The woe that pursues such is threefold. First, Temporal. Secondly,
Spiritual. Thirdly, An eternal woe.

1. God will pursue such with temporal woes. And they are these three.

1. With a woe upon them in their Name. A good Name is exceeding precious. For
the worth and value of it preferred before Silver, Gold, and great riches,
Prou. 22. 1. For the sweetness, comfort, and contentment of it before sweet
ointment, Eccles. 7. 2. So that for a man to loose his good Name, is as great a
loss as to loose a great estate of great riches. It would be judged a woeful
condition for a man that had a great estate, and abundance of wealth, if Gods
hand should follow him, and consume him, and bring him to nothing. It is no
less a woe to be bereft of ones good Name, and to have the smell of that
ointment taken away. Now in this thing is there a woe to him by whom an offense
and a scandal comes. Not only the sweetness of this ointment is taken away,
but that sweetness is turned into a loathsome and a noisome savor, Eccles.
10. 1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecarie to send forth a
stinking savor, so does a little folly him that is in reputation, for wisdom
and honor. Let a man have the honorable name of a wiseman, yea, of a godly,
religious, zealous man, which give the greatest honor in the world to a man,
yet, if he be guilty but of a little folly, that little folly impeaches his
Name, as much as a dead fly will do a box of ointment. Let ointme^t be never
so sweet and good, yet if but a dead fly, or two be in it, they do not only
take away the sweetness of the ointment, but cause it to stink, and to have a
vile favor, so that a man will not only not smell to it, but stops his nose
at it.

Now if a dead fly will do so much in a box of ointment, what will a dead
dog, or some such filthy carrion do? If a little folly will stain a man's
reputation what will a great deal do? Specially when it is folly in a high
nature, not folly slipped into at unawares, but artificial, and deliberate
folly, folly lain in and practiced a long while, how much more will that
stain, and make a man's name stink? That same speech of Thamars (but that Lust
has no ears) had a great deal of weight in it, when Amnon was bent upon the
commission of a foul scandalous fact, 2. Sam. 13. 13. And as for thee thou
shall be as one of the Fools in Israel. Indeed that had been enough to have
stayed him, if his Lust would have given him the liberty of deliberation. It
was as if she had said. If thou do this thing, woe be unto thee. But what
woe? Now thou art a man of some credit and esteem, but if thou do this
scandalous Act, God will blast thy name and credit, Thou shall be as one of the
Fools of Israel. This is the just hand of God upon such, that they shall be
smitten with the loss of their credit and Name, and be counted of the number
of the Fools in Israel. It is a vile disgrace to be a Fool any where, but to
be a Fool in Israel, to be of vile, and base report, and repute in the Church
of God, this is an heavy punishment. Amnon was afterward stabd by Absoloms
Servants, had Amnon had but any sense left after that sin of his, the Sword
of Absoloms Servants could not be so cutting, and so piercing, as was this,
There goes Amnon that base man, that vile person, There goes one of the Fools
in Israel. When Amnon could not stir, nor be seen in the streets, could not
be occasionally mentioned in ordinary talk, but one or other would be
throwing the mire of his base action in his face, and the mention of him had
been as the stirring of an unsavory excrement, What He? Ah vile man, ah
wretched fellow; Why, these things were far more keen and cutting, then the
very Swords that murdered him.

We may see the truth of this, Mal. 2. 8, 9. The Priests were scandalous, and
by their scandalous courses had caused many to stumble at the Law. Well woe be
to them, God would meet with them for it. What woe does God bring upon them?
Therefore have I also made you contemptible, and base before all the people.
God brought a woe upon them in their credit and esteem, that they were vile in
the esteem of all, one and another, good and bad. And herein the Lord serves
men but justly, and pays them with their own coin, By scandals Gods Name is
defiled, Gods Name disgraced, and blasphemed, therefore for their scandals God
smites them in their Names, that in the woe lighting upon their Names, they may
see what it was to dishonor, and pollute the Name of God; God will pollute
their Names that pollute his, and will cause that pearl of theirs to be trod
in the dirt, and mire. Yea, God so takes to heart the dishonor of his Name by
scandals, that though there may be true Repentance, yet still some stain may
lie upon the Name. David made his peace with God, and truly repented, so as the
Prophet tells him his sin was forgiven him, and yet 1. King. 15. 5. after
David is dead and gone, that fact of his is mentioned as some blurre. David did
that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, save only in the matter of Vriah
the Hittite. David did other things that were sinful, the Numbering of the
people, the giving of Mephibosheths Lands to Ziba, why then says the text,
save in the matter of Vriah? Because though the other were sins, yet they
were not scandalous sins. The other was a scandalous sin, and a scandalous
sin is of that heinous nature, that though the guilt be taken away, yet after
the wound has done bleeding and is closed up, and healed, there will remain
some skarre in the Name, and credit. So that of foul scandalous offenders it
may be said as of the Adulterer, Prou. 6 33. A wound, and dishonor shall he
get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. So long as he lives his
reproach will live with him, yea and out-liue him too, his reproach will last
as long as his memorial. And as Jeroboam is seldom named in Scripture without
dishonor, Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, so such seldom be mentioned,
but with the remembrance of their sca^dal, oh that was he that made such a
profession of Religion, and yet playde that heinous pranke. We have a cause,
Deuteronomy. 25. 9, 10. that when a man refused to do a brothers office, his brothers
wife must loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, And his name
shall be called in Israel the house of him that has his shoe loosed. Now all
this was great disgrace, and matter of great reproach, But what was this to the
reproach that comes by a scandal? How much more reproach is it to have all men
ready to spit in ones face, to have it said, the house of him that had his
conscience loosed, the man who deserved to have his face spit in, because he
occasioned so many to spit on, and spit at religion and the Gospel.

2. A second temporal woe which God will bring upon them, and follows upon
the former is eiection and casting of them out of the society and communion of
Gods people. That which David complains of as injustice in his friends, shall be
their righteous portion. Psalm. 31 11, 12. I was a reproach amongst all mine
enemies, but specially amongst my neighbors, and a fear to mine acquaintance,
they that did see me without fled from me, I am forgotten as a dead man out of
mind, I am like a broken vessel. Not only shall their enemies despise, and
scorn them, but their neighbors, not ordinary neighbors, but their familiar
acquaintance shall discard them, yea they shall be afraid and ashamed of them,
and shall shun all society, and converse with them, as judging it a matter
of discredit to be seen in their company. They shall be as dead men out of
mind, nay worse, for dead men may be mentioned with honor and regard, but
they shall be as dead men in regard of society, their society no more desired
then the society of a dead man, which every man abhorres. They are like a
broken vessel. A vessel whilst it is whole is useful, and desirable, and
whilst whole, use is continually made of it, it is called for, enquired for,
and is at every turn in request. But now let such a vessel be broken, it is
thrown by, thrown out of doors, cast on the dunghill, none once meddles with
it, nor looks after it. So whilst such persons are whole vessels, they are
vessels of use, and honor they have the honor of communion and society, but
if once such vessels get a knock, fall into scandal, and take such foul falls
as that they break their credits and their consciences, and so become broken
vessels, they are then cast out of the hearts, out of the society, out of the
fellowship of Gods people. See how these go together Ierem. 22. 28. Is he a
vessel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed.
So that when a man becomes a vessel wherein there is no pleasure, then he is
cast out. So was Coniah. And such is the case of scandalous persons, they
become vessels wherein is no pleasure, and so are cast out. That same is
threatened as an heavy woe to Israel. Hos. 8. 8. Now shall they be amongst the
Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no pleasure. When they were in their own
country, they were desirable vessels, they were as vessels of silver and gold,
as vessels of plate that are for service, set upon the table, had in great
account, and precious esteem. But, now they should be carried amongst the
Gentiles, and there should be as vessels wherein is no pleasure, that is, as
base abject vessels, put to the most sordid services, such as God would make
Moab to be. Psalm. 60. Moab my washpot, olla lotionis meae: Now this was an
heavy woe denounced against Israel, that he should be amongst the Gentiles as
a vessel wherein there is no pleasure. If to be such a vessel amongst the
Gentiles be a woe, and an heavy thing, what then is it to be such a vessel
amongst the Israel of God, and amongst his people, to be a reiectitious refuse
vessel, that a man has no pleasure to meddle with-al? Salt is good, that is,
whilst it is sauory, but if the salt have lost its savor, then it is cast out,
no longer set upon the table, no nor suffered in the house but it is cast unto
the dunghill. A scandalous person is salt, that has lost his savor, unsavory
salt, not only wanting good but having a stinking savor, and therefore fit for
the stinking dunghill, until his extraordinary, and deep humiliation have
brought him to recover his savor again. Such is the case of scandalous ones.
It is Gods Justice, and it is Gods command it should be so. If a man walk
disorderly he is thus to be dealt withal. 2. These. 3. 6. We command you in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every
brother that walks disorderly, and that disorderly walking, what it is, we see
in the words following. It was living idely. Now if men must withdraw
themselves out of the company of Idle disorderly persons, how much more then
should they withdraw themselves from such as be scandalous? What is disorder
to scandal? Therefore mark how punctual the Apostle is, Romans 16. 17. Now I
beseech you brethren mark (...), those that cause or commit scandals, or
offenses. And to what purpose should they mark them? That they might decline
and shun their company, Mark them, and Avoid them. And therefore we see the
Apostles severity, in the exercise of discipline in the case of the Incestuous
Corinthian; In the name of God he does excommunicate and cast him out not only
from society in holy things, but makes a rule upon it; that if any that
profess religion live in any scandalous course, that they should not afford
him civil familiar converse. 1. Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is called a
brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an Idolater, or arayler, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one no not to eat. It is not to be
denied but upon good and sound evidences of true repentance a broken vessel
may be mended, unsavory salt may regaine his savor, and so there may be an
healing of their error, and a receiving of such into public and private
communion again, for I press not Marcianus se Nouatiano co^iunxit tenens
haereticae praesumptionis durissimam prauitatem: vt seruis Dei poenitentibus,
and dolentibus, and ecclesiam lachrymis, and gemitu, and dolor pulsantibus
diuinae pietatis paternae solatia, and subsidia claudantur, nec ad fouenda
vulnera admittantur vulnerati, sed sine spe pacis, and co^municationis relicti
ad luporum rapinam, and praedam diaboli proijciantur. Cyp. Epist. 67.
Nouitian rigidity, but yet till such repentance do appear, all scandalous
persons though not touched with Church censures are to stand excommunicate out
of the hearts, and familiar fellowship of al Gods people. What difference
between a leprous and a scandalous person, and the leper during his leprosy,
till he were cleansed was to be shut up, and kept apart. If thy right hand
scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee, Math. 18. 8. This has a
truth in this case. If a man that has bin dear and precious fall into
scandal, yet spare him not but let him be cut off, and cast out of society til
he be brought to such truth of repe^ta^ce as becomes Adeo non pudet aut piget
admissorum, and tamen audent venire in ecclesiam sanctorum, audent missceri
gregi Dominico. Tales interdum tolerat ecclesia ne prouocati magis etiam
perturbent populum Dei. Sed quid prodest, non eijci caetu piorum, si merueris
eijci? Nam eijci remedium est, and gradus ad recuperandum sanitatem: eiectionem
meruisse summa malorum est. Ac frustra miscetur caetui sanctorum etc. Cypr. de
dupl. Martyr.
And how-euer men fallen into some foul scandal may escape the public
censure of eiection, and excommunication, and by intrusion have fellowship in
holy duties of worship yet little comfort shall such men's consciences have, so
long as public satisfaction is not given to the Church of God, for what shall
it profit a man, not to be cast out of the congregation of the faithful, so
long as he deserves to be cast out: for for a man to be cast out, is a remedy
and a degree toward the recovery of spiritual health. But to deserve casting
out (as all scandalous persons do that will not, and do not subject to Gods
ordinance of public satisfaction and confession) is the height of all evil.

Such was the ancient Nam cum in minoribus delictis poenitentia agatur iusto
tempore, and exomologesis fiat inspect a vita eius qui poenitentiam agit, nec
ad communicationem quis venire possit, nisi prius illi ab episcopo, and clero
manus fuerit imposita, quanto magis in his grauissimis, and extremis delictis
ante omnia and moderate secun dum disciplina^ Domini obseruari oportet? Nemo
abhinc importuno te^pore acerba poma d^cerpat, nemo naue^ sua^ quassata^ and
perforata^ fluctibus, priusqua^ diligenter refecerit, in altu^ denuo committat,
Nemo tunicam scissam accipere and induere properet, nisi eam abartifice perito
sartam viderit, and a fullone curata^ receperit. Cypr. Epist. 12.

Legimus literas -- quod Victori Presbytere antiqua^ poenitentiam plenam
egisset, temere Therapius collega noster immaturo tempore and praepropera
festinatione pacem dederit. Quae res nos satis mouit, recessum esse a decreti
nostri auctoritate vt ante legitimum, and plenum tempus satisfactionis, and
sine petitu and conscientia plebis -- pax ei concederetur. Cypr. Epist. 59.


severity of discipline, that such as had given sca^dal were neither suddenly
nor easily readmitted into Communion, but there was first public confession,
and a time it seems of the trial of their repentance before they had a fresh
admitta^ce into Church Fellowship. Green apples too soon gathered, they
thought, might set ones teeth on edge, and it was dangerous to set a ship to
sea that had bin cracked, and flawed, before it were thoroughly repaired again.

Yea and it was strange to see the O si posses frater charissime istic
interesse ^um praui isti and peruer si de schismate reuertantur, videres quis
mihi labor sit persuadere patientiam fratribus nostris vt animi dolor s^pito
recipiendis malis curandisque consenti^nt*vix plebi persuadeo, imo extorqueo,
vt tales patiantur admitti. Cypr. Epist. 55.
ancient zeal of the people against such with how much ado they suffered such
as had given scandal, and had not yet given sufficient evidence of their
repentance, to be readmitted and received into the Church again.

Nay further we shall find that in Inter Christianae religionis professores
ordinati sunt aliquot qui inquirunt in vias and mores accedentium, vt non
concessa facientes candidatos religionis arceant a suis conuentibus etc:
peccantes, praecipue libidine contaminatos e sua republic a reijciunt nostri.
rursum vero resipiscentes haud secus qua^ rediuiuos recipient tandem, ea tamen
condition vt quonia^ lap si su^t, excludantur in posteru^ ab omnibus
dignitatibus and magistratibus ecclesiasticis. Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 3.
Origens time there were some appointed to look into the ways and manners of
the people professing christian religion, that if they carried themselves
offensiuely, they might be kept out from the public meetings. And further if
any were found sinning scandalously, especially, if defiled with lust and
uncleanness, they cast them out of the Church. And when upon their repentance
they were received again yet was it with this condition, that because they had
fallen into scandal, they should be excluded for ever after from all
ecclesiastical dignity and government. And we so that in See Cyprian Epist.
64. 68.
Cyprians time, also it went for good discipline, that a Bishop that had fallen
into Idolatry, and defiled himself with that scandalous sin though he might
communicate as Lay persons, yet might he have no more to do with Episcopal or
Ministerial function. And this Discipline of theirs wants not foundation in
Scripture; It seems to be the same thing that God himself constituted, Ezekiel
44. 12, 13. Because they ministered unto them before their Idols, they shall
bear their iniquity, and they shall not come near unto me to do the office
of a Priest unto me, nor to come near to any of mine holy things in the most
holy place, but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they
have committed. Upon their Repentance they were received again to some other
places, Ver. 10. 11. but they must meddle no more after that scandal of
Idolatry with the Priesthood. And this Discipline did Josiah put in practice,
2. King. 23. 9. Some privileges upon their Repentance were granted unto the
Priests of the high places, that had defiled themselves with Idolatry, but the
office of Priesthood they were quite excluded from it. And this was the ancient
Discipline against the giuers of offense, and indeed such zeal, and such
severity it did concern, and ever will concern the Church of God to show to
scandalous delinquents. Facility, and an over easy readiness to comply with
such, breeds a fresh scandal to the world, and gives them just cause to Et
quoniam and^o, Charissimifratres, impudentia vos quorunda^ premi, and
verecundiam vestram vim pati, oro vos quibus possum precibus vt eua^gelij
memores -- vos quoque solicit et caute petentiu^ desideria ponderetis, vtpote
amici domini, and cum illo post modum indicaturi, inspiciatis and actu^ and
opera and merita singuloru^, ipsorum quoque delictorum genera and qualitates
cogitetis, ne si quid abrupte and indigne vel a vobis promissum vel a nobis
factu^ fuerit, apud Gentiles quoque ipsos ecclesia nosira erubescere incipiat.
Cypr. Epist. 11.
reproach the Church, and opens the mouth of iniquity to say, you be all
such; Whereas discommoning, and discarding such from our familiar and private
society, and when need and power is, from communion in holy things, gains
the Church a great deal of honor and stops the mouth of iniquity from
calumniating Gods people to be favorers, and countenancers of such persons.
Such will be pressing in, to gain their credit and to recover their respect,
but when such suddenly and easily get into credit it is no whit for the honor
and credit of the Church.

God will bring woes upon them in their outward state, their peace, their
posterity. Elies sons run into foul Scandals, 1. Sam. 2. 22. It was
scandalous for private persons, much more for Priests to be unclean, and
adulterous. It was scandalous to have done so unclean an act in any place, but
to do it in a scared place with women coming thither upon devotion, this was
egregiously scandalous. God therefore takes them to do, and does execution
upon them, and cuts them both off in one day by the Sword of the Philistims,
God brought the woe of the Sword upon them. Nay, when they ran into Scandal
because Eli did not restrain them, see what God threatens upon his Posterity,
1. Sam. 2. 36. that he would plague them with such base beggerie and misery
that they should beg their bread. If God thus punish him for not restraining,
how much more would he have punished him for the committing of a Scandal? If it
go thus hard with Eli that restraines not, how hard will it go with Hophni
and Phinehas that commit the scandal?

We cannot have a more pregnant and full example in this kind, then David
himself. He after his scandal committed was truly penitent, the guilt of his
sin pardoned, a solemn absolution and discharge given him by the Prophet.
And yet for all this we shall see how terribly this woe pursued him in
temporal crosses in this kind. First, God smites his child with death, then
follows his daughter Thamars defilement by her brother Amnon, then Amnons
murder, then the treason of Absalom, in which the hand of God was exceeding
smart, God turns him out of house and home. Whose heart would not earne, and
bleed to see his doleful departure from Jerusalem, 2. Sam 15. 30. And David
went up by the ascent of mount Oliuet, and wept as he went up, and had his head
covered, and he went barefoote, and all the people that was with him covered
every man his head and they went up weeping, as they went up. Who could have
beheld so sad and so woeful a spectacle with dry eyes? But this was not all,
his life is endangered, his Concubines defiled in open view on the house top.
And what think we was the ground of all this? For the child's death we see, 2.
Sam. 12. 13, 14. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die, howbeit
because by this thy deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme the child also that is borne unto thee shall surely die. It
is very much that fasting and praying can do, it can cast out devils, This
kind goes not out but by fasting and praying, Mark. 9. 29. And yet fasting and
praying could not keep off this woe that David's scandal brings upon him in the
childs death, woe unto David by whom that offense came, therefore shall his
child die. And for all the rest of all those woeful sorrows 2. Sam. 12. 9.
10. 11. 12. we see the cause of them all, these woes were upon David for his
scandal. And if Gods woe in these temporal, and outward calamities will thus
pursue and follow a repe^ting, and an humbled scandalous offender, how much
more will that hand of God pursue that man, upon whose scandal follows no
Repentance and Humiliation. If David the man after Gods own heart must not
escape, what then shall others look for? If a beloved David shall have his
teeth on edge with his own sour grapes of his scandalous courses, who then
shall think to go scotfree that is guilty of scandalous transgressions? what
a sure and irresistible woe is that which Repentance it self cannot keep off
from a man's children, his life, person and goods? And thus temporal woe is to
him by whom offenses come.

2. God will pursue, and pinch such as give offense with spiritual woe. God
will fill such men's hearts, specially if they belong to him, with much
spiritual woe, and bitterness of soul. He will awaken conscience to smite,
pinch and gripe them at the heart; He will so load, and burden their
consciences that in the anguish and bitterness of their spirits they shall be
forced to cry out, woe is me vile wretch that I was borne, that ever I
breathed thus to dishonor God. It is true that there is an happiness in this
woe, and it is singular mercy that men are not seared, and hardened in their
sin, but yet for all that there it a great deal of smart, and sorrow, and a
great deal of woeful bitterness in the work of Repentance after a scandalous
fall, And before such shall recover their peace with God, he will give them
many a woeful gripe of Conscience, and many a bitter portion to drink. We
have an example of it in the Incestuous Corinthian. He indeed recovered his
peace, and his pardon, but yet how woeful was his case before it was done. 2.
Cor. 2. 7. Least such an one should be swallowed up of over much sorrow. See
then in what a woeful plight he was even in a sea and gulf of sorrow, ready
to be absorpt, and swallowed up therein. The Lord therefore plu^ged him into
the deeps of bitter sorrow of spirit, and plunged him so deep as that he was
ready to despair, and to be wholly cast away. Thus God would make his soul
smart, and his heart ache for this scandal of his, would make him feel the
truth of Christ's saying, woe unto him by whom the offense comes. It was David's
case before him. When he had fallen into scandal, in the matter of Bathsheba,
and Vriah, before he comes to a redintegration of his former condition, God
brings him upon the rack. Ps. 51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, therefore that was taken away and gone, that sweet sunshine was
ouerclouded, yea that sun was dreadfully eclipsed, and how fearful such
eclipses be, they know that see them. It is no less woe for the present to
loose the Joy of ones salvation, then to loose salvation it self. But that was
not all. See Verse 8. make me to hear joy, and gladness that the bones which
thou have broken may rejoice. God therefore not only took away his joy, but
God brake the bones of him. What an exquisite torture is the punishment of the
wheel, when a Malefactor has his bones broken one to day, another to morrow?
Such is the woe that God will bring upon scandalous ones, specially if they
belong to him, He will bring them to the wheel, he will crack and break
their bones, he will have them to the rack, and fill their consciences with so
much anguish, that they shall undergo as much woe as if all the bones in their
bodies were broken in pieces, That the bones which thou have broken. Yea their
bones shall be so broken, that they will not quickly, nor suddenly be healed
again. Nathan in the Name of God did that which one would have thought might
have set David's bones and given them ease, Thy sin is forgiven thee, and yet
we see after this he cries out of his bones, It lay in his bones still.

When men after Sca^dals are ouerquickly whole again, cranke, and jolly, it is
to be feared, their bones were never broken to the purpose. Well thus we see
what a woe there is for giuers of offense, woe be to the man whose bones God will
break, and therefore woe to him by whom the offense comes. If he belong to
God, God will break his bones, if he belong not to God, but were an hypocrite,
God will the^ happily harde^ his heart that he may break his neck.

3. God will bring eternal woe upon them. That is, if the person falling into
scandal did before his scandal but act a part and personate religion, and were
no better then an Hypocrite, then though possibly he may escape some of the
former woes, yet God will pay him with advantage, and make up all forbearance
with doubling, and trebling the principal. The greater his fall was here, the
deeper shall his fall be into Hell. Vniuscuiusque casus tanto maioris est
criminis, quanto prius quam caderet maioris erat virtutis. Bern. de interior.
Dom. cap. 50.
The higher the place is from which a man falls, the deeper a man plunges into
the pit of mire into which he falls. A man that makes profession of Religion,
is set higher then another man is, and if he profess in hypocrisy, and fall
into scandal, he by reason of the height from whence he falls, falls deeper
into wrath and hell, then another does. At this happily our Savior aims,
Matthew. 18. 6. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

A man so used were but in an ill case, and yet it is a better case then the
case of some scandalous person. A man cast into the Sea in any place of it is
but in an ill case, for suppose he be not drowned, yet will he be shrewdly
doused, and cannot but be in danger. But cast a man into the depth of the Sea,
into the huge Deepes which cannot be bottomed and there is but little hope of
such a man's life. But yet such a man may escape. Jonas was cast into the deep,
in the midst of the seas, the deptb closed him round about, Ion. 2. 3. 5. and
yet he escaped. A man by providence may meet with a planke or a piece of a
mast in such vast depths and possibly may escape. But take a man and cast him
not only into the Sea, but into the depth of the Sea, and not only into the
depth, but cast him in with an heavy stone, specially a millstone, specially
with such an heavy millstone as cannot be turned about with a man's hand, but
must be turned about with the strength of a beast (and such a millstone some
think is here intended (...), mola asinaria, such a millstone as is turned
about by the help of an Ass) and let him be cast into the depth of the Sea
with it (as Hierome says some Malefactors in those Countries used to be
served) and what possibility is there to escape drowning.

Now this is the case of scandalous Hypocrites. If scandalous persons be
Hypocrites then will their judgment, and woe be great, and inevitable. Their
scandal is a great heavy millstone about their neck, with this millstone God
casts them not into the shallow, but into the depth, the gulf of Hell. And
this millstone sinkes them, and this millstone holds them down for ever rising
again. Milstones do not make surer work for the drowning, then Scandals do
for the damning of personating gross Hypocrites.

CHAP. VIII.
Why God is so smart, and so severe in his Justice against those by whom
Scandals come.
WE have seen how sharp, and severe the Justice of God is in punishing such
by whom offenses come. Consider we a little, as we have seen the severity of
his Justice, so the Justice of his severity, and why God does deal thus
roundly with offenders in that kind. I conceive there be four special
reasons of Gods so dealing.

1. Because by Scandals Gods holy and glorious Name is polluted, and
blasphemed, and so God in a high measure wronged. God is a jealous God, and he
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, that is, he will
surely meet with, and be revenged upon such as do it. It is a greater matter
to pollute, and profane Gods Name then it is to take his name in vain. If
therefore God will deal so severely with them that do but take his Name in
vain, how much more will he make them smart that do pollute his Name, and
cause it to be blasphemed by the malignant enemies of his truth. The defiling
of Gods Name is an heinous thing, we see how sharp God was with Moses and
Aaron, they must both die, and not come into the Land of Canaan. But what was
the reason? See Deuteronomy. 32. 51. Because ye trespassed against me amongst the
children of Israel. But what was that trespass? Because ye sanctified me not
in the midst of the children of Israel. And must they die, and not enter
Canaan because they sanctified not, what if they had polluted his Name? If it
be so heinous not to sanctify, what is it to pollute, and defy Gods Name? And
this sin is Numquid dici de Hunis potest. Ecce qua les sunt qui Christiani
dicuntur? Numquid de Saxonibus aut Francis? Ecce quae faciunt, qui se asserunt
Christi esse cultores? Numquid propter Maurorum efferos mores lex sacro-sancta
culpatur? Nunquid Scytharum aut Gepidarum inhumanissimi ritus in maledictum.
atque blasphemia^ nomen Domini Saluatoris inducunt? -- Hoc autem, vt dixi,
malum peculialiter tantum Christianerum est, quia per eos tantummodo
blasphematur Deus, qui bona dicunt, and mala faciunt. Salu. de Prou. Dei lib. 4.
proper and peculiar to the Professors of the Name of God, and Christ to defile
his Name.

Other men sin in those evils which they commit, but yet this sin they are
not guilty of. They only commit the sin of polluting Gods Name, that do
profess his Name. This is properly a Church-sinne, and befalls not such as are
without. When men take the Name of God, and the profession of Religion upon
them, and yet live lewdly and loosely, or fall into any scandalous practices,
they do thereby defile the Name of God, and pollute it. We find the people
charged with this sin, Ezekiel. 36. 20. That they profaned or polluted Gods
holy Name amongst the Heathen whither they went. Now how could they pollute
Gods Name? That they did by that which follows in the same Verse. They
profaned my Name amongst the Heathen when they said of them, These are the
people of the Lord, and are gone out of his Land. The Jews where ever they
came professed themselves the people of God; that they had the God of Heaven
for their God, and that they had his Law, and Oracles, and that they were an
holy people, near unto him, hereupon the Heathen looked for some singular thing
from them, singular holiness in their life's, singular fidelity in their
dealings, etc. But when they observed their life's, many of them to be loose
and scandalous, they began presently to open their mouths against God, and
against his Truth, oh these be the people of the Lord, these be your holy
people, that worship such an holy God, that have such an holy Law. No marvel
their God, their Law, their Religion is so holy, for ought we fee by these
men's life's, there is no more in their God, and Religion then in ours. Thus
spoke the Heathen when they saw the wicked life's and practices of some of the
people of the Jews. And indeed it is an Heathenish trick in such cases to
fall foul upon God and Religion, It is heathenish language to say, These be
the people of the Lord, and this is their religion and their zeal.

And thus by their evil life's occasioning the heathen to blaspheme God, and to
throw the filth of their base actions upon Him and his Name, they thereby
polluted his Name.

Thus was Gods Name polluted by the Spaniards among the Indians: When they
first came amongst the West Indians, the people enquired of them whence they
came, and what they were? They told them that they were come down from
Heaven, and that they were the sons of the God of Heaven. Whereupon the poor
Saluages observing their covetousness, cruelty, and uncleanness, answered,
that he could not be a good God that had such evil sons, and so was Gods
Name polluted by their polluted life's. Sicut enim nomen Dei glorificatur vita
piorum hominum in quibus ipse per spiritum suum operatur quic quid faciunt
boni: ita e diuerso polluitur and infamatur malefactis eorum qui se Dei
cultores profitentur. Cypr. de dupl. Mart. Postremo sancta a Christianis si
erent, si Christus sancta docuisset. Aestimari itaque de cultoribus suis potest
ille qui colitur. Quomodo enim bonus magister est, cuius tam malos videmus esse
discipulos? Ex ipso enim Christiani sunt, ipsum audiunt, ipsum legunt. Promptum
est omnibus Christi intelligere doctrinam. Vide Christianos, quid agant, and
euidenter potest de ipso Christo sciri, quid doceat. Mimesis Pagan. Salu. de
Prouiden. lib* ^
For look as an holy and honest conversation sanctifies, and glorifies the
Name of God, 1. Pet. 2. 12. I beseech you abstain from fleshly lusts, Having
your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that when they speak against
you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold
glorify God in the day of visitation; So contrarily, Gods Name is unhallowed,
and polluted by the evil and scandalous life's of such as profess his Name.
When Gods Name is blasphemed it is polluted, Gods Name is blasphemed when the
Truth is blasphemed. The truth comes to be blasphemed by reason of the evil
life's of such as profess the Truth, 2. Pet. 2. 2 And many shall follow their
pernicious ways by reason of whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed,
(...). Now God will not put it up at men's hands that occasion others to pollute
his Name. God is very tender of the glory of his Name. He has prescribed,
Hallowed be thy Name, to be the leading petition in our Prayers, and if
therefore the glory of his Name be any way impeached by men's scandalous
actions, he will repair and make his glory whole by his Justice upon their
persons who have by scandal wronged it. When men do pollute Gods Name, God who
is always ready to vindicate his own glory, will sanctify his own Name,
and rescue it from the pollutions, and prophanations wherewith scandalous
persons have defiled it.

That passage is worthy our observation, Ezekiel. 36. 20. 23. When they entered
unto the Heathen whither they went, they profaned mine holy Name: And I will
sanctify my great Name which was profaned amongst the Heathen, which they
have profaned in the midst of them, and the Heathen shall know that I am the
Lord, says the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
See then that God will sanctify his Name when men pollute it, and he will one
way or other take order to wash off that pollution, wherewith men have defiled
it. God would be sanctified in them before the eyes of the Heathen.

Now Gods Name is sometimes sanctified in his works of Mercy, as Ezekiel. 20.
41. -- and sometimes in the works of Justice. Ezekiel. 38 22, 23. Now though in
that forenamed place it is spoken of sanctifying his polluted Name by his
works of Mercy in the eyes of enemies, yet it is also true that God will
sanctify his polluted Name in the eyes of Adversaries by his works of
Justice, That is, he will do such exemplarie Justice, and such smart woe upon
such as by their scandals polluted his Name, that he will recover himself as
much glory in their punishment as they lost him by their sin, and so
remarkeably will he do it in enemies eyes, that they who before opened their
mouths to dishonor his Truth, shall now open their mouths to acknowledge his
glorious Justice, and by that Justice be drawn at least to a secret
acknowledgement, that this Religion and this profession is the truth, the
Scandalizers whereof God does so seuerly punish.

This we shall see in David, 2. Sam. 12. 14. There was no remedy, David
though fast and pray, and seek the child's life, yea though David have
repented, and Nathan have pronounced the pardon of his sin, yet no remedy
but the child must die. Quam grauis autem and piaculi singularis malum sit
nomen diuinitatis in blasphemiam Gentium dare etiam David beatissimi exemplo
edo^emur qui -- cum aeternam pro offensionibus suis poenam per vnam
confessionem meruerit euadere: huius tamen criminis veniam non per poenitentiam
patrocinantem potuit impetrare. Nam cum ei proprios errores confitenti Nathan
Propheta dixisset, transtulit Deus peccatum tuum, non morieris, subdidit statim
veruntamen quia blasphemare fecisti inimicos Dei propter verbum hoc filius qui
natus est morietur, and quid post haec? Deposito scilicet diademate, proiectis
gemmis -- fletu madidus, cinere sordidatus vitam paruuli sui tot lamentationum
suffragijs peteret, and pijssimum Deum tanta precum ambitione pulsaret, sic
rogans and obsecrans obtinere non potuit, ex quo intelligi potest quod nullam
penitus maioris piaculi crimen est quam blasphemandi causam Gentibus dare.
Salu. lib. 4. de Prouid.
What was the reason? Because by his scandal he had given great occasion to
the enemies of God to blaspheme. His scandal was great. Any scandal gives
occasion of blaspheming, but great scandals give great occasion of blaspheming,
therefore as he by his great Scandal has polluted Gods Name, so God by his
great Justice would sanctify his name in the eyes of those enemies that had
blasphemed.

We find a Law Deuteronomy. 22. 19. that a man in that case specified in the text,
should be sharply amearced, and a good round fine set upon his head, and the
reason is given because he has brought up an evil Name upon a virgin of
Israel. Now in cases of scandal there is an evil Name brought up not upon a
virgin of Israel, but upon the God of Israel, upon his Gospel, and truth. If
then God would have a man so severely punished, that should bring up an evil
name upon a Virgin of Israel, how much more will God himself set smart fines
upon their heads as bring, as do occasion the bringing up of an evil name
upon the Religion, and the God of Israel. Amongst men, how ever other offenses
escape, yet how great is the severity of the Law in punishing Scandalum
Magnatum. Now in scandalous offenses of Professors, there is a right Scandalum
Magnatum, in regard of the wrong, and injury that Gods great Name suffers.

No marvel, that God is so severe in punishing scandals. For where God suffers
greatest wrong, there Justice requires that men undergo seuerest punishments.
Now no sins do God greater wrong then scandals. Other sins, and other men's
sins are breaches of his Law, and pollutions of men's Consciences, but yet are
not pollutions of Gods Name. But scandals, and the notorious offenses of
Professors are not only breaches of Gods Law, and pollutions of the offenders
Consciences, but are pollutions of Gods Name. What wonder then, that such
severity follows scandals? It it but Justice that where the guilt is (...).
Basil. de Bapt. lib. 1. q. 10.
double in the offense, there should be a double, and a proportionable measure
of punishment.

Now in every scandal there is a double guilt.

First, the guilt of breaking of Gods Law, and polluting a man's own
Conscience. And secondly, the guilt of profaning, and polluting Gods Name. And
this latter is the far greater, and more provoking guilt. God will worse
brook the pollution of his Name, then the breach of his Law. And therefore it
is a sure truth that he that commits a greater sin which yet is secret,
shall be less punished then he which commits a smaller sin, which breaking
out proves scandalous. We have an instance, Numb. 11. 21. compared with Deuteronomy.
32. 51. We have in these two places two offenses of Moses his committing. Let
a man weigh them together, and questionless in their own nature compared,
that offense Numb. 11. 21, 22. was the greater, there is in it not only
unbelief as in the other, but a kind of murmuring contest with God, as it
were to his face. The latter has reference to that History, Numb. 20. 10.
where we find Moses to contest with some impatience, and unbelief with the
people. Is it not a greater sin to murmr and contest in unbelief and
impatience with God, then to grow into passion with a rebellious people? Is it
not a greater matter to have ones spirit stirred at God, then with sinful men?
Consider both passages together, and any one will judge the first miscarriage
in it own nature the greatest. And yet all that God says to the first is
this, Is the Lords hand now waxed short? Thou shall see now whether my Word
shall come to pass unto thee or not. What could have been said less? But now
come to the other which in it self seems nothing so great, and see what
follows upon it. Because ye believed me not to sanctify me in the eyes of
the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the
Land. Numb. 20. 12. But shall die because ye trespassed, and sanctified me
not in the midst of the children of Israel. Now then here may be a question,
why the lesser sin has the sharper reproof and the greater punishment.

Is it equal dealing to wink at and pass by a greater, and to be so severe
in the lesser? Yes most equal, for though the former sin in it own nature
were greater, yet that was happily (...) Isid pelus. lib. 5. Epist. 161.
private between God and Moses, and so no scandal in it, but the latter was
public before all the people, and so a scandal in it, God not sanctified, his
Name dishonored, and for the scandal sake the punishment so smart in this
rather then in the other.

A small sin scandalous has a greater punishment then a great sin close,
and secret, because there is in the scandal a pollution of Gods Name, an
Impeach of his honor, besides the guilt of the breach of his Law. So then
therefore is God so severe in punishing scandals, because God is more wronged
by them then by simple sin, because they pollute his sacred Name.

2. God is thus severe in the punishing of scandals, because soulebloud is not
cheap with God. They that spill the blood of souls shall pay full dearly for
it, God will require it at their hands. Now in the commission of scandalous
sins there is a great deal of spiritual Si quis simplici mente and
desiderio veniat ad Ecclesiam vt prosiciat, vt melior fiat: iste si videat nos
qui multo iam tempore in side stetimus, vel non recte agentes, vel cum
offendiculo loquentes efficimur nos illi lapsus ad peccatum, Cum autem
peccauerit trueidatus est, and sanguis animae eius prostuit, omnis ob eo virtus
vitalis abscedit -- Scandalizati animae sanguis effunditur cum ceciderit in
peccatum and propterea dixit, quia requi retur sanguis eius a fratre, frater
tuus est qui fudit sanguinem tuum. Origin. in Psalm. 36. hom. 3.
bloodshed, and murder. Paul speaking of Scandals of an inferior nature, such
as are given to weak brethren in the use of Christian liberty, in the use of
things in their nature indifferent makes them bloody and murtherour, Romans 14.
15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died, 1. Cor. 8. 12. Thorough
thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish.

If Scandals in such causes be so dangerous in their issue, and of such mortal
consequence, then what are Scandals in a higher nature in the offensive, and
evil life's of such as profess Religion? How much more are they of deadly
consequence, and how much more is blood spilt by them? If a man may have his
hand in the blood of souls by giving scandal in the doing of things in their
own nature lawful, then how much more by giving scandal in the doing of such
things as in their own nature are sinful and unlawful? There is a Law Exodus
21. 33, 34. that if a man open a pit, and cover it not, and an Ox or an Ass
fall therein, the owner of the pit shall make it good. Now in every Scandal
given there is a pit dug, and opened, every one that gives a Scandal opens,
and digges a pit, into which many a soul falls headlong. If he that opened the
pit must make good the Ox or Ass, that fell thereinto, that is, must pay the
full price and worth of it to the owner, what must he do that opens a pit
into which a soul falls? Surely God will require it at his hands, and it must
be made good. Does God, says the Apostle, take care for Oxen? So here, will
God require Oxen at their hands thorough whose default they fall into pits?
then how much more does he take care, and will he require souls of men at
their hands, that by Scandals have opened pits into which they are fallen, and
ruined? There is another Law in the same place worth our noting to this
purpose, Exodus 21. 22. 23. If men strive and hurt a woman with child so that
her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow, he shall be surely
punished, etc. And if any mischief follow thou shall give life for life, or
soul for soul, as the words originally are; If no mischief follow either to
the woman or the child, yet a punishment was due in such a case, but if
mischief followed, then life for life, soul for soul, Now in the case of
scandals it is a sure thing that Mischief does follow, we saw before what a
deal of Woe, and Mischief they bring with them. He that gives a Scandal is
as a man that smites or spurns a woman with child. He that does so, a hundred
to one but he causes mischief to follow.

It may be there was a man that began to have some good in him, some hope that
Christ began to be formed in him. Now a man gives some heinous Scandal, and
thereupon mischief follows, all these hopes are dashed, this man flies quite
off, and casts off all thoughts of meddling any more with godliness, here is
one with child spurned, and a mischief follows, therefore life for life,
soul for soul will be required. Vae illi qui scandalizauerit vnum ex pusillis
istis. Vae pregnantem calcanti. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
Woe be to him that spurns a woman with child, and causes mischief to
follow, and therefore Woe to him by whom an offense comes, because by him
mischief comes, mischief comes to many a soul, the mischief of rejecting
religion, or the mischief of an hardened heart. And therefore is God thus
severe in his Justice upon such because they do bloody mischief, and
therefore they must give Qui scandali conscius est animam dabit pro anima eius
quem scandalizauit, Origin,
soul for soul.

It may be that many a man was like to be brought on to Religion, might have
some Factus sum opprobrium and vicinis meis nimium vicinis meis nimium
opprobrium factus sum, id est, qui mihi (Ecclesiae) iam appropinquabant vt
crederent: hoc est, vicini mei nimium deterriti sunt mala vita malorum and
falsorum Christianorum. Quam multos enim putatis, fratres mei, velle esse
Christianos, sed offendi malis moribus Christianorum. Ipsi sunt vicini qui iam
appropinquabant, and nimium opprobrium illis visi sumus. Augustinus in Psalm. 30.
thoughts of embracing, and receiving the truth, but now some Professor of
Religion falling foul, he falls off and will none, all these thoughts are
dampt, and so laid aside. There be so many souls lost, and kept out of Heaven
by that Scandal, Here is the blood of souls spilt. How many might have come to
have been godly and religious Christians, if it had not been for the Scandal
of some one man professing godliness, and religion. Such a deal of mischief
follows by such a scandal. And for this cause, was that woe, upon the Priests
that they were base and contemptible, because they had caused many to stumble
at the law, and to fly off from religion which was not without the mischieuing
of their souls for ever.

It may be many a man's mouth was shut, and though he said no good, yet he
could say no evil of the way of truth, now that a man falls into scandal, his
mouth is opened against God, and against Religion, and he blasphemes full mouth.
Now is this man's soul by his blasphemy miserably endau^gered, here is soul
blood spilt. What a deal of mischief is done to his soul, but who is guilty
of that mischief, but he that gave that scandal? and therefore the Qui enim
sine blasphemia aliorum grauiter errauerit sibi tantum adfert damnationem: Qui
aute^ alios blasphemare fecerit multos secum praecipitat in mortem, and necesse
erit vt sit pro tantis reus quantos secum traxerit in reatum, Salu. lib. 4 de
Prouid.
blood of that blaspheming soul shall be required at thine hands that gave the
scandal which rusht him into that mischief.

It may be many a man began to mislike his evil ways, many men's hearts began
to misgiue them, but now a scandal is fallen out, their hands are strengthened,
their hearts are hardened, and so they sealed up to hell. Here is soul blood
spilt again. Here be many stumbling and fallen into the pit of hell, I, but
who laid this stumbling stone, that has topled them over? Here be a company
of souls undone, and cast away, I but who has undone, and cast them away?
Here is mischief done, but who has done it? Even he that has committed such
a scandal; he it is that has done this mischief, he has (as much as in him
lies) damned and destroyed these souls. And is it nothing to damn souls? Is
it any wonder that God should be so severe, when their sin is so bloody,
when they have destroyed who knows how many souls? God will punish such as do
not endeavor to (...). Chrysostom ad Romans Hom. 15.
save other men's souls what in them lies, what then deserve they at his hands,
that cast away men's souls as scandalous sinners do. And what wonder that
heavy Justice follows heavy sins.

Thou shall not put a stumbling block before the blind. Leuit. 19. 14. But
what if a man do it? Then shall a woe, and a curse fall upon him, Deuteronomy. 27.
18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out of his way. Now when men
do give scandal they do lay stumbling blocks in the way of many blind ones,
they cause them to wander out of the way, and to stumble so that they fall into
eternal ruin. And therefore is God so sharp with them. We shall see an
heavy woe denounced against those false prophitesses. Ezekiel. 13. 18. Thus says
the Lord God, Woe to the woman that sow pillowes to al armeholes, etc. But why
does God threatuen a woe against them? See the reason, Verse. 22. Because with
lies, ye have made the hearts of the righteous sad, and strengthened the hands
of the wicked that he should not return from his wicked way. Now such as give
scandal do both these things, they do grieve and sad the hearts of the
righteous, and strengthen the hands of the wicked that they return not from
their wicked ways. And therefore upon the same ground that the woe was
threatened against the false prophetisses, is it due to the giuers of scandals.
They are guilty of the same evil, and therefore under the same woe. If the
false prophetisses deserve a woe because by strengthening the hands, and
hardening the hearts of wicked men, they were guilty of the blood of their
souls, then because scandalous ones, are guilty of the self same evil, they
righteosly come under the same woe.

It is a dangerous thing to have an hand in other man's I gitur and tu quoque si
reliquis perditionis causa fueris, grauiora patieris quam qui per te subuer si
sunt. Neque enim peccare tantum in se perditionis habet, quantum quod reliqui
ad peccandum inducuntur, Chrysostom. ad Romans Hom. 25.
sins, and so in other men's damnations. A man's own personal guiit, will be
heavy enough, he shall not need to load himself with other men's guilt. Now
this is the case of scandalous persons, they stand answereable for others men's
sins, as the causers of them, and many times the causers may smart as much,
if not more then the committers of them.

3. God is so severe in the punishment of scandals, because by them is brought
a blurre, a disgrace, and a Reproach upon a whole Church. As God is tender of
his own, so is he also tender of the honor of his Church. It is not safe to
bring disgrace but upon one good man, nay, we saw before that he must smart
for it, that brought up an evil report, but upon one virgin of Israel, Deuteronomy.
22. Is God so tender of the honor, and ctedit of one virgin of Israel, what is
he then of the honor of al Israel. If not safe to bring up an evil report up
on one member of the Church, then much less to bring up an evil report upon a
whole Church. We find Numb. 14. 37. some there that brought up an evil report
upon the land, and what was the sequel? They dyed of the plague before the
Lord. If God were so severe in his Justice to smite them with present death
that brought up an evil report upon the Land of Canaan, what severity may they
expect that bring up an evil report upon his Church. What comparison between
Canaan and Gods Church? Now this al scandalours offenders do. If the reproach
of their actions, and the Infamy of their practices, were but only personal,
the matter were not so great, they have but their just deserts, but the
reproach of their scandals redoundes to the disgrace of the whole (...).
Justin. Apol. 2. a pro Chistianis.
Church of God and the excrementitious filth of their actions is thrown in the
face of the whole Church. David has a prayer. Ps. 69. 5. 6. O God thou know
my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee, let not them that wait
on thee O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake O God of Israel. As if he
had said. Thou know O Lord, what heinous things mine enemies lay unto my
charge, thou that know all my foolishnes and sins, know that they lay
them falsely upon me, But what ever sins they charge upon me, yet Lord keep
me and preserve me, that I may not fall into any such scandalous sin, that
may bring shame, and reproach upon thy people, Let me not so sin, that for my
sake thy people should have any shame. Mark then that when any that profess
the Name of God fall into any gross evil, it turns to the shame not only of
him that falls, but it brings shame upon all that wait upon God, and seek
him. All Gods people suffer, and share in the reproach of one miscarrying. We
have an example of it. 1. Cor. 1. It is reported commonly that there is
fornication amongst you. Pungit ac ferit et quo ad eius fieri potest commune
profert probru^ criminis Non dixit enim. cur ille, aut iste est fornicatus, sed
auditur inter vos fornicatio, nevt qui essent nulli reprehensioni affines,
pigri esse^t ac socordes, sed vtpote co^muni percusso, and in crimen vocat a
ecclesia ita essent animi dubij and anxij. Nemo enim dicet inquit quod ille aut
iste fornicatus est, sed quod in ecclesia Corinthiorum admiffum est illud
peccatum. Chrysostom. in locum.
He does not say, men do report that such a man has committed fornication, but
the report goes that fornication is committed amongst you. If it had been
reported that such a man had committed fornication, that had been but a
personal reproach, and disgrace to that one particular man. But; It is
reported that fornication is committed amongst you, so went the report. There
is fornication amongst the Christians, and in the Church of Corinth, And so the
reproach was general to the whole Church of Corinth, and common to them all,
So that by his Incestuous fact he brought a reproach upon the whole body of
believers. And the heathen questionless so reported it as to blurre them all,
as if they were al alike. So the whole Church of Corinth suffered by that one
man's scandal. And this is the ordinary practice of enemies to disgrace all
with one man's folly. Thus was it the Devils policy and malice to raise up
those Impure His igitur diabolus vsus est vtigentibus qui erant a fide alieni
ansam praeberent sacrosancto Dei verbo petulanter impieque obtrectandi: eo
plane consilio vt fama de flagitiosa eorum vitae ratione passim dissipata
turpemignominae notam vniuersae Christianorum multitudini inureret, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Gnostickes, that the heathen might have occasion of speaking against the
Gospel, and that the report of their flagitious courses being every where
spread, he might brande the whole multitude of Christians, with the mark of
their Ignominy. There is the same spirit reigns in all enemies that was in
Haman, Mordecay had offended him, but it would not serve his turn nor,
satisfy his malice to lay hands on Mordecay alone, for they had showed him the
people of Mordecay, wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews, even the
people of Mordecay. Esth. 3. 6. Mordecay had done him no wrong d Quid tam
timendum qua^ cum vidit homo multos male viuentes, and de quibus been
sperabatur in multis malefactis inuentos? Timet ne tales sint omnes quos
putabat bonos, and veniunt insuspicionem malam prope omnes honi. Qualis vir?
Quomodo cecidit? Quomodo inuentus est in illa turpitudine in illo scelere, in
illo facto malo? Putasne tales sunt omnes? -- Quanta mala dicunt in malos
Christianos quae maledicta perueniunt adomnes Christianos? Nunquid enim dicit
qui maledicit aut qui reprehendit Christianos, Ecce quid faciunt, non boni
Christiani? Sed ecce quid faciunt Christiani. Nonseparat non discernit. August.
in Psalm 30.
nor committed any offense, but when Hamans choler was up, the quarrel is not
at Mordecay alone, but at his people. So is it in cases of just offense, when
scandals are given the shame and blame is not laid upon the offender alone, but
upon his people, not upon that professor alone but upon all professors, not
upon that member of the Church, but upon the whole Church. It is a true thing
which g Augustine observes, that when some one man falls into some gross evil,
that gave some hope, and made some show of goodness, that such as are without,
are ready to judge others like them, and that an evil suspicion lies upon all
good men. Oh what a man? say they. How foulely is he fallen? how is he found
in such a filthiness, in such a wickedness, in such a vile fact? do ye not
think that they are all such? how great and foul evil things, says he, do
they speak against evil Christians, which evil sayings reach unto all
Christians? for, does he thus speak, that speaks evil of, or falls foul
upon Christians, Behold what they do, that are not good Christians? No, but,
Behold what the Christians do, he puts no difference at all. And so the
scandals of one Christian, tends and trenches to the disgrace of all
Christians, even to the dishonor of the Sed quosdam audio inficere numerum
vestrum, and laude^ praecipui nominis praua conuersatione destruere -- Cum
quanto enim nominis vestri pudore delinquitur qua^do alius aliquis temulentus
and lasciuiens demoratur, etc. Cypr. Epist. 7.
Christian name, the fall of one scandalous professor to the reproach all all.

4. Lastly, God is so severe in punishing such as give scandal, because their
sins therein are greater then other men's. Though other Ex ipso vtique
deteriores sumus si meliores non sumus, qui meliores esse debemus. Criminosior
enim culpa est vbi honestior status: si honoratior est persona peccentis,
peccati quoque mayor inuidia, furtum quidem in homine est malum facinus, Sed
damnabilius absque dubio si Senator furatur aliquando. Cunctis fornicatio
interdicitur, sed, grauius multo est si de clero aliquis qua^ si de populo
fornicatur. Ita and nos qui Christiani esse dicimur, si simile aliquid
barbarorum impuritatibus facimus grauius: erramus atrociusenim sub sancti
nomnis professione peccamus. Vbi sublimior est praerogatiua, mayor culpa, Ipso
enim, errores nostros, religio quam profitemur, accusat. Criminosior eius est
impudicitia qui promiserit castitatem foedius inebriatur, sobrietatem front
praetendeus. Nihil est Philosopho turpius vitia obscaena sectanti, quia praeter
eam deformitatem quam vitia in se habent, sapientiae nomine plus notatur, and
nos igitur in omni humano genere philosophiam Christianam professi sumus, ac
per hoc deteriores nos cunctis gentibus credi atque haberi necesse est, quia
sub tam magno professionis nomine viuimus, and positiin religione peccamus.
Salu. de Prouid, lib 4.
men commit the self same sins they do, yet are they not so great in other
men, as they are in such as profess religion. Their sins are greater then
other men's, because theirs, because the sins of such as honored with an high
and holy calling to be the people of God, to be a people near unto him. And
the greater a man's honor is, the more it aggrauates his guilt in case of
offense. Theft is foul in any man, but most foul in a Magistrate. It is a
fouler offense for a Minister then another man to commit fornication. The
dignity of the person adds to the foulnes of the gult. So here, such whom God
has called with this high calling to be his peculiar people, have a dignity,
and excellency above other men, and the dignity of their persons adds to the
indignity of their facts. Speak unto the children of Israel and say unto the^,
when any man has a running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is
unclean, Leu. 15. 2. 4. But why, speak unto the children of Israel? Because
they only were unclean, and made others unclean by running issues. Heathens
as some observe out of the Jewish Rabbis, did not make unclean by an issue,
or childbirth etc: but Israelites did. An issue was an issue in an heathen, as
well as in an Israelite, but in an Israelite only an unclean and a desiling
issue. Sins are sins in other men as well as in professors of Religion,
but in professors they be horirible sins, Ier. 18. 13. Ask now among the
Heathen, who has heard such things? The Virgin of Israel has done a very
horrible thing. The sins of Gods people are horrible sins, because Quanto
enim honoribus alios antecellunt, tanto quoque ipsorum peccatum, etiam si
alioqui idem sit, grauius efficitur, (...) Isid. pelus. lib. 4. Epist. 15. Quo
grandius nomen, eo grandius scandalum Ber. Epist. 200.
their persons are honorable persons, Isai. 43. 4. As God speaks of the
Prophets of Samaria and Jerusalem, Ier. 23. 13. 14. So it may be said of the
people of both. I have seen folly in the Prophets of Samaria, I have seen
also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing: and yet in effect the
sins of both were the same, but the same sins diversely circumstanced may
differ much, and so by reason of the persons one being Prophets of Baal, the
other professing themselves the Prophets of the true God, that which was but
folly in the Prophets of Samaria, was an horrible thing in the Prophets of
Jerusalem. So is the case amongst the people, that which is but folly in such
as are ignorant, irreligious, and live without God in the World, is an horrible
thing in a man that makes profession of Religion. And therefore hence, it is
just with God to be so severe in the punishment of such, and God will be
sanctified in them that come nigh unto him, and before all the people will he
be glorified, Leuit. 10. 3. If he be not sanctified by their singular and
special obedience toward him, he will be sanctified by his justice upon
them, and will be glorified before all the people, that is, publicly and
openly, he will do such severe exemplary justice upon them, that all shall take
notice of it. It suits with that, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. How
smart was Gods justice upon Jerusalem? Dan. 9. 12. For under the whole Heaven
has not been done, as has been done* upon Jerusalem. Why so? for under the
whole Heaven had not been done, as had been done in and by Jerusalem.
Jerusalem was the holy City, Math. 4. 5. The City of the great King, Math. 5.
35. The City of God, Psalm. 87. 3. Such she professed herself, so that she
sinning, her sins were out of measure sinful, and therefore God most
righteous, though most severe against her.

It is in this case of the peoples sufferings, as it was in the Priests
Offerings. We shall see that in some cases the people sinning, they might
bring for their Offering a Kid of the Goats, Leuit. 4. 23. 28. But still for
the sins of the Priests there must be offered a Bullock, Leuit. 4. 3.
Leuit. 16. 6. Exodus 29. 10. What might the reason of this be? The Priests
person being more excellent, and nigh unto God, their sins were greater then
other men's, so much greater as a Bullock is greater then a Kid, and therefore
whereas a Kid would serve another man, the Priest must bring a Bullock. So here
in case of suffering justice. All that profess themselves Gods people do
profess themselves Priests unto God, and therefore their sins are as much
above other men's, as is a Bullock above a Kid, and therefore when other men's
punishment which they suffer shall be but the weight of a Kid, that punishment
which they suffer shall be the weight of a Bullock. Woe, even a weighty, and
an heavy Woe to him by whom the offense comes.

Profession of Religion gives no man a license or dispensation, as if because
men will own and countenance Religion, God were beholding to them, and they
may take liberty to do what they please, but profession of Religion is the
strongest Religio autem est scientia Dei, ac per hoc omnis religiosus hoc ipso
quod religionem sequitur Dei se voluntatem nosse testatur. Professio itaque
religionis non aufert debitum, sed auget, quia assumptio religiosinominis
sponsio est deuotionis, per hoc plus quispiam debet opere quanto plus,
promiserit professione. Saluian. contra. Auarit. lib. 2.
obligation, and the deepest engagement unto godliness and holiness that can
be. That bond and obligation being broken, God will assuredly both sue the
bond, and take the forfeiture to the utmost.

And thus we see the reasons of Gods so sharp severity in punishing
Scandals, and scandalous offenders.

CHAP. IX.
The great care we should have of giving scandal, and sorrow for them given,
and the cause of humiliation they have by whom offenses come.
THe justice of God being thus smart and severe upon such as give offense,
consider we for the close of all, what use may be made of it. It serves
therefore to teach three things:

1. Gods justice being so severe against the giuers of scandal, how wary and
how careful should it make us, and with what fear and trembling should we
walk, least at any time an offense should come by us. Let this Woe pronounced
against all scandal-giuers be as the flaming Sword of the Cherubims to scare
us, and make us afraid how ever we do any thing, or come near the doing of any
thing that may prove offensive and scandalous. Since the Woe is so heavy and
so smart, let it make us listen to that counsel, Romans 14. 13. That no man put
a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. If Christ have
denounced a Woe, and a Curse to him that lays a stumbling block in another
way, then as we fear that Woe, and that Curse to light on our heads: so take
heed of laying a stumbling block for another man's feet.

Let us learn to live by that rule, 1. Cor. 10. 32. Give none offense, neither
to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Have a care so to
carry our selves, that neither the Church of God may be grieved, nor the
enemies of the Church be either hindered from good, or hardened in evil to
their ruin and destruction.

We see, Revel. 2. 14. That Balaam taught Balak to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel. He did not himself cast the stumbling block,
but he taught Balak to do it. And yet God met with Balaam, and taught him by
his justice upon him, what it was to teach others to cast stumbling blocks in
his peoples ways, Numb. 31. 8. Balaam was slain by the Sword of Israel
amongst the Midianites. He had taught Balak to make them stumble and fall,
therefore God in his justice makes him fall by the Sword.

Now, what if he had put stumbling blocks himself, how much more would Gods
justice have pursued and ouer-taken him? Now scandalous persons do themselves
put stumbling blocks before men, and therefore, we know what Paul's resolution
is, 1. Cor. 8. 13. Wherefore if meat scandalize my brother, and lay a
stumbling block in his way, I will eat no flesh whiles the World stands,
least I scandalize my brother. What is eating of flesh to the works of the
flesh, to the sins of uncleanness, fraud, and notorious deceit? And if Paul
rather then he would give offense would not eat flesh, which was Caeterum cum
rem adeo for midabilem esse demonstratum sit in ijs quae in potestate nostra
posita sunt fratrem scandalizare, quid de ijs dicendum erit qui rebus vetitis
faciendis loquend^sue scandalizant. Basil. Si vero in licitis tale est
iudiciu^, quid dicendum est de vetitis. Ibid.
lawful to do in in its own nature, how much more would he have resolved
never to have given offense by foul and notorious practices? Surely he implies
thus much more, I will never commit uncleanness, I will never be a fraudulent
dishonest dealer whilst the word stands least I give an offense, and lay a
stumbling block in another way. Why would Paul forbear flesh for ever, in
case of Scandal? Certainly he had an eye to this Woe, and and therefore chose
rather to eat no flesh then to eat it so sawced. It might prove no better
then the Israelites Quails, Psalm. 78. 27. 29, 30, 31. He rained flesh also
upon them as dust so they did eat and were filled, But while their meat was
yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of
them.

A man had been as good have fasted as have had their dainties with that
sauce. So Paul knew that meat eaten with Scandal, would have been sawced with
a Woe, and therefore, wisely resouled rather never to eat flesh then to eat
it on such terms. Upon the same ground since such a Woe follows upon giving
offense, dread we to do any thing that may be scandalous, and resolve never to
do it whilst the World stands.

Our Savior Christ was not bound to pay Tribute, or Custom, but yet he is
willing to part with his right upon this ground, Math. 17. 27. Notwithstanding
least we should scandalize them, etc. To prevent Scandal he parts with his
right, and rather works a miracle, then he would give them offense.

How much more then; there being so heavy a Woe, should we be careful to
avoid that which is sinful and unlawful, least we should scandalize men, and
lay ruining stumbling blocks in their ways. Woe to him by whom the offense
comes.

Now then as we would fear to meet with this woe, so take heed of giving any
offense. As we would fear to have a Woe come upon us, so let us fear to have
an offense come by us. This is the very use our Savior makes of it, Luke 17.
1, 2, 3. Woe to him thorough whom offenses come, Verse 1. But, why so? Because
of that which follows, Verse 2. And thereupon inferres that, Verse 3. Take
heed to your selves. As if he had said, since there is such a Woe follows upon
giving offense, therefore let me advise you in any case to take wondrous heed
to your selves, that you give no offense, nor fall into any Scandal.

It should be the care and endeavor of all Gods people to do their best to
remove all stumbling blocks and stones out of the way, Isa. 57. 14. Cast ye
up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of
my people, Isa. 62. 10. Prepare you the way of the people, cast up, cast up,
the high way, gather out the stones. Therefore if they must gather out the
stones, they must take heed of laying stones in the way, if they must take
stumbling blocks out of the way of the people, then must they not lay
stumbling blocks in their way. Woe unto him that does not his best to take up
a stumbling block out of the way, therefore much more a Woe to him that shall
cast a stumbling block in the way.

Quest. What may a man then do, and what course may one take to keep and
preserve ones self from falling into Scandals.

Answ. To save our selves from falling into Scandals, do these things.

1. Walk with Selfe-iealousie, and Selfe-suspition. In a conscience of our
own frailty be we ever jealous and suspicious of our selves. That which our
Savior speaks of securing our selves in case of tentation, is to be done, to
secure our selves from the danger of Scandals. Watch and pray least ye enter
into tentation, Math. 26. So watch and pray least ye fall into Scandals. Now
nothing will keep our eyes open in watching, nor our mouths open in praying,
more then a fear and an holy jealousy, and suspicion of our selves by reason
of our frailty, least we be ouer-taken and ensnared.

The profession of religon Non quisquam miretur, dilectissimi fratres etiam de
confessoribus quosdam ad ista procedere, inde quoque aliquos tam nefanda, quam
grauia peccare. Neque enim confessio immunem facit ab insidijs diaboli, aut
contra tentationes -- adhuc in seculo positum perpetua securitate defendit
Caeterum nunquam in confessoribus frauds, and stupra, and adulteria, post
modum videremus, quae nunc in quibusdam vid^ntes ingemi scimus and dolemus.
Cypr. de. unit Eccles.
secures no man from scandals, neither is it any protection from that danger.
Men are deceived that so imagine. Nay, no men in more danger of foul offenses
then such, and they in most danger that are men most eminent, and of greatest
note for profession. We saw before what special reason Satan has for it to
seek the ensnaring of such. Profane, and irreligious persons are not so beset,
nor haunted so with importunity of Satan's malice as those are and shall be, that
take upon them the profession of Godliness. Profane and Godless persons are his
own sure enough already, and as he Quida^ pastoris fungens munere in pago
Durwess circa Esweiler puellam nomine Helenam diaboli obsidione pressam
liberare velle elato supercilio promittebat atque se operem ludere videns
indignabundus tandem in haec verba erupit, quae non intellecturum doemonem
fortasse sperabat. Si vllam habes, potestatem transmigra^di in Christianu^
sanguine^ tra^smigra ex illa in me. Cui incu^ctanter latin, and quidem
iuridice respondit Diabolus, Quem pleno iure in postromo die possidebo, quid
opus est illum tentare. Wier de praest. Demon lib. 5. cap. 24.
answered that exorcist taking upon him to dispossess a maid of the Devil,
and adiuring him to come out of her into himself; What shall I need to tempt,
and possess him of whom I shall have full possession at the last day, So what
cares he to tempt those that he has already possession of, and are taken and
led captive at his pleasure. And besides nothing the advantage and gains comes
in by such men's sins as do by the foul, and notorious falls of such as
profess religion. Therefore the Devil seeking a new possession, and withal
the raising of his Kingdom by their falls, it is apparent that they are in
greater dangers of Satan's malice then the other. It therefore concerns them
out of the Conscience of this malice, of his, and their own frailty, to be
very jealous and suspicious of themselves, and out of that fear and Jealousy
to watch and pray.

Our hearts are false and fickle exceeding ready to close with Satan, therefore
keep so much the more strickt watch over them. We are exceeding weak and
frail, look up to God, and beg his help. It is God that keeps the feet
of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness. 1. Sam. 2. 9. Except
the Lord keep the City the watchman watches in vain, and except the Lord
keep the feet of his Saints, all their watching is in vain. Alas if we
trust to our own keeping how soon will our feet be ready to slip, how foul
shall we fall, and into what scandals shall not we run? And then how far
would wicked ones be from being silent in darkness? Indeed when God keeps
his Saints feet, he silences, and stops wicked men's mouths, because then they
have nothing to say against Godliness. But if God keep not the Saints feet,
how soon and how wide are wicked mouths opened to clamor and blaspheme?
Therefore out of an holy fear and jealousy of our own weakness, let us
daily petition God by prayer that he would keep us that our feet may not
stumble, that he himself would take the charge of us that we dash not our
foot against a stone. There is a promise Ier. 31. 9. I will lead them, I will
cause them to walk in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble. Now when
men out of a fear and jealousy of their own infirmity and frailty, do daily
look up to God, and beg guidance, and safe conduct from him, he will lead them
and make them walk in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble. This was
David's practice. Psalm. 5. 8. Lead me O Lord in thy righteousness because of
mine enemies, or mine obseruers, as Iunius renders it, make thy way straight
before my face. He saw that he had many eyes upon him that observed, and watched
him narrowly, he knows his own readiness to turn aside into by and crooked
ways, his suite therefore to God is, that he would lead him. Whilst God has
a man by the hand how safe is a man from falling? And God that keeps the feet
of his Saints. 1. Sam. 2. 9. has his Saints in his hand. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his
Saints are in thine hand. It is good daily by prayer to put our selves into
Gods hand. It is just with God to check selfe-confidence and to let such men
slip and fall too, that by their falls they may know their frailty. Laudo
Petrum sed prius erubesco pro Petro. Quam prompto animo, sed nesciens se
metiri. Aug de diverse. ser. 39.
Peter's cause is well known, Though all, yet not I, he was of forward spirit,
but knew not how to measure himself, if he had had more fear and jealousy
he would have been more watchful, and have sought more to God, and would have
said rather, If all men should, yet Lord by thy grace keep me that I may not
deny thee. He had been more secure if he had been less secure. But now
that he stands wholly upon his own legs, how soon, and how miserably falls
he? The child that cares not to be led but will go of himself, gets many a
knock, and many a shrewde fall, but the child that is fearful, and out of
his fear will be in the mothers or nurses hand, and will cry to be led, that
child scapes many a broken face.

2. Mortify your dearest lusts. A fostered and a cherisht lust does
exceedingly endanger a man, puts him into great danger of falling into scandal.
Let a lust be loved, and cherished and it will so befoole, and bewitch a man
that he will maintain, and sockle it though it be with the hazard of the
credit of Religion, and the Gospel, it will grow so strong at the last that it
will headlong him into some scandal or other. Therefore deal severely with
these lusts, that will bring thee happily to do that which will cause God to
deal severely with thee, be sure to make sure work with them by
mortification, that is a good way to preserve thee from scandal. This is the
very course our Savior here prescribes. Having in this seventh verse showed
the woe that falls upon the giuers of scandals, see what he inferres, Verse.
8. 9. Wherefore if thine hand; or thy foot offend thee cut them off, and cast
them from thee, etc. And if thine eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it
from thee. etc. Mark then what it is that makes men offend. Namely men's lusts,
their right hands, eyes, feet. These be the scandal-breeders. If a man would
be free from giving of offense he must out, and off with that which causes him
to offend. Now lusts when they are made much of, when they be made dear,
hands, and eyes, and right eyes, assuredly they will cause men to offend.
Therefore the way to save our selves that they cause not us to offend, is to
offend them, the way is by mortification to cut off, and cast away, such hands,
feet, and eyes as will cause us to offend. Were but this done how happily
might many foul scandals be prevented? If David had presently plucked out his
wanton eye, and cast it away; how easily had he been secured from that great
offense he gave?

It may be many a man out of the great pride of his heart, and his abundant
self-love makes his credit and esteem amongst men to be his right hand, his
right eye, his very Idol. Now this is a lust that will cause a man to offend.
A man in this pride and self-love to maintain and uphold his good opinion and
esteem, runs into this and that secret evil practice, and rather then his
esteem, and credit should sink in the world, uses a number of shifts, and
dishonest courses, and a company of deceitful guiles to uphold his esteem,
and runs so far in at last, that he come not off, without foul sca^dal. Now
mortification and self denial had prevented it. If such a man had plucked out
this eye, cut off this hand and foot, he had not halted, nor stumbled nor
fallen into scandal. The not cutting of this foot caused the stumbler the
fall. One chop had saved and prevented all, for if he had but denied himself,
and thus thought with himself, If it be Gods will that I shall be low, and
mean in the world, if he will have me come down and be in an inferior
estate, his will be done, I will humbly submit to his pleasure, and I will not
to uphold my credit in the world for a time hazard, and wound the credit of the
Gospel, and religion, I will tread my credit under foot, rather then bring
any discredit upon the Gospel; If thus by self-denial a man could have
submitted to Gods wisdom and administration, and could have mortified his
self-love, so as to have laid his credit and respect in the world at Gods
foot, how happily might a foul scandal have been prevented? Every
unmortified lust is a scandal that will cause a man to offend, so many lusts so
many tares. Therefore burn, and fire those tares, gather out and cast out
those scandals that will breed scandals and cause offenses. Math. 13. 40. 41.

3. Labor for sincerity, and fruitfulnes in the ways of God. I dare not say
that all that fall into scandal are Hypocrites, and barren. But yet sure it is,
that God many times punishes these two things with scandalous falls. When men
are not so sincere and so fruitful as they should be, God leaves them to
themselves, that by such scandalous falls they may be humbled, for not walking
so sincerely and so fruitfully as they should have done, and as their
profession required at their hands. Therefore the more sincere, and fruitful
we are, the more are we out of danger of scandals. See Phi. 1. 10, 11. That
ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ, Being filled
with the fruits of righteousness. So then the way to be without offense is
to be sincere, and to be filled with the fruits of righteousness. So long as
we adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all thing, we shall keep our
selfs from giving offense. Now sincerity, fidelity, and fruitfulnes do adorn
the Doctrine of God, Tit. 2. 9. 10.

4. Think always upon those two texts. First that, Neh. 4. 9. It is not good
that ye do, ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the
reproach of the heathen our enemies? Are we by Satan tempted to any sinful
course that specially may prove scandalous, think we thus with our selves.
It is not good that we are about to do, the thing is naught and sinful. If we
do thus how will enemies of godliness and religion triumph, how will they
reproach and scorn religion and therefore to prevent their reproach, and to
prevent the opening of their mouths how ought we to walk in the fear of
God. I will rather die then give them just occasion to reproach. If they will
needs be reproaching, let them do it at their Abundet hospitalitas vestra,
abundent bona opera vestra Quod iubet Christus faciant, Christiani, and tantum
suo malo blasphement pagani. Aug. Hom. 10 in append. sermon.
own peril, they shall have no cause from me to open their mouths in
reproachful wise. And this is the very argument the Apostle uses to persuade
women to a godly, discreet, chaste, and obedient carriage, That the word of
God be not blasphemed, Tit. 2. 4, 5. Secondly, consider the text, Neh. 6. 11.
Should such a man as I flee? And who is there that being as I am, would go
into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in. It were an happy thing in
these cases if men would know themselves, what they are, and would stand upon
it with Satan. Should such a man as I do thus? Nehemiah we see would not go
into the temple to save his life, when he considered what he was, Such a man
as I? Being as I am? It is no pride in these cases to stand upon what we are,
but much safety were in it. Should such a man as I? Why what a man is he that
professes religion? He is one that has the Name of God called upon him, If my
people on whom my name is called, 2. Chron. 7. 14. He is one that is called
with an high calling. Phil. 3. 14. He is one that is called to Holiness. 1.
These. 4. 7. He is one that is precious and honorable Isa. 43. 4. He is one of
the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 18. 22. He is one of the Sons of God.
1. Ioh. 3. 1. And now shall such a man as he run into foul and base actions?
Who, being as he is, would not rather loose his life, then dishonor such a
profession, then disgrace such and so many dignities? Why did Jeremy so
willingly subject to Gods word? For thy name is called upon me O Lord God of
hosts. Ier. 15. 16. And should such a man as he not give all obedience to God?
Why was Ezra ashamed to require of the King a band of Soldiers, and horsemen
to help against the enemy? Because it would not stand with that profession he
had made before the King, Because we had spoken unto the King saying, The hand
of our God is for good upon all them that seek him, but his power and his
wrath against all them that forsake him. 1. Ezra. 8. 22. He had made this
profession before the King, and should such a man as he, that had made such a
profession do a thing so contrary thereunto? What a foul shame had that
been? No wonder, having made such a profession, that he was ashamed to do it.
If men would but seriously consider what kind of persons they are, and what
kind of profession they make, oh how would they for shame not meddle with base
actions. What was the reason that Mordecay, would not bow to Haman? They spoke
to him daily, and he hearkened not unto them. And what was his reason. Reason
good enough, He told them that he was a Jew. It would not stand with the
religion he professed to bow to Haman as they bowed to him. He was a Jew, one of
the people of God, that professed the worship of the true God alone, and should
such an one as he bow down to Haman, not only a mortal man but an accursed
Amalekite? Who would being as he was, if it had been to have saved his life,
have wronged not so much his nation as his religion, and profession as to have
bowed to him. What made Abraham that he would not take any thing that was the
King of Sodoms from a thread even unto a shoe latchet, but because the King of
Sodom should not say, I have made Abraham rich. Genesis 54. 23. Like enough
Abraham had upon all occasions, and in all places professed that God whose name
he professed had made him so rich, therefore would he do nothing that might
be any prejudice to that his profession, he had a care so to carry himself
that the enemies of God should not have any thing to say that might disgrace
his profession. Thus if a man would consider the highness of his calling, the
honor of his profession, and would in all tentations unto foul and shamfull
actions but think, should such a man as I do this? or who being as I am,
would do this? how might he be preserned from many a foul scandal? Mordecay
told them he was a Jew, do thou in all tentations to foul actions, tell
Satan thou art a Christian, and should such a man as thou do so?

5. Look upon other men's Propone nihil esse quod tibi accidere non possit.
Vita foueam in quam vides alium coram te incidisse. Aliorum perditio tua sit
cautio. Bern de Inter. Dom. cap. 45.
falls, and tremble, and take warning by them. Say not in the pride and carnal
boasting of thy spirit, rather then I would have done as he has done, I would
have died a thousand deaths; To condemn such as fall scandalously, is not a
thing to be condemned, who shall dare to justify such? But a comparatiue
condemning of other men's evils, so to condemn them as to commend and brag of
our selves, what in such cases we would have done, and have been, so to
condemn others, as thereby to raise our own praises, what good ones we are,
and would have been to them, so to make others black, as to make our selfs
show the whiter, this is very dangerous. This savors of much Pride, and in
such causes it may be Tamen si alieui tanta est siducia de immobilitate
propriae infirmitatis saltem follicitis reformidet ne ipse sit scandalum
visibus alienis, sed terreatur voce Domini comminantis, vae huic mundo
ascandalis, Cypr. de singul. Cleric.
just with God, so to give us up to the power of our own corruptions, that we
may fall into the selfsame evil so condemned.

That Proverb of Salomons would be thought upon in all such events, Pro. 27.
19. As in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. Let a man
look into the water, he sees in it a face in all points answering to his
own, the same spots, Warts, Moulds, and blemishes that he sees in the face in
the water, they are all in his own, there is face answering to face. So does
the heart of a man answer to a man.

The same evils, corruptions, lusts, and sins that thou see in another man's
heart, breaking out in his life the very selfsame are in thine own heart,
his heart to thine is but a face answering thy face, his heart is but as the
face in the water to thy face, therein may thou see what is in thine heart.
And therefore his heart being the very picture of thine own, look not upon
his false, but with fear and trembling, considering least thou also thy self
may be tempted, and fall as foul as he. His heart naturally is as good as
thine, and thine naturally as bad as his, and therefore no better course in the
view of his fall, then to fear and tremble, least thine heart may serve thee
as slipperie a trick as his heart has done. Such humble fear and trembling
will awaken to an answerable caution, and so may prove a good preservative
against the danger of Scandals.

2. A second thing, this point of Gods severity may teach, is to stir us up to
mourn and grieve when Scandals fall out. There be diverse grounds of mourning
in such cases.

As first in regard of the woe that is to the world from offenses, and the
great mischief that will be done by them, That so many will start at and fly
from Religion, that so many will blaspheme the Name of God, that so many will
be hardened to their own ruin, here is cause enough of mourning to all good
hearts. There is a compassion and there be bowels to be shown to mankind,
even to reprobate ones, and a sorrow should there be for the loss of their
blood. And secondly, a sorrow should there be for Gods dishonor, the Churches
reproach. But thirdly, there is yet another ground of sorrow arising from this
point, a sorrow there should be in such events in regard of the woe that will
fall upon such by whom the offense comes. If their case be such that so many
woes will pursue them, then how should men's bowels earne with compassion
toward them, and out of Christian pity commiserate their condition? The
course of the world is to rejoice, and insult over such.

That is not lawful in sinlesse cases, Prou. 24. 17. Rejoice not when thine
enemy falls, namely, into some outward affliction, neither let thine heart be
glad when he stumbles; Therefore much more unlawful in cases of sin, and
scandal. This highly displeases God. Others it may be rejoice not, are not
glad, but in the mean time they mourn not, neither are they in sorrow for
Gods dishonor, or the offenders danger. Surely, as there is joy in Heaven when
one sinner repents, and rises, so should there be sorrow on earth, when one man
professing Christ, sins, and falls foul. This was the Corinthians fault, 1.
Cor. 5. 2. And you are puffed up and have not rather mourned. They should
therefore in that case have mourned, and sorrowed as for Gods dishonor, so for
the danger into which that man by his scandal had brought himself. And this
being done might be a great help to stir up a man fallen into a scandalous sin
to mourn for himself. For when he shall see others lay his case to heart,
and to be so sensible of his ill condition, how may it stir up himself to
take his condition to heart much more. It is said that Samuel mourned for Saul,
now when Saul should hear that Samuel mourned for him, if there had bin any
grace in his heart it could not but have made him mourn for himself. It must
needs have thus wrought upon him. Does Samuel mourn for me, and lies my case
heavy at his heart? Alas then what cause have I to mourn for my self. It is
I that have sinned, and it is I that must smart. What is it to Samuel, that I
must undergo such woe, if therefore he, how much more should I mourn. Thus
others sorrow might provoke such to mourn.

3. Lastly, this severity of Gods Justice considered, it serves for the
terror, and the humbling of such by whom offenses come.

Here is that which may break the hearts of them, and make them melt into
godly sorrow. Woe unto him by whom an offense comes. Is an offense come by
thee, and art thou fallen into a scandal? behold here a woe out of Christ's mouth
pursuing thee, and ready to arrest thee. Behold a woe posting after thee to
blast thee in thy Name, to brand thee with Infamy and Reproach. A woe
following thee to cast thee out of the hearts, and society of Gods people, A
woe following thee to smite thee with poverty and sickness, A woe to smite
thy Family, thy Children. And shall not such a woe terrify, and mightily humble
thine heart? How should the dread of such a woe hanging over thine head lay
thee in the dust? If a man had no care of his own soul, or no care of his
credit, or no care of society with the faithful, yet if a man had but any
bowels of nature toward his poor children, here is that which may make his
bowels earne and roll within him. Alas what have I done? I have brought a woe
upon my self, and children. Ah, says David, These sheep what have the done?
So may thou, Alas, these poor babes, and innocent Lambs what have they
done? An heavy woe may overtake and smite them for my folly. Woe is me, the
cause that my soul has to be humbled, Oh the cause that I have to put my
mouth in the dust? Here is that which should make a man hang down his head
with sorrow to think of that woe, that is pursuing him at the heels. If a man
had a Bayliffe or a Sergeant always watching, and dogging of him at the
heels, that he could not stir out of his doors, but he would be ready to
have him by the back, in what a deal of fear would a man be in such a case?
What a deal of care would he take to make his peace, and compound with his
Creditours? Now when a man is fallen into a Scandal, presently a woe is sent
out to pursue and attach such a sinner, oh then the fear, the depth of
humiliation and sorrow, that the dread of this woe should work in such a man?
It should make him do as in that case, Prou. 6. 3, 4. Go humble thy self,
Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, till thou have
made thy peace with God. Grandi plagae alla and prolixa opus est medicina.
Grande scelus grandem habet necessariam satisfactionem. Ambros. ad Virg. laps.
Go and do as Lam. 3. 28, 29, 30. He sits alone and keeps silence, he puts
his mouth in the dust if so be there may be hope, He gives his cheek to him
that smites him, he is filled full with reproach. Sit alone and keep silence,
and never wonder, nor murmr that thou art left alone, but Leuit. 26. 41.
accept of thy punishment. And certainly, where a man is truly humbled he will
do so. Sit alone? I cannot find fault with it, I deserve it, accept it. Oh put
thy mouth in the dust, thou that have laid thine honor in the dust, thou that
have laid the honor of religion in the dust. Give thy cheeks to him that
smites. Art thou reproached, and filled therewith? take it as the due desert of
thy ways, and say with Ecebolius lying, and howling at the Church door,
Calcate me salem insipidum. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Trample upon me that am unsavory salt. If at any time thou begin to have
but a cheerful thought in thine heart, a cheerful look in thy face, a
cheerful word in thy mouth, dash all cheerful thoughts, looks, words, and
behauiours, dash them all with the thoughts of this Woe. Think still where
ever thou art, what ever thou art doing, that thou hear the sound of this
text, and the sound of this Woe, ringing in thine ears, Woe to him by whom the
offense comes. What, I laugh? I be merry and iocund? I be chearie and jolly,
that have such a Woe hanging our mine head? Oh my soul! droope, and hang down
thine head, and be in bitterness of spirit, and Inhaere poenitentiae vsque ad
finem vitae. Ambros. ad virg laps.
never have one lightsome look, till the light of Gods countenance shine upon
thee. Who knows if God should see a man thus droope under the Conscience of
his sin, thus laid low under the fear of this Woe, but God of his mercy
might in some measure mitigate this Woe, at least might show mercy to the
soul in its peace and pardon.

FINIS.

