A COVRANTE OF NEWS FROM THE EAST INDIA.
A true Relation of the taking of the Islands of Lantore and Polaroone in the
parts of Banda in the East Indies by the Hollanders, which Islands had yielded
themselves subject unto the King of England. Written to the East India Company
in England from their Factors there.
ABout the Month of December 1620. the Dutch General having prepared a force
of 16. ships, declared to our President, that he intended an exploit for the
good of both Companies, without mentioning any particulars of his designs.

And seeing us to have no such forces ready to join with him, he said he would
attempt it alone. And the third of January. 1620. he did set sale from Iaquatra
with his said forces, and arrived at Banda about the third of February
following.

Presently upon his arrival he made great preparation against the Island of
Lantore, which Island was formerly by the inhabitants thereof delivered over
unto our people for the use, and under the subjection of the Kings Majesty of
England, whereof our Captain of the I Will of Polaroone had taken possession and
had also settled a factory there.

When our chief Factor in our said I Will of Polaroone heard of the purpose of
the Dutch General against the said I Will of Lantore, he wrote a letter unto the
said General, aduising him that the said I Will of Lantore did belong unto the
King of England, and that therefore he should not attempt any violence against
it, seeing there is an accord made in England between us. Which letter, the
said General threw from him in a great rage scarce vouchsafeing to read it
over, and caused the Messenger to be thrust out of doors, requiring him to
advise our Factor of Polaroone presently to send to Lantore; and fetch away all
such of our people and goods as were upon that Island; for whomsoever he should
find there: he would take them as his utter enemies, and they should fare no
better then the inhabitants.

And within ten or twelve days after he landed all his forces there, and
subdued the said Island. So long as the fight endured, our Factors and feruants
there (being three English and eight Chineces) kept themselves within doors,
and afterward our people came out of their houses, and told them, the house
wherein they were, was the English house, and that therefore they should not
meddle therewith.

Nevertheless they sacked our house, took away all our goods, murdered three
of our Chines servants, bound the rest (as well English as Chinesses) hand and
foot, and threatened the^ to cut their throats binding them three several
times to several stakes with their weapons ready drawn out, and did put a
halter upon our principal Factors neck, drawing up his head, and stretching
out his neck, ready to put them to death, yet did not execute them, but as
they were bound hand and foot (as aforesaid) tumbled them down over the
rocks like dogs, and like to have broken their necks, and thus bound, carried
them aboard their ships, and there kept them prisoners in Irons 14. or 16.
days.

After the conquest of the Island of Lantore the Dutch General threatened to do
the like unto Polaroone wherefore our principal Factor of Polaroone being
there but newly arrived, went unto the Dutch General unto the castle of Nera,
and told him that he heard that he purposed to take Polaroone by force, which
he could not believe, although his own messenger sent to Polaroone to speak
with our Factors, had given it out also, that the General himself should say,
that if the English did not come presently unto him and yield the said fort of
Polaroone unto him, he would send his forces, and ouer-run all the country,
but hoped he would enterprise no such thing against that place, considering the
Articles of agreement, and knowing how many years (to the great loss and
charge of the company) we held possession and maintained the place to the use
of his Majesty of England.

The said General made little answer to it, as though there were no such
matter intended, whereupon our said Factot took his leave and came away.

But the next day he was followed to Polaroone with and Armado of 26. Prowes
and one ship, which did put the inhabitants of Polaroone in such a fear, as
they knew not what to do; whereupon our chief Factor there asked the commander
of those forces, what his purpose was with such a fleet there, and that if he
attempted any thing against Polaroone, it was a breach of the Articles it being
in our possession. This could not prevail with him, but said the land was
theirs, and they would have it by fair means or force, and as for our
profession, they would not acknowledge it (the inhabitants and not we being
masters of the place) and so the Dutch Commander went a shore unto the
inhabitants.

Whereupon the said inhabitants asked us if we could and would defend them, but
perceiving we were not able to defend our selves, much less to secure them:
they were forced to yield themselves and the Island into his hands.

The Dutch took down the English colors, and set up their own, and caused
the inhabitants presently to bring in all their weapons, and to throw down all
their walls, and would have forced them to have taken all our Ordnance out of
our Fort, which they at the first refused to do, alleding that they had
formerly given and surrendered the land to the King of England, and in respect
they had lived so long with the English, they would not now offer us any injury
or violence.

And when our chief Factor went a shore to expostulate the matter with the
Dutch Commander, he could obtain nothing at his hands, but that the land was
theirs, and things must be so, and should be so.

Whereupon our said Factor went again unto the Dutch General to the castle of
Nera to confer with him thereabouts, but he would give no other answer, but
that he had referred those businesses to his said Lieutenant sent thither, with
whom he might confer: who in the absense of our said chief Factor, had
brought some of his soldiers a shore upon Polaroone, and forced the Ilanders
to throw all our Ordnance over the rock from the place where they were planted
(being nine pieces) whereof four broke with the fall, and were all carried
away by the Dutch.

Moreover our Captain of Polaroone who had defended the Island four years
together going to Lantore (at the request of the inhabitants) to receive the
surrendry thereof for our Kings Majesty's use (as aforesaid) and returning
back again about the beginning of November 1620. was slain by the Dutch. And
it is very probable, they did it after the time they had intelligence of the
publication of the accord at Bantam in March 1619. For presently upon the said
publication, they sent secretly to the Islands in those parts, where they had
trade, to prevent us of our part of the spices due unto us by the accord.

After the said Dutch General had subdued the fore mentioned Island of Lantore,
he constrained them to deliver unto him, the principal of all their children
for hostages: Then he took away from them all their small vessels and boats,
and then he also required all the men of Lantore to be brought unto him, and
they brought him all the prncipall men, but this did not satisfy him, but he
would have all the Bandinesses, which had aided them, as also all their wives
and children, small and great to ^e brought as prisoners aboard his ships.

Which when the Bandinesses perceived doubting that he meant to make them all
slaves and to carry them to some other places) they agreed together to retire
themselves into the highest and strongest places of the land, and there did
fortify themselves, whereupon the Dutch slew of them and took 1200 persons
prisoners, most of them being women and children, which they hauesince carried
to Iaquatra and other places.

Printed according to the original copy the eighth Febr. 1622. Stilo Nouo.


