THE MISCHIEF And Misery of SCANDALS Both Taken, and Given.

By IER. DYKE, Minister of Epping in Essex.

1. COR. 10. 12. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take heed least he
fall. Aug. de verb. Dom. Sermon. 53. Imo vtinam terruerim, vtinam aliquid egerim.
Vtinam qui sic fuerat, vel quae sic fuerat non sit vlterius. Vtinam verba ista
infuderim and non effuderim. LONDON, Printed by W. S. for R. Milbourne, in
Paul's Churchyard at the Greyhound. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH, Countess of Winchelsey,
his Noble PATRONESS.
MADAM.
IT is not unknown unto your Honor, what first occasioned me to meddle with
this Subject. That which first moved me to preach it in mine own Charge, has
also induced me to make it more public. I conceived it might be a work
well worth the while to vindicate, as much as in me lay, the Honor of God from
that impeachment it commonly receives from Scandals, to heal the bleeding
wounds they usually give to the profession of Godliness, to stop the mouth of
iniquity which they set so wide open, and to give men notice of the great
danger that both the taking, and giving of Scandal may bring them into.

I observe, that men do with the Scandals of Professors, as the Leuite did
with the twelve parts of his Concubine, they send them ^^dg. 1^. 29.
thorough all the quarters of Israel. It were happy that such foul actions as
trench to the dishonor of God, and Religion might be buried in eternal
silence, and never be published, Publish it not in 2. Sam. 1.
Gath: But since that is impossible, but that they will be published in Gath,
What inconvenience is it that something be published in, and sent into the
Coasts of Israel, that may stop the mouths of the men of Gath, that may salve
the Honor of God, and Religion, and that may discover and prevent the danger
of Scandalous evils.

I confess, that when I considered how frequently Scandals have fallen ou^,
and what a world of mischief has been done by them, I wondered, that no man,
for ought I know, or can learn, had hitherto meddled with this Argument so
needful, and so useful, and therefore thought it would not be lost labor to
do something in this kind.

And what I have done, I now make bold to present unto your Honor, as
presuming that that shall be welcome to you that pleades for the Honor of God,
and his Truth. I acknowledge my self many ways deeply engaged to your Honor,
and the many favors I have received from you, bind me to a thankful
acknowledgement of them. May it please you therefore to accept of this small
Treatise as a public testimonial of my thankfulness. Which if you shall
please to do, I shall reckon it as a superadded favor to all the rest, and to
my thankfulness to your self, shall add my daily prayers to the God of all
Grace, for his blessing upon your noble Family, both root and branch, and that
he would not only continue to you the blessing of the left hand, Riches and
Honor, Prou. 3. 16.
but give you the blessing of the right hand also length of days, and with
them both, the best of his blessings, All spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. This shall be the daily suite of

Your Honors Servant in the Gospel of Christ Jesus. Jer. Dyke.

To the Reader.
THere is not any one thing that Satan the professed enemy of Mankind labors,
and endeauours more, then the hindrance of the salvation of man. There is but
one way to Heaven, that which Peter calls the way of Truth, 2. Pet. 2. 2. which
Solomon calls the way of good men, Prou. 2. 20. which Isaie calls the way of
Holiness, Isai. 35. 8. which Jeremy calls the old, and the good way, and the
ancient paths, Ier. 6. 16, 18, 15. Now Satan to keep men from Heaven, does
his utmost to make men stumble at, and from the ancient paths, that by taking
offense at the ways of God, disliking, and distasting them, the salvation of
their souls might become impossible.

To effect their stumbling at those ways Satan lays many and sundry kinds
of stumbling blocks in the ways of men. But yet amongst those many ones, I
find there be some more dangerous then others, and by which the Devil
preuayles much more then by the rest. And those I observe and conceive to be
specially these three.

1. The Reproach, Contempt, and Obloquie, that by some men is usually cast upon
Religion and the conscionable profession, and Professors thereof. Satan tells
men that if they will needs go this way they shall have a deal of filth and
dirt flung in the faces of them, that they must look to be scorned, and
Reproached, as if they were the very Of-scourings of the earth. And this very
thing starts and stumbles not a few. Some will better abide a stake, then some
others can a mock. Zedekiah could happily have found in his heart to have
hearkened to the Prophets counsel, but that this lay in the way, I am afraid
of the Jews, least they deliver me into the Caldaeans hands, and they mock
me, Ier. 38. 19. It was death to him to be mocked. But all considered, we shall
see how little reason any have for this to stumble at Religion. For do but
consider who they are commonly that mock at Godliness. Do but observe their
Character in the Scriptures, and you shall find them such as these. A company
of Hypocrites. Hypocritical mockers, Psalm. 35. 16. A crew of Drunkards, Psalm.
69. 12. I am the song of Drunkards. A sort of vicious persons, following their
lusts, There shall come scoffers walking after their own lusts, 2. Pet. 3. 3.
A company of Abject persons, Psalm. 35. 15. Like those enemies, Acts 17. 5. Lewd
fellows of the baser sort. A rout of profane godless irreligious Atheists
that do no more know the Power, then Turks, and Heathens know the truth, of
Godliness, The fool has said in his heart there is no God, you have made a
mock at the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his trust, Ps. 14. 1,
6. It is a shrewd suspicion, that he that is a Mocker is an Atheist, It well
becomes him to mock at Religion that denies a God, and it is a sign that he
denies a God, that mockes at Godliness. And will any wise man stumble at
Religion for such men's Mockes and Reproaches? What can be expected better from
them? It was a good answer that that Orator gave Salust, Neque enim Orat. in
Salust.
qui, ita vt tu, vixit aliter, quam tu loqui potest, It cannot be but that he
that lives thy life, should speak thy language, and it is an answer will
serve the turn in this case; To look for other language from men of so ill
life's, were to expect to gather grapes of thorns. Let no man for such men's
mockes and reproaches be stumbled at Religion, or think ever the worse of it.
A man would choose his Religion by such men's enmity, and it is the great
honor of Religion that it has such Adversaries. Consulito comme^^ar^^s
vestros, ill^^ reperietis primum Neronem in hanc sectam tum maximae Romae
orientem Caesariano gladio ferocisse. Sed tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae
gloriamur. Qui enim scit illum, intelligere potest non nisi aliquod bonum
grande a Nerone damnatum. Tentauerunt and Domitian^s, etc. -- Tales nobis
semper Insecutores, Iniusti, Impij, Turpes quos and ipsi damnare consuestis, a
quibus damnatos restituere soliti estis. Tertull. Apol. cap. 5.
It was that wherein the Primitive Christians used to glory that they had Nero
their first Persecutor, and condemner of their persons and Religion, Inasmuch
as they that knew him could not but know that it must needs be some great good
which Nero did condemn. It was the honor of Christians, and their Religion
that Nero and such as he was, unjust, ungodly, filthy persons, whom the Heathen
themselves condemned were the sorest, and bitterest enemies they had. No wise
man would have stumbled at Christian Religion, because it had such an enemy as
Nero was, A wiseman would have loved it the better. The case is the same here,
It is the honor of Godliness, and Religion, that it has Hypocrites,
Drunkards, vicious followers of their lusts, base and lewd fellows, godless
Atheists, for her scoffing Adversaries. It must needs be some great good which
they hate, and scorn, I know scarce a better argument to persuade men to love
and embrace it, then that such men hate and deride it.

2. The Poverty, the mean, and homely outside of such for the most part, as
receive and profess Christ, and his Gospel. What should you do looking this
way, says Satan; Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?
But this people, etc. John 7. 48. What a fond thing is it to follow this Christ
whom none but a company of the meaner sort of people follow? The greater, and
richer sort of the world they like not, nor look not this way, but only a few
of the lower rank, and condition of men. And how-euer many are stumbled at
this, yet indeed little reason is there that any should in such a case be
scandalized. So much the less reason because our Savior has so fore-armed
and fenced us against this Scandal, Math. 11. 5, 6. The poor receive the
Gospel. Why then, might some say, we will not receive this Christ, and this
Gospel, which for the most part only the poorer sort receive. Therefore see
what our Savior adds to prevent such scandal. And blessed is he that is not
offended in me, that is in me a Christ received and professed by the poorer
sort. How could men like well of Godliness in gay apparel, and with a gold
ring, but the vile raiment makes it vile in their eyes, who consider not that
God has chosen the vile things of this world, to confound the things that are
mighty, that God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, heirs of
the kingdom which he has promised, Iam. 2. 5. When Iulian^^ dixit, and si
Philosoph^rum ego Senatu^ aduo^^uer^ tu continuo s^dularios opifices, omneque
in nos vulgus acce^das, Augustinus dixit. Contumeliosus es in infirma mundi
quae elegi^ deus vt confunderet fortia, Aug. contr. Julian. P^l^g. li. 1,
Julian the Pelagian gibed Augustine that he had not the wise sages, nor the
learned Senate of Philosophers, but only a company of mean tradesmen,
handicraftes men of the vulgar sort, that took part with him, he sweetly
answers, Thou reproachest the weak things of the world, which God has chosen
to confound the things that are mighty. That one thing may suffice to keep men
from stumbling at homely outsides. Specially if men had but an eye of faith in
their heads. Carnal eyes that are dazeled with the glittering outsides of
worldly glories are offended at such seeming baseness, but faith blindes it
self against such fleshly Scandals, and will not see them, when it sees them,
but looks thorough them, and sees glory thorough them. Ioh. 1. 14. And the
word was made flesh, and we beheld his glory, as the glory of the only
begotten son of the father, though his glory were obscured with the veil of
the flesh, yet this veil hides not glory from the eye of faith, faith did
look thorough this veil and easily discerned him the glorious, and only
begotten son of the father, even in the abasement of his Incarnation. The
wisemen that came from the East, when they saw Herod at Jerusalem, happily in
all his royal Robes, yet fall not down not worship him; They come to
Bethlehem and find Christ in a poor fashion, happily in little better then
rags, and yet they fall down and worship him. Why fall they down before a
mean poor Christ, and not before a Magnificent, and glorious Herod? Why
rather are they not scandalized at Christ's baseness and poverty? This is the
excellency of faith, In Christ's Infancy it saw Antiquity, in his baseness
beauty, in his meannesse majesty, and more glory in Christ's rags, then in
Herod's Robes. So surely if men did live and walk by faith, and not by sight,
never would Christ nor his Truth be stumbled at for the homely and poor
outside of those that profess him. The purblind eye of flesh cannot pierce
through these vayles and clouds, And what wonder is it to see a blind man
stumble?

3. But yet the sorest and greatest stumbling block of all, is the scandalous
sins and falls of such as profess religion: certain it is that these of
all others are the most perilous stumbling blocks by which Satan causes
multitudes of men to stumble at religion, and works them to the dislike of the
ways of salvation. Afflictions and Persecutions for the Gospells sake are
dangerous stumbling blocks, and by reason of them many are so offended at
religion, as that they turn their backs upon it, Math. 13. 21. When
tribulation, or persecution arises because of the word by and by, he is
scandalized. So that Persecutions cause Scandal. But yet the Scandals that come
by the evil life's of professors are in some sense far more dangerous and
hurtful then those Scandals that come from Persecutions. Though the scandal of
persecution stumble and beat off many, yet have very many been gained to a
love, and liking of Religion, by the Patience, Courage, and Constancy of the
Saints of God in Persecution. But never were, nor will be any gained thereunto by
the scandalous falls of professors. Persecutions keep men off by fear, but
Scandalous sins by Hardening men's hearts. There is far more hope, and
possibility of gayning a man that is kept off by fear, then of such as are
kept off by a settled, resolved Hardness of Heart. In scandals of the Cross men
may have some secret likings of the Truth, may have secret purposes in better
times to own it, but in scandals of evil example, men grow to an open, and
professed dislike thereof. In scandals of the cross, there is not always a
dislike of Religion it self, but only of the hard terms, with which it must
be received, but from scandals of evil life grows a dislike of Religion it
self. Notwithstanding the scandal of the cross men may have an Honorable, and
a good conceit of Religion, but scandals of evil life breed, and nourish a
base and a vile esteem thereof in the hearts of men. So that persecutions do
not do that mischief that scandalous falls do. Malicious persecutours in
some sense do not that hurt that scandalous professors do.

Now scandalous events being so mischieous and pernicious, and yet withal so
common, and so frequent, why may it not be a work of charity to counterworke
Satan, and to remove out of the way these dangerous stumbling blocks, at which
so many fall to their utter ruin, and destruction.

As Satan Balaam-like easts stumbling blocks in, so should it be our care to
take up these stumbling blocks out of men's ways. It is not enough for us that
we put not a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in another man's way, as
the Apostle aduises Romans 14. 12. But when others have done it, our endeavor
should be, to take such a stumbling block out of the way. It is Gods own
commandment we should so do, Isay 57. 14. Take up the stumbling block out of
the way of my people. It were happy if we could prevent scandals, but since
that cannot be (for it must needs be that offenses come) the next happiness
is to prevent their mischief, that though they do come, yet they may come
with as little hurt as may be. Esto quod alius mo^erit scandalum, profecto
compescere vos potestis. Nolle compescere si^e culpa erit? Aut velle compescere
sine gloria erit? -- Si ergo vos scandalum cum possitis non tollitis plane non
impletis ministerium vestrum. Bernard. Epist. 200. ad vulger. Episco. Audegav.
The which thing who so will not, nor cares not to do, shall not be without
blame, and who so endeauours to do shall not be without his reward. The which
work who so does not when occasion serves, fulfils not his ministry, and the
which work who so does, he does an excellent and a worthy work, even the
work of Angels. Annon denique ministerium est Angelorum tollere scandala de
regno Dei. Si dixeriti^ quid ad nos, etc. Bernard. ibid.
Is it not the work of Angels, says Bernard, to take scandals out of the
Kingdom of God? Yea we find it to be so, Mat. 13. 41. The son of man shall
send forth his Angels and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all scandals.
It is therefore not only a Charitable, but an Angelical work to gather out
scandals, and take up the stumbling blocks that Satan casts in men's way to
heaven.

The same spirit should be in all Gods ministers which was in Paul, 2. Cor. 11.
29. Who is offended, or Scandalized, and I burn not? In cases of scandal he
was all on fire, not only in regard of his grief for, but in regard of his
zeal against them. He burned with an holy zeal, to remove the scandal and to
prevent the mischief it might do. He burned with an holy fire of zeal to
keep others from burning in the fire of Hell, wherewith scandals did endanger
them.

Upon these grounds have I bin moved, and encouraged to the publishing of this
following treatise, to try if by any means, either preaching, or printing, I
might prevent the mischief of scandals. Were it that the fame of them did
spread no farther then the places where they happen, this labor might have
been spared, but Sicut quod de alto cadit grandem s^num facit vt ita audiant
omnes, sic and qui de alto gradu cadit ruina illius vbicunque auditur,
Chrysostom. in Matthew.
as that which falls from an high place (it is Chrysostomes comparison) makes
a great noise, so that all hear it; so men that fall from an high degree of
profession, their falls are not without such a noise as is heard far, and
near. It was needful therefore to proportion the remedy to the disease, that
the plaster should be as broad as the sore, and the medicine go as far as the
poison. When I saw, says Paul, that they walked not uprightly, according to
the truth of the Gospel, I said unto Peter before them all. Gal. 2. 14. But
why before them all? Why had he no more regard to the Honor of Peter? Why was
it not spoken to Peter privately, and by himself alone? Why speaks he tha^
which might be to the discred it o^ Peter before them all? Hierome given a
good answer, Dixi Cephae-Publicum scandalum non potuit private ^^rari, Hieron.
in Gal. 2.
A public scanda^ could not be healed privately. It i^ very fit that
public evils, should have public remedies. If these endeauours of mine,
such as they be, shall thorough Gods blessing have such effect as to prevent
any scandals for the time to come, t^ save any from the danger of such a are
already come, or to bring any t^ repentance by whom offenses have come, I shall
have cause to think my time and pains happily bestowed.

The several Chapters of this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THe Coherence, and resolution of the Text. page 1. CHAP. II. The
necessity of Scandalous events in Gods Church. page 7. CHAP. III. An Apology
for Religion, and the Professors thereof, against the Scandal of Scandals.
page 26. CHAP. IIII. That Scandals are woeful, and fatal to the Scandalized
World. p. 60. CHAP. V. How Scandals come to be so mortally mischievous. page
77. CHAP. VI. What little reason men have to triumphat, and what great reason
to be cautelous in the event of Scandals. page 109. CHAP. VII. The sharp and
severe Justice of God upon such as give Scandal. p. 136. CHAP. VIII. Why God is
so smart, and so severe in his Justice against those by whom Scandals come.
page 170. CHAP. IX. The great care we should have of giving scandal, and sorrow
for them given, and the great cause of humiliation they have by whom offenses
come. page 206.
The Mischief and Misery of SCANDALS Both Taken and Given.
MATH. 18. 7. Woe unto the world because of offenses: for it must needs be that
offenses come: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes.
CHAP. I.
The Coherence and Resolution of the Text.

THe drift of our Savior in his former Discourse was to exhort to the
receiving of little ones. Verse 5. And who so shall receive one such little
child in my name, receives me. A strong motive to receive such. The Apostles
argument to hospitality, Heb. 13. 2 is strong. Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares. But here the
argument carries more strength, Be willing and ready to do all Christian
Offices of love, and show tender respect to little ones, and so receive them,
and you shall receive not Angels, but Christ himself. How willingly would men
receive Christ? Receive these, and you receive him. And if little ones must be
thus tenderly received and regarded, how wary should men be of doing any
thing that may offend them? Therefore our Savior does not only advise to
receive such, but also to take heed of doing any thing that may prove unto
young belieuers, matter of offense and scandal. And so he takes occasion to
enter upon a large discourse concerning scandal. This Verse is part of that
discourse, and in it there be two principal points.

1. The necessity of scandals.
2. The mischief
1. The necessity of scandals, for it must needs be that offenses come. 2. The
Mischief and the misery that comes by them. And that is a twofold woe.
1. A woe to such as are scandalized, that do stumble and are offended; Woe to
the World because of offenses. Offenses shall come, and must come, but to the
sorrow, and smart of some men shall they come; They shall come to make way for
the greater woe to some persons. Such events shall be, but yet they will prove
events of woe to men of the world.

2. A woe to such as do cause and give the offense. But woe to the man by whom
the offense comes. As if he had said. It is necessary that offenses come,
and infallibly they will fall out, but yet this necessity of the event shall
no whit at all excuse, or protect the offender, but as a woe to them that take
the offense, so a woe to them that give the offense, Woe to him by whom the
offense comes.

To make way for what follows it is fit to consider what is here meant by
Scandal or Offense. That we call a scandal, which is or may be in it self an
occasion of falling unto another. Any thing whereby we so offend another, as
that he is hindered from Good, drawn into, or confirmed in evil, is a
scandal. Now a scandal may be. 1. First, in doctrine, and this is scandal given
in heresies, false doctrines. Secondly, by the abuse or the unseasonable use of
Christian liberty, of which kind of scandals the Apostle speaks, Romans 14. 1.
Cor. 8. 10. Thirdly, Scandal may be given by men's life's, when their life's and
actions are such as cross, and thwart the Religion professed by us, and
dishonours the Name of God, which we have taken up. As when a man professes the
Name and Faith of Christ, and professes it zealously, and yet falls into
uncleanness, drunkenness, into gross and notorious acts of fraud and
coozenage, these be scandals and offenses because they be occasions to make
others fall, they hinder some from coming toward goodness and Religion, and
they harden and confirm some in their sinful and evil courses. Thus David's
murder and adultery, Noah's drunkenness, the incestuous Corinthians marriage
were scandalous actions. Now though this text reach to offenses of all kinds,
yet I will only meddle with offenses of this last kind, such as be the
gross and foul courses and practices of any such as have taken upon them the
profession of the Gospel, and the Name of Christ.

To come then to the first point. The Necessity of scandals. It must needs be
that offenses come. The^e must and there shall assuredly fall out scandalous
and offensive actions in the Church of God, even amongst those that profess
Religion and godliness. For that our Savior speaks of the sins of those
that are in the Church, it is plain by that Verse 15, 16, 17. If thy brother
shall trespass, etc. therefore he speaks of the offenses of brethren. If he
shall neglect to hear them tell it to the Church. Now if not of the Church,
why should he be complained of to the Church. What has the Church to do to
judge those, and exercise discipline upon those that are without. And again
scandals properly so called can be no where but in the Church, and amongst such
as profess the Truth of God.

CHAP. II.
The Necessity of scandalous events in Gods Church.

THe point we have then first to handle is this. That there is a necessity of
scandalous events in the Church of God. That scandalous events, and offenses
shall assuredly and infallibly fall out amongst those that profess the Name of
Christ. It must be, and it must needs be that offenses come. So, Luke 17. 1.
It is impossible but that offenses should come. And as the Apostle speaks of
heresies, and of offenses given in that kind, 1. Cor. 11. 19. There must be
heresies, so is it true of these kinds of offenses which are given by sinful
and foul actions, that there must be scandals.

This Necessity arises from a threefold ground:

1. From the decree and council of God, and his secret, but most Just
Judgment: for God that brought light out of darkness, can bring good out of
evil, and can work out his glory even from those things which in their events
seem to make exceedingly to the impeaching and obscuring thereof. God can
gather grapes of these thistles, and figs of these thorns, and therefore his
pleasure it is, and so will he have it that such thorns, and thistles should
grow, and come up in his garden. His ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts. He can make that which for the present, and in our
eye and apprehension is for the great dishonor and disgrace of his Name and
Truth, to turn at the last to the greater honor, and glory of both. He by
his permissiue decree orders all such scandalous events to work together to
bring him in a great, and a rich return of glory. Therefore, Ezekiel. 3. 20. God
is said to lay a stumbling block before a man, And I lay a stumbling block
before him. God has decreed that there shall be scandals. Not a Sparrow falls
on the ground without our Father, Math. 10. 29. And therefore not a Professor
of his Name falls into scandal without him. And therefore God having decreed
that scandals shall be, there is a necessity of the event, It is impossible
but that there should be offenses. But yet this decree does in no wise make God
the author of these evils, because his decree has no necessitating influence
into the wills of men. It is a necessity of infallibility, and certainty of
the event, but not a constraining, forcing necessity to make them to do that
which shall give scandal. Scandals shall necessarily, that is infallibly come
to pass, but yet such as give scandal, shall not be forced and necessarily
constrained by the decree of God to do that they do. They shall work freely
and voluntarily in that which they do, or else it were injustice in God to
bring a woe upon him by whom an offense comes, if he by a Superior power from
Heaven were forced and constrained to fall into scandal. What Gods holy ends
are in that his Decree, we shall see after in the opening of the next point.

2. From the malice of Satan. The malice of the Devil against Gods Truth, and
Man's Salvation is exceeding great, and out of his malice against both, he
endeavors nothing more then to make men sin. He goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. But yet though all be fish that comes to
his net, yet his special malice is against those of Gods Church, and those
therein that most zealously profess his Name and Truth. He knows that if he
can but draw such into his nets and snares, and make them fall into foul and
scandalous actions, this will in a great measure dishonor God and his Gospel,
disgrace Religion and Godliness, and startle such as are but looking toward
God, and wonderfully harden such in their sinful ways that are not so forward
in the zealous profession of the Gospel, and therefore of all others he has
such in his eye, and uses all his power and policy toe nsnare and supplant
such more then a thousand others. He had rather catch one fish then a thousand
frogs, rather fell one Cedar then a whole wood of shrubs. Satan sees that the
sins and scandalous offenses of such will be exceeding aduantageous to the
advancement of his kingdom, and will conduce to the strengthening of his
party more then the falls of any other. Therefore he sets upon them with all
his might and malice above others. Thou art, say they of David, worth ten
thousand of us, And if the enemy had surprised David, it had been more
advantage to him then to have surprised ten thousand other Israelites. So
Satan reckons one zealous Professor of Religion if he can but entrap him
worth ten thousand others for his turn. Such a man's fall would more blemish the
Gospel, and make men more stumble at Godliness then if ten thousand others
should do the like. Therefore lives he by the King of Syria his principle,
Fight neither against small nor great, save only against the King of Israel,
for let the King of Israel fall, and small and great fall with him. His policy
therefore is to aim and level especially at such in whose falls he may ruin
many, and by whose ruins he may raise his own kingdom. Other men's sins
work nothing so much for his advantage. Numquid tam reprehensibilis ebrietas
Alamann^ quam ebrietas Christiani? aut tam damnabilis rapacitas Albani quam
rapacitas Christiani? si fallat Hunnus, vel Gepida, quid mirum est? si peieret
Francus quid noni faceret? Salu. de prou. lib. 4.
Who wonders or staggers at it to see profane and irreligious godless persons
to be vicious adulterers, to be brutish drunkards, to be artificial deceivers
and defrauders. It is no new thing, they do but their kind. The wonder were,
if they should be, or do otherwise. But when a man that professes Godliness
and Religion shall fall into any of these foul courses, how infinitely are
thousands staggered and scandalized at it? How fowly is Religion and Godliness
blurred? How many are there who resolutely determine never to meddle with such
Religion? And so the Devil has his end, has what he would have.

Consider to this end that example, 1. Cor. 5. 1. There is fornication amongst
you, and such fornication as is not once named amongst the Gentiles. Observe
the horrible malice of Satan against the Church of God, and such as are within
it, be they sound, or hypocritical professors of the Gospel. He labors to
bring of them into fowler, and more notorious offensive evils, then the very
heathens themselves are guilty of according to that, Jeremy 18. 13. Ask now
amongst the heathen who has heard such things. The Virgin of Israel has done
an horrible thing. At that time Christians were called out from amongst the
heathen, with whom they lived mingled together. Now the Devil did what in him
lay to keep those heathen from receiving the Gospel, and Christian Religion,
that by no means they might hearken to it. Now to bring this about what was
Satan's project? He lays about him to ensnare some one of the Christian
Corinthians, and to bring him into fowler fornication then was amongst the
heathen. This the Devil effects, and what think we followed upon it? Now
have the heathen occasion to cry down Christian Religion, and to say, Behold
these be your Christians that talk so much of holiness, where did they ever
see any of us whom they term heathens to commit so foul an act of Incest as
to marry his fathers wife. What are our Adulteries, and fornications they so
much judge us for to such foul uncleanness as this? This is your Christian
Religion, and these be your Saints forsooth, now God bless us from such a
Religion, never will we be of such a Religion. How much better is it to be
honest heathens, nay, Adulterous fornicating Pagans then Incestuous Christians?
And thus questionles was many a Pagan mouth opened, and many an heathen heart
stumbled, yea, many an one that before might be in some doubt of the evil
condition of paganism was by this scandal kept off from looking toward
Christian Religion. They liked not this Gospel, and new doctrine of these
Christians. Such men's scandals therefore being of so great advantage for Satan's
purposes, and he being so sedulous and industrious to seek and take all
advantages for his own turn, hence it is that it cannot be but that offenses
come.

How well did Satan foresee what he should gain by David's Scandal? Could he
but get David in, and bring him to commit Adultery with Bathsheba, it would
strike a greater stroke on his side, and do him more service then if a thousand
such as Doeg, Shimei, or Achitophel should do the like. How many men would
thereby be stumbled at David's zealous profession? How many hearts be thereby
hardened in their evil ways? How many men's ways be blockt up for going to
Heaven? How therefore in this case would, and did the Devil put on to get
David down, and to cause him to fall so fowly? The practices of the
Carpocrasians, and the Gnostickes were stupendiously, and prodigiously filthy
and impure. Never the like horrid Impurities practiced or once heard of amongst
the most godless heathen that ever were on the face of the earth.

The Apostle speaks of the heathen, that it was a shame to speak of those
things which they did in secret, but surely the most degenerate heathen that
had put off nature, could not but think it a shame to speak of those things in
secret which they did openly and familiarly, who took upon them the name and
profession of Christians.

Quod hominum genus ad Ecclesiae Dei probrum, and scandalum adornasse and
submisisse Satanas videtur: quippe qui Christianorum sibi nomen indiderint, vt
propter illos offensae Gentes a sanctae Dei Ecclesiae vtilitate abhorreant,
nunciatamque veritatem ob immania illorum facinora, and incred^bilem nequitiam
repudient, vt inquam frequentibus illorum sceleribus animaduersis, eos quoque
qui e sancta Dei Ecclesia sunt, tales esse sibi persuadeant, atque ita a
verissima Dei doctrina aures auertant, aut cer^e paucorum improbitate conspecta
in vniuersos eadem maledicta conijciant. Atque ea demum causa est cur plerique
Gentilium vbicunque istius sectae homines deprehenderint, nullam nobiscum
velint neque dati* acceptique, neque consilij, neque audiendi diuini verbi
societatem coniungere, ac neaures quidem praebere sustineant, vsque adeo
nesarijs illorum flagitijs consternati ac deterriti sunt. Ephiphan lib. 1.
Haeres. 27.

Ad detrectationem diuini nominis and Ecclesiae a Satana praemissi sunt, vti
quae sunt illorum audientes homines, and putantes omnes nos tales esse quertant
aures suas a pr^co^i^ veritatis. Iraen. lib. 1. cap. 24.


Now what was the aim of Satan's malice in bringing those Carpocrasians and
Gnostickes tearming themselves Christians unto such more then heathenish
Impurities? Surely none other but this, that upon the sight of their loathsome
courses the heathen might abhor the Church of God, and might be so
scandalized thereby that they might utterly reject the truth of God preached
unto them. By their scandalous filthiness they took occasion to rail on
Christian Religion, and so to judge all Christians of the same stamp that they
would not only none of their Religion, but no manner of dealing with them, no
not in civil commerce. So strongly by their scandalous life's did Satan hedge
and fence up their way from coming into the Church, and unto Christ. With
these thorns did the Devil hedge up their way from entering into the Church.

3. From the corruption, falsenesse, hypocrisy and deceitfulness of men's
hearts. There be in the Church of God, and in the number of such as profess
the Name of God, two sorts of persons.

1. Such as profess his Name hypocritically, such as make Religion but a mask
and a cloak to hide and cover their rotten insides, and take upon them the
profession of Religion for base and by-ends, only to advance their credit, and
their profit, as the Shechemites would be circumcised for sheep, oxen, and
substance. Some put on a Quanam sunt istae pelles onium nisi nomini^ Cbristiani
extrinsecus superficies? Tertull. de praescript. aduers. Haeret. Quae sunt
vestimenta ouilia? species videlicet simulatae religionis, elce^mosyna
simulata, oration simulata, ieiunium simulatum etc. Chrysostom. oper. imperf. in
Math. hom. 19.
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. Now where Religion is thus
personated, and men do but act a part, corruption restrained will break out
at last. Yea, and God in his Justice will uncase, and discover such by giving
them up to foul and notorious gross evils. Judas under hope of some temporal
preferments both professed, and preached Christ, forsakes all, and follows
him, and was as forward as the best of them. But because all this was in
hypocrisy, therefore his corruption held in for a time under this violent
restraint at the last breaks fowly out, and because he fowly takes Gods Name
in vain, he is by divine Justice left to himself, and falls into that
fearful scandal of betraying Christ. Observe that Matthew. 7. 27. The house
built upon the sand fell, and the fall of it was great: When Hypocrites fall,
they fall not the ordinary falls of other men, Great was the fall of it, They
fall into great and heinous scandals. As Moses speaks of those, Numb. 16. 29.
If these men die the common death of all men, as every man dies, etc. So these
men fall not the common falls of all men, not as every man falls, but when they
fall their fall is great, with great and notorious scandal. Other men may fall
on the ground, but they fall into the kennell, the puddle, into the very mire;
The Sow that is washed to her wallowing in the mire. 2. Peter 2. 22. She lies
not down in the dust, nor in the dirt, but in the mire, and not only lies
down, or falls down into the mire, but wallowes in the mire, and so becomes
all over foul and filthy. It is so with Hypocrites, they so fall, as if a man
fell into and wallowed in the mire, so foul and scandalous are their falls. Now,
then, inasmuch as it cannot be avoided, and it is impossible, but that there
will and shall be Hypocrites in the Church of God, and Satan will be standing
amongst the children of God, Job 1. and in as much as it cannot be but that
rotten hypocrisy will break out, and in regard of Gods Justice must sometimes
be discovered in this life, therefore there must needs be scandals, and
therefore it is impossible but that offenses should come.

2. Such as profess sincerely, and in Truth. Now even in these there are yet
great remaynders of corruption, the very best bear a body of sin and death
about them. And because they are not so watchful as they should, to look so
narrowly to their own hearts as they ought, therefore comes it to pass also
that offenses must needs come. The heart of man is deceitful above all things,
Ier. 17. therefore should Christians be watchful over it above all things.
But because they trust their false and loose hearts to much, and grow remiss
in their watch, thence comes it frequently to pass that offenses must needs
come. When they keep not their own Vineyard, their mothers children are angry
with them, Cant. 1. 6. that is their natural corruptions Sic Iunius.
which they brought from their mothers womb with them, when they watch not,
and look not to themselves do rebel, and ouer-power them, and so oftentimes
carry them into offensive courses. David was a man after Gods own heart, and
yet David fell into a foul scandal. It is not always safe to judge a man to
be an Hypocrite, because he gives scandal. Gods dearest servants are not
always freed and secured from falling into scandalous sins. Well, but what
made David fall? All the while David was in his exile, and affliction all that
while David was free enough. Afflictions kept him awake. But afterward when
David came to be King, and lived in a full estate at his ease, then began he to
be more remiss, and therefore after his afternoones nap when he was walking
upon the roof, the Devil sets a snare, and his own remiss heart soon
catches at the bait, and he is presently ensnared. We find, Math. 13. 27, 28.
tares in the field amongst the wheat. Sir, did thou not sow good wheat in
thy field? Whence then has it tares? He said unto them, An enemy has done
this! These tares are Scandals, Verse 40, 41. They shall gather out of his
kingdom all scandals. We see whence these scandals come, Verse 28. An enemy
has done this. Satan has a great hand in sowing these tares. But observe when
this enemy sowes these tares, Verse 25. But whilst men slept the enemy came,
and sowed tares. The time of men's security is the Devils seeds time, their
sleeping time is his sowing time. So that because men sleep, even good men
oftentimes fall asleep, and are not so watchful as would become them, hence
comes it to pass, that tares must needs be sown, and that offenses must needs
come. Thus we see the grounds of the necessity of scandalous events in Gods
Church.

CHAP. III.
An Apology for Religion, and the professors thereof against the scandal of
scandals.

Give me leave now, for use of all that has been said, to do that which all
the children of wisdom are bound to do. Wisdom, that is Religion, is and
ought to be justified of her children. Luke 7. 35. Give me leave to justify
her, by whom I hope to be saved. Open thy mouth for the dumb, open thy mouth
and plead their cause, Pro. 31. 8, 9. much more then open thy mouth, and plead
the cause of condemned Religion. Never do scandalous events come to pass, but
wisdom and her children do suffer, and Religion and religious ones are
instantly condemned and cried down. But let this that has been spoken serve
to teach us not to be offended at offenses, not to be scandalized at scandals.
It is true indeed, that God should never be offended but it should deeply
offend us. It should be a trouble to us when our brother is offended, 2. Cor.
11. 29. Who is offended and I burn not? How much more then when God is
offended, and that by gross scandals! But my meaning is this, that we should
not so take offense at the scandals of such as profess Religion, and
godliness, whether they do it sincerely or hypocritically, as to be offended
either at the Religion or the persons of all others professing the Truth and
power of godliness. Two things here may stay us in this case.

1. First, because our Savior has Vnde te admoneo ne granius perturberis his
scandalis quae ideo ventura praedicta sunt, vt quando venirent reminisceremur
esse praedicta, and non ei^ valde commoueremur. Nam haec ipse Dominus ita
praedixit, vae mundo a scandalis, etc. August. Epist. 209.
foretold us that they should come, we are told of it before hand, and
therefore nothing in such events falling out but what was before told, why
should any start o^ stumble at them when they come to pass. Why should not
this prevent scandal in this case as well as in the case of the Cross. Thus
Christ preuents the scandal of the Cross and afflictions that should befall
his Disciples, John 16. 1, 2. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye
should not be offended, They shall put you out of their Synagogues etc. And thus
also the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 3, 4. That no man should be moved by these
afflictions, for verily when we were with you, we told you before that we
should suffer tribulation. So here our Savior having Non te ista conturbent
fili dilectissime, haereses enim and scandala futura praedicta sunt, vt inter
inimicos erudiamur, ac sic fides and dilectio nostra possit esse probatior. Aug
Epist. 50. Atqui plures, ait Trypho, qui se Iesum profiteri dicunt, and
Christiani nominantur audio simulachris mactata manducare ***. Cui respondens
eo quoque, inqua^, quod eiusmodi extent viri qui se profitentur Christianos,
and Iesum crucifixum and Dominum, and Christum laudant, sed non illius
doctrinas docent, nos qui purae and verae Jesu Christi disciplinae sectatores
sumus in spe ab ipso annunciata fide constantiores reddimur. Nam quae praedixit
futura (...). Dixit enim, etc. Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryphone Iudaeo.
told us before that scandals should come, why should we be offended thereat,
as if some strange thing that had never been thought of had fallen out. No man
should be moved with scandals so as to stumble at the event of them, because
Christ when he was with us told us before that they should come, and therefore
told us before, because we should not be stumbled and offended. Yea, these
things being foretold that they should fall out amongst those of the Church,
and of the true Religion, we should ^^ereupon be so far from being stumbled,
that we should rather be so much the more stablished and confirmed in the truth
of our Religion and Profession, because we ^^e those things so truly
fulfilled which the High Priest of our profession has foretold.

2. Secondly, because we see that ^ere is a Necessity of them. Since ^ere must
be offenses, and since ^ere must be scandals, therefore ^ould we not for
scandals be so stumbled as to conclude that Religion to be false, and that
profession to be naught where some Professors thereof give scandal. For t^
speak properly and truly there ca^ be no scandal given but by thos^ that are
Professors of true Religion and godliness. A Turk, a Mohammedan, a Jew, a
Papist cannot i^ proper and strict phrase of spee^ give a scandal, for there is
scand^ given where occasion of stumblin^ at the Truth and Power of godliness
is given. So that scandal i^ only properly given by the Professors of Truth,
whose sins a^ such as make the truth of God, an^ the saving profession
thereof to b^ stumbled at. And therefore the^ only are scandals to be found
where Religion and Godliness ar^ professed. And therefore when such scandal is
given, we must not take offense at Religion because we se^ there is a
necessity of scandalo^ events in the Church of God, and amongst such as do
profess true Religion.

Indeed when scandals do fall out this is the conclusion the Devil would have
men infer upon them, and it is the thing he aims at in bringing men into
scandals, to have men thereupon judge such Religion naught, and all of the same
outward profession to be alike. Ecce quales sunt qui Christum colunt, falsum
plane illud est quod aiunt se bona discere, se sanctae legis praecepta
retinere. Si enim bone discerent boni essent, talis profecto secta est quales
and sectatores, hoc sunt absque dubio quod docentur. Mimesis Paganorum apud
Salu. de Prou. lib. 4.
Do ye not see what they are? Are not of the very choicest and chiefest of
them scandalous? As they are so are they All, As they are, so is their Religion
they profess; Surely this Religion and the profession of it are not of God.
But this is the Devils Logic, and reasoning taught in the School of Hell.

Here be two things inferred.

First, Therefore their Religion is naught, and not to be trusted.

Secondly, Thus they are all. That men may not thus stumble at scandals,
consider the weakness of such inferences.

1. They that profess Religion, fall into scandals, therefore their Religion
and Profession is naught, etc. If this be a good reason the Religion that is
from Heaven, and which is taught by God himself, must be damned for a false
Religion, for here we see that amongst the Professors of true Religion, in the
very Church of God there must be scandals. So that if men shall go this way
to work, they will make but mad work of it. Let us but a little consider this
kind of reasoning what validity it has, or could have in such men's cases
whose religion and profession were without question on all hands of God?

Foul and fearful was the scandal of David, And what was the issue?
Presently the enemies of God and godliness began to lift up their heads, and
to fall foul upon David's Religion. 2. Sam. 12. The enemies of God blasphemed
the Name of God. And that happily on this, or the like manner. Oh this is he
that was so grand a Zelot, that the zeal of Gods house did eat him up, Psalm,
69. 9. This is the man forsooth, that danced before the Arc out of his
transcendent zeal, 2. Sam. 6. 14. This is he that prayed thrice a day,
Morning, Evening, and at Noone, Psalm. 55. 17. This is he that was so strict,
and so precise in the government of his Family, Psalm. 101. This your great
precise Zelot, has defiled the Wife, and murdered the Husband. Now you see
what his Religion is, Now you see what comes of this Profession of so much
Holiness, and Godliness. Such as he is, such is his Religion, naught both.
Now was this think we fair reasoning? Was David's Religion false because his
scandal was foul? Who dares justify David's fact, and yet who dares condemn
his Religion and Profession?

The fact of the Incestuous Corinthian was exceeding foul, he marries his
fathers wife, uncleanness unparalleled amongst the Heathen. And how wide now
think we were the Heathen Corinthians mouths opened? Certainly at that time
they did as those, Psalm. 59. 7. Behold they belch out with their mouth, and as
those, Psalm. 73. 9. They set their mouth against the Heavens, and their tongue
walks through the earth So that Heaven and Earth seemed now to ring of them;
Vbi esi lex catholica quam credunt? vbi sunt pieta^^^ and castitatis praecepta
qua discunt? Euangelia legunt and impudici sunt, Apostolos audiu^t and
inebriantur, Christum scquu^tur and rapiunt, vitam improba^ agunt, and proba^
legem habere se dicunt. Mimesis Paganorum apud Salu. de Prou. lib. 4.
Now see, say they, what the God and the Religion of these pure Christians is,
These be the fruits of this Christian Religion? Is not your Religion a goodly
religion? A clear case that their religion is naught. Thus the Heathens, and
right like Heathens did they reason, and pity it is to hear such Heathen
Logic in Christians mouths. Was the Religion of Christ preached and
professed at Corinth naught, and false, because that Corinthian being a
Christian proved so foul? God forbid. Here that has a truth in this sense
which Tertullian spoke in case of Heresies, Quid ergo si Episcopus, si Doctor,
si etiam Martyr lapsus ^ regula fuerit? ideo haereses videbuntur veritatem
ob^inere? ex personis prebamus fidem, an ex fide pe sonas? Tertul. de
praescript. aduers. Haeret.
Do we try faith by men's persons, or men's persons by their faith? Even in
this case may we not judge of faith by men's persons, as if because some persons
professing Religion prove scandalous, therefore their religion should be proved
false. The Religion of the Christian Corinthians was of God, though that man's
incestuous practice were from Satan. We find a case, Mal. 2. 8. But ye are
departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the law. It is
spoken to the Priests, they should have been examples of holiness, and
patterns of piety to the people, but they lived wickedly and scandalously, so
that many of the people stumbled at the Law of God. They began to call the Law,
and their Religion into question, and like enough were ready to say, Surely
this Law is not of God, nor this Religion which the Priests preach and
profess, is not from Heaven. For if this Law and Religion were from God, why
live these Priests so lewdly, and basely. Thus the stumbled people reasoned.
But was their reason good against the Law, and Religion, because the Priests
were scandalous? Was the Law to be cried down, because they lived not
according to that Law they preached and professed? Was the Law naught, because the
Priests were so? Wherefore, says the Apostle, the Law is holy, and the
Commandment is holy, and just, and good, Romans 7. 12. Though they were unholy,
yet the Law was holy, though they were unjust, yet the Law was Just, though
they were naught, yet the Commandment was good. So that it was the peoples
great sin to stumble at the Law, though the Priests departed out of the way.
It is not therefore a safe process to condemn, and cry down Religion from
the scandals and offenses of the Professors thereof. Is the Protestant
Religion false, because, as the Papists reason, so many Protestants are
scandalous Drunkards, Adulterers, etc. yea, let this reason stand good, and
show me that Religion in the whole World that can be true; by this reason
there is no true Religion at all on earth. For give me any Religion on the face
of the earth, Turkish, Jewish, Heathenish, Popish or Protestant, among the
Professors whereof there may not scandalous persons be found. If then I will
be of no religion till I find one whose Professors are wholly free from
scandalous and notorious offenses, I must live and die an irreligious Atheist,
and renounce all religion.

I confess, there is a case wherein a religion may be cried down from the
wicked, and loose life's of the Professors thereof, and that is when the
principles and doctrines of it are such as open a gap, and give liberty to
loose and dishonest practices. When men do not only break the Commandments
of God, but according to the principles of their religion teach men to do so,
Math. 5. 19. As for example, when the Pharisees Disciples did swear, did seek
revenge, did hate their enemies, did neglect their parents in their
necessities, here a man might have said to them, This is your Religion, because
the principles of Pharisaisme taught men so. When I see a Papist profane the
Sabbath in hawking, hunting, bowling, carding, dicing, dancing, and going to
plays, here I may fall upon his religion, because the doctrine of their
religion is, that provided a man hear a Mass on the Sabbath be may spend the
rest of the day in those things. When I see a Papist give himself to all
lewdnes, and vicious uncleanness, I may lay the blame upon his religion,
because the principles thereof set open a gap thereto. For what need I care for
drunkenness whilst it is made but a Venial sin, and a Venial sin is such,
as our Rhemists say, is pardonable of it own nature, so slight Rhem. in Romans 1
32.
as a man need not make confession of it, such as makes no breach of friendship
between God, and us, so small a triffle as may be pardoned by a knock on the
breast, by the Bishops Blessing, by the sprinkling of holy Water, and saying a
Pater Noster, as they teach. Now I say if drunkenness be but a venial sin,
and venial sins be such nothings, why by the principles of his religion
should a Papist fear to be drunk. Profligata Christipietas and extincta
quando quilibet pro modo pretij quod in merces illas expendit peccandi
impunitatem sibi pollicetur. Hinc stupra incestus, adulteria, periuria,
homicidia, etc. originem traxerunt. Quodenim malorum amplius iam horrebunt
mortales quando sibi peccandi licentiam and impunitatem nedum in hac vita, sed
and post obitum aere licet immodico comparari posse persuasum habent. Cent
Grau. Germ. art. 3.
So what need he care what sins he runs into, so long as their Priests
have a iudiciarie power of Absolution, and the Church has a treasury of
Indulgences, and for small sums great Pennances and great sins may be
remitted. There is no religion wherein a man can sin so good cheap. Now
therefore if we see those of that religion take liberty to loose and sinful
courses, it is no injustice to lay the blame, and condemnation upon their
religion, whose Principles and Doctrines are such as give men liberty enough.

So if I should see a man of the Pelagian faith and profession to live
licentiously, in the neglect of the means of grace, and to deny himself no
carnal liberty, I would here condemn his religion from his life, because the
Grounds and Principles of his faith are such as give men liberty to live as
they list. For if so be there be a power of Free will in me, that I may repent
and believe if I will, and when I will, what need I then care what courses I
take, what sins I run into, so long as I can be saved when I list, I will
try such and such sins, and when I have taken my fill, at my pleasure I will
repent and believe. So that in such a case it is not amiss to cry down a
Religion from the scandalous courses of the Professors thereof, and in such a
case a man may innocently say, This is your Religion. But on the contrary,
when a Religion is pure Religion, Iam. 1. 27. A Truth which is according to
godliness, Tit. 1. 1. and the doctrine thereof according to Godliness, 1.
Tim. 6. 3. When a Religion teaches Godliness, Holiness, Purity, Fidelity,
Just and upright dealing, and binds the Conscience to these things upon the
pain of death eternal, if any Professor of such a religion fall into
scandalous sins, here to cry down a Religion that is Holy, Just and Good,
because a Professor thereof does wickedly, vilely and unjustly, this is the
greatest Injustice, and the most unequal, and injurious dealing in the world.
It is true that amongst the Professors of true Religion scandals must be, but
must they needs be from the grounds and doctrines of that Religion? Must
scandals needs be, because that Religion teaches men to do so? Nay, does not
that Religion teach the contrary, upon danger of Hell bind to the contrary?
And why then is the Religion condemned, and cried down? What foul Injustice
is this, that an innocent Religion should suffer for a nocent Professor? If
the Religion they profess do Quae si vera sunt, nulli vel sexui vel aetati
parcite, ad pe^nas rapite, cum vxoribus and liberis funditus extirpate.
Athenag. legate. pro Christian.
principle and teach them to be Drunkards, Adulterers, to be Coozeners,
Cheaters, Defrauders; throw dirt in the face of that Religion, yea, stones at
the head of that religion, and spare it not. Not reproaches, scoffs, squibs,
taunts, but even the stake, and the fire is too easy a punishment for such a
religion.

But if religion and its Principles teach nothing but Holiness, and
righteousness, nothing but Sanctity and Honesty, why must a good and holy
Mother be smitten and wounded, and have her face spitted on, for the
miscarriage of a degenerating, and ungracious child? If the Daughter play the
Whore, and the lewd Filth, will it stand with any justice, or equity that the
Mother a grave, sober, chaste Matrone that has instituted her better should be
carted, and have filth and dirt thrown at her? And yet this is the equity and
justice of the worlds dealings. Because sometimes some of wisdoms children
that should have been so wise by their godly and holy life's to have honored,
and justified their Mother, because I say they do sometimes play the fools,
the scandalous and notorious fools, therefore they cannot be content to
scourge and cart these ungracious children, and to cast abominable filth upon
them, as they deserve, but they must needs fall foul upon the poor and good
Mother, and the keenest and sharpest of their teene must be wreackt upon her,
and she must be lasht with the Scorpions of men's malignant tongues, even to the
very bones.

What is this but the ancient Jewish Non vt principes vestri viuimus, etc. Quod
si quos etiam inter nos tales esse sciatis, non continuo ea de causa Scripturas
and Chri-tstum maledictis proscindite. Justin. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph. Iudaeo.
practice against Christian religion? Who if at any time any of the Christians
fell into any scandalous evil, fell a railing upon Christ, and the sacred
Scriptures? And will we call this Justice? Why rather as in other cases learn
we not to pity and lament the case of a good Mother in the miscarriage of a
lewd ungracious child? It should be the wisdom of men to set the saddle upon
the right horse, let every man have the blame and shame of his own evil
actions, but take we heed that we do not fly in Gods face by falling foul
upon religion for men's scandalous miscarriages. It is not the religions but the
man's fault, if one professing religion miscarrie, had he held him to the rule
of his religion, that had kept him from that evil.

That which was of ancient pleaded with the Heathen on the behalf of
Christians had a great deal of reason in it. They desired but the same equity
and moderation toward them which was used toward their Philosophers. Si
conuicti fuerimus puni amur non propter nomen sed propter crimen. Hoc modo
illos etiam qui philosophiam profitentur iudicari cernimus. Nemo eorum ante
causam iudicio cognitam propter scientiam vel artem suam bonus malusue iudici
esse videtur, sed postquam improbitas alicuius dedetecta fuerit paen^s luit,
nec vllu mex eo in philosophiam redundat crimen. (...), Ille enim malus qui non
legitime philosophatur, professu autem crimine vacat. Hoc ex aequo and nobis
fieri cupimus. Athenag. legate. pro Christian.

Quemadmodum nihil ad philosophiam crimen Sophistarum, Epic^reorum,
Peripateticorum, aut quorumcunque falsa dogmata profitentium: ita in verum
Christianismum non cadit crimen deprauantium Euangelia. Origin contra Celsum,
lib. 2.

Si aliquis cui notum sit Jesus praeceptum docentis temperantiam, and dicentis,
Quicunque inspexerit mulierem ad concupiscentiam, etc. iam commisit adulterium
in cord suo, videret paucos aliquot pro Christiani habitos libidinosc viuere
merito eis praeuaricatione^ impinget, sed iniquissim^ faceret, si doctrinae
Jesus imputaret eorum flagitia. Orig. con. Cells. l. 3.


If any professing philosophy did commit any evil worthy punishment, after
conviction and detection he was punished according to the desert of his fact,
yet Philosophy received no impeachment thereby, and that was not presently
cried out upon, when a Professor of Philosophy miscarried. Because they thus
equally and wisely considered, That the wickedness was in him that was not a
Philosopher according to his rule, but the profession it self was blameless,
That it was the man's fault, and not his professions, that though the man were
naught, yet his profession was good. This equity did the Christians desire the
Heathen would show to them. And this equity I would Christians would show to
those of their own religion, that the Heathen showed to Philosophers* Does a
man professing religion fall into any scandal? Learn to distinguish between
the Man and his Profession, and let not the burden be laid upon religion and
his profession, which is to be laid upon his own back. Learn thus to judge?
that though the Man be deeply to be blamed, yet his Religion and Profession is
blameless. We may justly in such cases blame the man, but we shall deal
very unjustly to blame religion, because we know that nothing blames and
condemns such courses more then that religion which they profess.

We have a prophecy of the condition of the last times. 2. Tim. 3, 1-5 In
which place the Apostle speaks not of Pagans, Jews, Turks, but of
Christians, and such Christians, Verse 5. That should have an outward form and
profession of godliness. Now will any conclude that the profession of godliness
is naught because some that profess a form of godliness are covetous,
boasters, proud, unholy, etc. And shall I be ungodly because some that have a
form of godliness be so vile? or shall I distaste and condemn godliness,
and all profession of it, because many professing godliness prove such and
such? God forbid. Yea, the Apostle sufficiently preuents the scandal when he
says, Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, as if he
should say, Let no man for these things stumble at religion and the profession
of Godliness, for godliness and profession is not in the fault, but the fault
is because there is but a form without power. It is not to be denied, but a
man that has the power of Godliness may fall into a scandal, and by violence
of some strong tentation be rusht into some foul action, but yet in that
particular case, and at that time may want the power of Godliness. What is to
be done then? Surely writing is not to be condemned because some Writers
blot, and blurre; nor Godliness to be condemned for some men's scandals, but
formalitie and want of power. We may not resolve therefore that it is best not
to meddle with godliness, but never to meddle with the profession of it, but
joined with the power. Since therefore there must be scandals amongst such as
profess Godliness learn we to be wiser then for sca^dals to cry down and
condemn religion.

2. Come we now to the second inference. Diverse zealous Professors fall into
scandals, therefore they be all such, all alike naught, and unsound, only
they are not discovered as some are.

This is no new thing, this was the old practice of the Ad quid enim aliud
sedent isti, and quid aliud captant, nisi vt quisq^is Episcopus, vel clericus,
etc. ceciderit omnes tales esse credant, iactent, contendant, sed non omnes
posse manifestari.

Cum de aliquibus qui sanctum nomen profit entur, aliquid criminis vel falsi
sonuerit, vel very patuerit, instant, satagunt, ambiunt vt de omnibus boc
credatur. Aug. Epist. 137


ancient enemies of the Church, and Gods people long ago. It is that which
Augustine in his time complains to have been their guise, That if any that
made profession of the holy Name of God did fall into any sin, if either some
true thing were discovered, or some false thing were reported, oh, how they
laid about them, and labored tooth and nail to persuade men, and make them
believe that they were All such, though they were not all discovered.

The same spirit lives in too many still, and nothing more usual then such
language, and such censures in the like cases. Now ye may see what these men
are, Never a barrel better herring, all naught, all alike. An Inference
miserably uncharitable, which must necessarily make the Church of Christ a
very den of Hypocrites. For here we see that in the very Church of Christ
there must necessarily be scandals and scandalous persons,

And if where some be such all be such, tell me what the Church of Christ
shall be but a collection and confluence of rotten and dissembling Hypocrites.
What is ^his but to do that which David in an other case was afraid to do?
Psalm 73. 15. If I say, I will speak thus: behold I should offend against the
generation of thy children. In speaking thus, let men consider how they can
wash their hands from that guilt. Far is such dealing from that sweet and
gracious dealing of the Lords, Is. 65. 8. that casts not away the whole
cluster, for some corrupt and evil grapes, far are men from that Spirit, who
because now and then some one grape proves rotten, and offensive, do thereupon
reject the whole cluster, and cry out upon the rest of the grapes of the bunch,
as if they were like Ieremies naughty figs. Ier. 24. 2. Which could not be
eaten they were so bad.

To stop the mouth of Iniquity, in such a case, let but these things be
seriously and sadly considered.

1. That there must be such amongst those that powerfully and sauingly
profess the Name of Christ. And therefore we shall never find the most holy
and happy Quantum libet enim vigilet disciplina domus meae homo sum et inter
homines viuo, nec mihiarrogare audeo vt domus mea melior sit quam arca Noe vbi
tamen inter octo homines reprobus vnus inuentus est, aut melior sit quam domus
Abrahae. aut melior sit quam domus Isaac aut melior sit quam cohabitatio ipsius
Domini Christi, in qua vndecim boni perfidum et furem Iudam colerauerint, aut
melior sit postremo quam caelum vnde Angeli ceciderunt Aug. Epist 137.
societies to have bin so happy as to be free from such. In Noah's Arc where
but eight persons, yet one reprobate Cham, In Abraham's family, a bondwoman,
and her son to be cast out; in Isaacs family a profane Esau; in Jacobs family
an Incestuous Reuben; amongst David's children an Incestuous Amnon; a rebellious
Absalom, in the sacred college of Christ's Apostles a Judas a Theife. Ioh. 12.
6. a Traitor. Luke 6. 16. a Devil. Ioh. 6. 70. Even in heaven Gods own house,
and habitation, were found such Angels in whom God found not steadfastness;
such Angels as kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, and
became Devils. Now then look back upon some of these Instances, and see if
this kind of reasoning be safe. In Noah's Arc there was a graceless Cham,
therefore all in the Arc were such as he. Amongst the twelve Patriarchs
Reuben was unclean, and Incestuous, therefore all your pillars of your Ancient
Church were such also. Among the twelve Apostles of Christ the great
professors, and preachers of his Name, Judas was a thief, a traitor, a
devil, therefore the whole company, is a college of thieues, traitors and
devils; Amongst the Angels in heaven, there were legions of Devils, therefore
all of the same stamp, all alike: would not all men spit in that man's face
that should thus reason? and yet how familiar is such reasoning in too many
men's mouths. It is a sure thing that as Simpliciter autem fateor Charitati
vestrae -- quomodo difficile sum expertu^ meliores quam qui in monasterijs
profecerunt: ita non sum expertus p^iores quam qui in monasterijs ceciderunt.
Aug. Epist. 137.
there cannot be found better men in the world, then amongst those in the
Church, professing Christ's Name, and Truth, so neither can there be found some
times worse then those that in the Church fall into heinous scandals. The which
since it must so be, why should the filth of some particular persons
miscarriages be flung in the faces of all. What is this but for the Nolite
ergo propter amurcam qua oculi vestri offen duntur, torculariae detestari vnde
apothecae dominica fructu olei luminosio^is implentur Aug. Epist. 137.
lees, and the dregs to loath the presses from whence Gods storehouses are
filled with oil?

2. That though there be such, and that too many, yet far many more there be
of the same profession that are not such, what though Christ have one disciple
that becomes a thief, a traitor, a devil, that brings scandal upon the
Preaching, and profession, of his Masters Name, yet has he not eleven others
holy and right godly men, that live according to their profession, and do
their profession honor and credit? What though one Christian Corinthian fall
into the sin of Incest, yet why should the heathen Corinthians cast the
disgrace of that his sin, upon all the Christian Corinthians? Are they so
blind that they cannot see, that there be many Corinthians. Act 18. 8. and that
God has much people in that City. Act. 18. 10. Who are holy, gracious,
mortified, and renowned for the power of Godliness, that do every way make good
the religion they profess? what though, now and then we see a star falling
from Heaven, yet see we not millions of those glorious lights of Heaven, keep
their station and their luster? And why have not men an eye as well to look at
such, at the many such whose life's suite with their holy profession, as they
have an eye to look at such, at a few such as give scandal? why can they not
see that Quapropter et si co^tristamur de aliquibus purgamentis consolamur
tamen de pluribus ornamentis Aug. Epist. 137.
there are that shine as lights in the midst of a froward, and a crooked
generation, and so shine that they be ornaments of the Church, as well as they
can see such, as are the disgracers and dishonourers of religion? Surely
because they are a froward and a crooked generation, and out of that
perverseness of Spirit for one, and by one will injuriously judge and condemn
all.

3. If all such, how is it that such more then all do condemn such scandalous
offenders. Who so sharp, and so severe against them, for their scandals as
such as profess the same truth with them. Others triumph over them, scorn and
deride them, but who so sadly, and so sharply reproues, censures, and
condemns them, as do they of the same profession? Who so discountenances, and
discardes them once lapsed till their public satisfactions, and their
unquestioned repentance, and humiliations do in some measure wash off the
blurre of their scandals. Sufficient to such a man is this punishment which was
inflicted of many 2. Cor. 2. 6. And sufficient was the infliction of that
punishment, by those many to acquit them from being all such. If they had all
countenanced him, held fellowship and communion with him, pleaded his cause,
and justified his practice, then had there been some color to have said they
had been all such. But now that the Corinthian Christians, deal so severely
with him, for his offense, it is clear that they are not all such, for if all
such as he, then should he have found more favor at their hands then so. And
this was Augustines answer unto, and defense against the Manichees. It was
their fashion it seems to disgrace the Church, and cast reproach upon it, and
to besmeare it with the mire of the foul actions of scandalous professors of
Christian religion. Nolite mihi colligere professores nominis Christian, n^c
professionis suae vim aut scientes aut exhibentes. Noui multos esse qui
luxuriosissime s^pe^ mo^tuo^ bibent. Noui multos qui renu^ iauerint verbis huic
saculo. Nunc vos illud admoneo vt aliquando ecclesiae catholicae maledicere
definatis vituperando mores hominum quos and ipsa condemnat, and quos quotidie
tanquam malos filios corigere studet. August. de moribus eccl. Cathol. cap. 34.
He confesses that indeed there were many, that gave scandal by there lustful
and luxurious life's, by their drunkenness, vile wordlines and earthlines, but
yet gives them to understand that they were injurious, to reproach the Church
with the condemning of the manners of those men whom the Church her self did
condemn, and whom as evil children she daily endeavored to reform. If
indeed others of the Church professing the same Religion had winked at them,
had slighted their offenses, or had in any kind seemed to have countenanced
their persons, or approved their courses, then might the Manichees have had
some color to have for their sakes condemned all professors, that they were
all alike. But professors and the Church condemning and crying down their
courses it was but malignantly and peruersly done of the Maniches to twit and
reproach the Church with such men's manners.

CHAP. IIII.
That Scandals are woeful and fatal events to the scandalized world.

HItherto we have seen the Necessity, come we now to consider the Mischief
of scandals. That mischief is twofold. The first is a woe to such as are
scandalized that do stumble and are offended. Woe to the world because of
offenses. For the meaning of the words. To the world, that is to worldly and
carnal men. Because of offenses, or from offenses. (...), not (...), from
offenses, not for offenses, not as if scandals were the cause for which the woe
comes, as if God brought a woe upon men for their scandals, but that scandals
are the means and the Instruments by which, and from which God brings woe upon
some men's heads. So that these words are not to be understood as threatening of
woe to such as give offense by falling into scandalous sins, who are
threatened in the former verse, and in the end of this, but it is a threatening
of woe to men of this world, wicked and ungodly men taking offense at the
scandalous actions of such as profess Religion, that these scandals should
prove to such matters of woe and sorrow, and from, and by them should much
mischief come to worldly men. Which words so opened, afford us this point.

That the scandalous and offensive Actions of such as profess the Gospel and
Name of Christ are fatal, dismal, banefull and woeful events to wicked and
worldly men. God that has a providence in all events, has an all-wise and
ouer-ruling providence in events of scandal, and he in that providence of his
orders and appoints them so to come, that they make way for some great woe to
worldly men. Every scandal is a stumbling block, and when a scandal is given,
there is a stumbling block laid, and such a stumbling block, at which some
men shall not only break their shinnes, but their necks. But who lays this
stumbling block? This stumbling block God lays, Ezekiel. 3. 20. I laying a
stumbling block before him he shall die. When God in his Justice means to
make sure work with some men that they shall die, he first in his providence
disposes of a stumbling block to be laid in their way, at which they may
stumble so as they may fall, and be ruined, so as they may die. Amongst many
other stumbling blocks that God disposes to be laid in men's ways, this is a
very frequent, and ordinary one, the scandalous actions of some Professors
of Religion. And when such stumbling blocks are laid, woe to the world, they
are fatal, and mortal, I laying a stumbling block that he may die.

The word (...), a scandal, (...) significat proprie t^gillum in instrumentis
qu^bus capiuntur lupi, aut vul^es, aut mures (...) apud Helych. M^lancth. ad
Romans 14.
the Grammarians say it signifies the crooked piece in a trap to which the
bait is tied, at which a Mouse, Rat, Wolf, or any other vermin biting, the
trap falls down, ensnares, and catches the beast. So that in scandalous events
God sets up a trap, a gin, a snare, by which he purposes to catch and ensnare
such vermin as men in a reprobate condition be. That look as when a man sets
up and baits a trap he may say, Now woe to Rats and Mice, woe to the Foxes,
Wolves, and the baggage vermin, so when scandals fall out, woe to the world,
Gods trap is set up to ensnare such withal as are made to be taken, 2. Peter
2. 12. And look as a man when he sets up a trap, he intends it purposely for
the woe of vermin, so when God in his providence disposes of the events of
scandals, he therein intends the woe, the ensnaring, the catching, killing,
and destroying of such who had been happy, if they had been made the vilest
vermin in the world.

That which Solomon speaks of a wicked man's own sin, is also true of the
scandalous sin of another, Prou. 29. 6. In the transgression of an evil man
there is a snare, though he take a great deal of delight, and pleasure in it,
yet it will prove a thrackling snare; so in the transgression, the scandalous
transgressio^ of a good man, or a seeming good man, there is a snare. Though
evil men take a great deal of Content, and make themselves much mirth, and
pastime at the false, and scandals of such as profess religion, yet in that
scandalous transgression there is a snare for them, a deadly, and a mortal
snare; woe to the world because of offenses.

As it is in the case of Passive, so is it in the case of active sca^dals. Now
in case of passive scandals it is true, woe unto the world from offenses. Such
offenses work to worldly men's great smart, and sorrow. The Apostle speaks of
Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 8. that he was (...), a rock of scandal, or offense. And
Is. 8. 14, 15. the Prophet foretold that he should be for a gin, and for a
snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. So that it may be truly said of such, woe
unto them that Christ the rock of scandal ever came into the world. For
Judgment and for woe, am I come into the world, John 9.

Thus also is it true in case of Active scandals for Judgment do they come
into the world, and for Judgment unto the world. Woe be to the world for the
scandalous sins of Professors of Religion, for they be set up to be
stumbling stones and rocks of offense, against which men of the world shall
dash themselves, they be set for ginnes and for snares in which they shall be
taken. In the case of passive scandals, where offense is only taken, there the
trap is baited with the bread of life. In the case of Active scandal, where
offense is given, there the trap is baited with baine, and poison, with deadly
poison, death is in the trap. Now if woe to the world when the trap is baited
with the bread of life, how much more woe to the world, when it is baited with
rank, and deadly poison?

Scandals and offenses are dismal and fatal to wicked men, because God in his
intention and administration disposes and orders them as the means that shall
make way for the surer and sorer punishment of them for their unprofitableness
under, and their contempt of the Gospel, the means of grace and the holy
examples of such as are truly godly. Therefore are they fatal and woeful
events because they are sent as executioners of divine vengeance upon the
disobedient rebels against the Gospel. God gives men his word and the
Ministry of it to convert, and save them, the holy examples of his children
to guide, and lead them. Now neither one thing nor another will reclaim men of
the world, nothing will do them good, still will they go on in their unbelief
and hardness of heart, notwithstanding the light of the Word, and the light of
holy examples, notwithstanding the shining light of both, they will love, and
live in darkness still. So then God seeing this that nothing will better them,
but to Hell they will go, and damned they will be, let his Ministers, and his
people do what they can, he thereupon enters into a resolution to make sure
work with them, and to take such a course as shall infallibly, and irreuocably
make way for their eternal ruin, and to this end in his providence disposes
of these scandalous events, as stumbling stones, and stumbling blocks; at
which they may so stumble as they may fall, and be surely ruined. As if the
Lord should speak on this manner. I have given you my Word and Gospel, it has
been preached amongst you plentifully, and powerfully, all the means
notwithstanding, you have not been one whit the better, but rather worse, ye
are more stubborn, more rebellious, more malicious, and to Hell ye will, do
my Ministers what they can.

Well then since there is no re^,medie since ye will go, I will take an order
to set you going surely. Behold, in my providence I will dispose of scandalous
events to fall out that shall lie as stumbling blocks in your way; at which,
stumble ye, and fall ye, and be ye remedilesly ruined. I gave you my word
that you might have risen, but you would not be raised by it, I will therefore
lay a stumbling block in your way, at which you shall be sure to fall. I gave
you my word that you might have lived, but now I will lay a stumbling block
that you may die, Ezekiel. 3. 20. You would not be drawn to Heaven by the holy
examples and life's of my Saints, therefore shall ye be head-longed another
way by the scandalous events that shall by my providence fall out. I sent my
Ministers, whom I made fishers of men, with their nets and baits to catch you,
but by no means would ye be caught in their nets, nor bite at their baits,
nor be caught with their hooks, therefore now will I dispose of scandalous
events, which I will set as traps, and snares and ginnes for you: greedily and
eagerly shall you come to them, and shall be ensnared and held fast for ever
getting out again. And thus do scandals come as messengers of wrath and death.

Gods dealing with wicked men in events of scandals, is clean contrary to his
dealing with good men. Such as love the truth of God, and subject unto it,
though scandals come shall not be ensnared by them, God will secure and save
them from being ensnared, Psalm. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy
law, and nothing shall offend them, or, they shall have no stumbling block.
Such as love Gods truth have great peace, great security when scandals fall
out, they shall have no stu^bling blocks, God himself will keep them, that
they shall not dash their feet against these stones, they shall have no
stumbling blocks to hurt them. But now on the contrary great danger and
mischief shall they have that love not the Law, they shall have stumbling
blocks, and therefore because they love not Gods law shall they have them, that
God may be avenged upon them for the neglect and contempt of his truth. And
because they love not Gods Law, therefore shall scandals come, that shall be
fatal stumbling blocks for them. That look as Solomon speaks of the Harlot,
Eccl. 7. 26. I find more bitter then death the woman whose heart is snares and
nets, and her hands as bands, who so is good before God shall escape from her,
but the sinner shall be taken by her; So may it be said of scandals. More bitter
then death, (woe unto the world because of scandals) are scandalous events, for
they are as snares and nets, who so is good before God, an holy and a godly man
shall escape, and be delivered from being ensnared by them, but the sinner, the
neglecter and contemner of Gods grace shall be taken, and be ruined by them,
and therefore woe unto the sinners of the world, because of scandals. It is in
this case between men of the world and scandals, as it was in Ahabs case
between him and his false prophets, 1. King. 22. 20, 21, 22. God had a purpose
out of divine Justice and vengeance that Ahab should fall, and be ruined. Now
God enters into counsel what course shall be taken to bring it about that he
may fall and perish, Verse 20. Who shall persuade Ahab that he may go up and
fall at Ramoth Gilead. There comes forth a spirit, Verse 21. and says, I will
persuade him. The Lord asks, Verse 22. How or wherewith? He answers, I will
go forth and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets, And the Lord
said, Thou shall persuade him and prevail also, Go forth, and do so. The
case is the very same here. God bestows his Word, and the Ministry of it
upon a people, it works them not to Faith and Repentance. Hereupon is the Lord
provoked to anger, and upon that he enters into a consult of revenge. Here be
a company of men that have had the means of grace, but they will not be
converted, and raised up, I am therefore resolved they shall fall into Hell for
ever. But who will now take some course that they may fall. Then steps forth
Satan, I will take a course to make them fall fatally. And the Lord says what
course will thou take? Satan answers. I will go forth and draw some noted
Professor of Religion into some gross and scandalous sin. And that scandal
of his will be such a stumbling block at which they will so stumble, that I
will warrant them fall far enough, and deep enough for ever recovering out
of the pit. And the Lord answers, Thou shall effect it and prevail, Go forth
and do so. Go Satan, prevail with such, and such a Professor of Religion to
bring him into some foul scandal. And let that scandal be a fatal stumbling
block to make such fall, and assuredly perish, that would not be wrought upon
by the word.

So that look what the false prophets were to Ahab, that are scandals to the
world, means of their fatal falls and ruins, woe to Ahab because of the false
prophets, and woe to the world because of scandals that make way for their
mischief, as the false prophets did for Ahabs. So that by all this we see
that Gods disposal of scandals, is an Act of divine vengeance, and Justice
plaguing men's unprofitableness under the means of grace, that by this means
their righteous damnation might be sealed up, and made sure.

And therefore this is a point well worth our observation. That where God sends
most preaching, and the greatest means of grace, there commonly fall out the
greatest and foulest scandals, and where little or no means little or no
scandal.

Now what may the reason of this be? Not that the preaching of the Gospel makes
men worse, as men of evil spirits are ready to slander and calumniate it in
case of such events, but amongst many other reasons that might be given of it,
this is one special one. Where God gives greatest means of grace, and
salvation, there men's sin in their unprofitableness, impenitencie, and
unbelief is the greater. The greater men's sins are, the greater is Gods
wrath, and therefore out of the greatness of his wrath against men's great
unprofitableness, God disposes it, that where the greatest means of grace are
neglected and contemned, there shall be the greatest scandals, that so he may
greatly plague great unprofitableness and contempt. God will have such as be
unprofitable under great means, to have great falls, that they of all others may
fall most lethally, and most dangerously, and fatally. Now a little stumbling
stone causes but a little and an easy fall, but the greater the stumbling block
is, the greater, and more woeful must the fall needs be. And therefore where
greatest means not profited by, are, there are greatest scandals to bring the
greater woe, and vengeance upon so great unprofitableness; therefore there the
greatest stumbling blocks to fall by, where the greatest means to rise by,
that such may not simply fall, but so fall that they may be dashed to pieces.

CHAP. V.
How Scandals come to be so woeful and Mischievous.

NOw how Scandals make way for men's falls and ruins, and so for their woe will
appear in these following particulars.

1. In that they make way for their stumbling at Religion and godliness, the
powerful and saving profession thereof. When men stumble at Religion and are
so offended at Godliness as to dislike and reject it, and that with a
peremptory resolution of spirit never to receive and embrace it, it must needs
be confessed that such persons are in a woeful and miserable case. We find
some that stumbled at Christ, 1. Pet. 2. 8. Some that stumbled at the word, 1.
Pet. 2. 8 Some that stumble at the law, Mal. 2. 8. Some that stumble in their
ways from the ancient paths, Iere. 18. 15. Now to stumble at Christ, at the
word, at the Law, at the ancient ways, at Religion, this is a woeful thing.
There is but one true Religion in which a man can be saved, now therefore woe
to him that stumbles at true Religion, for there is no way but infallible
damnation for such a man. There is no way of salvation but by Christ, There is
no other name under heaven to be saved by, Act. 4. 12. Therefore woe to that
man that stumbles at Christ, for that man puts himself out of possibility of
salvation. The word, is the word of grace, Act. 20. 32. the word of life, Ioh.
6. 68. the word of the kingdom, Mat. 13. 19. therefore woe to that man that
stumbles at the word, for he puts himself out of possibility of grace, eternal
life, and the kingdom of God. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting or
restoring the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. therefore woe to him that stumbles at the
Law, for he is out of possibility of being converted, and restored. The old
and the Ancient ways are the good ways wherein a man shall find rest to his
soul. Ier. 6. 16. Therefore woe to that man that stumbles at and from the
ancient ways, because what possibility has he of finding rest to his soul?

Now by scandals and offenses stumbling blocks are laid to make men stumble
at these, and so to bring woe upon their souls. When professors of religion,
of Christ, of the word, of the law, of the Ancient ways fall into foul
scandals, thereupon men of the world take occasion to stumble at that Religion,
at that Christ, at that word, at that law, at those Ancient ways which they
profess, and grow to a resolution never to make or meddle with these, and so
make way for their own woe by refusing, and resolving against the ways of
salvation: for look what the force of holy example and good life is to stop
men's mouths, and gain their hearts to a love and liking of the truth and
religion, of that force on the contrary, is evil and scandalous life to keep
men of Godly and holy life, good conversation makes evil speakers ashamed. 1.
Pet. 3. 16. Well doing puts to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1. Pet. 2.
15. that they cannot speak evil of Godliness and Religion. Religious
conversation winnes and gains those that are without and brings them to a love
of religion, 1. Pet. 3. 1. So contrarily, scandalous carriages embolden the
faces, and open the mouths of enemies, stumbles, and offends them, and works
in them such a disallowance of religion and dislike of the profession of
Godliness, that they utterly resolve against it.

And that scandals, do make men thus stumble at Religion, the word, etc. how
plain does daily experience make it? let such an one as professes Christ, his
word, his truth fall into any scandal, and what follows? Oh! Say men, this is
their religion, this is their profession, do ye not see what persons they are
that are of this same holy religion, and profession? Are there any worse then
these, more dishonest, and deceitful? If this be their religion, God bless
me from their religion, I am resolved never to be of such a religion, I now
plainly see that it is nothing but errant hypocrisy, lying, coozening, and
dissembling. And thus through divine vengeance punishing the^ for their
unprofitableness under the word, they so stumble at these scandals, as to fall
into an hatred, and dislike of saving religion, and saving powerful profession
of it. Into which who so falls, how woefully falls he?

That scandals do bring this woe upon the world, and prove ruining stumbling
blocks thus to make them fall, is further clear by that, Mal. 2. 8. Ye are
departed out of the way. It is a charge upon the Priests. The Misera eorum
conuersatio plebis tuae miserabilis subuersio est. Bernard in conuers. Pauli
ser. 1.
Priests that preached; and professed the law, they departed out of the way,
they committed gross and foul scandals what was the issue of it? A great
deal of mischief followed upon it, namely, a woe, an heavy woe, unto the
people from their scandals. But what was that woe? Ye have caused many to
stumble at the Law, that, is to stumble at true religion, and the ways of God.
When the people saw the Priests that professed and preached the Law, and who so
great Zelots for the Law as they, when they saw these Priests to live so
loosely, and so scandalously they began to start at it, and to question happily
whether this Law, this religion they preached, and professed were of God or no.
And if this were their law, and their religion, for their parts they were
resolved never to have to do with such a Law, with such a religion. Thus their
scandals did stumble the^ And thus did their scandals bring an heavy woe upon
the people, for what a woeful condition was this, thus to stumble at the Law,
at the true religion of God? what was this, but to seal up, and make sure
their own damnation? for if they would none of the Law, they could none of
Heaven, if shut out of Heaven, what remained but Hell? The Lord had, it is
likely, a long while called upon the people by his Prophets, they would not
hearken nor repent, nor embrace the truth of God. The Lord therefore in his
Justice resolves to be revenged upon them, by bringing a woe upon them. And
what woe would God bring upon them! This woe of stumbling at religion that so
he might make sure work with them, that since they would not be saved, when
he offered them salvation, therefore now they should ueuer be saved. But now
what course will God take to effect this, and bring this woe upon them. He
will in his wise providence lay the stumbling block of the Priests scandals in
their way, at which they shall so stumble as to dislike the Law, and to fall
into an utter distaste of religion, by which they should make sure work against
their own salvation. And so woe was unto the people from the Priests scandals.

2. Scandals make way for woe in that they make way to occasion, men of the
world to fall into the foul and woeful sin of blaspheming Gods holy Name.
It is a woeful thing to fall into that sin, especially so to fall into it,
as to make that the joy of our hearts which tends to the reproach and dishonor
of his Name. The Name of God is a glorious and a fearful Name. Deuteronomy. 28. 50.
and therefore how woeful and fearful a thing for a man to blaspheme that
Name. What does he better then cut himself off, from all communion with God
that blasphemes his Name, that flies in his face, and triumphs in his
reproach. It is said of the malicious Jews. Act. 13. 45. that they spoke
against Paul's doctrine contradicting, and blaspheming. And mark what follows,
verse. 46. Seeing ye put the word of God from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. See then when they
blasphemed what they did, They put away the word from them, they judged
themselves unworthy of life, they caused God to turn away the means of
salvation from them. Such a case is a woeful case, and to this case will
contradicting and blaspheming of God, and his truth, and Religion bring men.
And therefore in this regard are scandals woeful events because they occasion
men to blaspheme and speak evil of God and his truth. When David fell in to
that foul Scandal, what followed upon it? See 2. Sam. 12. 14. By this deed
thou have given great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme. Those
amongst the people that were haters of true godliness, and enemies to the
powerful profession thereof and so enemies of God when David fell into this
sin, they fell into a woeful case, they presently fall a blaspheming of
Religion, and speaking evil of godliness, and he that blasphemes godliness
blasphemes God, and so by this means causes God in wrath peremptorily to turn
from them. So Romans 2. 23. 24. thorough you the name of God is blasphemed a
among the Gentiles. So that the scandalous sins of the Jews were stumbling
blocks to the Gentiles that made them fall into that foul sin of blaspheming,
that must needs make them unworthy of eternal life.

3. Scandals make way for woe, in that they make way for the hardening of the
hearts, and stiffening of the necks of sinful men in their evil ways. It
is a very dangerous thing, for a man to be in a sinful way, but for a man
to have his hand strengthened in his Iniquity, to be hardened in any sin,
this is a woeful condition. It is the greatest woe, and curse that can be to
have ones heart hardened. Lam. 3. 64. 65. Render unto them a recompense O Lord
according to the work of their hands, Give them obstinacy of heart, thy curse
unto them. Solomon speaks of the plagues in the heart. 1. King. 8. 38. The
plague in the body, is a woeful disease, and what then is the plague in the
heart. God threatens Pharaoh with this plague, Exodus 9. 14. I will at this time
send all my plagues upon thine heart, and see how God did it. Exodus 10. 1. Go
into Pharaoh for I have hardened his heart. Therefore the Hardness, or Hardening
of the heart is the plague of the heart. God sent ten plagues upon Pharaoh, but
this plague of his heart, in the hardening of it, was ten times greater then
all the plagues of Egypt. It is that which usually God premises, and
fore-sendes when he means to prepare men to temporal destruction. When God
means resolutely, to speed a particular person, or a whole nation, and to
bring inevitable destruction upon them, God first makes way for it, by the
hardening of men's hearts. Exo. 14. 17. When God would get himself honor in
the destruction of Pharaoh and the Egyptians. I will says he, harden their
hearts, and they shall follow them, and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh. So
Josh. 11. 19. 20. Not a City that made peace, with the children of Israel, save
the Hiuites the Inhabitants of Gibeon, They took all in battle. But why did
not other Cities, do as the Gibeonites, why did not they submit, and seek
their peace? Because God had a purpose, they should be destroyed, and to make
the surer way for it, gave them up to an hardened heart, for it was of the
Lord, to harden their hearts, that they should come out against Israel in
battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor
but that he might destroy them. So that when God means that a man shall have
no favor, but be utterly destroyed then God first gives men up to hardness of
heart. Nay, it is that which is a woeful preparatiue to eternal wrath, it is
that which locks men, and shuts them fast up, and keeps them sure for eternal
vengeance. When God is so angry, as that he is peremptorily resolved that a
man shall not be saved, but be damned without all peradventure, then God gives
him up to the hardness of heart, under which he shall be surely reserved unto
the day of wrath.

When a Prince is resolved to put a man to death, he commands him first to be
surely imprisoned, to be laid fast in fetters and irons. When Herod meant to
execute Peter, see what sure work is made, He is delivered to four
quaternions of Soldiers to be kept, he lies between two Soldiers, bound
with two chains, and the keepers before the doors keeping the prison, Act. 12
4, 6. So that in reason there was an impossibility of his escape from death.

So when God will make sure work with a man, and is peremptory for his
execution, the Lord delivers him up to hardness of heart, and this hardness
of heart will be as quaternions of Soldiers, as Chains, and Keepers, Locks,
Bars, Bolts, and Fetters, to reserve a man sure for damnation. A man has had
the means of grace offered him, he has slighted them, and he will go on, and
he will do this and that, say all the Preachers what they will, and can to the
contrary. When God sees this, he thus resolves. Here is a man that I would
have saved, I offered him the outward means of grace, but he has stubbornly
and rebelliously stood out against the means, I am resolved he shall never be
saved. I but perhaps the man lives still under the means of grace, and so long
there is a possibility of his conversion, and if he be converted he must needs
be saved. Therefore God to keep him from salvation will take a course sure
enough to keep him from conversion. Now what course is that? God will have such
a man's heart hardened. And if once the heart be hardened there is no
possibility of Conversion, and if no Conversion, no Salvation. This process
of Divine Justice and vengeance we have. Is. 6. 10. Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert and be healed. We see in the end of the Verse, that Gods full and
final resolution is that they shall not be healed, that is, they shall not be
saved, as appears, Mark. 4. 12. But how will God keep them from being saved,
they having, and hearing the Word? They shall not be converted. But how will
he keep them from Conversion? They shall not understand with their heart,
though they hear. But how will he keep them from understanding with their
heart? Go make the heart of this people fat, that is, Go harden their hearts.
When the heart is hardened they cannot understand with the heart, when they
cannot understand with the heart, they cannot be converted, when they cannot
be converted, when they cannot be saved. And so the hardening of the heart is
nothing else but the locking, and the shutting, and sealing of a man up, to
keep him sure and fast for Hell. So that for a man to be given up to
hardness of heart is a sign, and a woeful sign that a man is such an one, as
on whose soul God is resolved to show no mercy, and that a man is in the
woeful state of reprobation. Therefore see how the Apostle speaks, Romans 9. 18.
Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. See how hardening, and showing mercy stand in opposition. Whom he
will he hardens, that is, he reprobates, and shows no mercy to. But why says
he not, to whom he will show no mercy, he shows none, but in steed of that,
whom he will he hardens? Because God makes way for the execution of his
counsel of Reprobation by Hardening men's hearts. By all this then it is clear,
that it is a woeful thing to be given up to the hardness of heart, woe to
that man that has his heart hardened.

Now then Scandals are woeful events unto men of the world, because they be
such snares and stumbling blocks, as make and occasion them to fall into this
woeful condition of hardening their hearts. Therefore woe to the world because
of scandals, because by scandals their hearts shall be hardened, they shall have
the woeful plague of the heart, they shall come under a woeful curse, be
brought into a preparatiue condition for temporal and eternal ruin. For when
men see such as make profession of godliness to fall into scandals, and
heinous evils, it occasions them exceedingly to harden their hearts, and to
bless themselves in their evil, and ungodly ways, as if their ways were
better then the ways of godliness, and their persons in a better estate and
condition then theirs that make such ado with their profession.

We may conceive the truth of this in the scandal of the Incestuous
Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5. There were multitudes of Heathen Corinthians that had
not yet received Christ, nor his Gospel. The Christian Corinthians had
questionless been dealing with the Heathen Corinthians, to bring them to
repentance for the sins of their Gentilisme. What those sins were we may
see, 1. Cor. 6. 10. Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, etc. nor Thieues, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, etc. And such were
some of you. Namely, when they lived in their Heathen condition. Now out of
these sins would not the Heathen residue be brought. Now when all means, and
endeauours for their reclaiming were in vain, God in his Justice would even
give them up to that woeful condition of being hardened in those their sins.

To this end in his providence a scandalous event is disposed to come to pass
in the sin of the incestuous Corinthian, which could not but turn to the
great hardening of the Heathens heart in their sins, Then began they to say
and think in their hearts, They told us our estates, and our ways were
dangerous and damnable, but to be sure, our ways are as good as theirs. We
are better yet then these professors of Christ, we are honester at the
hardest, then are they, The fornication and filthiness that is acted and
committed amongst them is not once named amongst us.

We will therefore even keep us in these ways, and go on in these courses
still. For if such as these profess themselves to be, if your holy and strict
Christians may do such vile things as these, then I trow it is not such an
heinous thing for us that make no such profession to be Drunkards, Adulterers,
Swearers, etc. And thus by occasion of this scandal did they confirm, hearten,
and harden themselves in their iniquities. Suppose any of the Christians had
after the falling out of this scandal, but offered to have reproved an Heathen
Corinthian for Fornication, Drunkenness, etc. what answer was he like to have
had but such an one as this. Oh Sir, it is no marvel, you should find fault
with me, though now and then I may be drunk, or commit fornication yet I am
not such a beast, as such an one your fellow Christian, that made such ado
with his holiness, that has now married his fathers Wife, I would you should
know it, I am as honest as he, and as good a liver as he for his heart. And so
shook they off all admonition and reproof, and hardened their hearts against
all remedies by occasion of that scandal. And so was there a woe to many an
Heathen Corinthian, from the scandal of that Incestuous Christian, because they
stumbled at it and were ensnared by it, so as to harden themselves in their
sinful courses, and so by that hardness were sealed up to assured wrath.

There is nothing hardens men in their Iniquity more, then to Justify them in
their sinful ways. There is a Justification of a sinner from his
ungodliness, and there is a Justification of a sinner in his ungodliness.

The first is a blessed thing, and makes a man happy, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

The second is woeful, dismal, and dangerous. Justification of a sinner from
his sins is called a Justification of life, Romans 5. 18. But Justification of a
sinner in his sins is a Justification of death, that seals up a man to
damnation. Justification of a sinner from sin is an Act of Gods grace, and
mercy, and so he iustifies the ungodly, (Romans 4 5. on him that iustifies the
ungodly) by acquitting, discharging, and absoluing him from the guilt of his
ungodliness. Justification of a sinner in his sin is an act of Gods woeful
vengeance punishing men for former ungodliness, and making way for the
infallible ascertaining of his damnation. And for Justification of a sinner in
his sins is way made by scandalous events. And that scandalous events do
justify ungodly men in their sins, and so harden them therein, may appear by
that, Ezekiel. 16. 51. Neither has Samaria committed half thy sins, but thou
have multiplied thine abominations more then they, and have justified thy
sisters in all their abominations which thou have done. Samaria was one of
Iudahs sisters; The Samaritans were an idolatrous wicked people, Judah she
professed her self the people of God. Now Judah that professed her self Gods
people, fell into foul, and scandalous abominations. Samaria committed not
half her sins. Upon this, Samaria begins to Saint her self, and to justify
her self, being justified by Judah. Which may be understood not only of the
event, that Samaria was less unjust, and unrighteous in comparison of Judah,
but also of the effect or consequent of that event, because Samaria in
comparing her self with Judah, finding herself more just, that is less
unjust, did thereby positiuely justify her self, as if she were in a good
case, and a good way, because Judah's abominations were so many and so great,
and because Judah is blacker then she, therefore she begins to imagine her
self Lilly white. I, says Samaria, it is no marvel that Judah is so godly,
so religious, so holy a people, and that I am so idolatrous, and so sinful, I
am sure I am not half so bad as she. For all their godliness, and Religion
they talk of, for any thing I see, my life, courses, dealings are as good, and
honest, nay, more justifiable then theirs. And if Judah that professes such
singular holiness, do thus and thus I hope my ways being better then hers,
my condition is better. I am therefore resolved to ride on in the old road
still, I will not change life's and ways with Judah for all her godliness and
Religion. Thus questionless, did Iudahs abominations occasion Samaria to
justify her self, and by such justifying of her self, she hardened and
strengthened her self in her sins, and so were Iudahs scandals and
abominations woeful events to Samaria, because thereby her heart was hardened
to her destruction.

It is with scandals as it was with those false Prophets, Ezekiel. 13. 22. Ye
strengthened the hands of the wicked that he should not return from his
wicked way. Men cannot be saved if they be not turned from their evil ways,
men cannot be turned from their evil ways, if their hands be strengthened in
them, and their hearts hardened. Now here was the mischief and the woe that
came by those false Prophets, they strengthened men's hands, and hardened their
hearts in their evil ways that they could not be saved. Such is the mischief
and the woe of scandals, men cannot be saved, unless they return from their
wicked way, they cannot return from their wicked way so long as their hands
be strengthened, and woe to the world because of scandals, for they strengthen
the hands of the wicked, and so make way for their fatal ruin.

Scandals are that to the World, that those things were to the Jews, Romans 11.
9. Let their table be made a snare, a trap, and a stumbling block, and a
recompense unto them. When no means of grace will soften hard hearts and bring
them to Repentance, God in his Justice disposes of scandals, and they are made
snares, traps, and stumbling blocks, and a recompense unto them that God may
recompense them for their unprofitableness; and by those scandals, occasion them
to harden their hearts to their ruin, that would not be softened unto life.

It is otherwise to the World from the scandals and falls of Professors, then it
was to the Gentiles from the fall of the Jews from Christ. The fall of the
Jews was for the happiness of the Gentiles. Romans 11. 11, 12. Have they
stumbled that they should fall? that is, fall quite and clean off, God forbid,
But through their fall, salvation is come unto the Gentiles, The fall of them
is the riches of the world. But now in scandalous falls of Professors into foul
sins it is contrary, Thorough their falls damnation comes to many, and they
are the mischief, misery and undoing of many. And that on this manner. God
many times vouchsafes the means of grace and repentance to a people, in those
means strives a long time with them, but strives in vain. Therefore he
resolves thus, My spirit shall strive no longer with them, but since they will
not, they shall not be saved, I will take a sure course for their damnation. I
am resolved they shall not be saved, and because they shallbe sure never to be
saved, I will make sure they shall never be converted, And that they may be
made sure for ever being converted, I will take a course that they shall not
understand the word they hear with their hearts, and that they may not
understand the word they hear, I will take a course for the hardening of their
hearts, and for the thorough hardening of their hearts some professor of
religion shall fall into scandal, and thereby shall their hearts be hardened
seven fold more then ever, they shall justify themselves in their sins, and
so by an hard heart shall put themselves out of all possibility of Conversion,
and so out of all possibility of salvation. How often would I have had you
risen, and ye would not rise? therefore now shall you fall into hell, for he
that ^ardens his heart shall fall into ^ischiefe, Prou. 28. 14.

That therefore ye may fall into a mischief, and with a mischief; ye shall be
hardened, and that you may fall into greater hardness of heart, some man shall
fall into scandal; his fall into scandal shall make way for a woe to fall upon
your heads. His scandal shall harden you, that hardness shall make you fall into
mischief. And thus woe to the world because of offenses, because they come to
stiffen, and harden their spirits, and as messengers of wrath to bind them
sure, hand and foot, that they may be prepared, to be thrown out into utter
darkness.

Thus woe to the world, because of offenses, because the world is occasioned by
them, to reject the saving profession of Religion, to fall foul on Gods holy
Name, to justify themselves in their sinful ways, and so by these things
to make hell sure their own. So that the fall of a professor of religion, is
as the fall of an oak upon underwood, and smaller trees, that be near it: woe
to them, when the oak falls, because it mischiefs, brushes and breaks them
in pieces by its fall. It is just in this case, as it was in the overthrow of
that Army. Ier. 46. 12. The mighty man has stumbled against the mighty, and
they are both fallen together, first one fell, he being fallen; another stumbles
at him, and so they both lay on the ground together. Thus falls it out in
scandals. First one falls into some great sin, others come and stumble at
him being fallen, and so both fall, and the first man's fall is the last man's
ruin. And therefore woe to the world because of scandals.

CHAP. VI.
What little reason men have to triumph at, and what great reason to be
cautelous in the event of scandals.

ALl this well weighed, and duly considered will give us to understand two
things: the little reason of joy, and the great reason of fear and caution in
case of such scandalous events.

1. It lets us see what little reason men of the world have to triumph, insult,
and (...). Just Mart. Epist. ad Zen. and Seren.
rejoice as they use to do, in the falls and scandals of such as profess
religion. When my foot* slippeth they magnify themselves against me. Psalm.
38. 16. If such an one do but tread awry, or his foot but slip, their enemies
let not their slips slip, but take occasion from small slips to make great
tryumphs, And if they be so ready to magnify themselves against them, when
they but slip, how much more when they fall, and fall into the puddle, into the
mire? How do they magnify themselves against them then? The reproach and
disgrace of their sinful falls yeeldes adversaries such content that they
project and lay on purpose for it. Neh. 6. 13. Therefore was he hired that I
should be afraid, and do so and sin, and that they might have matter for an
evil report, that they might reproach me. And therefore proiecting for theie
falls, and laying plots before hand for them if it may, be no wonder that they
so rejoice and triumph if at any time they fall into such sins, whereby they
may have matter for an evil report tha^ they may reproach them. So true is that
which Papistae caelumniandi studio ^otam nostra^ conuersationem abseruant Si
quid ergo humani patimur, sicut profecto infirmi sumus, and patimur nostra
incommoda, ibi demum tanquam famelici porci immergunt se in stercora nostra,
and ex ijs delicias faciunt, dum infirmitatem nostram exemplo maledicti Ham
aperiunt and traducunt, vere enim esuriunt and sitiunt scandala nostra, Luth.
in Gen 9.
Luther speaks that they hunger and thirst, after the^ scandals of the Godly,
and if at any time, through humane frailety they do fall into an evil, like
hungry hogs they nuzzle in their excrements, and feast upon them as upon
dainties, There being nothing that so glads their hearts, that so opens their
mouths with so much insolency and triumph. And as Luther compares them in this
regard to hogs, so Hos ergo de nostris do^oribus suauitatem suae malae linguae
captantes; facile est vt ill^ canibus co^paremus, si forte ^n male intelligendi
sunt, qui lingebant vulnere pauperis illius qui ante ianuam diuitis iacebat
etc. Aug. Epist. 137.
Augustine to dogs, namely to the rich gluttons dogs that lay licking, and
sucking Lazarus his sores and wounds. It pleased not those dogs so much to be
licking Lazarus sores as it pleases some men to have their tongues in the
scandalous wounds and sores of such, as profess godliness. As it is the sorrow,
and grief of good hearts, and that which makes them droop and mourn to see
Christ, his Gospel, and truth reproached, and disgraced by scandals; so
contrarily, it is meat and drink to wicked ones, and the very joy of their
hearts, when such events fall out. Proinde charissimi in isto scandalo quo de
Bonifacio pr^sbytero no^ nulli perturbantur, non vobis dico vt non doleatis.
Qui enim ista non dolent, non est in eis charitas Christi, qui autem de talibus
gaudent, abundat in eis malignitas diaboli. Aug Epist. 137.
As such as are filled with the love of Christ, do grieve and mourn, so they
that are filled with the malignity of the Devil, do rejoice in the event of
scandals. Any thing that makes to the disgrace of Gods Church, his cause, and
religion, that sets and puts them into ecstasies of rejoicing. 2. Sam. 1. 20.
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistims rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised
triumph. Why? what was it, that should make them triumph and rejoice? That
verse 19. How are thy mighty fallen? Saul and Jonathan were fallen, not by
scandal, but by the sword, but that fall such as it was, made to the disgrace
of Israel, to the reproach of the God of Israel, and hence their Joy, and
Triumph. Mark by the way, who they are that rejoice in such cases,
uncircumcised Philistines, the sons and daughters of uncircumcised
Philistims. And well becomes it such, and none but such to rejoice. And such
do and will rejoice. Now truly all before considered, we see what little
cause they have to be so ouer-ioyed, there is a great deal of Joy, and
merriment more then there is cause. All considered, we may truly say unto
them, as Iam. 4. 9. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy
into heaviness. Woe unto the world because of scandals. When scandals come
into the world, a woe comes unto the world, messengers of vengeance to do
executions of Justice are sent by God. And will the world be so blind and
witless, to rejoice and triumph in that which comes to be their bane and
ruin, their sorrow and their smart? Has the silly beast any cause to leap
and friske when he sees the trap set up and bayted that will ensnare and
murder him?

It is probably thought that when Noah fell so foul and shamefully in his
drunkenness that Canaan Chams son first Hebreus etiam id tradebat, and ratione
confirmabat, primum Chanaan verenda aui sui vidisse, suoque solum patri
narrasse tanquam desene ridentem. Theodoret. Quaest. in Gens. 57.
saw his grandfather in that case, and so went and told his father Cham of it:
for else why should Noah curse Cham in his son Canaan rather then in any
other of his sons. He had other sons besides, Gene. 10. 6. And the sons
of Cham, Cush and Mizraim, and Phut and Canaan. Why therefore cursed be Canaan
rather then Cush, Mizraim, or Phut? Like enough that Canaan as the Jews
probably conjecture first espied Noah in that case, and he being an ungracious
youngster, one without all Religion, and possibly an hater of all goodness,
one that had like enough been often sagely admonished, and sharply reproved
by Noah. And little content did the holiness, austeritie and religious
carriage of Noah give either to Canaan or to Cham. Now therefore Canaan when
he sees him in his drunkenness, and in that shameful pickle in his nakedness,
he tells it to his father, and his father after to Sem and Iaphet, and that with
Joy and gladness, with mocking and derision: for otherwise for Canaan to have
seen it occasionally and to have told it his father, or for his father to have
seen it occasionally and have told it his brethren, had been no matter of
offense, but questionless they both told it with much joy, and rejoicing. Like
enough Canaan when he first espied it, came running to his father, with much
joy in his face, Oh father I can tell you excellent News, the brauest News
that can be, News that will do you good at the very heart, do but go along
with me, and I will show you such a sight as you never saw. Look where that
old Dotard lies drunk, and in what a base and shameful fashion? This is he
that always telling me of my swearing, censuring me for my want of religion,
this is he that was so holy, so full of his religion, and godliness, see there
how like a beast he lies. And surely if Canaan did tell Cham of it, Chams fact
was exceeding unnaturally villainous. The text says. Genesis 9. 22. And Cham the
father of Canaan saw the nakedness of his father, not occasionally and at
unawares, so might Shem, or Iaphet have done. But if Canaan did first tell Cham
of it, as very probably he did, then Cham like an ungracious varlet as he was,
could not be content to hear of it, but to rejoice, and glad his heart the
more, he must go see the sight, he must go feed his eyes with it, and that
he might be sure of it, and observing all the several circumstances he might
have the more to make up his mouth. And then after this in scorn, and derision
and with insulting insolency goes and reports it to Shem and Iaphet. So that
what between an ungracious son, and a graceless grandchild there was sure
no small Iubilation, and exultation in Noah's scandal, and drunkenness. But now
as merry and iocund as Cham and Chanaan were, let us see a little what cause
they had for it, and consider if there were not that in it, that was enough to
mar their merriment, and to have turned their mirth into mourning. Alas all
considered, full little cause had they to be thus upon their merry pinnes. It
could not be but the scandal of Noah's drunkenness must come, but woe to Cham and
Canaan because of that scandal. God had a purpose to bring a woe, and a curse
upon Cham and Canaan and upon the Canaanites his posterity, that they should be
rooted out, and cut off by the sword of Israel. But how now should way be made
to bring this curse upon the heads of them? Noah shall fall into a scandal,
thereby shall they be occasioned by reason of their naughty spirits to do as
they did, and then no sooner shall Noah awake from his wine but he shall awake
with a solemn curse in his mouth, which should be as the oracle of God, Cursed
be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. And now I
pray what cause have Sed O miser, Ham quam b^a^u^ es qui nunc demum inuenisti
quod quaere^^^ venenum scili^et in sal^berrima rosa, Luther in Genesis 9.
Cham, and Canaan so to rejoice at their fathers fall? Woe be to them because
of this offense, because in this offense of his there is a trap, and a snare
set to catch them, and a way preparing to bring a sorrowful curse upon the^
both. And have they then think we any great cause of merrime^t? will any man
that is in his wits rejoice at that event, whose errand purposely is to bring
Gods curse upon him. So little cause had Cham, and Canaan to rejoice at Noah's
fall. And every whit, as little cause has the world to rejoice when scandals
come, for then woe comes, God is setting his ginnes, and snares, and traps to
catch some, he sends forth his messengers of wrath, to do severe Justice upon
persons that have been unprofitable under the Gospel.

Suppose God should send the sword amongst men, would men rejoice and be glad
at it? See Ezekiel. 21. 9, 10. A sword, A sword is sharpened, and also fourbished,
It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter, it is fourbisht that it may glitter,
should we then make mirth? I trow not. And why not make mirth in such a case?
Because the sword brought woe and mischief with it, because it came to be
dismal, and fatal, because it was a messenger of wrath and vengeance. And why
then make men mirth at scandals when they come? May we not truly say of this
laughter, Thou art mad, and of this mirth, what does it? Eccl. 2. 2. Come not
scandals with a woe as well as the sword? And is he not as mad that rejoices
at the coming of scandals, as he is that reioyces at the coming of a sword?
Say, a scandal a scandal, it is foul and heinous, it is come with woe, to make
a sore spiritual slaughter, should we then make mirth, and rejoice at it? God
forbid. Woe unto the world because of scandals, and shall we laugh, and sport
with Gods woes? This makes scandals doubly woeful.

That same is good counsel which Solomon gives Prou. 24. 17, 18. Rejoice not
when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbles. If
a man have an enemy that hates him, if any cross or calamity befalls him a man
may not rejoice at it, nor be glad of it not only when he falls, and God
utterly ruins him, but if he do but stumble, and God lay but some smaller
cross upon him. Now mark the reason, least the Lord see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him, and so turn it upon thee. So that
the sum of the reason is, least God should be angry, and his wrath should be
against thee. Mark then; If I may not rejoice at a man's outward stumbling and
fall, then how much less may I rejoice in a man's spiritual stumbling and
falling, how much more will that displease and anger God? If I may not rejoice
at his outward fall least God should be angry, then much less when in another
man's spiritual stumbling and fall God is angry with me, and out of his anger
against me disposes his fall. Little cause have I to rejoice at another
stumbling and falling, when God in wrath disposes of another man's stumbling to
make me stumble, and of another man's fall to make me fall. What cause have I
to rejoice at his stumbling and falling, who therefore stumbles and falls that I
may stumble and fall at him. And this is the very case here. Such as do give
scandals do stumble that others may stumble at them, do fall that others may
fall at them, Ierem. 46. 12. The mighty man has stumbled against the mighty:
and they are both fallen together. It is spoken of the Egyptians ruined in war.
It may be that one Captain that hated his fellow might see him fall by the
sword of the enemy. Now though he were his enemy that he see fall, had he any
cause to rejoice? Not any at all. Why so? Because God providence disposed that
the fall of the first should make way for the fall and ruin of the next. He
that fell first should lie in his fellows way as a stumbling block at which
he should stumble and fall also. Thus we saw before that the falls of such as
profess Religion, are but as stumbling blocks in other men's ways to
precipitate them into ruin. And judge then what cause they have to rejoice
thereat. If a man should see a stumbling stone, or a stumbling block laid on
purpose at a pits brinke to topple him headlong over into the pit, would that
man rejoice that that block were laid there? I think not. This is the case
here. Scandals are stumbling blocks laid at hell pits mouth to precipitate,
and headlong worldly wicked men down into hell. So that to rejoice at scandals
is to rejoice at the matter, and instrument of their own sorrow to rejoice at
that which will surely send them to Hell. He that reioyces in such a case,
Much good may his joy do him, I envy no man such joy.

There fell out a scandal in the Church of Corinth, 1. Corinthians. 5. Now whereas
upon the event of it they should have been mourning and heavy, they were in
another vein, Verse 2, 6. They were glorying, and rejoicing. They did not
rejoice in, or at the scandal, that such a man that made such a profession was
fallen, but they rejoiced in their own gifts, in the gifts of their Preachers.
What Church had such Preachers, what people had such gifts? And rejoice they
might in these things, but now it was unseasonable, they should now rather have
been mourning, because of this scandal. Therefore the Apostle sharply takes
them up, Verse. 2, 6. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, your
glorying, or rejoicing is not good. If then the Apostle reprooues them thus for
rejoicing when there was a scandal, though they reioiced not at the scandal,
how much more vehemently, and sharply would he have reproved them if they had
rejoiced at, and for the scandal? How much more in this case would he have
said, your rejoicing is not good. Woe to the world because of scandals, and yet
many make these matters of woe laughing matters, but woe unto them that in such
a case laugh, for they shall weep, and after-time, and after-wit will teach
them, that never had they greater cause of weeping, then even then when they
were upon their merry pinnes, because that at which they made themselves so
merry, came with a woe unto them.

2. Secondly, this lets us see what great cause of fear, warines, and caution
there is in case of scandalous events. Since they be such dangerous events, let
men have a special care they be not ensnared, and entrapped by them. When
scandals fall out, we see there is a trap, and a snare set, there is a
stumbling block laid, therefore it should be a man's wisdom, and watchfulnes
that he be not caught in the trap, that he be not ensnared in the gin, that he
stumble and fall not at the block. We see that God has put that wisdom,
wariness, and shinesse into some creatures, that if a trap, or a snare be set
for them, they are very shie, and jealous of coming near it, or meddling with
the bait, and out of a fear of being taken, they will decline and shun the
snare, though tempted and allured thereto by such baits as otherwise they have
a full good mind unto. Such, much more should be the shinesse, and wary
jealousy of men in the case of scandalous events. Do we see at any time such
as profess religion to fall into any foul evils, then think thus with thy
self. I had thought that when such events had come to pass, the danger of
them had been only a personal danger to the party Delinquent, that it had
been only for the discovery, and for the disgrace of him, I never dreamt of
any further matter, and therefore I thought I might have made a may game of
them, and have rejoiced and triumphed in their falls. But now I see there is a
further matter in them then I was aware of, I see that they come to pass by
Divine Providence, to bring a woe upon other men's heads. I see they come, that
some may be occasioned to stumble at Religion, at the Law, at the Word, and
from the ancient paths, that hereupon they should resoluedly reject and
renounce saving Religion, and the saving powerful profession thereof to their
own assured ruin for ever. I see now that they be disposed by a Divine
Providence, that some men being occasioned to blaspheme Gods Name, and Truth,
may feel the weight of Gods revenging hand. I now see there is a Divine finger
in them, and that they come to occasion some men to harden their hearts so, as
they may fall into mischief; and be put out of possibility, and the reach of
mercy. These be great dangers and heavy woes, for I see now they be but
stumbling blocks, at which some men shall break their necks into Hell. I
confess, I did never conceive them to be half so dangerous events, I never
apprehended them such dangerous traps and snares, as now upon the opening of
this point I see they are. Believe it, I see it is good wisdom in such events
to look about me, and to take heed how I come within the reach of these
snares.

Since Divine Providence sets them to make way for Divine vengeance, though
such a man professing Religion, have committed a foul scandal, Iuxta semit^^
scandalum posuer^n^ mihi; no^ in semitis sed iuxta s^mita^. Semitae tuae
praecepta Dei s^nt. Illi scandala iuxta semitas posuerunt: tu noli recedere a
semitis and non irrues inscandala: permisit Deus ponere scandal^ iuxta semitas
vt tu non recedas a semitis. Iuxta semitas scandala posuerunt mihi and quid
restat? Quid remedium inter tanta mala, in istis tentationibus, in istis
periculis? Dixi Domino, Deus meus es tu. Aug. Psalm. 139. Ergo cum audis vae
mundo a scandulis, noli terreri, dilige legem Dei, non tibi erit scandalum --
teneamus indeclinabilem confessionem, diligamus legem Dei, vt euadamus quod
dictum est, vae mundo a scandalis. Aug.
yet I will by Gods grace take heed for all that of stumbling at Godliness, or
thinking ere the worse of the profession of Religion; Nay, I will be so far
from flying off, that I will cleave the closer and the faster to God, and the
ways of Truth. I will hold my profession so much the faster, and love that
Word so much the more, that so I may avoid this heavy woe. Do in this case
when scandals fall out, and so snares be set as David did when wicked men hid
a Snare for him, and laid Nets to catch him, Psalm. 140. 5. The proud have hid a
snare for me, and cords, they have spread a net by the way side, they have
set grinnes for me. And what does David now do in this case? See Verse 6. I
said unto the Lord, Thou art my God. So when Scandals fall out, Snares and
Nets, and Grinnes are laid: What shall we do then? Shall we distaste and
dislike Godliness and Religion? No, by no means, that is the way to be
ensnared and caught; But then specially say unto the Lord, Thou art my God, I
will cleave close to thee and to thy Truth, these events shall not cause me to
dislike of Godliness, and Religion, Say of wisdom, notwithstanding such
events, that she is and shall be thy sister.

Though Illa (scilicet Iobi vxor) scandalum erat, sed illi non erat. Aug. in
Psalm. 141.
these persons be scandals, yet shall they be none to me, Non egredia^ a
Christo, non incidam in muscipulam. Ibid.
I will not for all this go from Christ, Godliness, and Religion for then am
I caught in the trap. I will take heed for all this of blaspheming God and his
Truth, I will for all this take heed of justifying my self in any evil ways,
and how I harden my self in my sins, for if I do thus, then am I in the
trap, then I stumble at the stumbling block, then has the woe of the scandal
light upon and taken hold of me, God give me grace, and wariness to look to
one.

Because scandalous events are dangerous events, this should be therefore our
wisdom, wariness, and caution when they happen. Surely, the more dangerous
they are, the more cautelous should we be, and in their events be so far from
being staggered, as to stick closer to religion, and to persevere the more
resolutely. Scandala non defutura praedixit quibus fidem nostram exerceri and
probari oporteret. Ait enim quoniam abundauit iniquitas, refrigescet charitas
multorum, sed continu subijcit, Qui autem perseuerauit vsque in finem saluus
erit. August. Epist. 136.
Because Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold, Math. 24.
12. It so commonly falls out that when iniquities, scandalous iniquities of such
as profess the truth fall out, that many that (it may be) had some good
affection to, and liking of goodness are started, and stumbled at Religion, and
their love grows cold. But how should it be with us in such cases? But he
that endures to the end shall be saved, Verse 13. As much as to say, that even
great and foul scandalous iniquities abounding, men's love and liking to
Religion should not be abated, but they should for all that cleave close to it,
and hold out and endure to the end, and not be started, and stumbled by
scandals.

Are scandalous events then woeful events? And when scandals come, does woe
come? Then be so wise, though thou could not prevent the scandal, yet to
prevent the woe, that the woe it brings with it, may none of it light upon
thine head. In every scandal there is a guilt, and a woe, a sin, and a curse.
The guilt and the sin is the persons that offends, but the woe, and the curse
falls upon others. Now when scandals do come, so look to thy self, that thou
may have as little share in the curse and the woe, as thou have in the guilt
and the sin. Adders, Snakes, Serpents how shie are men in meddling with them,
and all because they are venomous, and have a sting? Every scandal caries a
sting with it, a woe with it, and when they come they come to sting some men
mortally to the very death.

Scandals to many prove as those fiery Serpents to the Israelites, Numb. 21.
6. And the Lord sent fiery Serpents amongst the people, and they bit the
people, and much people of Israel died. Therefore concerns it men to carry
themselves as warily when they meet with scandals, as if they met with
Serpents, and be as much afraid of a Scandals woe, as of a Serpents sting.
Amongst the extraordinary signs that should follow them that believe, this is
one, that they shall take up Serpents, and they shall not hurt them, Mark 16.
18. Now, such should our wisdom, and warines be, that when these fiery
Serpents come, we might so take them up as they might not hurt us, that we
might see the Serpent, but not feel the sting.

Scandals are like Ezekiels roll. Ezekiel. 2. 10. There was written therein
lamentations, and mourning, and woe. Ezekiel he was commanded to eat the roll.
Had it been a matter left to his own choice, like enough he would scarce have
meddled with it. See how it fared with him when he had eaten it, Ezekiel. 3. 14. I
went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit. All Scandals when they come are
roules of woe, it is great wisdom for a man to take heed how he eat such
roules, least a man get away with bitterness in the end. A wise man sees a
plague, and hides himself, but fools go on and are punished, Prou. 22. When
the plague comes how wary are men, how cautelous, and careful to look to
themselves? And what makes them so, but only because it is a woeful, and a
fatal disease. By the same reason should men be no less cautelous, and wisely
wary in the event of Scandals, because when they come a woe comes with them,
and therefore should people be as fearful of the woe that comes with a Scandal,
as they would be of the infection that is in the plague.

CHAP. VII.
The sharp and severe Justice of God upon such as give Scandal.

ANd thus have we seen the first Mischief and Woe that comes by Scandals,
namely, that which comes to the scandalized World: now follows the second
mischief and woe, that which is to the parties sca^dalizing, and to such as
give the offense, But woe to the man by whom the offense comes, that is, A
necessity there is of scandalous events, but that necessity shall be no excuse,
or protection to the offender, but as there is a woe for the taker, so there is
a woe for the giver of the offense, woe be to him by whom the offense comes.

In which words take notice of.

The severe and smart Justice of God upon all Scandalizers of the Gospel and
Religion. God will assuredly be meet with such persons as break out, and fall
into foul notorious scandalous Actions, and will meet with them sharply, and
severely. Woe unto him by whom the offense comes. God threatens Eli very
sharply, I have told him that I will judge his house for ever, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
But why would God deal so severely? Because (say some Translations) his sons
run into a scandal, and he restrained them not, or frowned not upon them. If
God would punish Eli for not punishing Scandals, how much more will he punish
them that give scandals. The practices of Elies sons were monstrous
scandalous, 1. Sam. 2. 22. and what did they by so doing? Because his sons
bringing a curse upon themselves, So Iunius. So that by those Scandals they
brought a curse upon themselves, A woe came upon them by their Scandal.

The woe that pursues such is threefold. First, Temporal. Secondly,
Spiritual. Thirdly, An eternal woe.

1. God will pursue such with temporal woes. And they are these three.

1. With a woe upon them in their Name. A good Name is exceeding precious. For
the worth and value of it preferred before Silver, Gold, and great riches,
Prou. 22. 1. For the sweetness, comfort, and contentment of it before sweet
ointment, Eccles. 7. 2. So that for a man to loose his good Name, is as great a
loss as to loose a great estate of great riches. It would be judged a woeful
condition for a man that had a great estate, and abundance of wealth, if Gods
hand should follow him, and consume him, and bring him to nothing. It is no
less a woe to be bereft of ones good Name, and to have the smell of that
ointment taken away. Now in this thing is there a woe to him by whom an offense
and a scandal comes. Not only the sweetness of this ointment is taken away,
but that sweetness is turned into a loathsome and a noisome savor, Eccles.
10. 1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecarie to send forth a
stinking savor, so does a little folly him that is in reputation, for wisdom
and honor. Let a man have the honorable name of a wiseman, yea, of a godly,
religious, zealous man, which give the greatest honor in the world to a man,
yet, if he be guilty but of a little folly, that little folly impeaches his
Name, as much as a dead fly will do a box of ointment. Let ointment be ever
so sweet and good, yet if but a dead fly, or two be in it, they do not only
take away the sweetness of the ointment, but cause it to stink, and to have a
vile savor, so that a man will not only not smell to it, but stops his nose
at it.

Now if a dead fly will do so much in a box of ointment, what will a dead
dog, or some such filthy carrion do? If a little folly will stain a man's
reputation what will a great deal do? Specially when it is folly in a high
nature, not folly slipped into at unawares, but artificial, and deliberate
folly, folly lain in and practiced a long while, how much more will that
stain, and make a man's name stink? That same speech of Thamars (but that Lust
has no ears) had a great deal of weight in it, when Amnon was bent upon the
commission of a foul scandalous fact, 2. Sam. 13. 13. And as for thee thou
shall be as one of the Fools in Israel. Indeed that had been enough to have
stayed him, if his Lust would have given him the liberty of deliberation. It
was as if she had said. If thou do this thing, woe be unto thee. But what
woe? Now thou art a man of some credit and esteem, but if thou do this
scandalous Act, God will blast thy name and credit, Thou shall be as one of the
Fools of Israel. This is the just hand of God upon such, that they shall be
smitten with the loss of their credit and Name, and be counted of the number
of the Fools in Israel. It is a vile disgrace to be a Fool any where, but to
be a Fool in Israel, to be of vile, and base report, and repute in the Church
of God, this is an heavy punishment. Amnon was afterward stabd by Absoloms
Servants, had Amnon had but any sense left after that sin of his, the Sword
of Absoloms Servants could not be so cutting, and so piercing, as was this,
There goes Amnon that base man, that vile person, There goes one of the Fools
in Israel. When Amnon could not stir, nor be seen in the streets, could not
be occasionally mentioned in ordinary talk, but one or other would be
throwing the mire of his base action in his face, and the mention of him had
been as the stirring of an unsavory excrement, What He? Ah vile man, ah
wretched fellow; Why, these things were far more keen and cutting, then the
very Swords that murdered him.

We may see the truth of this, Mal. 2. 8, 9. The Priests were scandalous, and
by their scandalous courses had caused many to stumble at the Law. Well woe be
to them, God would meet with them for it. What woe does God bring upon them?
Therefore have I also made you contemptible, and base before all the people.
God brought a woe upon them in their credit and esteem, that they were vile in
the esteem of all, one and another, good and bad. And herein the Lord serves
men but justly, and pays them with their own coin. By scandals Gods Name is
defiled, Gods Name disgraced, and blasphemed, therefore for their Scandals God
smites them in their Names, that in the woe lighting upon their Names, they may
see what it was to dishonor, and pollute the Name of God; God will pollute
their Names that pollute his, and will cause that pearl of theirs to be trod
in the dirt, and mire. Yea, God so takes to heart the dishonor of his Name by
scandals, that though there may be true Repentance, yet still some stain may
lie upon the Name. David made his peace with God, and truly repented, so as the
Prophet tells him his sin was forgiven him, and yet 1, King. 15. 5. after
David is dead and gone, that fact of his is mentioned as some blurre. David did
that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, save only in the matter of Vriah
the Hittite. David did other things that were sinful, the Numbering of the
people, the giving of Mephibosheths Lands to Ziba, why then says the text,
save in the matter of Vriah? Because though the other were sins, yet they
were not scandalous sins. The other was a scandalous sin, and a scandalous
sin is of that heinous nature, that though the guilt be taken away, yet after
the wound has done bleeding and is closed up, and healed, there will remain
some skarre in the Name, and credit. So that of foul scandalous offenders it
may be said as of the Adulterer, Prou. 6. 33. A wound, and dishonor shall he
get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. So long as he lives his
reproach will live with him, yea and out-liue him too, his reproach will last
as long as his memorial. And as Jeroboam is seldom named in Scripture without
dishonor, Jeroboam that made Israel to sin, so such feldome be mentioned,
but with the remembrance of their scandal, oh that was he that made such a
profession of Religion, and yet playde that heinous pranke. We have a case,
Deuteronomy. 25. 9, 10. that when a man refused to do a brothers office, his brothers
wife must loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face, And his name
shall be called in Israel the house of him that has his shoe loosed. Now all
this was great disgrace, and matter of great reproach, But what was this to the
reproach that comes by a scandal? How much more reproach is it to have all men
ready to spit in ones face, to have it said, the house of him that had his
conscience loosed, the man who deserved to have his face spit in, because he
occasioned so many to spit on, and spit at religion and the Gospel.

2. A second temporal woe which God will bring upon them, and follows upon
the former is eiection and casting of them out of the society and communion of
Gods people. That which David complains of as injustice in his friends, shall be
their righteous portion. Psalm. 31 11, 12. I was a reproach amongst all mine
enemies, but specially amongst my neighbors, and a fear to mine acquaintance,
they that did see me without fled from me, I am forgotten as a dead man out of
mind, I am like a broken vessel. Not only shall their enemies despise, and
scorn them, but their neighbors, not ordinary neighbors, but their familiar
acquaintance shall discard them, yea they shall be afraid and ashamed of them,
and shall shun all society, and converse with them, as iudgeing it a matter
of discredit to be seen in their company. They shall be as dead men out of
mind, nay worse, for dead men may be mentioned with honor and regard, but
they shall be as dead men in regard of society, their society no more desired
then the society of a dead man, which every man abhorres. They are like a
broken vessel. A vessel whilst it is whole is useful, and desirable, and
whilst whole, use is continually made of it, it is called for, enquired for,
and is at every turn in request. But now let such a vessel be broken, it is
thrown by, thrown out of doors, cast on the dunghill, none once meddles with
it, nor looks after it. So whilst such persons are whole vessels, they are
vessels of use, and honor they have the honor of communion and society, but
if once such vessels get a knock, fall into scandal, and take such foul falls
as that they break their credits and their co^scie^ces, and so become broken
vessels, they are then cast out of the hearts, out of the society, out of the
fellowship of Gods people. See how these go together Ierem. 22. 28. Is he a
vessel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed.
So that when a man becomes a vessel wherein there is no pleasure, then he is
cast out. So was Coniah. And such is the case of scandalous persons, they
become vessels wherein is no pleasure, and so are cast out. That same is
threatened as an heavy woe to Israel. Hos. 8. 8. Now shall they be amongst the
Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no pleasure. When they were in their own
country, they were desirable vessels, they were as vessels of silver and gold,
as vessels of plate that are for service, set upon the table, had in great
account, and precious esteem. But, now they should be carried amongst the
Gentiles, and there should be as vessels wherein is no pleasure, that is, as
base abject vessels, put to the most sordid services, such as God would make
Moab to be. Psalm. 60. Moab my washpot, olla lotionis meae: Now this was an
heavy woe denounced against Israel, that he should be amongst the Gentiles as
a vessel wherein there is no pleasure. If to be such a vessel amongst the
Gentiles be a woe, and an heavy thing, what then is it to be such a vessel
amongst the Israel of God, and amongst his people, to be a reiectitious refuse
vessel, that a man has no pleasure to meddle with-al? Salt is good, that is,
whilst it is sauory, but if the salt have lost its savor, then it is cast out,
no longer set upon the table, no nor suffered in the house but it is cast unto
the dunghill. A scandalous person is salt, that has lost his savor, unsavory
salt, not only wanting good but having a stinking savor, and therefore fit for
the stinking dunghill, until his extraordinary, and deep humiliation have
brought him to recover his savor again. Such is the case of scandalous ones.
It is Gods Justice, and it is Gods command it should be so. If a man walk
disorderly he is thus to be dealt withal. 2. These. 3. 6. We command you in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selfs from every
brother that walks disorderly, and that disorderly walking, what it is, we see
in the words following. It was living idly. Now if men must withdraw
themselves out of the company of Idle disorderly persons, how much more then
should they withdraw themselves from such as be scandalous? What is disorder
to scandal? Therefore mark how punctual the Apostle is, Romans 16. 17. Now I
beseech you brethren mark (...), those that cause or commit scandals, or
offenses. And to what purpose should they mark them? That they might decline
and shun their company, Mark them, and Avoid them. And therefore we see the
Apostles severity, in the exercise of discipline in the case of the Incestuous
Corinthian; In the name of God he does excommunicate and cast him out not only
from society in holy things, but makes a rule upon it; that if any that
profess religion live in any scandalous course, that they should not afford
him civil familiar converse. 1. Cor. 5. 11. If any man that is called a
brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner with such an one no not to eat. It is not to be
denied but upon good and sound evidences of true repentance a broken vessel
may be mended, unsavory salt may regaine his savor, and so there may be an
healing of their error, and a receiving of such into public and private
communion again, for I press not Marcianus se Nouatiano coniunxit tenens
haereticae praesumptionis durissimam prauitatem: vt seruis Dei poenitentibus,
and dolent^bus, and ad ecclesiam lachrymis, and gemitu, and dolere pulsantibus
diuinae pietatis, and lenitatis paternae solatia, and subsidia claudantur, nec
ad fouenda vulnera admittantur vulnerati, sed sine spepacis, and
co^municationis relicti ad lu^orum ra^inam and praedam ^iaboli proijciantur.
Cypr. Epist. 67,
Nouitian rigidity, but yet till such repentance do appear, all scandalous
persons though not touched with Church censures are to stand excommunicate out
of the hearts, and familiar fellowship of al Gods people. What difference
between a leprous and a scandalous person, and the leper during his leprosy,
till he were cleansed was to be shut up, and kept apart. If thy right hand
scandalize thee cut it of, and cast it from thee, Math. 18. 8. This has a
truth in this case. If a man that has bin dear and precious fall into
scandal, yet spare him not but let him be cut of, and cast out of society till
he be brought to such truth of repe^ta^ce as becomes Adeo non pudet aut piget
admissorum, et tamen audent venire in ecclesiam sanctorum, audent missceri
gregi Dominico. Tales interdum tolerat ecclesia ne prouocati magis etiam
perturbent populum Dei. Sed quid prodes^, non eijci caetu piorum, si merueri^
eijci? Nam eijci remedium est, and gradus ad recuperandum sanitatem: eiectionem
meruisse summa malorum est. Ac frustra miscetur catui sanctorum etc. Cyp. de
dupl. Martyr.
And how-euer men fallen into some foul scandal may escape the public
censure of eiection, and excommunication, and by intrusion have fellowship in
holy duties of worship yet little comfort shall such men's consciences have, so
long as public satisfaction is not given to the Church of God, for what shall
it profit a man, not to be cast out of the congregation of the faithful, so
long as he deserves to be cast out: for for a man to be cast out, is a remedy
and a degree toward the recovery of spiritual health. But to deserve casting
out (as all scandalous persons do that will not, and do not subject to Gods
ordinance of public satisfaction and confession) is the height of all evil.

Such was the ancient Nam cum in minoribus delictis poenitentia agatur iusto
tempore, and exomologesis fiat inspecta vita eius qui poenitentiam agit, nec ad
communicationem quis venire possit, nisi prius illi ab expiscopo, and clero
manus fuerit imposita, quanto magis in his grauissimis, and extremis delictis
ante omnia and moderate secundum disciplina^ Domini obseruari oportet. Nemo ab
hinc importuno tempore acerba po^^a decerpat, nemo nauem suam quassata^ and
perforata^ fluctibus, priusqua^ diligenter refecerit in al^u^ denuo co^mittat,
Nemo tunicam scissam accipere and induere properet, nisi eam and ab artifice
perito sartam viderit, and a fullore curatam receperit Cypr. Epist. 12.

Legimus literas -- quod Victori Presbytero antequam poenitentiam plenam
egisset, temere Therapius collega noster immaturo tempore and praepropera
festinatione pacem dederit. Quae res nos satis mouit, recessum esse a decreti
nostri auctoritate vt aen^e legitimum, and plenum tempus satisfactionis, and
sine petitu and conscientia plebis -- pax ei concederetur Cypr. Epist. 59


severity of discipline, that such as had given scandal were neither suddenly
nor easily readmitted into Communion, but there was first public confession,
and a time it seems of the trial of their repentance before they had a fresh
admittance into Church Fellowship. Green apples too soon gathered, they
thought, might set ones teeth on edge, and it was dangerous to set a ship to
sea that had bin cracked, and flawed, before it were thoroughly repaired again.

Yea and it was strange to see the O si posses frater charissime istic
interesse cum praui isti and peruerside schismate reuertantur, videres quis
mihi labor sit persuadcre patientia^ fratribus nostris vt animi delore sopito
recipiendis malis curandisque consentiant -- vix plebi presuadeo, imo
extorqueo, vt tales patiantur admitti. Cypr. Epist. 55.
ancient zeal of the people against such with how much ado they suffered such
as had given scandal, and had not yet given sufficient evidence of their
repentance, to be readmitted and received into the Church again.

Nay further we shall find that in Inter christianae religionis professores
ordinati sunt aliquot qui inquirunt in vias et mores accedentium, vt non
concessa sacientes candidatos religionis arceant a suis c^nuentibus etc:
peccantes, praecipue libidine contaminatos e sua republica reijciunt nostri --
rursum vero re piscentes haud secus qua^ rediuiuos recipient tandem, ca tamen
condition vt quonia^ lapsi sunt, excludantur in posterum ab omnibus
dignitatibus and magistratibus ecclesiasticis. Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 3.
Origens time their were some appointed to look into the ways and manners of
the people professing christian religion, that if they carried themselves
offensiuely, they might be kept out from the public meetings. And further if
any were found sinning scandalously, especially if defiled with lust, and
uncleanness they cast them out of the Church. And when upon their repentance
they were received again yet was it with this condition, that because they had
fallen into scandal, they should be excluded for ever after from all
ecclesiastical dignity and government. And we see that in See Cyprian Epist.
64. 68.
Cyprians time, also it went for good discipline, that a Bishop that had fallen
into Idolatry, and defiled himself with that sca^dalous sin though he might
communicate as Lay persons, yet might he have no more to do with Episcopal or
Ministerial function. And this Discipline of theirs wants not foundation in
Scripture; It seems to be the same thing that God himself constituted, Ezekiel.
44. 12, 13. Because they ministered unto them before their Idols, they shall
bear their iniquity, and they shall not come near unto me to do the office
of a Priest unto me, nor to come near to any of mine holy things in the most
holy place, but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they
have committed. Upon their Repentance they were received again to some other
places, Ver. 10, 11. but they must meddle no more after that scandal of
Idolatry with the Priesthood. And this Discipline did Josiah put in practice,
2. King. 23. 9. Some privileges upon their Repentance were granted unto the
Priests of the high places, that had defiled themselves with Idolatry, but the
office of Priesthood they were quite excluded from it. And this was the ancient
Discipline against the giuers of offense, and indeed such zeal, and such
severity it did concern, and ever will concern the Church of God to show to
scandalous delinquents. Facility, and an over easy readiness to comply with
such, breeds a fresh scandal to the world, and gives them just cause to Et
quoniam audio, charissimi fratres impuden^ia vos quorundam premi, and
verecundiam vestram vim pati oro vos quibus possum precibus vt eua^gelij
memores -- vos quoque solicit and caute petentiu^ desideria ponderetis,
vtpote amici domini and cum illo post modum iudicaturi, inspiciatis and actum
and opera and merita singulerum, ipsorum quoque delictorum genera and
qualitates cogitetis, ne si quid abrupte and indigne vel a vobis promissum vel
a nobis factum fuerit, apud Gentiles quoque ipsos eclcesia nostra crubescere
incipiat. Cypr. Epist. 11
reproach the Church, and opens the mouth of iniquity to say, you be all
such; Whereas discommoning, and discarding such from our familiar and private
society, and when need and power is, from communion in holy things, gains
the Church a great deal of honor and stops the mouth of iniquity from
calumniating Gods people to be favorers, and countenancers of such persons.
Such will be pressing in, to gain their credit, and to recover their respect,
but when such suddenly and easily get into credit it is no whit for the honor
and credit of the Church.

God will bring woes upon them in their outward state, their peace, their
posterity. Elies sons run into foul Scandals, 1. Sam. 2. 22. It was
scandalous for private persons, much more for Priests to be unclean, and
adulterous. It was scandalous to have done so unclean an act in any place, but
to do it in a sacred place with women coming thither upon devotion, this was
egregiously scandalous. God therefore takes them to do, and does execution
upon them, and cuts them both off in one day by the Sword of the Philistims,
God brought the woe of the Sword upon them. Nay, when they ran into Scandal
because Eli did not restrain them, see what God threatens upon his Posterity,
1. Sam. 2. 36. that he would plague them with such base beggerie and misery
that they should beg their bread. If God thus punish him for not restraining,
how much more would he have punished him for the committing of a Scandal? If it
go thus hard with Eli that restraines not, how hard will it go with Hophni
and Phinehas that commit the scandal?

We cannot have a more pregnant and full example in this kind, then David
himself. He after his scandal committed was truly penitent, the guilt of his
sin pardoned, a solemn absolution and discharge given him by the Prophet.
And yet for all this we shall see how terribly this woe pursued him in
temporal crosses in this kind. First, God smites his child with death, then
follows his daughter Thamars defilement by her brother Amnon, then Amnons
murder, then the treason of Absalom, in which the hand of God was exceeding
smart, God turns him out of house and home. Whose heart would not earne, and
bleed to see his doleful departure from Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 15. 30. And David
went up by the ascent of mount Oliuet, and wept as he went up, and had his head
covered, and he went barefoote, and all the people that was with him covered
every man his head and they went up weeping, as they went up. Who could have
beheld so sad and so woeful a spectacle with dry eyes? But this was not all,
his life is endangered, his Concubines defiled in open view on the house top.
And what think we was the ground of all this? For the child's death we see, 2.
Sam. 12. 13, 14. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die, howbeit
because by this thy deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme, the child also that is borne unto thee shall surely die. It
is very much that fasting and praying can do, it can cast out devils, This
kind goes not out but by fasting and praying, Mark. 9. 29. And yet fasting and
praying could not keep off this woe that David's scandal brings upon him in the
childs death, woe unto David by whom that offense came, therefore shall his
child die. And for all the rest of al those woeful sorrows 2. Sam. 12. 9. 10.
11. 12. we see the cause of them all, these woes were upon David for his
scandal. And if Gods woe in these temporal, and outward calamities will thus
pursue and follow a repe^ting, and an humbled scandalous offender, how much
more will that hand of God pursue that man, upon whose scandal follows no
Repentance and Humiliation. If David the man after Gods own heart must not
escape, what then shall others look for? If a beloved David shall have his
teeth on edge with his own sour grapes of his scandalous courses, who then
shall think to go scotfree that is guilty of scandalous transgressions? what
a sure and irresistible woe is that which Repentance it self cannot keep off
from a man's children, his life, person and goods? And thus temporal woe is to
him by whom offenses come.

2. God will pursue, and pinch such as give offense with spiritual woe. God
will fill such men's hearts, specially if they belong to him, with much
spiritual woe, and bitterness of soul. He will awaken conscience to smite,
pinch and gripe them at the heart; He will so load, and burden their
consciences that in the anguish and bitterness of their spirits they shall be
forced to cry out, woe is me vile wretch that I was borne, that ever I
breathed thus to dishonor God. It is true that there is an happiness in this
woe, and it is singular mercy that men are not seared, and hardened in their
sin, but yet for all that there is a great deal of smart, and sorrow, and a
great deal of woeful bitterness in the work of Repentance after a scandalous
fall, And before such shall recover their peace with God, he will give them
many a woeful gripe of Conscience, and many a bitter potion to drink. We
have an example of it in the Incestuous Corinthian. He indeed recovered his
peace, and his pardon, but yet how woeful was his case before it was done. 2.
Cor. 2. 7. Least such an one should be swallowed up of over much sorrow. See
then in what a woeful plight he was even in a sea and gulf of sorrow, ready
to be absorpt, and swallowed up therein. The Lord therefore plu^ged him into
the deeps of bitter sorrow of spirit, and plunged him so deep as that he was
ready to despair, and to be wholly cast away. Thus God would make his soul
smart, and his heart ache for this scandal of his, would make him feel the
truth of Christ's saying, woe unto him by whom the offense comes. It was David's
case before him. When he had fallen into scandal, in the matter of Bathsheba,
and Vriah, before he comes to a redintegration of his former condition, God
brings him upon the rack. Ps. 51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation, therefore that was taken away and gone, that sweet sunshine was
ouerclouded, yea that sun was dreadfully eclipsed, and how fearful such
eclipses be, they know that see them. It is no less woe for the present to
loose the Joy of ones salvation, then to loose salvation it self. But that was
not all. See Verse 8. make me to hear joy, and gladness that the bones which
thou have broken may rejoice. God therefore not only took away his joy, but
God brake the bones of him. What an exquisite torture is the punishment of the
wheel, when a Malefactor has his bones broken one to day, another to morrow?
Such is the woe that God will bring upon scandalous ones, specially if they
belong to him, He will bring them to the wheel, he will crack and break their
bones, he will have them to the rack, and fill their consciences with so much
anguish, that they shall undergo as much woe as if all the bones in their
bodies were broken in pieces, That the bones which thou have broken. Yea their
bones shall be so broken, that they will not quickly, nor suddenly be healed
again. Nathan in the Name of God did that which one would have thought might
have set David's bones and given them ease, Thy sin is forgiven thee, and yet
we see after this he cries out of his bones, It lay in his bones still.

When men after Scandals are ouer-quickly whole again, cranke, and jolly, it
is to be feared, their bones were never broken to the purpose. Well thus we
see what a woe there is for giuers of offense, woe be to the man whose bones
God will break, and therefore woe to him by whom the offense comes. If he
belong to God, God will break his bones, if he belong not to God, but were an
Hypocrite God, will then happily harden his heart that he may break his neck.

3. God will bring eternal woe upon them. That is, if the person falling into
scandal did before his scandal but act a part and personate religion, and were
no better then an Hypocrite, then though possibly he may escape some of the
former woes, yet God will pay him with with advantage, make up all forbearance
with doubling, and trebling the principal. The greater his fall was here, the
deeper shall his fall be into Hell. Vniuscuiusque casus tanto maior^s est
criminis, quanto prius quam caderet maioris erat virtutis. Barn. de interior.
Dom. cap. 50.
The higher the place is from which a man falls, the deeper a man plunges into
the pit of mire into which he falls. A man that makes profession of Religion,
is set higher then another man is, and if he profess in hypocrisy, and fall
into scandal, he by reason of the height from whence he falls, falls deeper
into wrath and hell, then another does. At this happily our Savior aims,
Matthew. 18. 6. It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.

A man so used were but in an ill case, and yet it is a better case then the
case of some scandalous person. A man cast into the Sea in any place of it is
but in an ill case, for suppose he be not drowned, yet will he be shrewdly
doused, and cannot but be in danger. But cast a man into the depth of the Sea,
into the huge Deepes which cannot be bottomed, and there is but little hope of
such a man's life. But yet such a man may escape. Jonas was cast into the deep,
in the midst of the seas, the depth closed him round about, Ion. 2. 3, 5. and
yet he escaped. A man by providence may meet with a planke or a piece of a
mast in such vast depths and possibly may escape. But take a man and cast him
not only into the Sea, but into the depth of the Sea, and not only into the
depth, but cast him in with an heavy stone, specially a millstone, specially
with such an heavy millstone as cannot be turned about with a man's hand, but
must be turned about with the strength of a beast (and such a millstone some
think is here intended (...), mola asinaria, such a millstone as is turned
about by the help of an Ass) and let him be cast into the depth of the Sea
with it (as Hierome says some Malefactors in those Countries used to be
served) and what possibility is there to escape drowning.

Now this is the case of scandalous Hypocrites. If scandalous persons be
Hypocrites then will their judgment, and woe be great, and inevitable. Their
scandal is a great heavy millstone about their neck, with this millstone God
casts them not into the shallow, but into the depth, the gulf of Hell. And
this millstone sinkes them, and this millstone holds them down for ever rising
again. Milstones do not make surer work for the drowning, then Scandals do
for the damning of personating gross Hypocrites.

CHAP. VIII.
Why God is so smart, and so severe in his Justice against those by whom
Scandals come.

WE have seen how sharp, and severe the Justice of God is in punishing such
by whom offenses come. Consider we a little, as we have seen the severity of
his Justice, so the Justice of his severity, and why God does deal thus
roundly with offenders in that kind. I conceive there be four special
reasons of Gods so dealing.

1. Because by Scandals Gods holy and glorious Name is polluted, and
blasphemed, and so God in a high measure wronged. God is a jealous God, and he
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain, that is, he will
surely meet with, and be revenged upon such as do it. It is a greater matter
to pollute, and profane Gods Name then it is to take his name in vain. If
therefore God will deal so severely with them that do but take his Name in
vain, how much more will he make them smart that do pollute his Name, and
cause it to be blasphemed by the malignant enemies of his truth. The defiling
of Gods Name is an heinous thing, we see how sharp God was with Moses and
Aaron, they must both die, and not come into the Land of Canaan. But what was
the reason? See Deuteronomy. 32. 51. Because ye trespassed against me amongst the
children of Israel. But what was that trespass? Because ye sanctified me not
in the midst of the children of Israel. And must they die, and not enter
Canaan because they sanctified not, what if they had polluted his Name? If it
be so heinous not to sanctify, what is it to pollute, and defile Gods Name?
And this sin is Numquid dici de Hunis potest. Ecce quales sunt qui Christiam
dicuntur? Numquid de Saxonibus aut Francis. Ecce quae faciunt, quise asserunt
Christi esse cultores? Numquid propter Maurorum efferos mores lex sacro-sancta
culpatur? Nunquid Scytharum aut Gepidarum inhumanissimi ritus in maled^ctum,
atque blasphemia^ nomen Domini Saluatoris inducunt? -- Hoc autem, vt dixi,
malum peculialiter tantum Christi^^^rum est, quia per eos tantummodo
blasphematur Deus, qui bona dicunt, and mala faciunt. Salu. de Prou Dei lib. 4.
proper and peculiar to the Professors of the Name of God, and Christ to
defile his Name.

Other men sin in those evils which they commit, but yet this sin they are
not guilty of. They only commit the sin of polluting Gods Name, that do
profess his Name. This is properly a Church-sinne, and befalls not such as are
without. When men take the Name of God, and the profession of Religion upon
them, and yet live lewdly and loosely, or fall into any scandalous practices
they do, thereby defile the Name of God, and pollute it. We find the people
charged with this sin, Ezekiel. 36. 20. That they profaned or polluted Gods
holy Name amongst the Heathen whither they went. Now how could they pollute
Gods Name? That they did by that which follows in the same Verse. They
profaned my Name amongst the Heathen when they said of them, These are the
people of the Lord, and are gone out of his Land. The Jews where ever they
came professed themselves the people of God, that they had the God of Heaven
for their God, and that they had his Law, and Oracles, and that they were an
holy people, near unto him, hereupon the Heathen looked for some singular thing
from them, singular holiness in their life's, singular fidelity in their
dealings, etc. But when they observed their life's, many of them to be loose and
scandalous, they began presently to open their mouths against God, and
against his Truth, oh these be the people of the Lord, these be your holy
people, that worship such an holy God, that have such an holy Law. No marvel
their God, their Law, their Religion is so holy, for ought we see by these
men's life's, there is no more in their God, and Religion then in ours. Thus
spoke the Heathen when they saw the wicked life's and practices of some of the
people of the Jews. And indeed it is an Heathenish trick in such cases to
fall foul upon God and Religion, It is heathenish language to say, These be
the people of the Lord, and this is their religion and their zeal.

And thus by their evil life's occasioning the heathen to blaspheme God, and to
throw the filth of their base actions upon Him and his Name, they thereby
polluted his Name.

Thus was Gods Name polluted by the Spaniards among the Indians? When they
first came amongst the West Indians, the people enquired of them whence they
came, and what they were, They told them that they were come down from
Heaven, and that they were the sons of the God of Heaven. Whereupon the poor
Saluages observing their covetousness, cruelty, and uncleanness, answered,
that he could not be a good God that had such evil sons, and so was Gods
Name polluted by their polluted life's. Sicut enim nomen Dei glorificatur vita
piorum hominum in quibus ipse per spiritum suum operatur quicquid faciunt boni:
ita e diuerso polluitur and infamatur malefactis eorum quise Dei cultores
profitentur. Cypr. de dupl. Mart. Postremo sancta a Christianis fierent, si
Christus sancta docuisset. Aestimari itaque de cultoribus suis potest ille qui
colitur. Quomodo enim bonus magister est, cuius tam malos videmus esse
discipulos? Ex ipso enim Christiani sunt, ipsum audiunt, ipsum legunt. Promptum
est omnibus Christi intelligere doctrinam. Vide Christianos, quid agant, and
euidenter potest de ipso Christo sciri, quid doceat. Mimesis Pagan. Salu de
Prouiden. lib. 4.
For look as an holy and honest conversation sanctifies, and glorifies the
Name of God, 1. Pet. 2. 12. I beseech you abstain from fleshly lusts, Having
your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles, that when they speak against
you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold
glorify God in the day of visitation; So contrarily, Gods Name is unhallowed,
and polluted by the evil and scandalous life's of such as profess his Name.
When Gods Name is blasphemed it is polluted, Gods Name is blasphemed when the
Truth is blasphemed. The truth comes to be blasphemed by reason of the evil
life's of such as profess the Truth, 2. Pet. 2. 2. And many shall follow their
pernicious ways by reason of whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed, (...)
Now God will not put it up at men's hands that occasion others to pollute his
Name. God is very tender of the glory of his Name. He has prescribed,
Hallowed be thy Name, to be the leading petition in our Prayers, and if
therefore the glory of his Name be any way impeached by men's scandalous
actions, he will repair and make his glory whole by his Justice upon their
persons who have by scandal wronged it. When men do pollute Gods Name, God who
is always ready to vindicate his own glory, will sanctify his own Name,
and rescue it from the pollutions, and prophanations wherewith scandalous
persons have defiled it.

That passage is worthy our observation, Ezekiel. 36. 20, 23. When they entered
unto the Heathen whither they went, they profaned mine holy Name: And I will
sanctify my great Name which was profaned amongst the Heathen, which they
have profaned in the midst of them, and the Heathen shall know that I am the
Lord, says the Lord God, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
See then that God will sanctify his Name when men pollute it, and he will one
way or other take order to wash off that pollution, wherewith men have defiled
it. God would be sanctified in them before the eyes of the Heathen.

Now Gods Name is sometimes sanctified in his works of Mercy, as Ezekiel. 20.
41. -- and sometimes in the works of Justice. Ezekiel. 38. 22, 23. Now though in
that forenamed place it is spoken of sanctifying his polluted Name by his
works of Mercy in the eyes of enemies, yet it is also true that God will
sanctify his polluted Name in the eyes of Adversaries by his works of
Justice, That is, he will do such exemplarie Justice, and such smart woe upon
such as by their scandals polluted his Name, that he will recover himself as
much glory in their punishment as they lost him by their sin, and so
remarkeably will he do it in enemies eyes, that they who before opened their
mouths to dishonor his Truth, shall now open their mouths to acknowledge his
glorious Justice, and by that Justice be drawn at least to a secret
acknowledgement, that this Religion and this profession is the truth, the
Scandalizers whereof God does so severely punish.

This we shall see in David, 2. Sam. 12. 14. There was no remedy, though
David fast and pray, and seek the child's life, yea though David have repented,
and Nathan have pronounced the pardon of his sin, yet no remedy but the
child must die. Quam grauis aut^m and piaculi singularis malum sit nomen
diuinitatis in blasphemiam Gentiumdare etiam David beatissimi exemplo edocemur
qui -- cum aeternam pro offensionibus suis poenam per vnam confessionem
meruerit euadere: huius tamen criminis veniam non per poenitentiam
patrocinantem potuit impetrare. Nam cum ei proprios errores confitenti Nathan
Propheta dixisset, transtulit Deus peccatum tuum, non morieris, subdidit statim
veruntamen quia blasphemare fecisti inimicos Dei propter verbum hoc fili^^ qui
natu^ est morietur, and quid post hac? Deposito scilicet diademate, proiectis
gemmis -- fletu madidus, cinere sordidatus vitam paruuli sui tot lamentationum
suffragijs peteret, and pijssimum Deum tanta precum ambitione pulsaret, sic
rogans and obsecrans obtinere non potuit, ex quo intelligi potest quod nullom
penitus maioris piaculi crimen est quam blasphemandi causam Gentibus dare.
Salu. lib. 4. de Prouid.
What was the reason? Because by his scandal he had given great occasion to
the euemies of God to blaspheme. His scandal was great. Any scandal gives
occasion of blaspheming, but great scandals give great occasion of blaspheming,
therefore as he by his great Scandal has polluted Gods Name, so God by his
great Justice would sanctify his name in the eyes of those enemies that had
blasphemed.

We find a Law Deuteronomy. 22. 19. that a man in that case specified in the text,
should be sharply amearced, and a good round fine set upon his head, and the
reason is given because he has brought up an evil Name upon a virgin of
Israel. Now in cases of scandal there is an evil Name brought up not upon a
virgin of Israel, but upon the God of Israel, upon his Gospel, and truth. If
then God would have a man so severely punished, that should bring up an evil
name upon a Virgin of Israel, how much more will God himself set smart fines
upon their heads as bring, as do occasion the bringing up of an evil name
upon the Religion, and the God of Israel. Amongst men, how ever other offenses
escape, yet how great is the severity of the Law in punishing Scandalum
Magnatum. Now in scandalous offenses of Professors, there is a right Scandalum
Magnatum, in regard of the wrong, and injury that Gods great Name suffers.

No marvel, that God is so severe in punishing scandals. For where God suffers
greatest wrong, there Justice requires that men under go seuerest punishments.
Now no sins do God greater wrong then scandals. Other sins, and other men's
sins are breaches of his Law, and pollutions of men's Consciences, but yet are
not pollutions of Gods Name. But scandals, and the notorious offenses of
Professors are not only breaches of Gods Law, and pollutions of the offenders
Consciences, but are pollutions of Gods Name. What wonder then, that such
severity follows scandals? It is but Justice that where the guilt is s double
in (...). Basil. de Bapt. lib. 1. q. 10.
the offense, there should be a double, and a proportionable measure of
punishment.

Now in every scandal there is a double guilt.

First, the guilt of breaking of Gods Law, and polluting a man's own
Conscience. And secondly, the guilt of profaning, and polluting Gods Name. And
this latter is the far greater, and more provoking guilt. God will worse
brook the pollution of his Name, then the breach of his Law. And therefore it
is a sure truth that he that commits a greater sin which yet is secret,
shall be less punished then he which commits a smaller sin, which breaking
out proves scandalous. We have an instance, Numb. 11. 21. compared with Deuteronomy.
32. 51. We have in these two places two offenses of Moses his committing. Let
a man weigh them together, and questionless in their own nature compared,
that offense Numb. 11. 21, 22. was the greater, there is in it not only
unbelief as in the other, but a kind of murmuring contest with God, as it
were to his face. The latter has reference to that History, Numb. 20. 10.
where we find Moses to contest with some impatience, and unbelief with the
people. Is it not a greater sin to murmr and contest in unbelief and
impatience with God, then to grow into passion with a rebellious people? Is it
not a greater matter to have ones spirit stirred at God, then with sinful men?
Consider both passages together, and any one will judge the first miscarriage
in it own nature the greatest. And yet all that God says to the first is
this, Is the Lords hand now waxed short? Thou shall see now whether my Word
shall come to pass unto thee or not. What could have been said less? But now
come to the other which in it self seems nothing so great, and see what
follows upon it. Because ye believed me not to sanctify me in the eyes of
the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this Congregation into the
Land, Numb. 20. 12. But shall die because ye trespassed, and sanctified me not
in the midst of the children of Israel. Now then here may be a question, why
the lesser sin has the sharper reproof and the greater punishment.

Is it equal dealing to wink at (...). Isid. pelus. lib. 5. Epist. 261.
and pass by a greater, and to be so severe in the lesser? Yes most equal, for
though the fomer sin in it own nature were greater, yet that was happily t
private between God and Moses, and so no scandal in it, but the latter was
public before all the people, and so a scandal in it, God not sanctified, his
Name dishonored, and for the scandal sake the punishment so smart in this
rather then in the other.

A small sin scandalous has a greater punishment then a great sin close,
and secret, because there is in the scandal a pollution of Gods Name, an
Impeach of his honor, besides the guilt of the breach of his Law. So then
therefore is God so severe in punishing scandals, because God is more wronged
by them then by simple sin, because they pollute his sacred Name.

2. God is thus severe in the punishing of scandals, because soule-bloud is not
cheap with God. They that spill the blood of souls shall pay full dearly for
it, God will require it at their hands. Now in the commission of scandalous
sins there is a great deal of spiritual Si quis simplici mente and
desiderio veniat ad Ecclesiam vt proficiat, vt melior fiat: iste si videat nos
qui multo iam tempore in fide fletimus, vel non recte agentes, vel cum
offendiculo loquentes efficimur nos illi lapsus ad peccatum. Cum autem
peecauerit trucidatus est, and sangxis animae eius profluit, omnis ab eo virtus
vitalis abscedit -- Scandalizati animae sanguis effunditur cum ceciderit in
peccatum. and propterea dixit, quia requiretur sanguis eius a fratre, frater
tuus est qui fudit sanguinem tuum. Origin. in Psalm. 36. hom. 3.
bloodshed, and murder. Paul speaking of Scandals of an inferior nature, such
as are given to weak brethren in the use of Christian liberty, in the use of
things in their nature indifferent makes them bloody and murtherous, Romans 14.
15. Destroy not him with thy meat for whom Christ died, 1. Cor. 8. 12. Thorough
thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish.

If Scandals in such cases be so dangerous in their issue, and of such mortal
consequence, then what are Scandals in a higher nature in the offensive, and
evil life's of such as profess Religion? How much more are they of deadly
consequence, and how much more is blood spilt by them? If a man may have his
hand in the blood of souls by giving scandal in the doing of things in their
own nature lawful, then how much more by giving scandal in the doing of such
things as in their own nature are sinful and unlawful? There is a Law Exodus
21. 33, 34. that if a man open a pit, and cover it not, and an Ox or an
Assefal therein, the owner of the pit shall make it good. Now in every Scandal
given there is a pit dug, and opened, every one that gives a Scandal opens,
and digges a pit, into which many a soul falls headlong. If he that opened the
pit must make good the Ox or Ass, that fell thereinto, that is, must pay the
full price and worth of it to the owner, what must he do that opens a pit
into which a soul falls? Surely God will require it at his hands, and it must
be made good. Does God, says the Apostle, take care for Oxen? So here, will
God require Oxen at their hands thorough whose default they fall into pits?
then how much more does he take care, and will he require souls of men at their
hands, that by Scandals have opened pits into which they are fallen, and
ruined? There is another Law in the same place worth our noting to this
purpose, Exodus 21. 22, 23. If men strive and hurt a woman with child so that
her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief follow, he shall be surely
punished, etc. And if any mischief follow thou shall give life for life, or
soul for soul, as the words originally are; If no mischief follow either to
the woman or the child, yet a punishment was due in such a case, but if
mischief followed, then life for life, soul for soul, Now in the case of
scandals it is a sure thing that Mischief does follow, we saw before what a
deal of Woe, and Mischief they bring with them. He that gives a Scandal is
as a man that smites or spurns a woman with child. He that does so, a hundred
to one but he causes mischief to follow.

It may be there was a man that began to have some good in him, some hope that
Christ began to be formed in him. Now a man gives some heinous Scandal, and
thereupon mischief follows, all those hopes are dashed, this man flies quite
off, and casts off all thoughts of meddling any more with godliness, here is
one with child spurned, and a mischief follows, therefore life for life,
soul for soul will be required. Vae illi qui scandalizauerit vnum ex pusillis
istis. Vae pregnantem calcanti. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
Woe be to him that spurns a woman with child, and causes mischief to
follow, and therefore Woe to him by whom an offense comes, because by him
mischief comes, mischief comes to many a soul, the mischief of rejecting
religion, or the mischief of an hardened heart. And therefore is God thus
severe in his Justice upon such because they do bloody mischief, and
therefore they must give Qui scandali conscius est animam dabit pro anima eius
quem scandalizanit, Origin.
soul for soul.

It may be that many a man was like to be brought on to Religion, might have
some Factus sum opprobrium and vicinis meis nimium] vicinis meis nimium
opprobrium factus sum, id est, qui mihi (Ecclesiae) iam appropinquabant vt
crederent: hoc est, vicini mei nimium deterriti sunt mala vita malorum and
falsorum Christianorum. Quam multo^ enim putatis, fratres mei, velle esse
Christianos, sed offendi malis moribus Christianorum. Ipsi sunt vicini qui iam
appropinquabant, and nimium opprobrium illis visi sumus. Augustinus in Psalm. 30.
thoughts of embracing, and receiving the truth, but now some Professor of
Religion falling foul, he falls off and will none, all these thoughts are
dampt, and so laid aside. There be so many souls lost, and kept out of Heaven
by that Scandal, Here is the blood of souls spilt. How many might have come to
have been godly and religious Christians, if it had not been for the Scandal
of some one man professing godliness, and religion. Such a deal of mischief
follows by such a scandal. And for this cause, was that woe, upon the Priests
that they were base and contemptible, because they had caused many to stumble
at the law, and to fly off from religion which was not without the mischieuing
of their fowls for ever.

It may be many a man's mouth was shut, and though he said no good, yet he
could say no evil of the way of truth, now that a man falls into scandal, his
mouth is opened against God, and against Religion, and he blasphemes full mouth.
Now is this man's soul by his blasphemy miserably endau^gered, here is soul
blood spilt. What a deal of mischief is done to his soul, but who is guilty
of that mischief, but he that gave that scandal? and therefore the Qui enins
sine blasphemiae aliorum grauiter errauerit sibi tantum adfert damnationem: Qui
aute^ alios blasphemare fecerit multos secum praecipitat in mortem, and necesse
erit vt sit protantisr eus quantos secum traxerit in reatum, Salu. lib. 4. de
Prouid.
blood of that blaspheming soul shall be required at thine hands that gave the
scandal which rusht him into that mischief.

It may be many a man began to mislike his evil ways, many men's hearts began
to misgiue them, but now a scandal is fallen out, their hands are strengthened,
their hearts are hardened, and so they sealed up to hell. Here is soul blood
spilt again. Here be many stumbled and fallen into the pit of hell, I, but who
laid this stumbling stone, that has topled them over? Here be a company of
souls undone, and cast away, I but who has undone, and cast them away? Here
is mischief done, but who has done it? Even he that has committed such a
scandal; he it is that has done this mischief, he has (as much as in him
lies) damned and destroyed these souls. And is it nothing to damn souls? Is
it any wonder that God should be so severe, when their sin is so bloody,
when they have destroyed who knows how many souls? God will punish such as do
not endeavor to (...). Chrysostom ad Romans Hom. 25.
save other men's souls what in them lies, what then deserve they at his hands,
that castaway men's souls as scandalous sinners do. And what wonder that heavy
Justice follows heavy sins.

Thou shall not put a stumbling block before the blind. Leuit. 19. 14. But
what if a man do it? Then shall a woe, and a curse fall upon him, Deuteronomy. 27.
18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out of his way. Now when men
do give scandal they do lay stumbling blocks in the way of many blind ones,
they cause them to wander out of the way, and to stumble so that they fall into
eternal ruin. And therefore is God so sharp with them. We shall see an heavy
woe denounced against those false prophetesses. Ezekiel. 13. 18. Thus says the
Lord God, Woe to the woment that sow pillowes to al armeholes, etc. But why
does God threatnen a woe against them? See the reason, Verse. 22. Because with
lies, ye have made the hearts of the righteous sad, and strengthened the hands
of the wicked that he should not return from his wicked way. Now such as give
scandal do both these things, they do grieve and sad the hearts of the
righteous, and strengthen the hands of the wicked that they return not from
their wicked ways. And therefore upon the same ground that the woe was
threatened against the false prophetisses, is it due to the giuers of scandals.
They are guilty of the same evil, and therefore under the same woe. If the
false prophetisses deserve a woe because by strengthening the hands, and
hardening the hearts of wicked men, they were guilty of the blood of their
souls, then because scandalous ones, are guilty of the self same evil, they
righteously come under the same woe.

It is a dangerous thing to have an hand in other men's Igitur and tu quoque si
reliquis perditionis causa fueris, grauiora patieris, quam qui per te subuer si
sunt. Neque enim peccare tantum in se perditionis habet, quantum quod reliqui
ad peccandum inducuntur, Chrysostom. ad Romans Hom. 25.
sins, and so in other men's damnations. A man's own personal guilt, will be
heavy enough, he shall not need to load himself with other men's guilt. Now
this is the case of scandalous persons, they stand answereable for others men's
sins, as the causers of them, and many times the causers may smart as much,
if not more then the committers of them.

3. God is so severe in the punishment of scandals, because by them is brought
a blurre, a disgrace, and a Reproach upon a whole Church. As God is tender of
this own, so is he also tender of the honor of his Church. It is not safe to
bring disgrace but upon one good man, nay, we saw before that he must smart for
it, that brought up an evil report, but upon one virgin of Israel, Deuteronomy. 22.
Is God so tender of the honor, and credit of one virgin of Israel, what is he
then of the honor of all Israel. If not safe to bring up an evil report upon
one member of the Church, then much less to bring up an evil report upon a
whole Church. We find Numb. 14. 37. some there that brought up an evil report
upon the land, and what was the sequel? They dyed of the plague before the
Lord. If God were so severe in his Justice to smite them with present death
that brought up an evil report upon the Land of Canaan, what severity may they
expect that bring up an evil report upon his Church. What comparison between
Canaan and Gods Church? Now this al scandalous offenders do. If the reproach
of their actions, and the Infamy of their practices, were but only personal,
the matter were not so great, they have but their just deserts, but the
reproach of their scandals redoundes to the disgrace of the whole (...).
Justin. Apol. 2. a pro Christianis.
Church of God and the excrementitious filth of their actions is thrown in the
face of the whole Church. David has a prayer. Ps. 69 5. 6. O God thou know
my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee, let not them that wait
on thee O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my sake O God of Israel. As if he
had said. Thou know O Lord, what heinous things mine enemies lay unto my
charge, thou that know all my foolishnes and sins, know that they lay
them falsely upon me, But what ever sins they charge upon me, yet Lord keep
me and preserve me, that I may not fall into any such scandalous sin, that
may bring shame, and reproach upon thy people, Let me not so sin, that for my
sake thy people should have any shame. Mark then that when any that profess
the Name of God fall into any gross evil, it turns to the shame not only of
him that falls, but it brings shame upon all that wait upon God, and seek
him. All Gods people suffer, and share in the reproach of one miscarrying. We
have an example of it. 1. Cor. 5. 1. It is reported commonly that there is
fornication amongst you. Pungit ac ferit et quoad eius fieri potest commune
profert probru^ criminis. Non dixit enim curille, aut iste* est fornicatus, sed
auditur inter vos fornicatio, ne vt qui essent nulli reprehensioni affines,
pigri esset ac socordes, sed vtpote co^muni percusso, and in crimen vocata
ecclesia ita essent animi dubij and anxij. Nemo enim dicet inquit quod ille aut
iste fornicatus est, sed quod in ecclesia Corinthiorum admissum est illud
peccatum. Chrysostom. in locum.
He does not say, men do report that such a man has committed fornication, but
the report goes that fornication is committed amongst you. If it had been
reported that such a man had committed fornication, that had been but a
personal reproach, and disgrace to that one particular man. But; It is
reported that fornication is committed amongst you, so went the report. There
is fornication amongst the Christians, and in the Church of Corinth, And so the
reproach was general to the whole Church of Corinth, and common to them all,
So that by his Incestuous fact he brought a reproach upon the whole body of
believers. And the heathen questionless so reported it as to blurre them all,
as if they were al a like. So the whole Church of Corinth suffered by that one
man's scandal. And this is the ordinary practice of enemies to disgrace all with
one man's folly. Thus was it the Devils policy and malice to raise up those
Impure His igitur diabolus vsus est -- vt gentibus qui erant a fide alieni
ansam praeberent sacrosancto Dei verbo petulanter impieque obtrectandi: eo
plane consilio vt fama de flagitiosa eorum vitae ratione passim dissipata
turpem ignominiae notam vniuersae Christianorum multitudini inureret, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Gnostickes, that the heathen might have occasion of speaking against the
Gospel, and that the report of their flagitious courses being every where
spread, he might brande the whole multitude of Christians, with the mark of
their Ignominy. There is the same spirit reigns in all enemies that was in
Haman, Mordecay had offended him, but it would not serve his turn nor, satisfy
his malice to lay hands on Mordecay alone, for they had showed him the people
of Mordecay, wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews, even the people
of Mordecay. Esth. 3. 6. Mordecay had done him no wrong nor committed any
offense, but when Hamans choler was up, the quarrel is not at Mordecay alone,
but at his people. So is it in cases of just offense, when scandals are given,
the shame and blame is not laid upon the offender alone, but upon his people,
not upon that professor alone but upon all professors, not upon that member
of the Church, but upon the whole Church. It is a true thing which Quid tam
time^dum quam cum vidi^ homo multos male viuentes, and de quibus been
sperabatur in multis malefactis inuentos? Timet ne tales sint omnes quos
putabat bonos, and veniunt in suspicionem malam prope omnes bo^i. Qualis vir?
Quomodo cecidit? Quomodo in^e^^us est in illa tu^pitudine, in illo scelere, in
i^^o facto malo? Putasne tales sunt omnes? -- Quanta mala dicunt in malos
Christianos quae maledicta perueniunt ad omnes Christianos? Nunquid enim dicit
qui maledicit aut qui reprehendit Christiano^, Ecce quid faciunt, non boni
Christiani? Sed ecce quid faciunt Christiani. Non s^pa^a^ non discernit.
August. in Psalm. 30.
Augustine observes, that when some one man falls into some gross evil, that
gave some hope, and made some show of goodness, that such as are without, are
ready to judge others like them, and that an evil suspicion lies upon all good
men. Oh what a man? say they. How foulely is he fallen? how is he found in
such a filthiness, in such a wickedness, in such a vile fact? do ye not
think that they are all such? how great and foul evil things, says he, do
they speak against evil Christians, which evil sayings reach unto all
Christians? for, does he thus speak, that speaks evil of, or falls foul
upon Christians, Behold what they do that are not good Christians? No, but,
Behold what the Christians do* he puts no difference at all. And so the
scandals of one Christian, tends and trenches to the disgrace of all
Christians, even to the dishonor of the Sed quosdam audio inficere numerum
vestru^, and laude^ praecipai nominis pra^a conuersatione destruere -- Cum
quanto enim nominis vesiri pudore delinquitur qua^do alius aliquis te^ule^tus
and l^sci^ien^ demoratur, etc. Cypr. Epist. 7.
Christian name, the fall of one scandalous professor to the reproach of all.

4. Lastly, God is so severe in punishing such as give scandal, because their
sins therein are greater then other men's. Though other Ex ipso vtique
deteriores sumus si meliores non sumus, qui meliores esse debemus. Criminosior
enim culpa est vbi honestior status: si honoratior est persona peccantis,
peccati quoque mayor inuidia, furtum quidem in homine est malum facinus, Sed
damnabilius absque dubio si Senator furatur aliquando. Cunctis fornicatio
interdicitur, sed, grauius multo est si de clero aliquis quam si de populo
fornicatur. Ita and nos qui Christiani esse dicimur, si simile aliquid
barbarorum impuritatibus facimus grauius: erramus atrocius enim sub sanccti,
nomnis professione peccamus. Vbi sublimior est praerogatiua, mayor est culpa,
Ipso enim, errores nostros, religio quam profitemur, accusat. Criminosior eius
est impudicitia qui promiserit castitatem, foedius inebriatur, sobrietatem
front praetendens. Nihil est Philosopho turpius vitia obscaena sectanti, quia
praeter eam deformitatem quam vitia in se habent, sapientiae nomine plus
notatur, and nos igitur in omni humano genere philosophiam Christianam professi
sumus, ac per hoc deteriores nos cunctis gentibus credi atque haberi necesse
est, quia sub tam magno professionis nomine viuimus, and positi in religione
peccamus. Salu. de Prouid, lib. 4.
men commit the self same sins they do, yet are they not so great in other
men, as they are in such as profess religion. Their sins are greater then
other men's, because theirs, because the sins of such as honored with an high
and holy calling to be the people of God, to be a people near unto him. And
the greater a man's honor is, the more it aggrauates his guilt in case of
offense. Theft is foul in any man, but most foul in a Magistrate. It is a
fouler offense for a Minister then another man to commit fornication. The
dignity of the person ads to the foulnes of the guilt. So here, such whom God
has called with this high calling to be his peculiar people, have a dignity,
and excellency above other men, and the dignity of their persons adds to the
indignity of their facts. Speak unto the children of Israel and say unto the^,
when any man has a running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is
unclean, Leu. 15. 2. 4. But why, speak unto the children of Israel? Because
they only were unclean, and made others unclean by running issues. Heathens
as some observe out of the Jewish Rabbis, did not make unclean by an issue,
or childbirth etc: but Israelites did. An issue was an issue in an heathen, as
well as in an Israelite, but in an Israelite only an unclean and a defiling
issue. Sins are sins in other men as well as in professors of Religion,
but in professors they be horirible sins, Ier. 18. 13. Ask now among the
Heathen, who has heard such things? The Virgin of Israel has done a very
horrible thing. The sins of Gods people are horrible sins, because Quanto
enim honoribus alios antecellunt, tanto quoque ipsorum peccatum, etiamsi
alioqui idem sit, grauius efficitur, (...) Isid. pelus. lib. 4 Epist. 15.

Quo grandius nomen, eo grandius scandalum Ber. Epist 200.


their persons are honorable persons, Isai. 43. 4. As God speaks of the
Prophets of Samaria and Jerusalem, Ier. 23. 13, 14. So it may be said of the
people of both. I have seen folly in the Prophets of Samaria, I have seen
also in the Prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing: and yet in effect the
sins of both were the same, but the same sins diversely circumstanced may
differ much, and so by reason of the persons one being Prophets of Baal, the
other professing themselves the Prophets of the true God, that which was but
folly in the Prophets of Samaria, was an horrible thing in the Prophets of
Jerusalem. So is the case amongst the people, that which is but folly in such
as are ignorant, irreligious, and live without God in the World, is an horrible
thing in a man that makes profession of Religion. And therefore hence, it is
just with God to be so severe in the punishment of such, and God will be
sanctified in them that come nigh unto him, and before all the people will he
be glorified, Leuit. 10. 3. If he be not sanctified by their singular and
special obedience toward him, he will be sanctified by his justice upon
them, and will be glorified before all the people, that is, publicly and
openly, he will do such severe exemplary justice upon them, that al shall take
notice of it. It suits with that, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. How
smart was Gods justice upon Jerusalem? Dan. 9. 12. For under the whole Heaven
has not been done, as has been done. upon Jerusalem. Why so? for under the
whole Heaven had not been done, as had been done in and by Jerusalem.
Jerusalem was the holy City, Math. 4. 5. The City of the great King, Math. 5.
35. The City of God, Psalm. 87. 3. Such she professed herself, so that she
sinning, her sins were out of measure sinful, and therefore God most
righteous, though most severe against her.

It is in this case of the peoples sufferings, as it was in the Priests
Offerings. We shall see that in some cases the people sinning, they might
bring for their Offering a Kid of the Goats, Leuit. 4. 23, 28. But still for
the sins of the Priests there must be offered a Bullock, Leuit. 4. 3.
Leuit. 16. 6. Exodus 29. 10. What might the reason of this be? The Priests
person being more excellent, and nigh unto God, their sins were greater then
other men's, so much greater as a Bullock is greater then a Kid, and therefore
whereas a Kid would serve another man, the Priest must bring a Bullock. So here
in case of suffering justice. All that profess themselves Gods people do
profess themselves Priests unto God, and therefore their sins are as much
above other men's, as is a Bullock above a Kid, and therefore when other men's
punishment which they suffer shall be but the weight of a Kid, that punishment
which they suffer shall be the weight of a Bullock. Woe, even a weighty, and
an heavy Woe to him by whom the offense comes.

Profession of Religion gives no man a license or dispensation, as if because
men will own and countenance Religion, God were beholding to them, and they
may take liberty to do what they please, but profession of Religion is the
strongest Religio autem est scientia Dei, ac per hoc omn^^ religiosus hoc ipso
quod religionem sequitur Dei se volun^^tem nosse testatur. Professio itaque
religionis non aufert debitum, sed auget. quia assumptio religiosi nominis
sponsio est deuotionis, ac per hoc plus quispiam debet opere quanto plus,
promiserit professione. Saluian. contra Auarit. lib. 1.
obligation, and the deepest engagement unto godliness and holiness that can
be. That bond and obligation being broken, God will assuredly both sue the
bond, and take the forfeiture to the utmost.

And thus we see the reasons of Gods so sharp severity in punishing
Scandals, and scandalous offenders.

CHAP. IX.
The great care we should have of giving scandal, and sorrow for them given,
and the cause of humiliation they have by whom offenses come.

THe justice of God being thus smart and severe upon such as give offense,
consider we for the close of all, what use may be made of it. It serves
therefore to teach three things:

1. Gods justice being so severe against the giuers of scandal, how wary and
how careful should it make us, and with what fear and trembling should we
walk, least at any time an offense should come by us. Let this Woe pronounced
against all scandal-giuers be as the flaming Sword of the Cherubims to scare
us, and make us afraid how ever we do any thing, or come near the doing of any
thing that may prove offensive and scandalous. Since the Woe is so heavy and
so smart, let it make us listen to that counsel, Romans 14. 13. That no man put
a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. If Christ have
denounced a Woe, and a Curse to him that lays a stumbling block in another
way, then as we fear that Woe, and that Curse to light on our heads: so take
heed of laying a stumbling block for another man's feet.

Let us learn to live by that rule, 1. Cor. 10. 32. Give none offense, neither
to the Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. Have a care so to
carry our selves, that neither the Church of God may be grieved, nor the
enemies of the Church be either hindered from good, or hardened in evil to
their ruin and destruction.

We see, Revel. 2. 14. That Balaam taught Balak to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel. He did not himself cast the stumbling block,
but he taught Balak to do it. And yet God met with Balaam, and taught him by
his justice upon him, what it was to teach others to cast stumbling blocks in
his peoples ways, Numb. 31. 8. Balaam was slain by the Sword of Israel
amongst the Midianites. He had taught Balak to make them stumble and fall,
therefore God in his justice makes him fall by the Sword.

Now, what if he had put stumbling blocks himself, how much more would Gods
justice have pursued and ouer-taken him? Now scandalous persons do themselves
put stumbling blocks before men, and therefore, we know what Paul's resolution
is, 1. Cor. 8. 13. Wherefore if meat scandalize my brother, and lay a
stumbling block in his way, I will eat no flesh whiles the World stands,
least I scandalize my brother. What is eating of flesh to the works of the
flesh, to the sins of uncleanness, fraud, and notorious deceit? And if Paul
rather then he would give offense would not eat flesh, which was Caeteru^ cum
remade^ formidabilem esse demonstratum sit in ij^ quae in potestat^ nostra
posita sunt fratrem scandalizare, quid de ijs dicendum erit qui rebus vetitis
faciendis loquendisue scandalizant. Basil. Sivero in licitis tale est iudiciu^,
quid diceadum est de vetitis. Ibid.
lawful to do in its own nature, how much more would he have resolved never
to have given offense by foul and notorious practices? Surely he implies this
much more, I will never commit uncleanness, I will never be a fraudulent
dishonest dealer whilst the world stands least I give an offense, and lay a
stumbling block in another way. Why would Paul forbear flesh for ever, in
case of Scandal? Certainly he had an eye to this Woe, and and therefore chose
rather to eat no flesh then to eat it so sawced. It might prove no better
then the Israelites Quails, Psalm. 78. 27, 29, 30, 31. He rained flesh also
upon them as dust* so they did eat and were filled, But while their meat was
yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the fattest of
them.

A man had been as good have fasted as have had their dainties with that
sauce. So Paul knew that meat eaten with Scandal, would have been sawced with
a Woe, and therefore, wisely resolved rather never to eat flesh then to eat it
on such terms. Upon the same ground since such a Woe follows upon giving
offense, dread we to do any thing that may be scandalous, and resolve never
to do it whilst the World stands.

Our Savior Christ was not bound to pay Tribute, or Custom, but yet he is
willing to part with his right upon this ground, Math. 17. 27. Notwithstanding
least we should scandalize them, etc. To prevent Scandal he parts with his
right, and rather works a miracle, then he would give them offense.

How much more then, there being so heavy a Woe, should we be careful to
avoid that which is sinful and unlawful, least we should scandalize men, and
lay ruining stumbling blocks in their ways. Woe to him by whom the offense
comes.

Now then as we would fear to meet with this woe, so take heed of giving any
offense. As we would fear to have a Woe come upon us, so let us fear to have
an offense come by us. This is the very use our Savior makes of it, Luke 17.
1, 2, 3 Woe to him thorough whom offenses come, Verse 1. But, why so? Because
of that which follows, Verse 2. And thereupon inferres that, Verse 3. Take
heed to your selves. As if he had said, since there is such a Woe follows upon
giving offense, therefore let me advise you in any case to take wondrous heed
to your selves, that you give no offense, nor fall into any Scandal.

It should be the care and endeavor of all Gods people to do their best to
remove all stumbling blocks and stones out of the way, Isa. 57. 14. Cast ye
up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the way of
my people, Isa. 62. 10. Prepare you the way of the people, cast up, cast up,
the high way, gather out the stones. Therefore if they must gather out the
stones, they must take heed of laying stones in the way, if they must take
stumbling blocks out of the way of the people, then must they not lay
stumbling blocks in their way. Woe unto him that does not his best to take up
a stumbling block out of the way, therefore much more a Woe to him that shall
cast a stumbling block in the way.

Quest. What may a man then do, and what course may one take to keep and
preserve ones self from falling into Scandals.

Answ. To save our selves from falling into Scandals, do these things.

1. Walk with Selfe-iealousie, and Selfe-suspition. In a conscience of our
own frailty be we ever jealous and suspicious of our selves. That which our
Savior speaks of securing our selves in case of tentation, is to be done, to
secure our selves from the danger of Scandals. Watch and pray least ye enter
into tentation, Math. 26. So watch and pray least ye fall into Scandals. Now
nothing will keep our eyes open in watching, nor our mouths open in praying,
more then a fear and an holy jealousy, and suspicion of our selves by reason
of our frailty, least we be ouer-taken and ensnared.

The profession of religon Non quisquam wiretur, dilectissimi fratres, etiam de
confessoribus quosdam ad ista procedere, inde quoque aliquos ^am nefanda, quam
grauia peccare. Neque enim confessio immunem facit ab infidijs diaboli, aut
contra tentationes -- adhuc in seculo positum perpetua securitate defendit.
Caeterum nunquam in confessoribus frauds, and stupra, and adulteria, post
modum videremus, quae nunc in quibusdam videntes ingemiscimus and dolemus.
Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
secures no man from scandals, neither is it any protection from that danger.
Men are deceived that so imagine. Nay, no men in more danger of foul offenses
then such, and they in most danger that are men most eminent, and of greatest
note for profession. We saw before what special reason Satan has for it to
seek the ensnaring of such. Profane, and irreligious persons are not so beset,
nor haunted so with importunity of Satan's malice as those are and shall be, that
take upon them the profession of Godliness. Profane and Godless persons are his
own sure enough already, and as he Quida^ pastoris fungens munere in pago
Durweiss circa Esweiler puellam nomine Helenam diabolt obsidione pressam
liberare velle elato supercilio promittebat atque se operam ludere videns
indignabundus tandem in haec verba erupit, quae non intellecturum doemonem
fortasse sperabat. Si vllam habes, potestatem transmigrandi in Christianu^
sanguine^ tra^smigra ex illa in me. Cui incu^ctanter latin, and quidem
iuridice respendit Diabolus, Quem pleno iure in pastrem^ die possidebo, quid
opus est illum tentare. Wier de praest. Demon lib. 5. cap. 24.
answered that exorcist taking upon him to dispossess a maid of the Devil,
and adiuring him to come out of her into himself; What shall I need to tempt,
and possess him of whom I shall have full possession at the lastday, So what
cares he to tempt those that he has already possession of, and are taken and
led captive at his pleasure. And besides nothing the advantage and gains comes
in by such men's sins as do by the foul, and notorius falls of such as
profess religion. Therefore the Devil seeking a new possession, and withal
the raising of his Kingdom by their falls, it is apparent that they are in
greater danger of Satan's malice then the other. It therefore concerns them
out of the Conscience of this malice, of his, and their own frailty, to be
very jealous and suspicious of themselves, and out of that fear and Jealousy
to watch and pray.

Our hearts are false and fickle, exceeding ready to close with Satan, therefore
keep so much the more strickt watch over them. We are exceeding weak and
frail, look up to God, and beg his help. It is God that keeps the feet
of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness. 1. Sam. 2. 9. Except
the Lord keep the City the watchman watches in vain, and except the Lord
keep the feet of his Saints, all their watching is in vain. Alas if we
trust to our own keeping how soon will our feet be ready to slip, how foul
shall we fall, and into what scandals shall not we run? And then how far
would wicked ones be from being silent in darkness? Indeed when God keeps
his Saints feet, he silences, and stops wicked men's mouths, because then they
have nothing to say against Godliness. But if God keep not the Saints feet,
how soon and how wide are wicked mouths opened to clamor and blaspheme?
Therefore out of an holy fear and jealousy of our own weakness, let us
daily petition God by prayer that he would keep us that our feet may not
stumble, that he himself would take the charge of us that we dash not our
foot against a stone. There is a promise Ier. 31. 9. I will lead them, I will
cause them to walk in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble. Now when
men out of a fear and jealousy of their own infirmity and frailty, do daily
look up to God, and beg guidance, and safe conduct from him, he will lead them
and make them walk in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble. This was
David's practice. Psalm. 5. 8. Lead me O Lord in thy righteousness because of
mine enemies, or mine obseruers, as Iunius renders it, make thy way straight
before my face. He saw that he had many eyes upon him that observed, and watched
him narrowly, he knows his own readiness to turn aside into by and crooked
ways, his suite therefore to God is, that he would lead him. Whilst God has
a man by the hand how safe is a man from falling? And God that keeps the feet
of his Saints. 1. Sam. 2. 9. has his Saints in his hand. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his
Saints are in thine hand. It is good daily by prayer to put our selves into
Gods hand. It is just with God to check selfe-confidence and to let such men
slip and fall too, that by their falls they may know their frailty. Laudo
Petrum sed prius erubesco pro Petro. Quam prompta anima, sed nesciens se
metiri. Aug de diverse. ser. 39.
Peter's case is well known, Though all, yet not I, he was of a forward spirit,
but knew not how to measure himself, if he had had more fear and jealousy
he would have been more watchful, and have sought more to God, and would
have said rather, If all men should yet Lord by thy grace keep me that I may
not deny thee. He had been more secure if he had been less secure. But now
that he stands wholly upon his own legs, how soon, and how miserably falls
he? The child that cares not to be led but will go of himself, gets many a
knock, and many a shrewde fall, but the child that is fearful, and out of
his fear will be in the mothers or nurses hand, and will cry to be led, that
child scapes many a broken face.

2. Mortify your dearest lusts. A fostered and a cherisht lust does
exceedingly endaunger a man, puts him into great danger of falling into
scandal. Let a lust be loved, and cherished and it will so befoole, and bewitch
a man that he will maintain, and sockle it though it be with the hazard of
the credit of Religion, and the Gospel, it will grow so strong at the last
that it will headlong him into some scandal or other. Therefore deal severely
with these lusts, that will bring thee happily to do that which will cause God
to deal severely with thee, be sure to make sure work with them by
mortification, that is a good way to preserve thee from scandal. This is the
very course our Savior here prescribes. Having in this seventh verse showed
the woe that falls upon the giuers of scandals, see what he inferres, Verse.
8. 9. Wherefore if thine hand, or thy foot offend thee cut them off, and cast
them from thee, etc. And if thine eye offend thee pluck it out, and cast it
from thee. etc. Mark then what it is that makes men offend. Namely men's lusts,
their right hands, eyes, feet. These be the scandal-breeders. If a man would
be free from giving of offense he must out, and off with that which causes him
to offend. Now lusts when they are made much of, when they be made dear,
hands, and eyes, and right eyes, assuredly they will cause men to offend.
Therefore the way to save our selves that they cause not us to offend, is to
offend them, the way is by mortification to cut off, and cast away, such hands,
feet, and eyes as will cause us to offend. Were but this done how happily
might many foul scandals be prevented? If David had presently pluck out his
wanton eye, and cast it away; how easily had he been secured from that great
offense he gave?

It may be many a man out of the great pride of his heart, and his abundant
self-love makes his credit and esteem amongst men to be his right hand, his
right eye, his very Idol. Now this is a lust that will cause a man to offend.
A man in this pride and self-love to maintain and uphold his good opinion and
esteem, runs into this and that secret evil practice, and rather then his
esteem, and credit should sink in the world, uses a number of shifts, and
dishonest courses, and a company of deceitful guiles to vphould his esteem,
and runs so far in at last, that he comes not off, with foul scandal. Now
mortification and self denial had prevented it. If such a man had plucked out
this eye, cut off this hand and foot, he had not halted, nor stumbled nor
fallen into scandal. The not cutting of this foot caused the stumble, the
fall. One chop had saved and prevented all, for if he had but denied himself,
and thus thought with himself, If it be Gods will that I shall be low, and
mean in the world, if he will have me come down and be in an inferior
estate, his will be done, I will humbly submit to his pleasure, and I will not
to uphold my credit in the world for a time, hazard and wound the credit of the
Gospel, and religion, I will tread my credit under foot, rather then bring
any discredit upon the Gospel; If thus by self-denial a man could have
submitted to Gods wisdom and administration, and could have mortified his
self-love, so as to have laid his credit and respect in the world at Gods
foot, how happily might a foul scandal have been prevented? Every
unmortified lust is a scandal that will cause a man to offend, so many lusts so
many tares. Therefore burn, and fire those tares, gather out and cast out
those scandals that will breed scandals and cause offenses. Math. 13. 40. 41.

3. Labor for sincerity, and fruitfulnes in the ways of God. I dare not say
that all that fall into scandal are Hypocrites, and barren. But yet sure it is,
that God many times punishes these two things with scandalous falls. When men
are not so sincere and so fruitful as they should be, God leaves them to
themselves, that by such scandalous falls they may be humbled, for not walking
so sincerely and so fruitfully as they should have done, and as their
profession required at their hands. Therefore the more sincere, and fruitful
we are, the more are we out of danger of scandals. See Phil. 1. 10, 11. That
ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of Christ, Being filled
with the fruits of righteousness. So then the way to be without offense is to
be sincere, and to be filled with the fruits of righteousness. So long as we
adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, we shall keep our
selfs from giving offense. Now sincerity, fidelity, and fruitfulnes do
adorn the Doctrine of God, Tit. 2. 9, 10.

4. Think always upon those two texts. First that, Neh. 4. 9. It is not good
that ye do, ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the
reproach of the heathen our enemies? Are we by Satan tempted to any sinful
course that specially may prove scandalous, think we thus with our selves.
It is not good that we are about to do, the thing is naught and sinful. If
we do thus how will enemies of godliness and Religion triumph, how will they
reproach and scorn Religion and therefore to prevent their reproach, and to
prevent the opening of their mouths, how ought we to walk in the fear of
God. I will rather die then give them just occasion to reproach. If they will
needs be reproaching, let them do it at their Abundet hospitalit as vestra,
abundent bona opera vestra Quod iubet Christus faciant, Christiani, and tantum
suo malo blasphement pagani. Aug. Hom. 10. in append sermon.
own peril, they shall have no cause from me to open their mouths in
reproachful wise. And this is the very argument the Apostle uses to persuade
women to a godly, discreet, chaste, and obedient carriage, That the word of God
be not blasphemed, Tit. 2. 4, 5. Secondly, consider that text, Neh. 6. 11.
Should such a man as I flee? And who is there that being as I am, would go
into the Temple to save his life? I will not go in. It were an happy thing in
these cases if men would know themselves, what they are, and would stand upon
it with Satan. Should such a man as I do thus? Nehemiah we see would not go
into the temple to save his life, when he considered what he was, Such a man
as I? Being as I am? It is no pride in these cases to stand upon what we are,
but much safety were in it. Should such a man as I? Why what a man is he that
professes religion? He is one that has the Name of God called upon him, If my
people on whom my name is called, 2. Chron. 7. 14. He is one that is called
with an high calling. Phil. 3. 14. He is one that is called to Holiness. 1.
These. 4. 7. He is one that is precious and honorable Isa. 43. 4. He is one of
the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 18. 22 He is one of the Sons of God. 1.
Ioh. 3. 1. And now shall such a man as he run into foul and base actions? Who,
being as he is, would not rather loose his life, then dishonor such a
profession, then disgrace such and so many dignities? Why did Jeremy so
willingly subject to Gods word? For thy name is called upon me O Lord God of
hosts. Ier. 15. 16. And should such a man as he not give all obedience to God?
Why was Ezra ashamed to require of the King a band of Soldiers, and horsemen
to help against the enemy? Because it would not stand with that profession
he had made before the King, Because we had spoken unto the King saying, The
hand of our God is for good upon all them that seek him, but his power and his
wrath against all them that forsake him. 1. Ezra. 8. 22. He had made this
profession before the King, and should such a man as he, that had made such a
profession do a thing so contrary thereunto? What a foul shame had that
been? No wonder, having made such a profession, that he was ashamed to do it.
If men would but seriously consider what kind of persons they are, and what
kind of profession they make, oh how would they for shame not meddle with base
actions. What was the reason that Mordecay, would not bow to Haman? They spoke
to him daily, and he hearkened not unto them. And what was his reason. Reason
good enough, He told them that he was a Jew. It would not stand with the
religion he professed to bow to Haman as they bowed to him. He was a Jew, one of
the people of God, that professed the worship of the true God alone, and
should such an one as he bow down to Haman, not only a mortal man but an
accursed Amalekite? Who would being as he was, if it had been to have saved
his life, have vvronged not so much his nation as his religion, and profession
as to have bovved to him What made Abraham that he would not take any thing
that was the King of Sodoms from a thread even unto a shoe latchet, but
because the King of Sodom should not say, I have made Abraham rich. Genesis 54.
23. Like enough Abraham had upon all occasions, and in all places professed
that God whose name he professed had made him so rich, therefore would he do
nothing that might be any prejudice to that his profession, he had a care so
to carry himself that the enemies of God should not have any thing to say that
might disgrace his profession. Thus if a man would consider the highness of
his calling, the honor of his profession, and would in all tentations unto
foul and shameful actions but think, should such a man as I do this? or
who being as I am, would do this? how might he be preserved from many a foul
scandal? Mordecay told them he was a Jew, do thou in all tentations to foul
actions, tell Satan thou art a Christian, and should such a man as thou do so?

5. Look upon other men's falls, r Propone nihil esse quod tibi accidere. non
possit. Vita foueam in quam vides alium coram te incidisse. Aliorum perditio
tua fit cautio. Bern. de Inter. Dom. cap. 45.
and tremble, and take warning by them. Say not in the pride and carnal
boasting of thy spirit, rather then I would have done as he has done, I would
have died a thousand deaths; To condemn such as fall scandalously, is not a
thing to be condemned, who shall dare to justify such? But a comparatiue
condemning of other men's evils, so to condemn them as to commend and brag of
our selves, what in such cases we would have done, and have been, so to
condemn others, as thereby to raise our own praises, what good ones we are,
and would have been to them, so to make others black, as to make our selfs
show the whiter, this is very dangerous. This savors of much pride, and in
such cases it may be Tamen si alicui tanta est fiducia de immobilitate propriae
infirmitatis saltem sollicitus reformidet ne ipse sit scandalum visibus
alienis, sed terreatur voce Domini comminantis, vae huic mundo a scandalis,
Cypr. de singul. Cleric.
just with God, so to give us up to the power of our own corruptions, that we
may fall into the selfsame evil so condemned.

That Proverb of Salomons would be thought upon in all such events, Prou. 27.
19. As in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man. Let a man
look into the water, he sees in it a face in all points answering to his
own, the same spots, Warts, Moulds, and blemishes that he sees in the face in
the water, they are all in his own, there is face answering to face. So does
the heart of a man answer to a man.

The same evils, corruptions, lusts, and sins that thou see in another man's
heart, breaking out in his life the very selfsame are in thine own heart,
his heart to thine is but a face answering thy face, his heart is but as the
face in the water to thy face, therein may thou see what is in thine heart.
And therefore his heart being the very picture of thine own, look not upon
his false, but with fear and trembling, considering least thou also thy self
may be tempted, and fall as foul as he. His heart naturally is as good as
thine, and thine naturally as bad as his, and therefore no better course in the
view of his fall, then to fear and tremble, least thine heart may serve thee
as slipperie a trick as his heart has done. Such humble fear and trembling
will awaken to an answerable caution, and so may prove a good preservative
against the danger of Scandals.

2. A second thing, this point of Gods severity may teach, is to stir us up to
mourn and grieve when Scandals fall out. There be diverse grounds of mourning
in such cases.

As first in regard of the woe that is to the world from offenses, and the
great mischief that will be done by them, That so many will start at and fly
from Religion, that so many will blaspheme the Name of God, that so many will
be hardened to their own ruin, here is cause enough of mourning to all good
hearts. There is a compassion and there be bowels to be shown to mankind,
even to reprobate ones, and a sorrow should there be for the loss of their
blood. And secondly, a sorrow should there be for Gods dishonor, the Churches
reproach. But thirdly, there is yet another ground of sorrow arising from this
point, a sorrow there should be in such events in regard of the woe that will
fall upon such by whom the offense comes. If their case be such that so many
woes will pursue them, then how should men's bowels earne with compassion
toward them, and out of Christian pity commiserate their condition?

The course of the World is to rejoice, and insult over such. That is not
lawful in sinlesse cases, Prou. 24. 17. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls,
namely, into some outward affliction, neither let thine heart be glad when he
stumbles; Therefore much more unlawful in cases of sin, and scandal. This
highly displeases God. Others it may be rejoice not, are not glad, but in the
mean time they mourn not, neither are they in sorrow for Gods dishonor, or
the offenders danger. Surely, as there is joy in Heaven when one sinner
repents, and rises, so should there be sorrow on earth, when one man professing
Christ, sins, and falls foul. This was the Corinthians fault, 1. Cor. 5. 2.
And you are puffed up and have not rather mourned. They should therefore in
that case have mourned, and sorrowed as for Gods dishonor, so for the danger
into which that man by his scandal had brought himself. And this being done
might be a great help to stir up a man fallen into a scandalous sin to mourn
for himself. For when he shall see others lay his case to heart, and to be so
sensible of his ill condition, how may it stir up himself to take his
condition to heart much more. It is said that Samuel mourned for Saul, now when
Saul should hear that Samuel mourned for him, if there had been any grace in
his heart it could not but have made him mourn for himself. It must needs
have thus wrought upon him. Does Samuel mourn for me, and lies my case heavy
at his heart? Alas then what cause have I to mourn for my self. It is I that
have sinned, and it is I that must smart. What is it to Samuel, that I must
undergo such woe, if therefore he, how much more should I mourn. Thus others
sorrow might provoke such to mourn.

3. Lastly, this severity of Gods Justice considered, it serves for the
terror, and the humbling of such by whom offenses come.

Here is that which may break the hearts of them, and make them melt into
godly sorrow. Woe unto him by whom an offense comes. Is an offense come by
thee, and art thou fallen into a scandal? behold here a woe out of Christ's mouth
pursuing thee, and ready to arrest thee. Behold a woe posting after thee to
blast thee in thy Name, to brand thee with Infamy and Reproach. A woe
following thee to cast thee out of the hearts, and society of Gods people, A
woe following thee to smite thee with poverty and sickness, A woe to smite
thy Family, thy Children. And shall not such a woe terrify, and mightily humble
thine heart? How should the dread of such a woe hanging over thine head lay
thee in the dust? If a man had no care of his own soul, or no care of his
credit, or no care of society with the faithful, yet if a man had but any
bowels of nature toward his poor children, here is that which may make his
bowels earne and roll within him. Alas what have I done? I have brought a woe
upon my self, and children. Ah, says David, These sheep what have they done?
So may thou, Alas, these poor babes, and innocent Lambs what have they
done? An heavy woe may overtake and smite them for my folly. Woe is me, the
cause that my soul has to be humbled, Oh the cause that I have to put my
mouth in the duft? Here is that which should make a man hang down his head
(...) sorrow to think of that woe, (...) is pursuing him at the heels. If a
man had a Bayliffe o^ a Sergeant always watching* and dogging of him at the
heels, that he could not stir out of his doors, but he would be ready to
have him by the back, in what a deal of fear would a man be in such a case?
What a deal of care would he take to make his peace, and compound with his
Creditours? Now when a man is fallen into a Scandal presently, a woe is sent
out to pursue and attach such a sinner, oh then the fear, the depth of
humiliation and sorrow, that the dread of this woe should work in such a man?
It should make him do as in that case, Prou. 6. 3, 4. Go humble thy self,
Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, till thou have
made thy peace with God. Grandi plagae alta and p^^^^xa opus est medicina.
Grande scelus grandem habet necessariam satisfactionem. Ambros* ad Virg. laps.
Go and do as Lam. 3. 28, 29, 30. He sits alone and keeps silence, he puts
his mouth in the dust if so be there may be hope, He gives his cheek to him
that smites him, he is filled full with reproach. Sit alone and keep silence,
and never wonder, nor murmr that thou art left alone, but Leuit. 26. 41.
accept of thy punishment. And certainly, where a man is truly humbled he will
do so. Sit alone? I cannot find fault with it, I deserve it, accept it. Oh put
thy mouth in the dust, thou that have laid thine honor in the dust, thou that
have laid the honor of religion in the dust. Give thy cheeks to him that
smites. Art thou reproached, and filled therewith? take it as the due desert of
thy ways, and say with Ecebolius lying, and howling at the Church door,
Calcate me salem insipidum. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 11.
Trample upon me that am unsavory salt. If at any time thou begin to have
but a cheerful thought in thine heart, a cheerful look in thy face, a
cheerful word in thy mouth, dash all cheerful thoughts, looks, words, and
behauiours, dash them all with the thoughts of this woe. Think still where
ever thou art, what ever thou art doing, that thou hear the sound of this
text, and the sound of this Woe, ringing in thine ears, Woe to him by whom the
offense comes. What, I laugh? I be merry and iocund? I be chearie and jolly,
that have such a Woe hanging over mine head? Oh my soul! droope, and hang
down thine head, and be in bitterness of spirit, and Inhaere poenitentiae
vsque ad finem vitae. Ambros. ad virg. laps.
never have one lightsome look, till the light of Gods countenance shine upon
thee. Who knows if God should see a man thus droope under the Conscience of
his sin, thus laid low under the fear of this Woe, but God of his mercy
might in some measure mitigate this Woe, at least might show mercy to the
soul in its peace and pardon.

FINIS.

