THE PARADYSE of daynty devises, aptly furnished, with sundry pithie and
learned inventions: devised and written for the most part, by M. Edwards,
sometimes of her Majesty's Chapel: the rest, by sundry learned Gentlemen, both
of honor, and woorshippe. viz. S. Barnarde. E. O. L. Vaux. D. S. Jasper
Heywood. F. K. M. Bevve. R. Hill. M. Yloop, with others.


EGO SVM VIA ET VERITAS


IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Henry Disle, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
South west door of Saint Paul's Church, and are there to be sold. 1576.

blazon or coat of arms IE NE CHERCHE Q'VNE


TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Sir Henry Compton Knight, Lord Compton, of Compton.
RIGHT HONORABLE, and my very good Lord, (presuming upon your curtesy) J am
bold to present unto your honor, this small volume: Entitled, The Paradise of
deynty devises, being penned by diverse learned Gentlemen, and collected
together, through the travel of one, both of woorship and credit, for his
private use: who not long since departed this life, which when J had perused
over, not with out the advice of sundry my friends, J determined by their good
motion, to set them in print, who thereunto greatly persuaded me, with these and
like words: The writers of them, were both of honor and worship: besides
that, our own country men, and such as for their learning and gravity, might
be accounted of among the wisest. Furthermore, the ditties both pithy and
pleasant, as well for the invention as meter, and will yield a far greater
delight, being as they are so aptly made to be set to any song in.5. parts, or
song to instrument. Which well consydering, J purposed not to forsake so good an
occasion, beseeching your honor to accept it in good part, cheefely for the
aucthours sake: who though some of them are departed this life, yet their
worthy doings shall continue for ever: for like as the shadow follows the
body, so praise follows virtue: and as the shadow goes sometimes before, and
sometimes behind, so does praise also to virtue: but the later it comes, the
greater it is, and to be the better esteemed. Thus fearing to offend your
honor with these my rude speeches, J end, wishing your L. many years of joy.

Your good Lordships wholly to command, H. D.

THE TRANSLATION of the blessed Saint Barnards verses, conteynyng the unstable
felicity of this wayfaring world.
CVR mundus militat, sub vana gloria, cuius prosperitas est transitoria;
Tam cito labitur, eius potentia, quam vasa figuli, quae sunt fragilia.
WHY does each state apply it self to worldly praise?
And undertake such toil, to heap up honors gain:
Whose seat, though seeming sure, on fickle fortune stays,
Whose gifts were never proved, perpetual to remain.
But even as earthen pot, with every fillip fayles,
So fortunes favor flittes, and fame with honor quayles.
Plus creed litteris, scriptis in glacie, quam mundi fragilis, vanae fallaciae.
Fallax in premijs, virtutis specie, quae nunquam habuit, tempus fiduciae.
Think rather firm to find, a figure graven in Ise,
Whose substance subject is, to heat of shinyng sun:
Then hope for steadfast stay, in wanton worlds devise,
Whose fained fond delights, from falsheds forge do come.
And under Virtues veyle, are largely dealt about,
Deceiving those, who think their date will never out.
Magis credendu^ est viris fallacibus, quam mundi miseris prosperitatibus.
Falsis insanijs and voluptatibus, falsis quoquae studiis and vanitatibus.
The trifeling truethles tongue, of rumors lying lips,
Deserves more trust, then does the highest happy hap:
That world to worldlinges geues, for see how honor slippes,
To foolish fond cenceytes, to pleasures poisoned sap.
To studyes false in proof, to arts applied to gain,
To fickle fancies toys, which wisdom deemeth vain.
Dic vbi Solomon, olim tam nobilis? vel vbi Samson est, dux inuincibilis?
Vel dulcis Ionathas, multu^ amabilis? vel pulcher Absolon, vultu mirabilis?
Where is the sacred king, that Solomon the wise?
Whose wisdom, former time, of duty did commend:
Where is that Samson strong, that monstrous man in syze?
Whose forced arm, did cause the mighty pillars bend.
Where is the peareles Prince, the freendly Ionathas?
Or Absolon, whose shape and favor did surpass.
Quo Caesar abijt, celsus imperio, vel dives splendidus, totus in prandie.
Dic vbi Tullius, clarus eloquio, vel Aristoteles, summus ingenio.
Where is that Caesar now, whose high renowned fame,
Of sundry conquestes won, throughout the world did sound?
Or Dives rich in store, and rich in richely name,
Whose chest with gold and dishe, with daynties did abound.
Where is the passing grace, of Tullies pleding skill?
Or Aristotle's vain, whose pen had wit and will.
O esca vermium, o massa pulueris, o ros, o vanitas, cur sic extolleris?
Ignoras penitus vtrum ^ras vixeris, fac bonum omnibus, quam diu poteris.
O food of filthy woorme, oh lump of loathsome clay,
O life full like the deawe, which morning sun does waste:
O shadow vain, whose shape with sun does shrink away,
Why gloryest thou so much, in honor to be plaste?
Since that no certain hour, of life thou do enjoy,
Most fyt it were, thy time in goodness to employ.
Quam breue festu^ est, haec mu^di gloria, vt vmbra hominu^, sic eius gaudia,
Quae semper subtrahit aeterna praemia, and ducunt hominu^, ad dura deuia.
How short a banquet seems the pomp of high renown?
How like the senseles shape, of shiuering shadow thin?
Are wanton worldly toys, whose pleasure plucketh down,
Our hearts from hope, and hands from works, which heaven should win.
And takes us from the trod, which guides to endless gain,
And sets us in the way, that leads to lastyng pain.
Haec mundi gloria, quae magnipenditur, sacris in litteris, flos faeni dicitur.
Vt leave folium, quod vento rapitur, sic vita hominem, hac vita tollitur.
The pomp of worldly praise, which worldlinges hold so dear,
In holy sacred book, is likened to a flower:
Whose date does not conteyne, a week, a moonth, or year,
But springing now, does fade again within an hour.
And as the lightest leaf, with wind about is thrown,
So light is life of man, and lightly hence is blown.
Finis. My Luck is loss.
Beware of had I wist.
BEware of had I wist, whose fine bringes care and smart,
Esteem of all as they deserve, and deem as deemd thou art:
So shall thy perfect friend, enjoy his hoped hyre,
And faythlesse fawning foe, shall miss theffect of his desire.
Good will shall have his gain, and hate shall heap despite,
A faithless friend shall find distrust, and love shall reap delight.
Thy self shall rest in peace, thy friend shall joy thy fate,
Thy foe shall fret at thy good hap, and I shall joy thy state.
But this my fond advise, may seem perchance but vain,
As rather teaching how to lose, then how a friend to gain.
But this not my intent, to teach to find a friend,
But safely how to love and leave, is all that I entend.
And if you prove in part, and find my counsel true,
Then wyshe me well for my good will, it is all I crave adewe.
Finis. My luck is loss.
The perfect trial of a faithful friend.
NOt stayed state, but feeble stay,
Not costly robes, but bare array:
Not passed wealth, but present want,
Not heaped store, but sclender skant:
Not plenties purse, but poor estate,
Not happy hap, but froward fate:
Not wyshe at will, but want of joy,
Not hearts good health, but hearts annoy:
Not freedoms use, but prisons thrall,
Not costly seat, but lowest fall:
Not weal I mean, but wretched woe,
Does truly try, the friend from foe:
And naught, but froward fortune proves,
Who fawning faines, or simply loves.
Finis.
Yloop.

No pleasure, without some pain.
Sweet were the joys, that both might like and last,
Strange were the state, exempt from all distress:
Happy the life, that no mishap should taste,
Blessed the chance, might never change success.
Were such a life to lead, or state to prove,
Who would not wyshe, that such a life were love.
But O the sowry sauce of sweet unsure,
When pleasures fly, and flee with wast of wind:
The trustlesse traynes that hoping hearts allure,
When sweet delights do but allure the mind.
When care consumes and wastes the wretched wight,
While fancy feeds, and draws of her delight.
What life were love, if love were free from pain?
But O that pain, with pleasure matched should meet:
Why did the course of nature so ordain,
That sugared sour, must sause the bitter sweet.
Which sour from sweet, might any means remove.
What hap, what heaven, what life, were like to love.
Finis.
E. S.

1. Our pleasures are vanities.
BEhold the blast which blows, the blossoms from the tree,
The end whereof consumes and comes, to naught we see.
Ere thou therefore be blown, from life that may not last,
Begin for grace, to call for time misspent and past.
Have mind on brittle life, whose pleasures are but vain,
On death likewise bethink, how thou may not remain.
And fear thy Lord to green, which sought thy soul to save,
To sin no more be bent, but mercy ask and have.
For death who does not spare, the kings on earth to kill,
Shall reap also from thee, thy pleasure, life, and will.
That life which yet remaynes, and in thy breast appears,
Has sown in thee such seeds, you ought to weed with tears.
And life that shall succeed, when death is worn and past,
Shall spring for ever then, in joy or pain to last.
Where death on life has power ye see, that life also,
Has mowen the fruits of death, which never more shall grow.
FINIS.
D. S.

2. M. Edwardes MAY.
WHen MAY is in his prime, then MAY each heart rejoice,
When MAY bedeckes each branch with green, each bird streines forth his voice.
The lively sap creepes, up into ye bloming thorn,
The flowers, which cold in prison kept, now laughes the frost to scorn.
All natures Impes triumphs, whiles joyful May does last,
When MAY is gone, of all the year the pleasant time is past.
MAY makes the cherfull hue, MAY breeds and bringes new blood,
MAY marches throughout every limme, MAY makes ye merry mood.
MAY pricketh tender hearts, their warbling notes to tune,
Full strange it is, yet some we see, do make their MAY in June.
Thus things are straungely wrought, whiles joyful MAY does last,
Take MAY in time, when MAY is gone, the pleasant time is past.
All ye that live on earth, and have your MAY at will,
Rejoice in MAY, as I do now, and use your MAY with skill.
Use MAY, while that you may, for MAY has but his time,
When all the fruit is gone, it is to late the tree to clime.
Your liking and your lust, is fresh whiles MAY does last,
When MAY is gone, of all the year the pleasant time is past.
Finis.
3. Fair words make fools feign.
IN youthful years when first my young desires began,
To prick me forth to serve in Court a sclender tall young man.
My Fathers blessing then I asked upon my knee,
Who blessing me with trembling hand, these words began say to me.
My son, God guide thy way, and shield thee from mischaunce,
And make thy just desartes in Court, thy poor estate to advance.
Yet when thou art become one of the Courtly train,
Think on this proverb old (quoth he) that fair words make fools feign.
This counsel gravely given, most strange appears to me.
Till tract of time, with open eyes, had made me plainly see.
What subtle sleightes are wrought, by painted tales devise,
When hollow hearts with freendly shoes the simple do entise.
To think al gold that shines to feed their fond desire,
Whose shiuering cold is warmd with smoke, in stead of flaming fire.
Since talk of tickle trust, does breed a hope most vain,
This proverb true by proof I find, that fair words make fools feign.
Fair speech always does well, where deeds ensue fair words,
Fair speech again, always does evil, that busshes geues for birds.
Who hopes to have fair words, to try his luckie lot,
If I may counsel let him strike it, while the iron is hot.
But them that feed on cloddes, in stead of pleasant grapes,
And after warning often given, for better luck still gapes.
Full loath I am, yet must I tell them in words plain,
This proverb old proves true in them, that fair words makes fools feign.
Woe worth the time that words, so slowly turn to deeds,
Woe worth the time, yt fair sweet flowers, are growe^ to rotten weeds.
But thrice woe worth the time, that truth, away is fled,
Wherein I see how simple hearts, with words are vainly fed.
Trust no fair words therefore, where no deeds do ensue,
Trust words, as skilful Falkeners do trust Hawks that never flew.
Trust deeds, let wodrdes be words, which never wrough me gain,
Let my experience make you wise, and let words make fools feign.
M. Edwardes.

4. In his extreme sycknesse.
What greeues my bones, and makes my body faint?
What pricks my flesh and tears my head in twaayne?
Why do I wake, when rest should me attaynt?
When others laugh, why do I live in pain?
I toss I turn, I change from side to side,
And stretche me often, in sorrows linkes betyde.
I toss, as one betost in waves of care,
I turn, to flee the woes of loathsome life:
I change to spy, if death this corpse might spare,
I stretche to heaven, to rid me of this strife,
Thus do I stretche and change, and toss and turn,
While I in hope of heaven by life do burn.
Then hold thee still, let be thy heaviness,
Abolishe care, forgeat thy pining woe:
For by this means soon shall thou find redress,
When often betost, hence thou to heaven must go.
Then toss and turn, and tumble frank and free.
O happy thryse, when thou in heaven shall be.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

5. For Christmas day.
Rejoice rejoice, with heart and voice.
In Christ's birth this day rejoice.

FRom Virgins womb, this day did spring,
The precious seed that only saved man:
This day let man rejoice and sweetly sing,
Since on this day salvation first began.
This day did Christ man's soul from death remove,
With glorious saints to dwell in heaven above.
This day to man came pledge of perfect peace,
This day to man came love and unity:
This day man's grief began for to surcease,
This day did man receive a remedy.
For each offense, and every deadly sin,
With guilty heart, that erst he wandered in.
In Christ's flock, let love be surely plaste,
From Christ's flock, let concord hate expel:
Of Christ's flock, let love be so embraste,
As we in Christ, and Christ in us may dwell.
Christ is the aucthour of all unity,
From whence proceeds all felicity.
O sing unto this glittering glorious king,
O praise his name, let every living thing:
Let heart and voice like Belles of silver ring,
The comfort that this day did bring.
Let Lute, let Shalme, with sound of sweet delight,
The joy of Christ's birth this day resight.
Finis.
F. K.

6. Easter day.
ALl mortal men this day rejoice,
In Christ that you redeemed has:
By death, with death sing we with voice,
To him that has appesed Gods wrath.
Due unto man for sinful path,
Wherein before he went astray:
Give thanks to him with perfect faith,
That for mankind has made this glorious day.
This day he rose from tomb again,
Wherein his precious corse was laid:
Whom cruelly the Jews had slain,
With blooddy wounds full ill araide.
O Man be now no more dismaide,
If thou henceforth from sin do stay,
Of death thou need not be afraid,
Christ conquered death for this his glorious day.
His death prevailed had no whit,
As Paul the Apostle well does write,
Except he had vprysen yet,
From death to life by Godlike might.
With most triumphant glittering light.
This day his glory shined I say,
And made us bright as sun this glorious day.
O man arise with Christ therefore,
Since he from sin has made thee free:
Beware thou fall in sin no more,
But rise as Christ did rise for thee.
So may thou him in glory see,
When he at day of doom shall say:
Come thou my child and dwell with me,
God Grant us all, to see that glorious day.
Finis.
Jasper Heywood.

7. For Whitsunday.
COme holy ghost eternal God, and ease the woeful grief:
That thorough the heaps of heavy sin, can no where find relief.
Do thou O God redress
The great distress
Of sinful heaviness.
Come comfort the aflicted thoughts, of my consumed heart:
O ryd the pearcing pricking pains, of my tormenting smart.
O holy Ghost grant me
That I by thee
From sin may purged be.
Thou art my God, to thee alone,
I will commend my cause:
Not glittering gold nor precious stone,
Shall make me leave thy laws.
O teach me then the way
Whereby I may
Make thee my only stay.
My lips, my tongue, my heart and al,
Shall spread thy mighty name:
My voice shall never cease to sound,
The praises of the same.
Yea every living thing
Shall sweetly sing
To thee (O heavenly king.)
Finis.
M. Kindlemarsh.

8. Who minds to bring his ship to happy shore,
Must care to know the laws of wysdomes lore.

MY friend, if thou wylt credit me in ought,
To whom the truth by trial well appears:
Naught worth is wit, till it be dearly bought,
There is no wisdom but in hoaric hears.
Yet if I may of wisdom often define,
As well as others have of happiness:
Then to my words my freende, thy ear incline,
The things that make thee wise, are these I guess.
Fear God, and know thy self in each degree,
Be friend to all, familier but to few:
Too light of credit, see thou never be,
For trial often in trust, does treason show.
To others faults cast not to much thy eye,
Accuse no man of gilt, amend thy own:
Of meddling much, does mischief often arise,
And often debate, by tickle tongue is sown.
What thing thou wylt have hid, to none declare,
In word or deed, beware of had I wist:
So spend thy good, that some thou ever spare,
For friends like Hawks, do soar from empty fist.
Cut out thy coat, according to thy cloth,
Suspected persons see thou always flee:
Believe not him that once has broke his troth,
Nor yet of gift, without desert be free.
Time quickly slips beware how thou it spend,
Of wanton youth, repentes a painful age:
Begin nothing without an eye to thend,
Nor bow thine ear from counsel of the sage.
If thou to far let out thy fancy slip,
And witless will from reasons rule outstart:
Thy folly, shall at length be made thy whippe,
And sore, the stripes of shame, shall cause thee smart.
To do too much for old men is but lost,
Of freendship had to women comes like gain:
Bestow not thou on children to much cost,
For what thou dooest for these, is all in vain.
The old man or he can requite, he dies,
Unconstant is the woman's waueryng mind:
Full soon the boy thy freendship will despise,
And him for love thou shall ungrateful find.
The aged man is like the barren ground,
The woman like the Reed that wagges with wind:
There may no trust in tender years be found,
And of the three, the boy is most unkind.
If thou have found a faithful friend in deed.
Beware thou lose not love of such a one:
He shall sometime stand thee in better steed,
Then treasure great of gold or precious stone.
Finis.
Jasper Heywood.

9. Of the unconstant stay of fortunes gifts.
IF Fortune be thy stay, thy state is very tickle,
She bears a double face, disguised, false, and fickle.
This day she seems to smile, to morrow will she frown,
What now she sets aloft, anon she throws down.
Fly Fortunes sly deseytes, let Virtue be thy guide,
If that you do intend in happy state to bide.
Upon the settled Rock, thy building surest stands,
Away it quickly wears, that rests on the sands.
Dame Virtue is the Rock, that yeeldes assured stay,
Dame Fortune is the Sand, that skowreth soon away,
Choose that is certain, let things uncertain pass,
Prefer the precious gold, before the brittle glass.
Sly Fortune has her sleightes, she plays upon the pack,
Look whom she favors most, at length she turns to wrack.
But Virtue simply deals, she shuns deceitful train,
Who is by Fortune raised up, shall never fall again.
Stick fast to Virtue then, that geues assured trust,
And fly from Fortunes freekes, that ever prove unjust.
Finis.
F. K.

10. Promise is debt.
IN my account, the promise that is vowed,
Among the good, is holden such a debt:
As he is thought, no whit to be allowed,
That sets light his promise to forget.
And for my part, I will not link in love,
With fickle folk, whose fancies often remove.
My happy gain, I do esteem for such,
As few have found, in these our doutful days:
To find a friend, I think it be as much,
Aste win, a fort full fraught of noble praise.
Of all the goods, that there may be possessed,
A faithful friend, I judge to be the best.
O freendly league, although to late begun,
Yet time shall try our troth, is well employed:
And that we both shall see, that we have won,
Such fastened faith, as can not be destroyed.
By envious rage, or slanders bitter blow
That seeks the good, to overthrow,
Finis.
R. Hill.

11. No words, but deeds.
THE wrong is great, the pain above my power,
That yeeldes such care in doutfull dens to drown:
Such hap is hard, where fortune does so lower,
As freendly look, is turned to froward frown.
Is this the trust that faithful treendes can find?
With those that yet have promise broke?
By deeds in dout, as though no words can bind,
A vowed friend to hold him to his yoke.
O faithless friend? what can assure your mind,
That doutes so soon, before you have cause why?
To what hard hap? does Fortune here me bind,
When words nor deeds can no way satisfye.
What can I write? that has not often been said?
What have I said? that other has not affyrmed?
What is approved? that ought to be assayed?
Or what is vowed? that shall not be performed?
Cast of mistrust, in haste no credit give,
To this or that, that breeds friends unrest:
No doubt at all, but trust me if I live,
My deeds shall prove, that all is for the best.
And this believe, the Sea shall cease to flow,
The Sun to shine within the settled sky:
All things on earth, shall leave to spring and grow,
Yea every foul shall want, his wings to fly.
Ear I in thought, shall seem once to retire,
If you my friend remain, as I desire:
Now lose no time, but use that while you may,
Forget not this, a dog shall have a day.
Finis.
R. D.

12. He desires exchange of life.
THE day delayed, of that I most do wish,
Wherewith I feed and starve, in one degree:
With wish and want, still served in one dishe,
Alive as dead, by proof as you may sow.
To whom of old, this proverb well it serves,
While grass does grow, the seelly Horse he sterues.
Tweene these extremes, thus do I rome the race,
Of my poor life, this certaynely I know:
Tweene would and want, unawarely that does pass,
More swift then shot, out of the archers how.
As Spider draws her line in vain all day,
I watch the net, and others have the pray,
And as by proof, the greedy dog d^^^ gn^^^,
The bared bone, all only for the taste:
So to and fro, this loathsome life I draw,
With fancies forced, and fled with vain repast.
Narsissus brought unto the water brinke,
So aye thirst I, the more that I do drink.
Lo thus I dye, and yet I seem not sick,
With smart unseen, my self my self I wear:
With prone desire, and power that is not quick,
With hope aloft now drenched in despair,
Trained in trust, for no reward assignd,
The more I haste, the more I come behind.
With hurt to heal, in frozen yse to frye,
With loss to laugh, this is a woonderous case:
Fast fetred here, is forste away to fly,
As hunted Hare, that Hound has in the chase.
With wings and spurs, for all the haste I make,
As like to lose, as for to draw the stake.
The days be long, that hang upon desert,
The life is irke of joys that be delayed:
The time is short, for to requite the smart,
That does proceed of promise long unpaid,
That to the last of this my fainting breath,
I wish exchange of life, for happy death.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

13. Of the instabilitie of youth.
WHEN I look back, and in my self behold,
The wandering ways, that youth could not descry:
And marked the fearful course that youth did hold,
And met in mind, each step youth strayed a wry.
My knees I bow, and from my heart I call,
O Lord, forget these faults and follies all.
For now I see, how void youth is of skill,
I see also his prime time and his end:
I do confess my faults and all my ill,
And sorrow sore, for that I did offend.
And with a mind repentant of all crimes,
Pardon I ask for youth, ten thousand times.
The humble heart, has daunted the proud mind,
Eke wisdom has given ignorance a fall:
And wit has taught, that folly could not find,
And age has youth, her subject and her thrall.
Therefore I pray, O Lord of life and truth,
Pardon the faults committed in my youth.
Thou that dydst grant the wise king his request?
Thou that in Whale, thy prophet did preserve:
Thou that forgauest the wounding of thy breast?
Thou that dydst save the thief in state to sterue.
Thou only God, the geuer of all grace?
Wipe out of mind, the path of youths vain race.
Thou that by power, to life did raise the dead.
Thou that of grace restorest the blind to sight:
Thou that for love, thy life and love out bled,
Thou that of favor, made the lame go right.
Thou that can heal, and help in all assayes,
Forgive the gilth, that grew in youths vain ways.
And now since I, with faith and doubtless mind,
Do fly to thee by prayer, to appease thy ire:
And since that thee, I only seek to find,
And hope by faith, to attain my just desire.
Lord, mind no more youths error and vnskill,
And able age, to do thy holy will.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

14. Most happy is that state alone,
Where words and deeds agree in one.

BY painted words, the silly simple man,
To trustlesse trappe, is trained now and than.
And by conseyte, of sweet alluring tale,
He bites the baits, that breeds his bitter bale.
To beawties blast, cast not thy rolling eye:
In pleasant green, do stinging Serpent lie.
The golden Pill, has but a bitter taste:
In glittering glass, a poison ranckest plaste.
So pleasant words, without perfourming deeds:
May well be deemed, to spring of Darnel seeds.
The freendly deed is it, that quickly tryes:
Where trusty faith, and freendly meaning lies.
That state therefore, most happy is to me:
Where words and deeds, most faithfully agree.
My friend, if thou wylt keep thy honest name:
Fly from the blotte, of barking slanders blame.
Let not in word, thy promise be more large:
Then thou in deed, art wylling to discharge.
Abhorred is that false dissembling brood,
That seems to bear, two faces in one hoode.
To say a thing, and not to mean the same:
Will turn at length, to lose of thy good name.
Wherefore my friend, let double dealing go:
In stead whereof, let perfect plainness flow.
Do thou no more, in idle words exceed:
Then thou intendes to do, in very deed.
So good report, shall spread thy worthy praise:
For being just in word and deed always.
You worldly wightes, that worldly dooers are:
Before you let your word slip forth to far,
Consider well, what inconvenience springes:
By breach of promise made, in lawful things.
First, God mislikes where such deceit does swarm:
Next, it redoundeth unto thy neighbors harm.
And last of all, which is not least of all:
For such offense, thy conscience suffer shall.
As barren grounds, bringes forth but rotten weeds:
From barren words, so fruitelesse chafe proceeds.
As sauerie flowers, do spring in fertile ground:
So trusty friends, by tried friends are found.
To shun therefore the woorst, that may ensue:
Let deeds always, approve thy sayings true.
Finis.
F. K.

15. Who will aspire to dignity,
By learning must advanced be.

THE poor that live in needy rate,
By learning do great richesse gain:
The rich that live in wealthy state,
By learning do their wealth mainteyne.
Thus rich and poor, are furthered still.
By sacred rules of learned skill.
All fond conceits of frantic youth.
The golden gift of learning stays:
Of doubtful things to search the truth,
Learning sets forth the reddy ways.
O happy him do I repute,
Whose breast is fraught with learninges fruit.
There grows no Corn within the feelde.
That Ox and Plough did never till:
Right so the mind no fruit can yield.
That is not lead by learninges skill.
Of ignorance comes rotten weedees,
Of learning springes right noble deeds.
Like as the Captain has respect.
To train his soldiers in array:
So Learning does man's mind direct.
By Virtues staff his life to stay.
Though Friends and Fortune waxes skant.
Yet learned men shall never want.
You Impes therefore in youth be sure.
To fraught your minds with learned things:
For Learning is the fountain pure,
Out from the which all glory springes.
Who so therefore will glory win,
With Learning first, must needs begin.
Finis.
F. K.

16. Man's flitting life, fyndes surest stay,
Where sacred Virtue bears sway.

THE sturdy Rock, for all his strength,
By raaging Seas, is rent in twain:
The Marble stone, is pearst at length,
With little drops, of drislyng rain.
The Ox does yield unto the yoke,
The Steel obeys the hammer stroke.
The stately Stagge, that seems so stout,
By yalpyng Hounds, at bay is set:
The swiftest Bird, that flees about,
Is caught at length in Fowlers net.
The greatest Fish in deepest Brook,
Is soon deceived with subtle hook.
Ye man him self, unto whose will,
All things are bounden to obey:
For all his wit, and worthy skill,
Does fade at length, and fall away.
There is nothing, but time does wast,
The Heavens, the Earth, consume at last.
But Virtue sittes, triumphing still,
Upon the Trone, of glorious Fame:
Though spiteful Death, man's body kill,
Yet hurtes he not, his virtuous name.
By Life or death, what so be tides,
The state of Virtue, never slides.
Finis.
M. T.

17. Nothing is comparable unto a faithful friend.
Since this our time of Freendship is so scant,
Since Freendship now in every place does want.
Since every man of Freendship is so hollow,
As no man rightly knows which way to follow.
Sease not my Muse, cease not in these our days,
To ryng loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
If men be now, their own peculier friends,
And to their neighbors Freendship none pretendes.
If men of Freendship show them selves so bare,
And of their brethren take no freendly care.
Forbear not then my Muse, nor fear not then,
To ryng disprayse of these vnfreendly men.
Did man of Freendship know the mighty power?
How great effects it woorketh every hour.
What store of hidden freendship it retaynes,
How still it powers forth aboundaunt gaynes.
Man would with thee my muse in these our days,
Ryng out loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
Freendship, releeueth man's necessity,
Freendship, comfort man's adversity.
Freendship augmenteth man's prosperity,
Friendship preferres man to felicity.
Then ryng my muse, ryng out in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
Of Freendship, grows love and charity,
By Freendship, men are linked in amity:
From Freendship, springs all commodity,
The fruit of Freendship, is fidelity.
Oh ryng my Muse, ryng out in these our days,
Peale upon peale, of sacred Freendships praise.
That man with man, true Freendship may embrace,
That man to man, may show a freendly face:
That every man, may sow such freendly seeds,
As Freendship, may be found in freendly deeds.
And join with me my Muse in these our days,
To ryng loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
Finis.
F. K.

18. Respise finem.
TO be as wise as CATO was,
Or rich as CRESVS in his life:
To have the strength of Hercules,
Which did subdue by force or strife.
What helps it when Death does call,
The happy end exceeds all.
The Ritche may well the Poor relieve,
The Rulers may redress each wrong:
The Learned may good counsel give,
But mark the end, of this my song.
Who does these things, happy they call,
Their happy end exceeds all.
The happiest end, in these our days,
That all do seek, both small and great:
Is either for Fame, or else for Praise,
Or who may sltte in highest seat.
But of these things, hap what hap shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
A good beginning often we see,
But seeldome standing at one stay:
For few do like the meme degree,
Then praise at parting some men say.
The thing whereto each wight is thrall,
The happy end exceeds all.
The mean estate, that happy life,
Which lives under governance:
Who seeks no hate nor breeds no strife,
But takes in worth his happy chance,
If contentation him befall,
His happy end, exceeds all.
The longer life that we desire,
The more offense does daily grow:
The greater pain it does require.
Except the Judge some mercy show.
Wherefore I think, and ever shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
Finis.
D. S.

19. He persuades his friend, from the fond effects of love.
WHY art thou bound, and may go free,
Shall reason yield to raging will?
Is thraldom like to liberty:
Wylt thou exchange thy good for ill:
Then shall thou learn a childishe play,
And of each part to taste and prove,
The lookers on, shall judge and say,
Lo this is he that lives by love.
Thy wits with thoughts, shall stand at stay,
Thy head shall have but heavy rest:
Thy eyes shall watch for wanton prays,
Thy tongue shall show thy hearts request.
Thy ears shall hear a thousand noise,
Thy hand shall put thy pen to pain:
And in the end, thou shall dispraise,
The life so spent, for such small gain.
If leave and list might never cope,
Nor youth to run from reasons race:
Nor if strong suit might win sure hope,
I would less blame a lovers case.
For love is hot, with great desire,
And sweet delight makes youth so fond,
That little sparks will prove great fire,
And bring free hearts to endless bond.
Finis.
20. Wantyng his desire, be complayneth.
THe sailing ships with joy at lenght, do touch the long desired port,
The hewing axe ye oak does waste, ye battring Canon breaks ye fort.
Hard hagard Hawks stope to ye lure, wild co^s in time ye bridle tames,
There is nothing so out of ure, but to his kind long time it frames.
Yet this I find in time, no time can win my suit,
Though often the tree I clime, I can not catch the fruit.
And yet the pleasant branches often, in yielding wise to me do bow,
When I would touch, they spring aloft, sone are they gone, I wot not how:
Thus I pursue ye fleting flood, like Tantalus in hell below.
Would god my case she understood, which can full sone releue my woe:
Which if to her were known, the fruit were surely mine,
She would not let me groan, and brouse upon the rine.
But if my ship with tackle turn, with rented sails must needs retire,
And stream and wind had plainly sworn, by force to hinder my desire:
Like one that strikes upon ye rocks, my weerie wrack I should bewaste
And learn to know false fortunes mocks, who smiles on me to small avail:
Yet since she only can, my rented ship restore,
To help her wracked man, but once I seek no more.
Finis.
M. Edwardes.

21. Try before you trust.
IN friends are found a heap of doubts, that double dealing use,
A swarm of such I could find out, whose craft I can accuse:
A face for love, a heart for hate, these feigned friends can bear,
A tongue for troth, a head for wyles, to hurt each simple ear.
In humble port is poison pact, that plainness can not spy,
Which credites all, and can not see, where stinging serpents lie:
Through hasty trust, the harmless heart, is easily hampred in,
And made believe it is good gold, when it is lead and tin.
The first deceit that bleares mine eyes, is feigned faith professed,
The second trappe, is grating talk, that gripes each strangers breast,
The third deceit, is greeting words, with colors painted out,
Which biddes suspect to fear no smart, nor dread no dangerous dout.
The fourth and last, is long repair, which creepes in freendships lap:
And daily hauntes, that under trust, deuiseth many a trap.
Lo how false friends, can frame a fetch, to win the will with wyles,
To sauce their sleightes with sugared sops, and shadow harm with smiles.
To serve their lusts, are sundry sorts, by practice diverse kinds,
Some carries honnie in their mouths, and venime in their minds.
Me thinks the stones within the streets, should cry out in this case,
And every one that does them meet, should shun their double face.
Finis.
D. S.

22. A Lady forsaken, complayneth.
IF pleasures be in painfulness? in pleasures does my body rest,
If joys accord with carfulness? a joyful heart is in my breast:
If prison strong be liberty? in liberty long have I been,
If joys accord with misery? who can compare a life to mine.
Who can unbind that is sore bound? who can make free yt is sore thrall
Or how can any means be found? to comfort such a wretch withal?
None can, but he yt has my heart, convert my pains to comfort then,
Yet since his servant I became, most like a bondsman have I been:
Since first in bondage I became, my word and deed was ever such,
That never once he could me blame, except from loving him too much.
Which I can judge no just offense, nor cause that I deserud disdain,
Except he mean through false pretense, through forged loved to make a train
Nay nay alas, my fained thoughts my fre^ded and my fained ruth
My pleasures past my present plaints, show well I mean but to much truth:
But since I can not him attain, against my will I let him go,
And lest he glory at my pain, I will attempt to cloak my woe.
Youth, learn by me, but do not prove, for I have proved to my pain,
What grievous greefes do grow by love, and what it is to love in vain.
Finis.
M. D.

23. Finding worldly joys but vanities, he wysheth death.
Forlorn in filthy froward fate, wherein a thousand cares I find,
By whom I do lament my state, annoide with fond afflicted mind:
A wretch in woe, and dare not cry,
I live, and yet I wish to dye.
The day in dole, that seems long, I pas with sighs and heavy cheer,
And with these eyes I vewe the wrong, that I sustain by loving here:
Where my mishappes as rife do dwell,
As plagues within the pit of hell.
A wailing wight I walk alone, in desert dens there to complain,
Among the savage sort to moan, I flee my friends where they remain:
And pleasure take to shun the sight,
Where erst I felt my chief delight.
A captive clapped in chains of care, lapt in the laws of lethall love,
My flesh and bones consumed bare, with crauling greefes full strange to prove:
Though hap does bid me hope at least,
Whiles grass does grow, yet starues the beast.
A seeged fort with foreign force, for want of aid, must yield at last,
So must my weeried pined corse, submit it self to bitter taste:
Of crauling care, that carkes my breast,
Till hop or death, shall breed my rest.
Finis.
F. M.

24. Having married a worthy Lady,
and taken away by death, he complayneth his mishap.

IN youth when I at large did lead, my life in lusty liberty,
When heavy thoughts no one did spread, to let my pleasant fantesie
No fortune seemd, so hard could fall,
This freedom then, that might make thrall.
And twenty years I skarse had spent, when to make full my happy fate,
Both treasures great were on me cast, with lands and titles of estate:
So as more blessed then I stood than,
Eke as me thought was never man.
For of Dame Fortune who is he, could more desire by just request,
The health, with wealth, and liberty, al which at once I thus possessed:
But maskyng in this ioly joy,
A soden sight, prooud al a toy.
For passing on these merry days, with new device of pleasures great,
And now and then to view the rays, of beauties works with cunnyng fret:
In heavenly hewes, al which as one,
I often beheld, but bound to none.
And one day rowlyng thus my eyes, upon these blessed wyghts at ease,
Among the rest one did I see, who straight my wandryng looks did sease:
And stayed them firm, but such a sight,
Of beauty yet saw never wight.
What shall I seek to praise it more, where tongs can not praise ye same,
But to be short to lovers lore, I straight my senses al did frame:
And were it wit, or were it chance,
I woonne the Garlande in this dance,
And thus where I before had thought, no hap my fortune might encrese*
A double blis this chance forth brought, so did my ladies love me plese:
Her faith so firm, and constant such,
As neue^ heart, can praise too much.
But now with torments strange I taste, ye fickle stay of fortunes whele,
And where she raysde from height to cast, with greater force, of grief to
feel:
For from this hap of soden frown,
Of Princes face she threw me down.
And thus exchange now has it made, my liberty a thing most dear,
In hateful prison for to fade, where sundred from my loving fear:
My wealth, and health, stands at like stay,
Obscurely to consume away.
And last when human force was none, could part our love wherein we lived,
My ladies life alas is gone, most cruel death has it bereued:
Whose virtues, her, to God, has won,
And least me here, a man undone.
Finis.
F. G.

24. A worthy dittie, song before the Queens
Majesty at Bristowe.

MIstrust not troth, that truly means, for every ielous freke,
In stead of wrong, condemn not right, no hidden wrath to wreke*
Look on the light of faultlesse life, how bright her virtues shine,
And measure out her steps each one, by leuel and by line.
Deem each desert by upright guess, whereby your praise shall live,
If malice would be match with might, let hate no judgment give:
Enforse no fear with wresting wits, in quiet conscience breast,
Lend not your ears to busy tongues, which breeds much unrest.
In doubtful driftes wade not to far, it weeries but the mind,
Seek not to search the secret hearts, whose thoughts are hard to find:
Avoid from you those hateful heads, that helps to heap mishapp,
Be flow to hear the flatterers voice, which creeps in your lapp.
Embrace their love that wills you good, and sport not at their praise,
Trust not too much unto your self, for feeble are your stays:
How can your seat be settled fast, or stand on steadfast ground,
So propped up with hollow hearts, whose suertie is unsound.
Give faith to those that fear for love, and not that love for fear,
Regard not them that force compels, to please you every where:
All this well waide and borne away, shall stablishe long your state,
Continually with perfect peace, in spite of puffing hate.
Finis.
D. S.

26. His good name being blemished, he bewayleth.
FRaud is the front of Fortune past all recovery,
I stayles stand, to abide the shocke of shame and infamy.
My life through lingering long is lodge, in lare of loathsome ways,
My death delaide to keep from life, the harm of hapless days:
My sprites, my heart, my wit and force, in deep distress are dround,
The only loss of my good name, is of these greefes the ground.
And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice, and tongue are weak
To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare, and speak:
Such pearsing plaintes, as answer might, or would my woeful case,
Help, crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face:
Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air be found,
To wayle with me this loss of mine, as of these greefes the ground.
Help gods, help saints, help sprites and powers, yt in the heaven do dwell,
Help ye yt are to wayle aye wont, ye howling hounds of hell:
Help man, help beasts, help birds, and worms, yt on ye earth does toil
Help fish, help foul, that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil:
Help echo that in air does flee, shryl voices to resound,
To wayle this loss of my good name, as of these greefes the ground.
Finis.
E. O.

27. Of Fortunes power.
POlicrates whose passing hap, causd him to lose his fate,
A golden ryng cast in the seas, to change his constant state,
And in a fish yet at his bourd, the fame he after found,
Thus Fortune lo, to whom she takes, for bounty does abound.
The myzers unto might she mountes, a common case we see,
And mighty in great misery, she sets in low degree:
Whom she to day does rear on hie, upon her whitling wheel,
To morrow next shedingeth down, and casts at her heel.
No measure has she in her gifts, she does reward each sort.
The wise that counsel have, no more then fools that makes sport.
She uses never partial hands for to offend or please,
Give me good Fortune all men says, and throw me in the seas.
It is no fault or worthiness, that makes men fall or rise,
I rather be borne Fortunate, then to be very wise.
The blindest man right soon, that by good Fortune guided is,
To whom that pleasant Fortune pipes, can never dance amiss.
Finis.
M. Edwardes.

28. Though Triumph after bloody wars, the greatest brags do bear:
Yet Triumph of a conquered mind, the crown of Fame shall wear.

WHo so does mark the careless life, of these unhappy days,
And sees what small and slender hold, the state of virtue stays:
He finds that this accursed trade, proceeds of this ill,
That men be given, too much to yield to their untamed will.
In lack of taming witless will, the poor we often see
Enuies the rich, because that he, his equal cannot be:
The rich aduauned to might by wealth, from wrong does not refrain,
But will oppresses weaker sort, to heap excessive gain.
If Fortune were so blind, to give to one man what he will,
A world would not suffice the same, if he might have his fill:
We wish, we search, we strive for all, and have no more therein
Then has ye slave, when death does come, though Cresus wealth we win.
In getting much, we get but care, such brittle wealth to keep,
The rich within his walls of stone does never soundly sleep:
When poor in weak and slender house, do fear no loss of wealth,
And have no further care but this, to keep them selves in health.
Affection may not hide the sword of sway, in judgment seat,
Least partial law do execute the law in causes great:
But if the mind in constant state, affection quite do leave,
The higher state shall have their rights, the poor no wrong receive.
It is accounted greater praise to Ceasars lofty state,
Against his vanquist foes, in wars to bridle wrekefull hate:
Then when to Rome he had subdued, the people long unknown,
Whereby as far as land was found, the same abroad was ^lowne.
If honor can self will refuse, and justice be upright,
And private state desires but that which good appears in sight:
Then virtue shall with sovereign show, to every eye reveal
A heavenly life, a wealefull state, a happy common weal.
Let virtue then the Triumph win, and govern all your deeds,
Your yielding to er sober heastes, immortal glory breed:
She shall vpreare your worthy name, show then unto the skies,
Her beams shall shine in grave obscure, where shrined carkesse l^es,
Finis.
M. Edwardes.

29 Of perfect wisdom.
WHo so will be accounted wise, and truly claim the same,
By joining virtue to his deeds, he must atchieue the same:
But few there be, that seek thereby true wisdom to attain,
O God, so rule our hearts therefore, such fondness to refrain.
The wisdom which we most esteem, in this thing does consist,
With glorious talk to show in words our wisdom when we list.
Yet not in talk, but seemly deeds, our wisdom we should place,
To speak so fair, and do but ill, does wisdom quite disgrace.
To bargain well, and shun the loss, a wisdom counted is,
And thereby through the greedy coin no hope of grace to mis.
To seek by honor to advance his name to brittle praise,
Is wisdom, which we da^ly see, increases in our days.
But heavenly wisdom sower seems to hard for them to win,
And weary of the suit they seem, when they do once begin:
It teaches us to frame our life, while vital breath we have,
When it dissolueth earthly mass, the soul from death to save.
By fear of God to rule our steps, from sliding into vice,
A wisdom is, which we neglect, although of greater price:
A point of wisdom also this, we commonly esteem,
That every man should be in deed, that he desires to seem.
To bridle that desire of gain, which forces us to ill,
Our hawtie stomachs Lord repress, to tame presuming will:
This is the wisdom that we should, above each thing desire,
O heavenly God from sacred throne, that grace in us inspire.
And print in our repugnant hearts, the rules of wisdom true,
That all our deeds in worldly life, may like thereof ensue:
Thou only art the living spring, from whom this wisdom flows,
O wash therewith our sinful hearts, from vice that therein grows.
Finis.
M. Edwardes.

30 A friendly admonition.
YE stately wightes, that live in quiet rest
Through worldly wealth, which God has given to you.
L^ment with tears and sighs from doleful breast:
The shame and power that vice obtains now.
Behold how God does daily profer grace,
Yet we disdain, repentance to embrace.
The suddes of sin do suck into the mind,
And cancred vice does virtue quite expel,
No change to good alas can resting find:
Our wicked hearts so stoutly do rebel.
Not one there is that hastes to amend,
Though God from heaven his daily threats do send.
We are so slow to change our blamefull life,
We are so pressed to snatche aluring vice:
Such greedy hearts on every side be rife.
So few that guide their will by counsel wise,
To set our tears lament the wretched case,
And call to God for undeserved grace.
You worldly wightes, that have your fancies sixth
On slipper joy of terreine pleasure here:
Let some remorse in all your deeds be mixed.
Whiles you have time let some redress appear.
Of sudden Death the hour you shall not know,
And look for Death atthough it seems slow.
Oh be no judge in other men's offense,
But purge thy self and seek to make thee free,
Let every one apply his diligence,
A change to good with in him self to see:
O God direct our feet in such a stay,
From cancred vice to shame the hateful way.
Finis.
R. Hill.

31. Sundry men, sundry affectes.
IN every wight some sondrie sort of pleasure I do find,
Which after he does seek to ease his toyling mind.
Diana with her training chase, of hunting had delight,
Against the fearful Dear, she could direct her shot aright.
The lofty years in every age, does still embrace the ^ame,
The sport is good, if virtue do assist the cheerful game.
Minerua in her chattering arms her courage does advance,
In trial of the bloody wars, she gives luckie chance.
For sauegard men embrace the same, which do so needful seem,
That noble hearts their chief delights in use thereof esteem.
In warlike games to ride or try the force of arms they use,
And base the man we do account, that does the same refuse.
The silver sound of musickes cords, does please Apollos wit,
A science which the heavens advance, where it deserves to sit.
A pleasure apt for every wight, relief to careful mind,
For woe redress, for care a salve, for sadness help we find.
The sovereign praise of Music still, does cause the Poets feign,
That whliring Spheres, and eke the heavens, do hecmonie retain.
I heard that these three powers, at variaunce lately fell,
Whiles each did praise his own delight, the other to excel.
Then Fame, as one indifferent judge, to end the case they call,
The praise pronounced by her to them, indifferently does fall.
Diana health and strength maintain, Minerua force does tame,
And Music geues sweet delight, to further other game.
These three delights to hawtie minds, the worthiest are esteemed,
If virtue be anexed to them, they rightly be so demed.
With joy they do relieve the wit with sorrow often oppressed,
And never suffer solemn grief too long in mind to rest.
Be wise in mirth, and seek delight, the same do not abuse,
In honest mirth, a happy joy we ought not to refuse.
Finis.
R. Hill.

32. Time gives experience.
WE read what pains the powers divine,
Through wrath conceived by some offense,
To mortal creatures they assign
Their due desartes for recompense.
What endless pain they must endure,
Which their offenses did procure.
A Gripe does Titius Liver tear
His greedy hungry gorge to fill,
And Sisiphus must ever bear
The rolling stone against the hill.
A number more in hell be found,
Which thus to endless pain are bound.
Yet all the woe that they sustain,
Is nothing to the pain of me,
Which comes through the proud disdain
Of one, that does to love repine:
Therefore I cry woe worth the hour,
Since first I fell in Venus power.
The gnawing gripes of irksome thought,
Consumes my heart with Titius grief:
I also have full vainly wrought,
With Sisiphus without relief.
Even when I hope to end my pain,
I must renew my suit again.
Yet will I not seem so untrue,
To leave a thing so late begone:
A better hap may yet ensue,
The strongest towers in time be won.
In time therefore, my trust I place,
Who must procure desired grace.
Finis.
R. H.

33 Of sufferance comes ease.
TO seem for to revenge each wrong in hasty wise,
By proof we see of guiltless men, it has not been the guise.
In slanders loathsome brute, where they condemned be,
With ragelesse mood they suffer wrong, where truth shall try the^ free.
These are the patient panges, that pass within the breast
Of those, that feel their cause by mine, where wrong has right oppressed.
I know how by suspect, I have been iudgd awrie,
And granted g^ltie in the thing, that clearly I deny:
My faith may me defend, if I might loved be,
God judge me so, as from the guilt I know me to be free.
I wrote but for my self, the grief was all mine own,
As, who would prove excremitie, by proof it might be known.
Yet are there such, that say, they can my meaning deem,
Without respect of this old trothe, things prove not as they seem,
Whereby it may befall, in judgment to be quick,
To make them selves suspect therewith, that needed not to kick.
Yet in resisting wrong, I would not have it thought
I do amiss, as though I knew by whom it might be wrought.
If any such there be, that heerewithall be vexed,
It were their virtue to beware, and deem me better next.
Finis.
E. S.

34 Being trapped in Love be complayneth.
THe hidden wees that swells in my heart,
Brings forth such sighs, as filles the air with smoke:
The golden beams, through this his fiery dart,
D^re not abide, the answer of the stroke.
Which stroke, although it dazed me some dele,
Yet nature taught my hand to work his kind,
Wherewith I taught to pull away the stele,
But to my pain, it left my head behind,
That fastened has my heart so near the pith,
Except such s^lue, as when the Scorpion stinges,
I might rece^ue to heal my wound therewith:
In vain for ease, my tongue always it ringes.
And I for pains, shall pearish through her guilt,
That can rejoice, to see how I am spilt.
Finis.
E. S.

35 Though Fortune have set thee on hie,
Remember yet that thou shall die.

TO die, Dame nature did man frame,
Death is a thing most perfect sure:
We ought not natures works to blame,
She made nothing, still to endure.
That law she made, when we were borne,
That hence we should return again:
To render right, we must not scorn,
Death is due debt, it is no pain.
The civil law, does bid restore
That thou have taken up of trust:
Thy life is lent, thou must therefore
Rep^y, except thou be unjust.
This life is like a poynted race,
To the end whereof when man has trod,
He must return to former place,
He may not still remain abroad.
Death has in all the earth aright,
His power is great, it stretches far:
No Lord, no Prince, can escape his might,
No creature can his duty bar.
The wise, the just, the strong, the hie,
The chaste, the meek, the free of heart,
The rich, the poor, who can deny,
Have yielded all unto his dart.
Could Hercules that tamde each wight?
Or else Ulysses with his wit?
Or Ianus who had all foresight?
Or chaste Hypolit escape the pit?
Could Cresus with his bags of gold?
Or Irus with his hungry pain?
Or Signus through his hardiness bold?
Drive back the days of Death again.
Seeing no man then can Death escape,
Nor hire him hence for any gain:
We ought not fear his carraine shape,
He only brings evil men to pain.
If thou have led thy life aright,
Death is the end of misery:
If thou in God have thy delight,
Thou die to live eternally.
Each wight therefore while he lives here,
Let him think on his dying day:
In midst of wealth, in midst of cheer,
Let him account he must away.
This thought, makes man to God a friend,
This thought does banish pride and sin:
This thought does bring a man in thend,
Where he of Death the field shall win.
39 All things ar Vain.
ALthough the purple morning, bragges in brightness of the sun,
As though he had of chased night, a glorious conquest won:
The Time by day, gives place again to forse of drowsy night,
And every creature is constraind, to change his lusty plight.
Of pleasures all, that here we taste:
We feel the contrary at last.
In spring, though pleasant Zephirus, has fruitful earth inspired,
And nature has each bushe, each branch, with blossoms brave attired:
Yet fruits and flowers, as buds and blomes, full quickly witherd be,
When stormy Winter comes to kill, the Summers iolitie.
By Time are got, by Time are lost
All things, wherein we pleasure most.
Although the Seas so calmely glide, as dangers none appear,
And dout of storms, in sky is none, king Phoebus shines so clear:
Yet when the boistrous winds break out, and raging waves do swel,
The seely bark now heaues to heaven, now sinkes again to hell.
Thus change in every thing we see,
And nothing constant, seems to be.
Who flows most in worldly wealth, of wealth is most unsure,
And he that cheefely tastes of joy, does sometime woe endure:
Who vaunteth most of numbered friends, forgo them all he must,
The fairest flesh and liuelest bioud, is turned at length to dust.
Experience geues a certain ground,
That certain here, is nothing found.
Then trust to that which aye remains, the bliss of heavens above,
Which Time, nor Fate, nor Wind, nor Storm, is able to remove:
Trust to that sure celestial rock, that restes in glorious throne,
That has been, is, and must be still, our anchor hold alone.
The world is but a vanity,
In heaven seek we our surety.
Finis.
F. K.

37 A virtuous Gentle woman in the praise of his Love.
I Am a Virgin fair and free, and freely do rejoice,
I sweetly warble sugared notes, from silver voice:
For which delightful joys, yet thank I courtesy love,
By whose almighty power, such sweet delites I prove,
I walk the pleasant fields, adornd with lively green,
And view the fragrant flowers, most lovely to be seen:
The purple Columbine, the Cousloppe and the Lilly,
The Violet sweet, the Daizie and Daffadillie.
The Woodbines on the hedge, the red Rose and the white,
And cache fine flowers else, that renders sweet delight:
Among the which I choose, all those of seemeliest grace,
In thought, resembling them to my dear lovers face.
His lovely face I mean, whose golden flouring gifts,
His ever living Fame, to lofty sky vpliftes:
Whom loving me I love, only for virtues sake,
When virtuously to love, all only care I take.
Of all which fresh fair flowers, that flower that does appear
In my conceit most like to him I hold so dear.
I gather it, I kiss it, and eake devise with it,
Such kind of lively speech, as is for lovers fit.
And then of all my flowers, I make a garland fine,
With which my golden wire hears, together I do twine:
And set it on my head, so taking that delight,
That I would take, had I my lover still in sight.
For as in goodly flowers, mine eyes great pleasure find,
So are my lovers gyftss, most pleasant to my mind:
Upon which virtuous gifts, I make more sweet repast,
Then they that for love sportes, the sweetest joys do taste.
Finis.
M. K.

38. Oppressed with sorrow, he wysheth death.
IF Fortune may enforce, the careful heart to cry,
And griping grief constrayne, the wounded wight lament:
Who then alas to mourn, has greater cause then I,
Against whose hard mish^p, both Heaven and Earth are bent.
For whom no help remaynes, for whom no hope is left:
From whom all happy happes is fled, and pleasure quite bereft.
Whose life naught can prolong, whose health naught can assure:
Whose death, oh pleasant port of peace, no creature can procure.
Whose passed proof of pleasant joy,
Mischaunce has changed, to greefes anoy:
And lo, whose hope of better day,
Is ouerwhelmd with long delay.
Oh hard mishap.
Each thing I plainly see, whose virtues may avail,
To ease the pinching pain, which gripes the groaning wight:
By Phisickes sacred skill, whose rule does seldom fail,
Through labors long inspect, is plainly brought to light.
I know, there is no fruit, no leaf, no root, no rynde,
No herb, no plant, no juice, no gum, no metal deeply mind:
No Pearl, no Precious stone, ne Ieme of rare effect,
Whose virtues, learned Gallens books, at lardge do not detect.
Yet all their force can not appease,
The furious fyttes of my disease,
Nor any drugge of Phisickes art,
Can ease the grief, that gripes my heart.
Oh strange disease.
I hear the wise affirm, that Nature has in store,
A thousand secret salues, which Wisdom has outfound:
To cool the scorching heat of every smarting sore:
And heals deepest scarre, though grievous be the wound.
The ancient proverb says, that none so festred grief,
Does grow, for which the gods them selves, have not ordeynd relief.
But I by proof do know, such proverbs to be vain,
And think that Nature never knew, the plague which I sustain.
And so not knowing my distress,
Has leaft my grief remediless,
For why, the heavens for me prepare,
To live in thought, and dye in care.
Oh lastyng pain.
By change of air I see, by haute of healthful soil,
By diet duly kept, gross humors are expeld:
I know that greefes of mind, and inward hearts turmoile,
By faithful friends advise, in time may be repeld.
Yet all this naught auailes, to kill that me anoyes,
I mean to stop these floudes of care, that ouerflow my joys.
No none exchange of place, can change my lucklesse lot,
Like one I live, and so must die, whom Fortune has forgo.
No counsel can prevail with me,
Nor sage advise with grief agree:
For he that feels the pains of hell,
Can never hope in heaven to dwell.
Oh deep despair.
What lives on earth but I, whose travail reapes no gain,
The wearyed Horse and Ox, in stall and stable rest:
The Ante with summers toil, bears out the winters pain,
The Foul that flies all day, at night retournes to rest.
The Ploughmans weary work, amid the winters mire,
Rewarded is with summers gain, which yeeldes him double hire:
The sillye laboring soul, which drudges from day to day,
At night, his wages truly paid, contented goth his way.
And coming home, his drowsy head
He cowcheth close in homely bed:
Wherein no sooner down he lies,
But sleep has straight possessed his eyes.
Oh happy man.
The Soldier biding long, the brunt of mortal wars,
Where life is never free, from dint of deadly foil:
At last comes joyful home, though mangled all with scarres,
Where frankly, void of fear, he spendes the gotten spoil.
The Pirate lying long, amidde the fooming floodes,
With every flawe in hazard is, to loose both life and goods.
At length finds view of land, where wished Port he spies,
Which once obtained, among his mates, he parts the gotten prise.
Thus every man, for travail past,
Does reap a just reward at last:
But I alone, whose troubled mind,
In seeking rest, unrest does find.
Oh lucklesse lotte.
Oh curssed caitife wretch, whose heavy hard mishappe,
Does wish ten thousand times, that thou had not been borne:
Since fate has thee condemned, to live in sorrows lap.
Where waylinges waste thy life, of all redress forlorn.
What shall thy grief appease? who shall thy torment stay?
Will thou thy self, with murdering hands, enforce thy own decay?
No, far be thou from me, my self to stop my breath,
The gods forbid, whom I beseech, to work my joys by death.
For lingering length of lothed life,
Does stir in me such mortal strife:
That whiles for life and death I cry,
In Death I live, and living die.
Oh froward fate.
Lo here my hard mishappe, lo here my strange disease,
Lo here my deep despair, lo here my lasting pain:
Lo here my froward fate, which nothing can appease.
Lo here how others toil, rewarded is with gain.
While luckelesse, lo, I live in loss of labors due,
Compeld by proof of torment strong, my endless grief to rue.
In which, since needs I must, consume both youth and age
If old I live, and that my care no comfort can assuage.
Henceforth I banishe from my breast,
All frustrate hope of future rest,
And truthlesse trust to times reward,
With all respects of joys regard,
Here I forswear.
39 Where reason makes request, there wisdom ought supply,
With friendly answer pressed, to grant or else deny.

I Sigh? why so? for sorrow of her smart.
I morn? wherefore? for grief that she complains.
I pity? what? her ouerpressed heart.
I dread? what harm? the danger she sustaines,
I grieve? where at? at her oppressing pains.
I feel? what forse? the fittes of her disease,
Whose harm does me and her, alike displease.
I hope, what hap? her happy healthes retire,
I wish, what wealth? no wealth, nor worldly store
But crave, what craft? by cunnyng to aspyre
Some skyll, whereto? to salve her sickly sore.
What then? why then would I her health restore,
Whose harm me hurtes, how so? so works my will
To wyshe my self and her, like good and ill.
What moves the mind, whereto? to such desire
Ne force, ne favor, what then? free fancies choice:
Art thou to choose? my charter to require
Each Ladies love is fred by customs voice,
Yet are there grauntes, the evidence of their choice.
What then, our freedom is at lardge in choosyng,
As women's wills are froward in refusing.
Wotes she thy will? she knows what I protest,
Daynde she thy suit? she daungerd not my talk:
Gave she consent? she granted my request,
What dydst thou crave? the root, the fruit, or stalk,
I asked them all, what gave she, Cheese, or chalk?
That taste must try, what taste? I mean the proof
Of friends, whose wyls withhold her bow aloof.
Meanst thou good faith? what else, hopest thou to speed?
Why not, O fool untaught in carpet trade,
Know not what proofs from such delays proceed,
Wylt thou like headles Cock be caught in glade?
Art thou like Ass, too apt for burden made?
Fie, fie, will thou for saint adore the shrine?
And woo her friend, ear she be wholly thine?
Who draws this drift? moved she, or thou this match?
It Was I: oh fool, unware of women's wyles,
Long may thou wait, like hungry hounds at hatche,
She crafty Fox, the seely Goose beguiles.
Thy suit is shaped so fyt for long delay,
That she at will may chek, from yea to nay,
But in good soothe, tell me her friends intent:
Best learn it first, their purpose I not know,
Why then thy will to worse and worse is bent,
Do thou delight, the vnkindled cole to blow?
Or childelike love, in anckred bote to row,
What mean these terms? who since thy suit is such,
Know of or on, or thou afect to much.
No haste but good, why no, the mean is best,
Admit she love, mislike in lingering grows:
Suppose she is caught, then Woodcocke on thy crest,
Till end approues, what skornefull seeds she sowes.
In loytring love, such dangers ebbes and flows,
What help herein? why wake in dangerous watch,
That too, nor fro, may make thee mar the match:
Is that the way to end my weary work?
By quick dispatch, to lesson long turmoyle,
Well well, though loss in lingering wontes to lurk,
And I a fool, most fit to take the foil:
Yet proof from promise, never shall recoyle.
My words with deeds, and deeds with words shall wend,
Till she, or hers, gayuesay that I entend.
Art thou so fond? not fond, but firmly fast,
Why fool, her friends wot how thy will is bent:
Yet thou like doult, whose wit and sense is past,
Sest not what frumpes, do follow thy intent.
Ne know, how love in lewe of skorne is lent,
Adewe, for sightes such folly should prevent.
Well well, their skoffes with scorns might be repaid,
If my requests were fully yead or nayd.
Well, well, let these with wisdoms pass be waide,
And in your chest of cheifest secreates laid.
What is, or may be mine,
That is, and shall be thine:
Till death the twist untwine,
That does our loves combine.
But if thy heart repine,
Thy body should be mine.
Show me thereof some sine,
That I may slack the line,
That knitts thy will to mine.
Finis. My Luck is loss.
40 Donec eris Felix multos numerabis amicos.
Nullus ad amissus ibit amicus opes.

EVen as the Raven, the Crow, and greedy Rite
Do swarming flock, where carren corpse does fall:
And tiring tear with beak and talentes might,
Both skin and flesh to gorge their guts withal.
And never cease, but gather more to more,
Do all to pull the carkase too and froe,
Till bared bones at last they leave behind,
And seek elsewhere, some fatter food to find.
Even so I see, where wealth does wax at will,
And Gold does grow to heaps of great increase:
There friends resort, and profering friendship still,
Full thick they throng, with never ceasing prease.
And stilie make a show of true intent,
When naught but guile, and inward hate is meant:
For when mischaunce shall change such wealth to want,
They pack them thence, to place of ritcher haunt.
Finis. My Luck is loss.
41. What joy to a contented mind.
THe faith that fails, must needs be thought untrue,
The friend that faines, who holds not unjust,
Who likes that love, that changes still for new:
Who hopes for truth, where trothe is void of trust,
No faith, no friend, no love, no trothe so sure,
But rather fails then steadfastly endure.
What head so stayed? that alters not intent,
What thought so sure? that steadfast does remain,
What wit so wise? that never needs repent:
What tongue so true? but sometime wonts to feign,
What foot so firm? that never treads awrie,
What sooner dimde? then fight of clerest eye.
What heart so fixed? but some enclines to change,
What mood so mild? that never moved debate:
What faith so strong? but lightly likes to range,
What love so true? that never learnde to hate.
What life so pure? that lasts, without offense,
What worldly mind? but moves with ill pretense.
What knot so fast? that may not be untied,
What seal so sure? but fraud or forse shall break:
What prop of stay? but one time shrinks aside,
What ship so stauche? that never had a leke.
What grant so large? that no exception maks,
What hoped help? but friend at need forsaks.
What seat so high? but low to ground may fall,
What hap so good? that never found mislike:
What state so sure? but subject is to thrall
What force preuailes? where Fortune list to strike.
What wealth so much? but time may turn to want,
What store so great? but wastyng makes skant.
What profits hope in depth of dangers thrall,
What ruste in time, but waxes worse and worse:
What helps good heart, if Fortune froune withal,
What blessyng thriues, against heavenly helples curse.
What winnes desire, to get and can not gain,
What botes to wish and never to obtain.
Finis. My luck is loss.
42. Amantium irae amoris redintigratia est.
IN going to my naked bed, as one that would have slept,
I heard a wife sing to her child, that long before had wept:
She sighed sore and sang full sore, to bring the babe to rest,
That would not rest but cried still, in suckyng at her breast.
She was full weary of her watch, and grieved with her child,
She rocked it and rated it, until on her it smilde:
Then did she say now have I found, the proverb true to prove,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renuyng of love.
Then took I paper, pen and ynke, this proverb for to write,
In regester for to remain, of such a worthy wight:
As she proceeded thus, in song unto her little bratte,
Much matter uttered she of weight, in place whereas she satte.
And proved plain, there was no beast, nor creature bearyng life,
Could well be known to live in love, without discord and strife:
Then kissed she her little babe, and swear by God above,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renuyng of love.
She said that neither king ne prince, ne lord could live aright,
Until their puissance they did prove, their manhood and their might
When manhood shall be matched so, that fear can take no place,
Then weary works makes warriors, each other to embrace.
And leave their forse that failed the^, which did consume the rout,
That might before have lived their time, and nature out:
Then did she sing as one that thought, no man could her reprove,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renuyng of love.
She said she saw no fish ne foul, nor beast within her haunt,
That mete a stranger in their kind, but could give it a taunt:
Since flesh might not endure, but rest must wrath succeed,
And forse the fight to fall to play, in pasture where they feed.
So noble nature can well end, the works she has begone,
And bridle well that will not cease, her tragedy in some:
Thus in her song she often reherst, as did her well behoue,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renuyng of love.
I marvel much pardy quoth she, for to behold the route,
To see man, woman, boy and beast to toss the world about:
Some knele, some crouch, some beck, some check, and some ca^ smothly smile
And some embrace others in arms, and there think many a wile.
Some stand aloufe at cap and knee, some humble and some stout,
Yet are they never friends indeed, until they once fall out:
Thus ended she her song, and said before she did remove,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renuyng of love.
M. Edwardes.

43. Think to dye.
THe life is long, which lothsomely does last,
The dolfull days draw slowly to their date:
The present panges, and painful plags forepast,
Yelds greffe aye grene, to stablishe this estate.
So that I feel in this great storm and strife,
That death is sweet, that shorteneth such a life.
And by the stroke of this strange overthrow,
All which conflict in thraldom I was thrust:
The Lord be praised, I am well taught to know,
From whens man came, and eke whereto he must.
And by the way, upon how feeble force,
His term does stand, till death does end his course.
The pleasant years that semes so swetely run,
The merry days to end, so fast that flete:
The joyful wights, of which days dawes so sone,
The happy howrs, which mo do miss then mete.
Do all consume as snow against the Son,
And death maks end of all that life begone.
Since death shall dure till all the world be wast,
What means man, to dread death then so sore?
As man might make, that life should alwaie last,
Without regard, the Lord has led before.
The dance of death, which all must run on row,
The hour wherein only himself does know.
If man would mind, what burdeins life does bring,
What grievous crimes to God, he does commit:
What plagues, what panges, what peril thereby spryng,
With no sure hour in all his days to sit.
He would sure think and with great cause I do,
The day of death is happier of the two.
Death is the door whereby we draw to joy,
Life is a lake, that drowneth all in pain:
Death is so dole it seaseth all away,
Life is so leude that all it yelds is vain.
And as by life, in bondage man is brought.
Even so by death is freedom likewise wrought.
Wherefore with Paul, let all men wish and pray,
To be disolued of this foul fleshly mass:
Or at the least be armed against the day,
That they be found good soldiers pressed to pass.
From life to death, from death to life again,
And such a life as ever shall remain.
Finis.
D. S.

44. Being asked the occasion of his white head, he answers thus.
WHere sethyng sighs and sower sobbs,
Has slain the slipps that nature set:
And skaldyng showers with stony throbbs,
The kindly sap from them has fett.
What wonder then though you do see,
Upon my head white heeres to be.
Where thought has thrild and throne his spears,
To hurt the heart that harmth him not:
And gronyng grief has ground for the tears,
Mine eyne, to stain my face to spot.
What wonder then though you do see,
Upon my head white heeres to be.
Where pinchyng pain him self has plaste,
There peace with pleasures were possessed:
And walls of wealth are fallen to waste,
And poverty in them is pressed.
What wonder then, though you do see,
Upon my head white heeres to be.
Where wretched woe does weaue her web,
There care the clewe, can catch and cast:
And floudds of joy are fallen to ebb
So lo, that life may not long last.
What wonder then, though you do see,
Upon my head white heeres to be.
These heeres of age are messengers,
Which bidd me, fast repent and pray:
They be of death the harbingers,
That does prepare, and dress the way.
Wherefore I joy, that you may see,
Upon my head such heeres to be.
They be the line that lead the length,
How far my race was for to run:
They say my yongth is fled with strength,
And how old age, is well begone.
The which I feel, and you may see,
Upon my head such lines to be.
They be the stryngs of sober sound,
Whose Music is hermonicall:
Their tunes declare, a time from ground
I came, and how thereto I shall.
Wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such stryngs to be.
God grant to those that white heeres have,
No worse them take, then I have meant:
That after they be laid in grave,
Their souls may joy their lives well spent,
God grant likewise that you may see,
Upon my head such heeres to be.
Finis.
L. V.

I Would to God I were Acteon, that Diana did disguise,
To walk the Forest up and down, whereas my lady lies:
An Heart of here and hew, I wish that I were so,
So that my Lady knew me, only and no mo.
The shalyng Nutts and Maste, that falls from the tree,
Should well suffice for my repast, might I my lady see:
It should not grieve me, there in frost, to lie upon the ground,
Delight should easly quite the cost, what evil so that I found.
Sometime that I might say, when I saw her alone,
Behold, see yonder slave aldaie, that walks the woodds alone,
Finis.
M.B.

WHy should I longer long to live,
In this desease of fantasy,
Sins fortune does not cease to give,
Things to my mind most contrary.
And at my joys does lowre and froune,
Till she has turned them vpsidoune.
Affrende I had to me most dear,
And of long time faithful and just:
There was no one, my heart so nere,
Nor one in whom I had more trust.
Whom now of late without cause why,
Fortune has made my enemy.
The grass me thinks should grow in sky
The stars, unto the earth cleave fast:
The water stream should pass awrie,
The winds should leave their stre^gt of blast.
The Son and Moon by one assent,
Should both forsake the firmament.
The fish in air should fly with sin,
The fowls in flood should bring forth fry
All things me thinks should erst begin,
To take their course unnaturally.
Before my friend should alter so,
Without a cause to be my foe.
But such is Fortunes hate I say,
Such is her will on me to wreake:
Such spite she has at me alwaie,
And ceasseth not my heart to break.
With such dispite of cruelty,
Wherefore then longer live should I.
Finis.
E. S.

47. Prudens. The history of Damacles, and Dionise.
Whosoever is set in princly trone, and craves rule to bear,
Is still beset on every side, with peril and with fear.
High trees by stormy winds are shakt, and rent up from the ground
and flashy flaks of lightnings flames on turrets do robou^d
When little shrubs in sauetie lurk, in covert all allow,
And freshly florishe in their kind, what ever wind do blow.
The cruel king of Scisily who fearyng Barbars hands,
Was wont to singe his beard him self, with cole and fire brands.
Has taught us this, the proof whereof, fu^l plainly we may see.
Was never thing more lively touched to show it so to be.
This king did seem to Damacles, to be the happiest wight,
Because he thought none like to him, in power or in might.
Who did alone so far excel the rest in his degree,
As does the Sun in brightness clear, the darkest star we see.
Will thou (then said this cruel king) prove this my present state
Possess thou shall this seat of mine, and so be fortunate.
Full gladly then this Damacles, this proferd honor took,
And shootyng at a princely life, his quiet rest forsook.
In honors seat then was he plast, according to his will,
Forthwith a banquet was preparde, that he might feast his fill.
Nothing did want wherein it was thought, that he would take delight,
To feed his eye, to fill his mouth, or please the appetite.
Such store of plate, I think in Greece, there scarsly was so much
His seruitours did Angels seem, their passing shape was such.
No dainty dishe but there it was, and thereof was such store,
That throughout Greece so princly chere, was never seen before.
Thus while in po^pe and pleasures seat, this Damacles was plast,
And did begin with gladsome heart, each dainty dishe to taste.
At length by chance cast up his eyes, and began the house to vewe,
And saw a sight that him enforst, his princly state to rewe.
A sword forsooth with dounward point, that had no stronger thread
Then one horse here that peised it, direct upon his head.
Wherewith he was so sore amasde, and shook in every part,
As though the sword that hong above, had stroke him to the heart
Then all their pleasures took their leave, and sorrow came in place,
His heavy heart the tears declared, that trickled down his face.
And then forthwith with sobbing voice, besought ye king of grace,
That he would licens him with speed, to depart out of that place.
And said that he full long enough, had tried now with fear,
What it is to be a happy man, and princly rule to bear.
This deed of thine oh Dionise, deserves immortal fame,
This deed shall always live with praise, though thou did live with shame.
Whereby both kings be put in mind, their dangers to be great
And subjects be forbid to clime, high stepps of honors seat.
Finis.
48. Fortitude. A young man of Aegipt, and Valerian.
Each one deserves great praise to have, but yet not like I think,
Both he that can sustain the yoke of pains, and does not shrink
And he whom Cupids covert craft, can nothing move at all,
Into the hard and tangled knotts, of Venus snares to fall.
Besturre you then who so delights, in virtues race to run,
The fliyng boy with bow ibent, by strength to overcome.
As one did once when he was young, and in his tender days,
Whose stout and noble deed of his, has got immortal praise.
The wicked Romans did pursue, the sely Christians than,
What time Valerian Emperor was, a wicked cruel man.
Who spared not with bloody draughts, to que^che his own desire
Dispatchyng all that stuck to Christ, with hot consumyng fire.
At length a man, of tender years, was brought before his sight,
Such one as Nature seemed to make, a witness of her might.
For every part so well was set, that nothing was depraved,
So that the cruel king him self, would gladly have him saved.
So loath he was to see a work, so rare of Naturs power,
So finely built so suddenly, destroyed within an hour.
Then means he sought to overcome, or win him at the lest,
To slip from Christ, whom he before had earnestly professed.
A bed preparde, so finely decked, such diverse pleasant smells,
That well it might appear a place, where pleasure only dwells.
By him he laid a naked wenche, a Venus darlyng sure,
With sugared speech and lovely toys, that might his mind allure.
Such wanton lewres as these he thought, might eassy him entise,
Which things he knew with lusty youth, had always been in prise.
Such ways I think the Gods themselves, could have invented none,
For flatteryng Venus ouercoms, the senses every chone,
And he him self was even at point, to Venus to consent,
Had not his stout and manly mind, resisted his intent.
When he perceived his flesh to yield, to pleasures wanton toys,
And was by sleight almost provoked, to taste of Venus joys.
More cruel to him self then those, that glad would him undo,
With bloody tooth his tender tongue, bote quite and clean in two.
Thus was the pain so passing great, of this his bloody bitte,
That all the fire and carnal lust, was quenched every whitte.
Do ill and all thy pleasures then, full sone will pass away,
But yet the shame of those thy deeds, will neuermore decaie.
Do well and though thy pains be great, yet sone each one will cease,
But yet, the praise of those thy deeds will evermore increase.
Finis.
49. Justice. Zaleuch and his Son.
LEt rulers make most perfect laws, to rule both great and small
If they them selves obey them not, it boteth not at all.
As laws be naught but rulers dome, co^teining egall might,
So rulers should be speaking laws, to rule by line of right.
Zaleuch the Prince of Locrine once, appointed by decree,
Each lecherer should be punished, with loss of either eye.
His son by chance offended first, which when his father saw,
Lord God how earnest then was he, to execute the law.
Then ran the people all by flocks, to him with weeping eyes,
Not one among the rout therewas, but pardon, pardon cries.
By whose outcries and earnest suit, his son in hope did stand,
That he thereby should then obtain, some pardon at his hand.
But all in vain for he is found, to be the man he was.
And makes have so much the more, to have the law to pass.
The people yet renewed their suit, in hope of some relief,
Whose faces all besprent with tears, did testify their grief.
And cried all for pities sake, yield now to our request,
If all you will not clean remit, yet ease the pain at lest.
Then somewhat was the father moved, with all the peoples voice
And every man did give a shoot, to show they did rejoice.
Well then quoth he it shall be thus, the law shall be fufilde.
And yet my son shall favor have, according as you wild.
One eye of his shall be pulde out, thus has his lewdness got,
And likewise so shall one of mine, though I deserve it not.
This word no sooner was pronou^cde, but strait ye deed was done,
Two eyes, no mo were left, between the father and the son.
Say now who can, and on my faith Apollo he shall be,
Was he more gentle father now? or iuster Judge trow ye.
This man would not his laws belike, the webbs ye spiders weue,
Wherein they lurk when they entende, the simple to deceive.
Wherewith small flies full sone be caught, and tangled ere they wist,
When great ones fly and escape away, and break them as they list.
Finis.
50. Temperaunce. Spurina and the Roman Ladies.
IF nature bear thee so great love, ye she in thee have beauty plast
Full hard it is as we do prove, to keep the body clean and chaste:
Twixt comeliness and chastity,
A deadly strife is thought to be.
For beauty which some men suppose to be, as twere a golden ill,
Provoke strief and many foes, that seek on her to work her will
Assaults to tounes if many make,
No town so strong but may be take.
And this Spurina witness can, who did for beauty bear the bell,
So clean a wight so comely made, no dame in Rome but loved well
Not one could cole her hot desire,
So burning was the flame of fire.
Like as when bait cast in ye flood, forthwith does cause the fishes come,
That pleasantly before did play, now presently to death to run.
For when they see the bait to fall,
Straight way they swallowe hook and all.
So when Spurina they did see, to him they flocked out of hand,
She happest dame was thought to be, that in his favor most did stand.
Not knowing under sweet deceits,
How Venus hids her poisoned baits.
But when he saw them thus to rage, whom love had linked in his chain,
This means he sought for to aswage, these ladies of their grievous pain.
His shape intendyng to disgrace,
With many wounds he skotch his face.
By which his deed it came to pass, yt he yt seemed an angel bright
Even now so clean disfigured was, yt he became a sothsom wight.
And rather had be foul and chaste,
Then fair, and filthy joys to taste.
What pen ca^ write, or to^g express, ye worthy praises of this deed,
My think that God can do no less, then grant him heaven for his meede.
Who for to save him self upright,
Him self has first destroyed quite.
Finis
quod F. M.

51. Abunche of herbs and flowers.
IF yt each flower, the godds have framed, are shapt by sacred skill
Were as I would (no wrong to wish) and mine to wear at will.
Or else each tree, with lusty top, would lend me leave to love,
With spriggs displaied to spread my suit, a wailing heart to prove
Upon my helm sone should you see, my hedde advanced hie,
Some slipp for solace there to set, and wear the same would I.
Yet would I not for great delight, the Daises strange desire,
The Lilly would not like my lust nor Rose would I require.
The Marigould might grow for me, Rosemary well might rest,
The Fenell to that is more fit, for some unfriendly gest.
Nor Cowslopps would I crave at all, sometimes they seem to coy
Some ioly youth the Gelliflower, estemeth for his joy.
The Lauender sometimes aloft, alures the lookers eyes,
The Paunsie shall not have the praise, where I may give the prise
And thus no flower my fancy feeds, as likes so my lust,
As that I may subject my self, to toys of tickle trust.
For flowers though they be fair and fresh, of sent excelling sweet
Yet grow they on the ground below, we tred them with our fete
And shall I then go stoop to such? or else go seek to those,
Shall flowers enforse me once to faune, for fear of friends or foes.
Yet rather yield I to the right, as reason has assignde,
Mine author said there was no salve, in flowers for me to find.
And yet perhapps some tree there is, to shroud me from the shower,
That with her arms may salve ye soul, that yeldeth to her power.
Where I may find some pleasant shade, to salve me from the son
Each thing w^ see that reason has, unto the trees do run.
Both men and beasts such souls as fly, the treasures are the trees
And for my part when branches fall, I wish no other fees.
But when that storms beset me round, such succor God me send,
That I may find a friendly tree, that will me well defend.
No tree there is which yelds no good, to some that do it seek
And as they are of diverse kynds, their uses are unlike.
The Eve tree serves the Bowiers turn, the Ash the Coupers art,
The puisant Oak does make the post, the Pine some other part.
The Elm does help to hide the birds, in weary winters night,
The Briers I guess are nothing worth, they serve but for despite
The willowe wished I far from hens, good will deserve no wrong,
The Sallowe well may serve their states, that sing so sad a song.
The Box and Beche each for himself, above the rest does boste,
The Eglantine for pleasure often, is pricked upon the post.
The Hauthorne so is had in prise, the Baies do bear the bell,
And that these Baies did bring no bliss, I like it not so well.
As erst I do that semely tree, by which those Baies I found,
And where withal vnwittyngly, I took so great a wound.
As if the tree by which I lent, does lend me no relief,
There is no help but down I fall, so great is grown my grief.
And therefore at the last I crave, this favor for to find,
When every tree that here is told, beginns to grow unkind.
The B. for beauty whom I boste, and shall above the rest,
That B. may take me to her trust, for B. does please me best.
It liks me well to walk the way, where B. does keep her bower
And when it raines to B. I run to save me from the shower.
This brau^che of B. which here I mean, to keep I chiefly crave,
At beck unto this B. I bow, to sarue that beauty brave.
What shall I say the time does pass, the tale to tedious is,
Though loath to leave, yet leave I must, and say no more but this,
I wish this B. I might embrace, when as the same I see,
A league for life then I require, between this B. and me.
And though unworthy, yet good will, does work the way herein
And B. has brought the same about, which beauty did begin.
Finis.
52. Now mortal man behold and see, This world is but a vanity.
Who shall profoundly way or scan, the assured state of man,
Shall well perceive by reason than:
That where is no stabilitie, remains naught but vanity.
For what estate is there think ye, thoroughly content with his degree,
Whereby we may right clearly see:
That in this vale of misery, remains naught but vanity.
The great men wish ye mean estate, mean men again their state do hate,
Old men think children fortunate:
A boy a man would fainest be, thus wandreth man in vanity.
The country man does daily swell, with great desire in court to dwell
The Courtier thinks him nothing well:
Till he from court, in country be, he wandreth so in vanity.
The sea does toss ye marcha^ts brains, to wish a farm and leave those pains,
The Farmer gapeth at marchantes gains:
Thus no man can contented be, he wandreth so in vanity.
If thou have lands or goods great store, consider thou thy charge ye more,
Since thou must make account therefore:
They are not thine but lent to thee, and yet they are but vanity.
If thou be strong or fair of face, sickness or age does both disgrace,
Then be not proud in any case:
For how can there more folly be, then for to bost of vanity.
Now finally be not infect, with worldly cares, but have respect,
How God rewards his true elect:
With glorious felicity: free from all worldly vanity.
Finis.
M. Thorn.

53. Incommendation of Music.
WHere gripyng grief the heart would wound and dolfull domps the^ oppress
There Music with her silver sound, is wont with speed to give redress,
Of troubled mind for every sore, sweet Music has a salve therefore.
In joy it maks our mirth abound, in grief it chers our heavy sprights,
The careful head release has found, by Musicks pleasant sweet delights
Our senses, what should I say more, are subject unto Musicks lore.
The Godds by Music has their pray, the foul therein does joy,
For as the Roman Poets say, in seas whom Pirates would destroy,
A Dolphin saved from death most sharp, Arion plaiyng on his harp.
A heavenly gift, that turns the mind, like as the stern does rule the ship,
Music whom the Gods assignde to comfort man, whom cares would nip,
Since thou both man and beast do move, what wiseman then will thee reprove.
Finis
M Edwards.

WHen sage Ulysses sailed by,
The perilous seas, where Cirens sing:
Him self unto the mast did tie,
Lest their alluryng tunes might bring,
His mind on maze and make him stay,
And he with his become their pray.
Ulysses O thou valiant wight,
It seemed dame Circes loved thee well:
What time she told, to thee aright.
The seas wherein the Sirens dwell.
By mean where, against thy fail,
Their subtle songs, could not prevail.
Were thou amongs us here again,
And heard our Sirens melody:
Not Circes skill nor yet thy brain,
Could keep thee from their treachery.
Such Sirens have we now adays,
That tempt us by a thousand ways.
They sing they dance, they sport, they play
They humbly fall upon their knees:
They sigh, they sobb, they prate, they pray,
With such dissemblyng shifts as these,
They calculate, they chaunt, they charm,
To conquer us that mean no harm.
Good ladies all letts join in one,
And banishe clean this Siren kind:
What need we yield, to hear their moan,
Since their deceit we daiely find.
Let not your hearts to them apply,
Defy them all for so will I.
And if where Circes now does dwell,
You wished you wit advise, to learn:
Lo I am she that best can tell,
Their Sirens songs and them discern.
For why experience yeldeth skill,
To me that escaped that Sirens ill.
Finis.
M. Bew.

55. Findyng no joy, he desires death.
THe Cony in his cave, the Feret does anoye,
And fleyng thence his life to save, him self he does destroy.
His Berrie round about besett, with hunters snares,
So that when he to escape starts out, is caught therein unawares,
Like choice poor man have I to bide and rest in love,
Or else from thence to start, and still as bad a death to prove.
I see, in love to rest, unkindness does pursue,
To rent the heart out of his breast, which is a lover true.
And if from love I starte, as one that love forsaks,
Then pensive thoughts my heart does perse, and so my life it taks.
Thus then to fly or bide, hard is the choice to choose,
Since death has ca^pde, and trea^hed each side, and says life now refuse
Content I am therefore, my life therein to spend,
And death I take a salve for sore, my weary days to end.
And thus I you request, that faithful love profess,
When carcas cased is in chest, and body laid on hears.
Your brinishe tears to save, such as my corse shall move,
And therewith write upon my grave, behold the force of love.
W. H.

Hope well and have well.
IN hope the Shipman hoiseth sail, in hope of passage good,
In hope of health the sickly man, does suffer loss of blood.
In hope the prisoner linckt in chains, hopes liberty to find,
Thus hope breds health and health breds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope desire getts victory, in hope great comfort spryngs,
In hope the lover lives in joys, he fears no dreadful flyngs:
In hope we ^iue and may abide, such storms as are assignde,
Thus hope breds health, and health breds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope we easily suffer harm, in hope of future time,
In hope of fruit, the pain semes sweet, that to the tree does clime
In hope of love such glory grows, as now by proof I find:
That hope breds health, and health breds ease to every troubled mind.
W. H.

He repents his folly.
When first mine eyes did view, and mark thy beauty fair for to behold,
And when mine ears, began first to hark, the pleasant words yt thou me told
I would as the^ I had been free, from ears to hear, and eyes to se
And when my hands did handle often, that might thee keep in memory,
And when my feet had gone so soft, to find and have thy company,
I would each hand a foot had been, and eke each foot, a hand so seen.
And when in mind I did consent, to follow thus my fancies will,
And when my heart did first relent, to taste such bait my self to spill,
I would my heart had been as thine, or else thy heart as soft as mine.
The^ should not I such cause have found, to wish this mo^strus sight to se,
Ne thou alas that made the wound, should not deny me remedy,
Then should one will in both remain, to grant one heart which now is twain.
W. H.

He requesteth some friendly comfort affirmyng his constancy.
THe mountains hie whose lofty topps, does mete the hautie sky
The craggie rock that to the sea, free passage does deny,
The aged Oak that does resist, the force of blustryng blast,
The pleasant herb that every where, a fragrant smell does cast.
The Lions forse whose courage stout, declares a princlike might,
The Eagle that for worthiness, is borne of kings in fight:
The Serpent eke whose poisoned ways, does belche out venim vile,
The loathsome Tode that shunneth light, and lives in exile.
These these I say and thousands more, by trackt of time decaie,
And like to time do quite consume, and vade from form to claie:
But my true heart and service vowed, shall last time out of mind,
And still remain as thine by dome, as Cupid has assignde.
My faith lo here I vow to thee, my trothe thou know right well,
My goods my friends, my life is thine, what need I more to tell?
I am not mine but thine I vow, thy hests I will obey,
And serve thee as a servant ought, in pleasyng if I may:
And since I have no fliyng wings, to see thee as I wish,
Ne finnes to cut the silver streams, as does the glidyng fish.
Wherefore leave now forgetfulness, and send again to me,
And strain thy azured veins to write, that I may greetyng see:
And thus farewell more dear to me, then chiefest friend I have,
Whose love in heart I mind to shrine, till death his fee do crave.
M. Edwards.

He complains his mishapp.
SHall rigor reign where youth has ron, shall fancy now forsake.
Shall fortune lose that favor won, shall not your anger flake:
Shall hateful heart be had in you, that friendly did pretend,
Shall slipper thoughts and faith untrue, that heart of yours defend
Shall nature show your beauty fair, that gentle semes to be,
Shall frowardness, your fancies air, be of more force then she:
Shall now disdain the dragg of death, direct and lead the way,
Shall all the imps upon the earth, rejoice at my decaie.
Shall this the service of my youth, have such reward at last,
Shall I receive rigor for ruth, and be from favor cast:
Shall I therefore berent my heart, with wights that wish to dye,
Or shall I bathe my self with tears, to feed your fickle eye.
No no I shall in pain lie still, with Turtle dove most true,
And vow my self to wit and will, their counsels, to ensue:
Good Ladies all that lovers be, your help hereto purtende,
Give place to wit, let reason seem, your enemy to defend.
Lest that you think as I have thought, your self to strive in vain,
And so to be in thraldom brought, with me to suffer pain.
Finis.
M.H.

No foe to a flatterer.
I Would it were not as I think, I would it were not so,
I am not blind although I wink, I feel what winds do blow:
I know where craft, with smilyng cheer, creps into bloody breast,
I hear how fained speech, speaks fair, where hatred is possessed.
I se the Serpent lie and Iurck, under the grene allow,
I see him watch a time, to work, his poison to bestow.
In friendly looks such fraud is found, as faith for fear is fleade,
And friendship has received such wound, as he is almost dead,
And hateful heart with malice great, so boyles in cankerd mind:
That flatteries flearyng in my face, had almost made me blind,
But now I see all is not gold, that glittereth in the eye,
Nor yet such friends as they profess, as now by proof I find.
Though secret spite by craft, has made a coat of Panters skin,
And thinks to find me in the shade, by sleight to wrapp me in,
Yet God be praised my eye is clear, and can behold the Son:
When falsehood dares not once appear, to end that he begone,
Thus time shall try the thing amiss, which God sone shortly send.
And turn the hatte that fained is, to be a faithful friend.
Finis.
THe Spider with great skill, does travel day by day,
His limbs no time, lie still to set his house in stay:
And when he has it wrought, thinkyng therein to reign,
A blast of wind unthought, does drive it down again.
The proof whereof is true, to make his work endure,
He pains him self a new, in hope to dwell more sure:
Or in some secret place, a corner of the wall,
He trauaileth a spare, to build and rest with all.
His pleasure sweet to stay, when he to rest is bent,
An ugly shamble Fly, approaches to his tent:
And there entends by forse, his labors great to win,
Or else to yield his corse, by fatal death therein.
Thus is the Spiders nest, from time to time thrown down,
And he to labor pressed, with endless pains unknown:
So such as lovers be, like travel do attain,
Those endless works ye see, ^er always full of pain.
W. Hunis.

THe subtle ^^^y sleights, that worldly men do work,
The fre^dly shows under whose shade, most craft does often lurk
Enforces me alas, with yernfull voice to say,
Woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decaie.
The bird that dreds no guile, is sonest caught in snare,
Each gentle heart deuoide of craft, is sonest brought to care:
Good nature sonest trapt, which gives me cause to say.
Woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decaie.
I see the serpent vile, that lurks under the grene,
How subtelly he shrouds him self, that he may not be seen:
And yet his fosters bane, his leryng looks bewraie,
Woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decaie.
Woe worth the fainyng looks, one favor that do wait,
Woe worth the fained friendly heart, that harbors deep deceit:
Woe worth the Vipers brood, oh chrise woe worth I say,
All worldly wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decaie.
Finis.
M. Edwards.

WIth painted speech I list not prove, my cunnyng for to try,
Nor^et will use to fill my pen, with gilefull flattery:
With pen in hand and heart in breast, shall faithful promise make
To love you best, and serve you most, for your great virtues sake.
And since dame Nature has you decked, with gifts above the rest,
Let not disdain a harbor find, within your noble breast:
For love has ledd his law alike, to men of each degree,
So that the beggar with the prince, shall love as well as he.
I am no prince I must confess, nor yet of princes line,
Nor yet a brutishe beggar borne, that feeds among the Swine:
The fruit shall try the tree at last, the blossoms good or no,
Then do not judge of me the worse, till you have tried me so.
As I deserve, so then reward, I make you judge of all,
If I be false in word or deed, let lightnyng thunder fall:
And furies fell with frantic fitts, bereue and stopp my breathe,
For an example to the rest, if I shall break my faith.
Finis.
M. B.

Try and then trust.
THe saint I serve, and have besought full often,
Upon my knees, to stand my Gods good:
With hope did hold, my head sometime aloft,
And fed my faunyng friend, with dainty food.
But now I see, that words are naught but wind,
The sweter meat, the sowrer sauce I find.
Thus while I held the Ele by the tail,
I had some hope, yet never wanted fear:
Of double dread, that man can never fail,
That will presume to take the Wolf, by the ear.
I snatche for sothe, much like to Esops dog,
I sought for fish, and always caught a frogg.
Thus did I long bite, on the fomyng bitt,
Which found me play enough, unto my pain:
Thus while I loved, I never wanted fit,
But lived by loss, and sought no other gain.
But why should I mislike with Fortunes fetters,
Since that the like have hapt unto my betters.
Richard Hill.

Complainyng to his friend, he replieth wittely.
A. THe fire shall freese, the frost shall fry the frozen mountains hie,

B. what strange things shall dame nature force, to turn her course awrie.

A. My Lady has me left, and taken a new man,

B. This is not strange, it happes often times, the truth to scan,

A. The more is my pain,

B. her love then refrain,

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. ethe one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light love will change.

A. By skillful means I her reclaim, to stope unto my luer,

B. Such hagard hawks will sore away, of them who can be fuct.

A. With silver bells and hoode, my joy was her to deck.

B. She was full gorgd, she would the sooner give the check.

A. The more is my pain,

B. her love then refrain,

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light love will change.

A. Her chirping lips would chirp to me, sweet words of her desire

B. Such chirping birds who ever saw, to preach still ^n one brire

A. She said she loved me dests, and would do till she die,

B. She said in words, she thought it not, as time does try.

A. The more is my pain,

B. her love then refrain,

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit.

A. Is not this strange,

B. light love will change.

A. Can no man win: a woman so, to make her love endure,

B. To make the Fox his wiles to leave, what man will put in ure,

A. Why then there is no choice, but all women will change,

B. As men do use so, some women do love to raunge,

A. The more is my pain,

B. her love then refrain,

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit:

A. Is not this strange,

B. light love will change.

A. Sith slipper gain falls to my lot, farewell that glidyng pray

B. Sith that the dice does run a wrie, betimes leave of thy play.

A. I will no more lament, the thing I may not have,

B. Then by exchange the loss to come, all shall thou save.

A. Love will I refrain,

B. thereby thou shall gain:

A. With loss I will leave,

B. she will thee deceive,

A. That is not strange,

B. then let her raunge.

M. Edwards.

No pains comparable to his attempt:
What watch, what we, what want, what wrack?
Is due to those that toil the Seas:
Life ledd with loss, of pains no lack,
In storms to win, much restless case.
A bedlesse horde, in seas unrest,
May happ to him, that chaunseth best.
How sundry sounds with lead and line,
Unto the deep, the shipman throws:
No foot to spare, he cries often times,
No nere, when how the master blows.
If Neptune frown, all be undone,
Strait way the shipp, the wrack has won
These dangers great do often befall,
On those that there upon the sand:
Judge of their lives, the best who shall,
How vile it is, few understand.
Alack? who then may judge, their game:
Not they, which have not felt the same.
But they that fall in storms and wind,
And days and years have spent therein:
Such well may judge, since proof they find
In rage, no rest, till calm begin.
No more then those, that love do feign,
Give judgment of true lovers pain.
Finis.
W. H.

No pleasure without some pain.
HOw can the tree but wast, and wither away,
That has not sometime comfort of the Son:
How can that flower but fade, and sone decaie,
That always is with dark clouds over run.
Is this a life, naie death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
What foodles beast can live long in good plight,
Or is it life, where senses there be none:
Or what avails eyes without their light?
Or else a tongue, to him that is alone.
Is this a life? naie death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
Whereto serve ears, if that there be no sound,
Or such a head, where no devise does grow:
But all of plaints, since sorrow is the ground,
Whereby the heart does pine in deadly woe.
Is this a life, naie death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

The fruits of fained friends.
IN choice of friends what happy had I, to choose one of Cirenes kind,
Whose harp, whose pipe, whose melody, could feed my ears and make me
blind:
Whose pleasant noise made me forget, that in sure trust was great deceit.
In trust I see is treason found, and man to man deceitful is,
And whereas Treasure does abound, of flatterers there do not miss:
Whose painted speech, and outward show, do seem as friends and be not so.
Would I have thought in thee to be, the nature of the Crokadill,
Which if a man a sleep may see, with bloody thirst desires to kill:
And then with tears a while began weep, the death of him thus slain a sleep.
O flatterer false, thou traitor borne, what mischief more might thou devise,
Then thy dear friend, to have in scorn, and him to wound in sondrie wise:
Which still a friend pretends to be, and art not so by proof I se.
Fie fie, upon such treachery.
Finis.
W. H.

Being importunate, at the length, he obtains.
A. SHall I no way win you, to grant my desire?

B. What woman, will grant you, the thing you require:

A. You only to love me, is all that crave,

B. You only to leave me, is all I would have.

A. My dear alas now say not so,

B. To love you best, I must say no:

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not.

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. The swifter I follow, then you fly away,

B. Swift hauks in their fliyng, often times miss their pray

A. Yet some kills dedly, that fly to the mark:

B. You shall touch no feather, thereof take no carke.

A. Yet hope shall further my desire,

B. You blow the coals, and raise no fire.

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt,

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. To love is no danger where true love is meant,

B. I will love no ranger, lest that I repent:

A. My love is no ranger, I make God auow,

B. To trust your smoth saiyngs, I sure know not how.

A. Most truth I mean, as time shall well try,

B. No truth in men, I often epsy.

A Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not.

B. I will not:

A. Make me your man,

B. Be shrewe me than.

A. Some women may say naie, and mean love most true,

B. Some women can make fools, of as wise men as you,

A. In time I shall catch you, I know when and where:

B. I will sone dispatche you, you shall not come there.

A. Some speds at length, that often have mist,

B. I am well armed, come when you list.

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. Yet work your kind kindly, grant me love for love,

B. I will use you friendly, as I shall you prove:

A. Most close you shall find me, I this do protest,

B. Then sure you shall bind me, to grant your request.

A. O happy threde now have I sponne,

B. You sing before the conquest won.

A. Why then, will you swarne,

B. even as you deserve:

A. Love still,

B. I will,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not.

A. Make me your man,

B. come to me than.

Finis.
M. B.

Requiryng the favor of his love: She answers thus.
M. WHat death may be, compared to love?

H. What grief therein, now do thou prove?

M. My pains alas who can express,

H. I see no cause of heaviness.

M. My Ladies looks, my woe has wrought:

H. Then blame thine eyes that first have sought,

M. I burn alas, and blow the fire,

H. A fool consumes by his desire,

M. What shall I do than?

H, come out and thou can.

H. Alas I die,

M. what remedy?

M. My sugared sweet, is mixed with gall,

H. Thy Lady can not do with all:

M. The more I seek, the less I find,

H. Then strive not with the stream and wind.

M. Her must I love, although I smarte,

H. With thy own sword, thou slaiest thy heart:

M. Such pleasant baits, who can refrain,

H. Such beats will sure bread the great pain.

M. What shall I do than?

H. Come out and thou can.

H. Alas I die,

M. what remedy.

M. Her golden beams, mine eyes do daze,

H. Upon the Son thou may not gaze:

M. She might reward my cruel smarte,

H. She thinks thou bear a fained heart.

M. She laughs to hear my woeful cries,

H. Forsake her then, in time be wise:

M. No no alas, that may not be,

H. No wise man then will pity thee,

M. What shall I do than?

H. come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

M. A living death, lo thus I prove,

H. Such are the fruts of froward love:

M. O that I might her love once again,

H. Thy gain would not, half quite the pain.

M. Her will I love though she be coye,

H. A fool him self will still anoye:

M. Who will not die for such a one,

H. Be wise at length, let her alone:

M. I can not do so,

H. then be thy own foe,

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

Finis.
E. S.

A lovers joy.
I Have no joy, but dream of joy, and joy to think on joy,
A joy I withstoode, for to enjoy, to finishe mine anoye:
I hate not without cause alas, yet love I know not why,
I thought to hate, I can not hate, although that I should die.
A foe most sweet, a friend most sower, I joy for to embrace,
I hate the wrong and not the wight, that workt my woeful case:
What thing it is I know not I, but yet a thing there is,
That in my fancy still perswads, there is no other bliss.
The joys of life, the pangs of death, it make me feel each day,
But life nor death, this humor can devise to wear away.
Feign would I dye, but yet in death no hope I see remains,
And shall I live? since life I see, a sourse of sorry pains:
What is it then that I do seek, what joy would I aspire,
A thing that is divine belike, to high for man's desire.
Finis.
FK.

The judgment of desire.
THe lively Lark did stretche her wyng,
The messenger of morning bright:
And with her cherefull voice did sing,
The days approach, dischargyng night.
When that Aurora blushyng redd,
Discride the gilt of Thetis bed:
Laradon tan tan, Tedriton teight.
I went abroad to take the air,
And in the meadds I met a knight,
Clad in carnation color fair,
I did salute the youthful wight.
Of him I did his name enquire,
He sight and said, I am desire,
Laradon tan tan, Tedriton teight.
Desire I did desire to stay,
A while with him I craved talk:
The courteous wight said me no naie,
But hand in hand with me did walk.
Then in desire I askte again,
What thing did please, and what did pain
Laradon, tan, tan.
He smild and thus he answered me,
Desire can have no greater pain:
Then for to see an other man,
The thing desired to obtain.
No joy no greater to then this,
Then to inioye what others miss,
Laridon, tan, tan.
Finis.
E. O.

The complaint of a lover, wearyng Black and Tawnie.
A Croune of Bays shall that man wear,
That triumphs over me:
For black and Tawnie will I wear,
Which mournyng colors be.
The more I followed on, the more she fled away,
As Daphne did full long agone, Apollos wishfull pray:
The more my plaints resounde, the less she pities me,
The more I saught the less I found, that mine she meant to be.
Melpomeney, alas with doleful tunes help than,
And sing bis woe worth on me* forsaken man:
Then Daphnes baies shall that man wear, that triumphs over me,
For Black and Taunie will I wear, which monrnyng colors be.
Droune me you tricklyng tears, you wailefull wights of woe,
Come help these hands to re^t my hears, my rufull happs to show:
On whom the scorchyng flames of love, does feed you se,
Ah a lalalantida my dear dame, has thus tormented me.
Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes Baies shall that man wear, that triumps ever me
For Black and Taunie will I wear, which mourning colors be.
An Ancres life to lead, with nails to scratche my grave,
Where earthly Worms on me shall feed, is all the joys I crave:
And hid my self from shame, since that mine eyes do see,
Ah a alantida my dear dame, has thus tormented me.
And all that present be, with doleful tunes help than:
And sing Bis woe worth on me, forsaken man.
Finis.
E.O.

He complains thus.
LO hear the man that must of love complain,
Lo hear that seas that feels no kind of bliss:
Lo here I seek for joy, and find but pain,
Lo what despite can greater be then this?
To freze to death, and stand yet by the fire,
And she that shonneth me most, I do desire.
L. But shall I speak alas, or shall I die,

A. By death no help, in speech some help does lie:

L. Then from that breast, remove a Marble mind,

A. As I see cause, so are ye like to find.

L. I yield my self, what would you more of me,

A. You yield, but for to win and conquer me,

L. Sa^e and kill not madame,

A. Forsake your suit for shame,
No no no no, not so.

O happy man, now vaunt thy self,
That has this conquest gainde:
And now does live in great delight,
That was so lately painde.
Triumph, triumph, triumph, wholouers be
Thrice happy is that woyng,
That is not long a doing,
Triumph, triumph, triumph, that has like victory.
Finis.
Findyng no relief, he complains thus.
IN quest of my relief I find distress,
In recompense of love, most deep disdain:
My langour is such, words may not express,
A shower of tears, my watrishe eye does rain.
I dream of this, and do divine of woe,
I wander in the thoughts, of my sweet fo.
I would no peace, the cause of war I fly,
I hope, I fear I burn, I chill in froste:
I lie allow, yet mounts my mind on hie,
Thus doubtful storms, my troubled thoughts have toste,
And for my pain, this pleasure do I prove.
I hate my self, and pine in others love.
The world I graspe, yet hold I naught at all,
At liberty, I seem in prison pent:
I taste the sweet, more lower then bitter gall,
My shipp semes sound, and yet her ribbs be rent.
And out alas, on Fortune false I cry,
Look what I crave, that still she does deny.
Both life and death, be equal unto me,
I do desire to die, yet crave I life,
My wits with sondrie thoughts do disagre,
My self am with my self at mortal strife.
As warmth of son does melte the silver Snow,
The heat of love, behold consumes me so.
Finis.
R.H.

Being in love, he complains.
What dome is, this I feign would know,
That demeth all by contraries:
What God, or whether height or low,
Now would I learn some warrantise.
Some say the blinded God above,
Is he that woorketh all by love:
But he that stirs strife, the truth to tell,
I always feel, but know not well.
Some say Alecto with her mates,
Are they which breeds all anoye:
Who sitts like Haggs in hellishe gates,
And seeks still whom they may destroy.
Some say again, it is destiny,
But how it comes, or what it is,
I let it pass, before I miss.
Despite does always work my woe,
And happ as yet holds hardly still:
For fear I set my frendshipp so,
And think again to reap good will.
I do but strive against the wind,
For more I seek, the less I find:
And where I seek most for to please,
There find I always my desease.
And thus I love, and do reap still,
Nothing but hate for my good will.
Finis.
L. V.

A lover disdained, complains.
IF ever man had love to dearly bought,
Lo I am he that plays within her maze:
And finds no way, to get the same I sought,
But as the Dear are driven unto the gaze.
And to augment the grief of my desire,
My self to burn, I blow the fire:
But shall I come ny you,
Of forse I must fly you.
What death alas, may be compared to this,
I play within the maze of my sweet foe:
And when I would of her but crave a kis,
Disdain enforces her away to go.
My self I check: yet do I twiste the twine,
The pleasure hers, the pain is mine,
But shall I come ny you,
Of forse I must fly you.
You courtly wights, that wants your pleasant choice,
Lend me a flood of tears, to wail my chance:
Happy are they in love, that can rejoice,
To their great pains, where fortune does advance
But since my suit alas, can not prevail,
Full freight with care, in grief still will I wail:
Since you will needs fly me,
I may not come ny you.
Finis.
L.V.

Being in love, he complains.
IF care or skill, could conquer vain desire,
Or reasons raines, my strong affection stay:
Then should my sights, to quiet breast retire,
And shun such signs, as secret thoughts bewraie.
Uncomely love, which now lurks in my breast,
Should cease my grief, through wisdo^s power oppressed
But who can leave, to look on Venus face?
Or yeldeth not, to Iunos high estate:
What wit so wise, as gives not Pallas place,
These virtues rare, each Godds did yield amate.
Save her alone, who yet on earth does reign,
Whose beauties stryng, no Gods can well destraine.
What worldly wight, can hope for heavenly hire,
When only sights, must make his secret moan:
A silent suit, does se^de to Grace aspire,
My haples hap, does role to restles stone,
Yet Phebe fair, disdainde the heavens above,
To joy on earth, her poor Endimions love.
Rare is reward, where none can justly crave,
For chance is choice, where reason maks no claim:
Yet luck sometimes, dispairyng souls does save,
A happy star made Giges joy attain.
A slauishe Smith, of rude and rascal race,
Found means in time, to gain a Gods grace.
Then lofty Love, thy sacred sails advance,
My sithyng seas, shall flow with streams of tears:
Amidds disdain, drive forth my doleful chance,
A valiant mind, no deadly danger fears.
Who loves alofte, and setts his heart on hie,
Deserves no pain, though he do pine and die.
Finis.
M.B.

A lover rejected, complains.
THe tricklyng tears, that fales along my cheeks,
The secret sighs, that shows my inward grief:
The present pains perforce, that love aye seeks,
Bidds me renew, my cares without relief,
In woeful song in dole displaie,
My pensive heart for to bewraie.
Bewraie thy grief, thou woeful heart with speed,
Resign thy voice, to her that causde thy woe:
With irksome cries, bewail thy late done deed,
For she thou love, is sure thy mortal foe,
And help for thee, there is none sure,
But still in pain, thou must endure,
The stricken Dear has help, to heal his wound,
The haggerd hawk, with toil is made full tame:
The strongest tower, the Canon lays on ground,
The wisest wit, that ever had the fame.
Was thrall to Love, by Cupids sleights,
Then way my case with equal waights.
She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
She is my pain, she is my ease therefore:
She is my death, she is my life also,
She is my salve, she is my wounded sore.
In fine, she has the hand and knife,
That may both save, and end my life.
And shall I live on earth to be her thral?
And shall I sue, and serve her all in vain?
And kiss the stepps, that she letts fall,
And shall I pray the gods, to keep the pain
From her, that is so cruel still?
No, no, on her work all your will.
And let her feel the power of all your might,
And let her have her most desire with speed:
And let her pine away, both day and night,
And let her move, and none lament her need.
And let all those, that shall her se,
Despise her state, and pity me.
Finis.
E. O.

Not attainyng to his desire, he complains.
I Am not as seem to be,
Nor when I smile, I am not glad:
A thrall although you count me free,
I most in mirthe, most pensive sadd.
I smile to shade my bitter spite,
As Haniball that saw in sight:
His country soil, with Carthage town:
By Roman force, defaced down.
And Caesar that presented was,
With noble Pompeyes princely hedd,
As twere some judge, to rule the case,
A flood of tears, he semde to shedd.
Although in deed, it sprung of joy,
Yet others thought it was annoye:
Thus contraries be used I find,
Of wise to cloak the covert mind.
I Haniball that smiles for grief,
And let you Caesar's tears suffice:
The one that laughs at his mischief,
The other all for joy that cries.
I smile to see me scorned so,
You weep for joy, to see me woe:
And I a heart by love slain dead,
Presents in place of Pompeyes head.
O cruel happ, and hard estate,
That forces me to love my foe:
Accursed be so foul afate,
My choice for to profixe it so.
So long to fight with secret sore,
And find no secret salve therefore:
Some purge their pain, by plaint I find,
But I in vain do breathe my wind.
Finis.
E. O.

His mind not quietly settled, he writes this.
EVen as the wax does melt, or dew consume away,
Before ye Son, so I behold through careful thoughts decaie:
For my best luck leads me, to such sinister state,
That I do wast with others love, that has my self in hate.
And he that beats the bushe, the wished bird not getts,
But such I see as sits still, and holds the foulyng netts.
The Drone more honey sucks, that labors not at all,
Then does the Be, to whose most pain, least pleasure does befall:
The Gardner sowes the seeds, whereof the flowers do grow,
And others yet do gather them, that took less pain I know.
So I the pleasant grape have pulled from the Vine,
And yet I languish in great thirst, while others drink the wine.
Thus like a woeful wight, I woue my webb of woe,
The more I would wede out my cares, the more they seem to grow
The which betokens hope, forsaken is of me,
That with the careful culuer climes, the worn and withered tree.
To entertain my thoughts, and there my hap to moan,
That never am less idle lee, then when I am alone.
Finis.
E. O.

Of the mighty power of Love.
MY meaning is to work, what wondes love has wrought,
Wherewith I muse why me^ of wit, have love so derely bought:
For love is worse then hate, and eke more harm has done,
Record I take of those that read, of Paris Priams son.
It seemed the God of sleep had mazed so much his wits,
When he refused wit for love, which comes but by fitts:
But why accuse I him, whom earth has covered long,
There be of his posterity alive, I do him wrong.
Whom I might well condemn, to be a cruel judge:
Unto my self who has the crime, in others that I grudge.
Finis.
E. O.

Being disdained, he complains.
IF friendless faith, if giltlesse thought may shield,
If simple truth that never meant to swerue:
If dear desire accepted fruit do yield,
If greedy lust in loyal life do serve.
Then may my plaint bewail my heavy harm:
That sekyng calm, have stombled on the storm.
My wonted cheer, ecclipsed by the cloud,
Of deep disdain, through error of report:
If weary woe enwrapped in thy shroude,
Lies slain by tongue of the unfriendly sort.
Yet heaven and earth, and all that nature wrought:
I call to vow of my unspotted thought.
No shade I seek in part, to shilde my taint,
But simple truth, I hunt no other suit:
On that I gape, the issue of my plaint,
If that I quail, let justice me confute.
If that my place, emongs the giltles sort,
Repaie by dome, my name and good report.
Go heavy verse, pursue desired grace,
Where pity shrinde in cell of secret breast:
Awaits my have, the rightful lot to place,
And lothes to see, the giltles man oppressed.
Whose virtues great, have crouned her more with fame,
Then kyngly state, though largely shine the same.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

Of the mean estate.
THe higher that the Ceder tree, under the heavens do grow,
The more in danger is the top, when sturdie winds began blow,
Who judges then in princely throne, to be deuoide of hate,
Does not yet know, what heaps of ill, lies hid in such estate.
Such dangers great, such gripes of mind, such toil do they sustain,
That oftentimes, of God they wish, to be vnkyngde again.
For as the huge and mighty rocks, withstand the ragyng seas,
So kyngdoms in subjection be, whereas dame Fortune please:
Of brittle joy, of smilyng cheer, of honey mixed with gall,
Allotted is to every Prince, in fredome to be thrall.
What watches long, what stepps unsure, what grefes and cares of mind:
What bitter broiles, what endless toiles, to kyngdoms be assingde.
The subject then may well compare with prince for pleasant days,
Whose silent might bryngs quiet rest, whose might no storm bewraies:
How much be we, then bound to God, who such provision maks
To lay our cares upon the Prince thus does he for our saks.
To him therefore, let us lift up our hearts, and pray a maine:
That every Prince that he has plast, may long in quiet reign.
Finis.
L. V.

Of a contented mind.
When all is done and said, in the end thus shall you find,
The most of all does bathe in bliss, that has a quiet mind:
And clear from worldly cares, to deame can be content,
The swetest time, in all his life, in thinkyng to be spent.
The body subject is, to fickle Fortunes power,
And to a million of mishapps, is casual every hour:
And death in time does change it to a clodde of claye,
When as the mind which is divine, runs never to decaie.
Companion none is like, unto the mind alone,
For many have been harmde by speech, through thinking few or none:
Few oftentimes restrains words, but maks not thoughts to cease,
And he speaks best that has the skill, when for to hold his peace.
Our wealth leaves us at death, our kinsmen at the grave,
But virtues of the mind, unto the heavens with us we have:
Wherefore for virtues sake, I can be well content,
The swetest time of all my life, to deem in thinkyng spent.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

Try before you trust.
TO counsel my estate, abandonde to the spoil,
Of forged friends whose grosest fraud, it set with finest foil.
To verify true dealyng wights, whose trust no treason dreads,
And all to dear thacquaintance be, of such most harmfull heads.
I am advised thus, who so does friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next he feared, for to become a fo.
To have a fained friend, no peril like I find,
Often fleryng face may mantell best, a mischief in the mind:
A pair of angels ears, often times does hide a serpents heart,
Under whose gripes who so does come, to late co^plaines ye smart.
Wherefore I do advise, who so does friend friend so,
As though to morrow next, he should become a mortal foe.
Refuse respectyng friends, that courtly know to feign,
For gold that winnes for gold, shall lose, the self same friend again:
The Quail needs never fear, in foulers netts to fall,
If he would never bend his ear, to listen to his call.
Therefore trust not to sone, but when you friend friend so,
As though to morrow next, ye feared for to become a foe.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

He renounceth all the affectes of love.
LIke as the Heart that lifts up his ears,
To hear the hounds, that has him in the chafe:
Does cast the wind, in dangers and in fears,
With fliyng foot, to pass away apace.
So must I fly of love the vain pursuit,
Whereof the gain is lesser then the friute.
And I also must loathe those learyng looks,
Where love does lurk still with a subtle slaight:
With painted mocks, and inward hidden hooks,
To trapp by trust, that lies not in wait.
The end whereof, assaie it who so shall,
Is sugared smart, and inward bitter gall.
And I also must fly such Sirian songs,
Wherewith that Circes, Ulysses did enchaunt:
These wily Watts I mean, with filed tongs,
That hearts of steel, have power to daunt,
Who so as hawk, that stops to their call,
For most desert, receives least of all.
But woe to me that first beheld those eyes,
The trapp wherein I say, that I was taken:
An outward salve, which inward me destroies,
Whereto I run, as Ratt unto her bane.
As to the fish, sometime it does befall,
That with the bait, does swallowe hook and all.
Within my breast, wherewith I daiely fedd,
The vain repast of amorous hot desire:
With loytryng lust, so long that has me fedd,
Till he has brought me to the flaming fire.
In time at Phoenix ends her care and carks,
I make the fire, and burn my self with sparks.
Finis.
L. Vaux.

Being in sorrow he complains.
MIstrust misdemes amiss, whereby displeasure grows,
And time delaied, finds friends afraied, their faith for to disclose:
Suspect that breed the thought, and thought to sighs conuarte,
And sighs have sought a flood of tears, where sobbs do seek ye heart.
Thus heart that means no harm, must feed on sorrows all,
Until such time as pleases the judge, the truth in question call:
Though cause of great mistrust, before that judge appear,
My truth and mercy of my judge, I trust shall set me clear.
Report these rimes at large, my truth for to detecte,
Yet truth in time shall try it self, and drive away suspecte:
Believe not every speech nor speak not all you hear,
For truth and mercy of the judge, I trust shall set me clear.
Finis.
L. V.

Being in love, he complains.
ENforst by love and fear, to please and not offend,
Within the words you would me write, a message must I send:
A woeful errande sure a wretched man must write,
A wretched tale, a woeful head, besemeth to endite.
For what can he but wail, that has but all he would.
And yet that all, is naught at all, but lack of all he should:
But lack of all his mind: what can be greater grief,
That have and lack that likes him best, must neds be most mischief.
Now fool what maks thee wail, yet some might say full well
That have no harm but of thy self, as thou thy self can tell:
To whom I answer thus, since all my harms do grow,
Upon my self, so of my self, some happ may come I trow.
And since I see both happ, and harm betids to me,
For present woe, my after bliss, will make me not forget thee:
Who has a field of gold, and may not come therein,
Must live in hope till he have forse, his treasure well to win.
Whose joys by hope of dread, to conquer or to lose,
So great a wealth does rise, and for example does disclose:
To win the golden flese, stood Jason not in dread,
Till that Medeas hope of help, did give him hope to speed.
Yet sure his mind was much, and yet his fear the more,
That has no happ but by your help, may happ for to restore:
The ragyng Bulls he dread, yet by his Ladies charm,
He knew it might be brought to pass, they could do little harm.
Unto whose grace yield he, as I do offer me,
Into your hands to have his happ, not like him for to be:
But as king Priamus did bind him to the will.
Of Cressed false which him forsook, with Diomede to spill.
So I to you commend my faith, and eke my joy,
I hope you will not be so false, as Cressed was to Troy:
For if I be untrue, her Lazares death I wish,
And eke to thee if I be false, her clapper and her dishe.
Finis.
R. L.

Being in trouble, he writes thus.
IN terrors trapp with thraldom thrust,
Their thornie thoughts to taste and try:
In conscience clear from case unjust,
With carpyng cares did call and cry.
And said O God, yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Thus tremblyng there with tears I trodd.
To totter tide in truths defense:
With sighs and sobbs, I said O God,
Let right not have this recompense.
Lest that my foes might laugh to see,
That thou would not deliver me. Bis.
My soul then to repentance ran,
My ragged clothes berent and torn:
And did bewail the loss it wanne,
With loathsome life so long forlorn.
And said O God yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Then comfort came with clothes of joy
Whose semes were faithful steadfastness:
And did bedecke that naked boy,
Which erst was full of wretchedness.
And said be glad for God is he,
That shortly will deliver thee. Bis.
Finis.
T. M.

Being troubled in mind, he writes as follows.
THe bitter sweat that strains my yielded heart,
The careless count, that does the same embrace:
The doubtful hope, to reap my due desarte,
The pensive path, that guids my restless race.
Are at such war within my wounded breast,
As does bereue my joy and eke my rest,
My greedy will, that seks the golden gain,
My luckles lot, does alwaie take in worth:
My mated mind, that dredes my suits in vain,
My piteous plaint, does help for to set forth.
So that between two waves of ragyng seas,
I drive my days in troubles and desease.
My woeful eyes do take their chief delight,
To feed their fill upon the pleasant maze:
My hidden harms that grow in me by sight,
With pinyng pains do drive me from the gaze.
And to my hope I reap no other hire,
But burn my self, and I to blow the fire.
Finis.
I.H.

Look or you leap.
IF thou in suertie safe wilt sit,
If thou delight at rest to dwell:
Spend no more words then shall seem fit,
Let tongue in silence talk expel.
In all things that thou see men bent,
Se all, say naught, hold thee content.
In worldly works degrees are three,
Makers, doers, and lookers on:
The lookers on have liberty,
Both the others to judge upon.
Wherefore in all, as men are bent,
Se all, say naught, hold thee content.
The makers often are in fault found,
The doers doubt of praise or shame:
The lookers on find surest ground,
They have the fruit, yet free from blame.
This does persuade in all here meant,
Se all, say naught, hold thee content.
The proverb is not South and West,
Which has be said, long time ago:
Of little medlyng comes rest,
The busy man never wants woe.
The best way is in all worlds sent,
Se all, say naught, hold thee content.
Finis.
Jasper Haywood.

He bewaileth his mishappe.
IN wretched state alas I rewe my life,
Whose sorrows rage torments with deadly pain:
In drowned eyes, behold my tears be rife,
In doubtful state, a wretch I must remain,
You woeful wights enured to like distress,
Bewail with me my woeful heaviness.
What stony heart such hardness can retain,
That sharp remorse, no rest can find therein:
What ruthlesse eyes so careless can remain,
That daiely tears may pity win.
For right I seek, and yet renew my sore,
Vouchsalfe at length my saftie to restore.
My love is lost, woe worth in woe I dye,
Disdainful heart does work such hateful spite:
In loss of love a wretch must joy to dye,
For life is death, now hope is banished quite.
O death approach bereue my life from me,
Why should I live oppressed with woe to be.
Finis.
R. H.

The complaint of a Sinner.
O Heavenly God O Father dear, cast down thy tender eye,
Upon a wretch that prostrate here, before thy trone does lie:
O power thy precious oil of grace, into my wounded heart,
O let the dropps of mercy swage, the rigor of my smarte.
My fainting soul suppressed sore, with careful clogge of sin,
In humble sort submitts it self, thy mercy for to win:
Grant mercy then O savior sweet, to me most woeful thrall,
Whose mornfull cry to thee O Lord, does still for mercy call.
Thy blessed will I have despised, upon a stubborn mind:
And to the swaie of worldly things, my self I have enclinde:
Forgettyng heaven, and heavenly powers, where God and saints do dwell
My life had likt to tread the path, ye leads the way to hell.
But now my lord, my lode star bright I will no more do so:
To think upon my former life, my heart does melt for woe.
Alas I sigh, alas I sobbe, alas I do repent:
That ever my licencious will, so wickedly was bent.
Since thus therefore with yernfull plain, I do thy mercy crave
O Lord for thy great mercies sake, let me thy mercy have:
Restore to life the wretched soul, that else is like to dye,
So shall my voice unto thy name, sing praise eternally.
Now blessed be the Father first, and blessed be the Son,
And blessed be the holy Ghost, by whom all things are done:
Bless me O blessed Trinity, with thy eternal grace,
That after death my soul may have, in heaven a dwelling place.
Finis.
F.K.

The fruit, that sprynges from wilful wites, is ruthe, and ruins rage: And
sure what heedelesse youth committes, repentance rues in age.
I Rage in restless ruthe, and ruins rule my days,
I rue (to late) my rechlesse youth, by rules of reasons ways:
I ran so long a race, in search of surest way,
That leisure learnde me tread the trace, that led to lewd decaie.
I gave so large a rain, to unrestrained bitt,
That now with proof of after pain, I wail my want of wit:
I trifeled forth the time, with trust to self conceiptes,
Whilst ple^ties use pricked forth my prime, to search for sugared baits.
Wherein once learnde to find, I found so sweet a taste,
That dew foresight of after speed, self will esteemed waste.
Which will, through wilfulness, has wrought my witless fall,
And heedelesse youths unskillfulness, has lapt my life in thrall.
Whereby by proof I know, that pleasure breeds pain,
And he that evil seed does sow evil fruit must reap again.
Let such therefore, whose youth, and pursses are in Prime,
Foresee and shun, the helpless ruthe, which fews misspence of time.
For want is next to waste, and shame does sin ensue,
Evil speding proof has hedeles have, my self has proved it true.
When neighbors next house burns, it is time thereof take heed,
For fortunes whele has choice of turns, which change of cha^ses breds.
My sail has been aloft, though now I bear but low,
Who clims to high selde falls soft, dedst ebb has highest flow.
Finis.
quod Yloop.

Imprinted at London by Henry Disle, dwelling at the Southwest door of S.
Paul's Church. 1576.


