Two Tales, Translated out of Ariosto: The one in dispraise of Men, the other
in disgrace of Women.

With certain other Italian Stanzes and Proverbs.

By R. T. Gentleman.

Cascan le Rose, et restan poi le spine,
Non iudicate nulla inanzi il fine.
Printed at London by Valentine Sims dwelling on Adling hill at the sign of
the white Swanne. 1597.

The Printer to the courteous and Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, these two Tales translated out of ARIOSTO, and the other Stanzies
following, were not done by this Translator, to compare (as it were) with
master HARRINGTONS verses (for he acknowledges himself every way his
inferior) but for his own private exercise, and at the earnest entreaty of
some gentlemen his friends, all which he did in the year 1592. he being then
in Italy: Yet the rather is he content they should come abroad, because that
by the harshnes of the one, you may perceive the sweetness of the other. And
thus not doubting of your wonted courtesies, I commit my self, and them to your
favorable constructions, and so bid you farewell.

THE FIRST TALE:
Cant. 43. Stanza 11. beginning thus: Qua su lasciasti vna citta vicina,
NOt far from hence you left a city nie,
Bout which a cristal river clear does run,
Into whose stream the surging Po does hie
And fountains head does from Benaco come
This city founded was (when cruelly
Thebes was destroyed) built by Agenors son)
There was I borne of ancient gentle blood,
But poor in wealth, in living and in good.
If Fortune at my birth had little care,
To make me rich in heaps of glittring gold,
Nature that fault supplide with beauty rare,
That fairer then my self none could behold,
Both maids and married wives goodwill me bare,
When I was young, their hearts for love were cold,
For I was courteous, and still showed the same,
(Although for one to praise himself it is shame.)
(By chance) within this city did abide,
A reverend Sire, whose learning did surmount
Beyond all credit far, who when he did,
His years a hundred twenty eight did count,
From company he kept himself still wide,
Till in his latter age he left his wont,
For being in love, through gifts (such was his lot,)
He of a matron fair, a maid begot.
And to provide the daughter should not be
Like to the mother, who for greedy gain,
Did sell that gemme (sans price) her chastity,
Worth fair more gold than does in world remain,
From place where was resort, he (here) did hie.
Where finding this alone and desert plain,
This rich and sumptuous Palace passing fair,
He devils forc'te to make b'inchantment rare.
By women old and chaste, his daughter dear
He causde in this for to be nourished,
Where never man she once could see, or hear
To speak (whilst she was young) was suffered,
And that she might of Ladies without peer,
Examples take, of such as banished
Al lawless love, he made for her delight.
Such to be carude, and drawn in colors right.
Not only such as by their virtues rare,
Adorned have the world in times that's past,
Whose glorious fame old histories declare,
And make them live whilst heaven and earth shall last,
But such to come, who Italy most fair
Shall make through their behavior sweet and chaste
He causde their pictures lively drawn to be,
As are these Eight you in this fountain see.
At last, when he his daughter judged ripe,
To join with man in nuptial married bed,
Whether my good luck it was, or me to spite,
I chosen was fore others, her to wed,
These spacious fields about the walls in sight,
With fish ponds, champaine grounds where beasts are bred
(Which twenty miles in compass bout do wind,)
He for his daughters dowry me assinde.
Fair was she, and so lovely qualified,
As I desire could not, or covet more
For cunning stitch where needle, colors hide,
The witty Pallas she might go before,
Her touch on lute, and song did well describe,
In heaven, and not on earth that she was bore,
And so to the liberal Arts she had given her mind,
She little came her fathers skill behind.
With wisdom great, with beauty (daunting blame)
(Which would have made to love a senseless stone)
Was ioynde such love, and sweetness to the same
As makes my heart (to think thereon,) to groan,
No joy nor pleasure did she feel, but pain,
Unless she went, and was with me alone,
Thus long we liude sans jar or jealous gruch,
At last, through folly mine we had too much.
When I five years had liude a married man,
My father in law did leave this world of woe,
And then to spring my sorrows first began,
Which yet I feel, and how the same I Will show,
Whilst on my wife Love breathde with chastest fan
Fresh love for me, which causde me love her so,
A noble Dame of this our City here,
Enamoured mightily of me did appear.
She of enchantments and of witches craft,
Did know as much as any sorceresse,
The day as night, the night she day by Art,
And sun moouelesse could make, the earth still fresh
As May, yet never could she move my heart,
To heal her amorous wound remediless,
With plaster such as well I could not give,
Unless I should my wife unjustly grieve.
And though she courteous was and lovely more,
And though I knew she lou'de me as her self,
Although she offered gifts and promised store,
And laid before me baits of ticing pelf,
Yet not one jot of my good will therefore
She ere could get from me by amorous stealth,
To know my wife to me was constant true,
My heart and fancy to her wholly drew.
The hope, the firm belief, sure certainety,
I held of my dear Spouses loyalnesse,
Would me have made the beauty to deny
Of Ledas daughter, and her daintiness,
Or the other proffers which on Ida hie,
Had Paris by the angry Goddesses,
Yet were not my repulses of such strength,
That I could rid my hands of her at length.
One day as forth, this witch of Pallas mine,
Melissa found me, (so each did her call)
And to discourse with me had space and time,
She found the means to turn my sweet to gall,
That faith I had still of my wife so kind,
Through jealousy she causde from heart to fall,
Beginning thus: She praised mine intent,
Faithful to be where faithfulness was meant.
But say thou can not, faithful is thy Wiue,
Less first (quoth she) of her thou trial make,
Put case the loyalst wench she be alive,
If fallen she has not, yet she fall may take,
Then if thou never her from thy side deprive,
Nor other man than thee, sees sleep, or wake,
How have thou this fool hardiness to say?
She constant is like to the Laurel Bay.
Do but absent thy self awhile from home*
Through city and through country give thou out,
That thou art parted, and leave her alone
And license Lovers come with revel rowt,
If she by luring gifts or piteous moan
Make not strange grafts within thy brain to sprowt,
And seek to hide the same, having done amiss,
Then may thou rightly say, she honest is.
With such strange speech, and to the same much leeke
Th'enchantresse (subtle) eggs me onward still,
That I to know my Ladies faith will seek
By proof to see, hap to me good or ill,
Suppose (quoth I) the nuptial bands she break,
Which I cannot believe, believe nor will,
How may I afterward my self assure,
If praise, or shame she merits to endure?
Melissa answered; I Will bestow on thee
A Cup to drink in, of rare Virtue strange,
(Morgana's work) that brother hers might see,
How often from faith Geneuora did range,
Who a wife has chaste, drink in it may frank and free,
But, he cannot, if she be given to change:
For when he thinks the wine to drink therein,
It spils and spurts in bosom strait of him.
Before thou part, I will the same thou prove,
And without shedding drop, thou drink it shall,
For I do know thy wife's yet true in love,
As soon thou this effect see plainly shall;
But if at thy return thy heart thee move
Trial to make, I doubt what will befall,
For if not shedding in bosom drink thou can,
Then I Will count thee the happiest married man.
This proffer (with the Cup) she does bestow
On me, I do accept and put in ure
The proof, and find (as I desirde) to know
My loving Mate, chaste to me, constant, pure
Melissa says, alittle from her go,
A month or two to stay from home endure:
Then turn again and try, if in this Cup,
Thou without spilling, can the wine drink up.
To me it seemde a death, to go my way,
Not that I doubted of her faith so much,
As, cause a day, I could not form her stay,
No not an hour, my love to her was such,
I Will make thee find the truth of this, did say
Melissa, if thou will by other touch,
Change shall thou speech and wotdes for this intent,
And (like another) fore her thy self present.
Hark how. The Po a city does defend,
Which stands here by with fierce and threatening Horn
Whose jurisdiction does from hence extend
To the place where Sea his ebb and flow does turn,
For auncientnesse it yeeldes* but does contend
With others, richnes such does it adorn.
The Troyans Offspring there, first plot did lay,
Which escaped from the scourge of Attila.
In treasure rich, a lovely youthful Knight,
This City bridle does with lordly rain,
Who after Falcon ran (which did alight
One day by chance in palace thine) amain:
Where he thy wife saw, who so at first sight
Pleased him, as sign in heart does still remain,
And many shifts he used afterward
To his desire to make her bow (too hard.)
Yet her repulses sharp, so bitter were,
That he his suit gave ore as desperate,
But yet her beauty, which Love drawn had there,
Within his mind he held, and never forgate.
Melissa so me flattered, in mine ear,
As I content was she should lay this plat:
And me she changde (but how I know not I)
Like him in speech, and favor suddenly.
I had (before) unto my wife yfainde,
That toward the Leuant, I parted was to go:
But in this youthful lover being changde,
In gate, in voice, in habit, and in show,
I with my Witch returnde, who still remainde
With me, and took of Page the shape as tho,
And gemmes of price had, which as we did feign,
From th'Indians and the Eritreans came.
I which did know each door of palace mine,
Boldly entered, Melissa following me,
And found my Woman then at such a time,
As man nor maid I there with her could see,
I show my grief, and then with cunning fine,
(The Spurs of evil, if so she will agree)
I offer Rubies, Diamonds, Emeraulds, such
As would have moude a mind more chaste by much.
And tell her, this is but a trifle small,
To such rare Jewels, as afterward shall come,
The opportunity she has withal
I show her, since her husband is from home,
Then (as she knew) I prayde to mind to call,
How I to be her Lover still have shown:
And that I loving her with love so chaste,
Well worthy was of some reward at last.
Much was she grieude at first these words to hear,
Nor would she hear me speak, but blushed for shame,
But seeing those costly gems, which shone more clear
Than fire, her stubberne heart, strait meek became,
And answered with a soft and fainting cheer,
That, which to think on makes me dead remain,
That if she were assurde none might this know,
She ready was this pleasure me to show.
This speech to my heart as poisned dart did come,
Through which my soul (me thought) transfixed was:
Through every joint a sudden cold did run,
My speech remaind twixt jaws, nor forth could pass:
Melissa, who her Chauntments had undone,
Turnde me into my proper shape and face,
Imagine how she lookte, when found by me,
Her self she saw in so foul fault to be.
Both of us pale became, as death most like,
Both of us speechless, with our eyes on ground,
Scarce had my faltring tongue such force and might,
Thus to cry out (grief so my heart did wound,)
And would thou then betray me (shameless wight?
When who would buy mine honor) thou had found?
To this no answer gave she me at all,
But tears like orient pearls on cheeks let fall.
Great was her shame, her collar more, not less,
To see me against her work this strange disgrace,
And so increast (as last) in headiness,
As rage and deadly hate in her took place:
Seeking to fly from me with speediness,
And when the Sun had run his wonted race,
She to the river steals, where all the night
In Barge she rows away with maine and might.
And in the morning does her self present
Before that Knight, who her long time had lou'de,
Under whose habit false and shape I went,
When witless against mine honor I her mou'de.
Judge you how welcome, she, and her intent
Was, to him, who never thought such joy to have prou'de:
Thence word she sent me (which as death does gore)
That never she would be mine, nor love me more.
Woe is me, from that day unto this, in joy
She lives with him, and iesteth at my grief,
And I (thanks to my self) in this annoy
Do pine away, and no where find relief,
Still grows it, and just it is, it me destroy,
And little now remains my days to brief,
Nor scarce I think, the first year had I liuen,
But that one thing to me has comfort given.
The comfort's this, that of so many men,
Which here for ten years space y-lodged be,
(For I this Cup do offer all of them)
Not one (sauns sheading) drink I yet could see,
To see, (as mine,) so many, with like wem
Upon their cheek, some comfort is to me,
Thou only done, amongst so many have
Wisely, for to refuse so dangerous taste.
My curious will, which made me search to know,
(More than I ought) the manners of my Wife,
Makes care and grief fresh in me still to grow,
And forces me to lead a hellish life.
Of this Melissa glad herself did show,
(But small it durde) being author of this strife,
For I her hated so, for this my ill,
That her In'er would see, and so do still.
She taking this my hate impatient
Whom she to love more then her self did feign,
Where Lady of my heart incontinent,
She thought in place of the other to remain,
Not for to have her grief so nigh, she went
Heavy from hence, because of my disdain,
And from this country wandered she so far,
As after never news I heard of her.
Thus said and ceast, the woeful Caualiere,
Who liude in anguish to his latest day,
Too late repenting that his lovely Pheere
Through folly his, he forced to go her way:
A caveat good for jealous heads to bear
In mind, lest for their pains they find like pay,
To whom I wish such luck as had this Knight,
And to their Wives like change for their delight.
Siena 28. di Lulio 1592.
THE SECOND TALE
Cant. 43. Stanza 73. beginning thus: Gia su di questa.
Terra, un Anselmo di famiglia degna.
WIthin this city dwelt not long ago,
One called Anselmo, of rich family,
Who, Studient like his youth did spend, to know,
The Laws which Vlpian taught most curiously
At last he sought a wife, which well might show
His match, for birth, for fame and honesty:
And one (by chance) not far from hence he found,
The fairest Wench that ever trod on ground.
With sweet behavior, such a heavenly grace,
As she did seem al Love and Amorousnes,
And for his state (perhaps) too lusty was,
Whose years (good man) craude not such youthfulnes:
No sooner had he her, but he did pass
For jealousy, that tongue cannot the same express,
Not that she gave him cause so for to care,
But, cause she was so witty and so fair.
In this self City was a worthy Knight,
Of ancient stock and honorable race,
Who did descend from that same Lineage hight,
Which sprung from out the jaws and Serpents face,
Whence Manto, with many a worthy wight
That Mantua built, are comen in like case:
This Caualire Adonio had to name,
Who fell enamored of this dainty Dame.
And for to gain her love, in princelike wise,
Without all reason he began to spend
In rich Attire, in Feasts, in strange Devise,
Or what to make him famous more did tend:
Tiberius themperors gold, could scarce suffice,
For charges such^ although it was without end,
So (as I guess) scarce passed were two year,
But that consumde both land and living were.
His house which was before frequented so,
With troops of fained friends both night and day,
Al desolate remainde, when once the show
Of Phesant, Quail, and Partridge did decay,
And he which captain of the crew did go
Before, behind the door as now does stay:
And seeing himself, by spending thus orethrowne,
He thought to go where never he should be known.
With this intent one morning early, he
Without leave taking, leaves his natrue home,
And with salt tears and sighs most heavily,
Along the cities moated wall does rome,
Nor can he Lady his, from memory
Let slip, (a cause of second grief and moan)
When, lo, from greatest ill, a sudden chance
To greatest good, (vnlookte for) him does vance.
He sees a country Clown with cudgel great,
Belaboring in the field a bush amain,
Wherewith he stays, and why he so does beat
That uncouth place, demands of the Swain,
Who answers, that within that hedgy Set,
An old and hugie Snake did there remain,
So great and long, as nere he saw before
In all his life, nor thought he see should more.
Affirming, thence he would not wend his way,
Before that he had found and killd her there,
Adonio, when he heard him so to say,
No longer patiently those words could hear,
For unto Snakes a favor bare he ay,
And for their Arms, his House the same did bear
In memory, his Predecessors came,
Of Serpents teeth ysowne, by Cadmus slain.
And so much with this pesant did and said,
That (against his will) he left that enterprise,
So as the Snake slain was not, or more fraid,
Nor hurt, or sought for more in any wise.
Adonio (after) so his journey made,
As none, nor him, nor his estate descries:
And in great need, and grief of mind does bear
His countries absence almost seven whole year.
Yet neither distance far, from city thence,
Nor wretched life he did sustain through need,
His wandering thoughts from ancient love could fence,
Which still afresh within his heart does breed,
And him does force again to his loving Wench
To turn, his eyes on beauty hers to feed:
With bushie beard, sick cheer, and ragged weed,
His way from whence he came he takes with speed.
Mean time, it hapt our City had to send
Bout business great to the Pope, an Orater,
Who on his Holiness should wait and tend,
How long, none knew, this suit for to prefer,
(The lots cast) it is the Judges luck to wend,
A dismal day for this Ambaslater,
He faines excuse, prays, gives, with promise more,
To stay at home (but forc'te) he needs must go.
Not unto him so cruel had it been,
And he supported had with lesser grief,
His bowels ripped forth for to have seen:
And bloody heart, torn out, without relief,
Through jealous fear with visage pale and lean,
In absence his, his Wife he doubts chief,
Yet in best manner, with sweet words most trim,
He prays her, she will true be unto him.
Saying, a woman, neither Favor fair,
Nobility, nor Fortunes worldly wealth
Famous can make, and in truth nor care,
If chaste in life she be not of her self,
And that such Virtue, always triumph bare,
Which being forc'te, yeeldes not, for life or Pelf,
Great proof whereof, whilst he should absent be,
He said, he have should of her Chastity.
With these and such like speeches to the same,
He her persuades, that she would constant dure:
For his departure she does wail amain,
And of her faith, she weeping does him sure,
Swearing, the Sun first darkened shall remain,
Before she once will stain her Honor pure,
And that she will bide to die a thousand time,
Than once be spotted with so foul a crime.
Although he at her vows and promise sweet
Some credit gave, and quiet was in show,
Yet leave he did not, further for to seek
(Cause for to have indeed to wail and woe)
A friend he had, for cunning great, none leeke,
Of things to come, the certain to foreshow,
Of Sorcery, Lots casting, Magic Art,
All knew he, or of all, the greatest part.
To him he goes, and prays him take the pain,
By his rare skill, the truth to him to show,
If that Argia (so his Wife had name)
Should (whilst he broad were) honest be or no,
Whereto he strait agreeing (entreated so)
His Compass takes, the Poles he measures plain,
Anselmo leaves him studying, and next day
For answer of him, takes his ready way.
Th'astronomer, not for to tell what might
The Doctor gall, kept silence for a while,
And sought excuse to hide it from his sight,
But when he saw he was as one with Chile,
To know his ill, he said, her faith once plight
She break should, ere he gone was forth one mile,
Not forc'te by Prayers, or Beauty in this case,
But foully being corrupt by gain most base.
Ioynde to first fear and doubt he had as now,
The threatenings of the angry Heavens above,
How he did feel himself imagine thou,
If such like chance has happened thee in Love,
Yet that which makes his heart to burst and bow,
And most of all his galled mind does move,
Is for to know, overcome with Avarice,
She Will sell her Honor at a worthless price.
Now to prevent what possible might be,
That into Errors such she might not fall,
(For Want makes men the Alters often we see,
To rob, that they may live from needy Thrall,
Such jewels and gold, as he had under key,
(For he had mountains) to her gave he all,)
Rents, Leases, Debts, Revenues of his land,
And all he had he put into her hand.
With leave (quoth he) not only thou this Wealth
For thy expenses (as shall like thee) take,
But as thou please, sell, spend this paltry Pelf,
Waste, and consume, and havoc of all make,
Nor other count I Will have (ere) of thy self
So, as I leave thee, I may (loving Mate)
Find thee the same, so, such I find thee may,
Sell, House. Farm, Livings, Lease, and all away.
Besides, when he shall part, he her does pray
She would to the Country, to her Manor wend.
And not within the noisome city stay,
Where she might live more free from troubles pend:
All this said he, because he thought not ay,
Those country Swains who beasts and plows do tend,
Could ere corrupt by subtle shifts most rife,
The chaste desires of his beloved Wife.
Mean while Argia does with arms embrace,
And hangs her fearful husbands neck about,
And does with pearly drops bedew that face,
Which forth from eyes, as from a fountain sprowt,
It grieves her she is blamed in this case,
As if already she had causde him doubt:
And that from hence suspicion his unjust
Did spring, because her Faith he did mistrust.
Orelong it were, all here for to be pend,
Which at his parting, said was by them both,
At last (quoth he) mine Honor I commend
To thee, and so does wend his way, though loath:
And surely then his life seemde for to end,
When horse he turns, and riding from her goth,
She him looks after, till he is out of sight,
Sweet tears distilling from Loves Lymbecke bright.
Mean while wretched Adonio pale and wan,
And (as I said before) much changde to see,
Toward country his, his journey took (poor man,)
Hoping he should not known of any be:
And by that Lake hard by the city came,
Where he the Snake from country Boore did free,
Who her besieging, in the hedge had pent,
And meant to kill her, ere away he went.
Arriving there, bout dawning of the day,
(For yet the skies some stars clear shining bare)
He saw to come in princely garments gay,
Toward him along the shore a Lady fair,
And though nor Man, nor Maid with her did stay,
Her presence showed, she was Persnage rare,
Who him accosts with sweet and gracious cheer,
And after, him salutes, as you shall hear.
Although (sir Knight) to you unknown I am,
Yet I your Parent hight, much to you bound,
For both of us from worthy Cadmus came,
And to descend from that same line are found:
The Fairy Manto am I (of whose name,
Because to build this City, I in ground
The first stone laid, it Mantua called is,
As often thou have heard, unless my marks I miss.)
Of Fairies one am I, and of our fatal star,
(Cause it importes us) to thee show I will:
In such a time borne were we, as we are
(Excepting death) subject to every ill,
But (so) to be immortal worse is far,
Then for to die, for (living (die we still,
Since each of us, each seventh whole day is sure,
From Fate, to Snake (changde so) that time to dure.
To see our selves closde in so foul a skin,
And crawling creep, so loathsome is a sight,
As to the world no vglier thing can seem,
And curse we do the hour we first saw light.
How I* beholding to thee much have been,
(For I will show thee whence this comes aright:)
Know then, that whilst in snakie shape we lurk,
We are in danger of great harms and hurt.
No living thing on earth is hated so,
As Serpents are, and we which have their form,
If we be spide, do suffer wrack and woe,
Each one assailing us, with furious storm,
If we some hole find not wherein to go:
Our skins, with blows are all to beat and torn.
And better a thousand times to die it were,
Than maimde and lame, such plages still for to bear.
Much am I bound to thee; for on a time
As thou did pass along this pleasant Shade,
From country Carle thou sau'dst this life of mine,
Who in this place, me, dead for fear sore fraid,
And had't not bin for thee this heavy sign
I borne had on my back, who load on laid,
Or at the least had made me 'smembred lie,
Though it was not in his power to make me die.
For whilst we traile like Snakes our breasts on ground,
The Planets, which unto us subject are
At other times, now (contrary) are found,
We wanting force, their power from us they bar:
At other times, the Sun by us is bound
Still for to stand, more dark than Darkness far,
The earth to move, and turn in strangest guise,
The Ice to flame, and fire to melt like Ice.
Now am I come to thank thee for thy pain,
And this good turn done me, to recompense,
Ask what thou will, (nor ask't shall thou in vain)
For now I am free from Vipers shape and sense,
Thrice richer than thy father did remain
I will thou be, before thou go from hence,
Nor though thou would, thou ere more shall be poor
But still, the more thou spendst, rich shall be more.
And for because I know thou art still in love,
Where first thou wast (nor change can thy desire)
A way I Will show thee forthy best behoue,
How thou may to thy wished will aspire,
I will forthwith this counsel mine thou prove,
(For jealous Husband is from home, not by her)
Thou to the Country (where she bides) shall wend,
And I to help thee, will on thee attend.
And therewithal she began most cunningly,
To teach him how himself he should present
Fore Lady his, how her to tempt and try,
What Weeds to wear to further his intent,
And does bethink what shape most fittingly
She take should for her self, for this attempt,
For but the term, whilst she liude as a Snake,
She might what form she pleased upon her take.
In habit of a pouer Pelegrine,
She him does change which begs from door to door
Her self into a little Dog so small and fine,
As Nature never had made the like before,
With curld hair, white like to the Armeline,
For making strange, but strange for tricks much more:
Thus metamorphosde both, they take their way,
Toward Argiaes house, where she did stay.
And first amongst her Plowmen and her Hindes,
Before he would into her Manor go.
His oten pipe, with cunning great he winds;
At sound whereof, the Dog to Dance does show:
This noise and news Argia straitway finds,
And she would see if it were true or no,
And causde the beggar come into their court,
As was the Doctors Destiny and S^rt.
And there Adonio does his Dog command,
(Who dancing many Galliardes) him obayes,
Both Ours, and Foreign he does understand,
With tricks, the Measures just, he keeps always,
In brief he knows so well in turn of hand
To do what he is bid, whilst the other plays,
That whosoever sees him, in love's with him so,
As not from thence his eyes lets willing go.
The Lady at this same does much admire,
And longs to have this pretty Puppy small,
And by her Nurse, for price does it require,
(As she does think) she might have sped withal.
If I, quoth he, more wealth had, than desire
Could in the greedy minds of Women fall,
Sufficient valor were it not, nor boot,
No not to buy my little Dog his foot.
And for to show he naught but truth had told,
He took the Nurse into a corner by,
And willd his Dog one piece of purest gold
To give to her, in sign of Courtesy:
He shakte his hair, the coin she did behold,
Adonio vvilld her take it presently,
Saying, Now tell me, think thou any prise,
Able to buy my Dog in worthy wise?
Whatso I will, the same I never miss,
Nor ere with empty hands I turn from him:
And ever when he shakes his hair, it is,
Or Ring, or Pearl, or Garments rich and trim,
Yet tell thy Dame, at her commandment it is,
But not for gold, though I in gold might swim:
But if I lie with her one Night she will,
The Dog is hers, to have and hold it still.
So said, a precious Iemme new shakte on ground
He gives the Nursse, her Mistress to present,
Who thinks a better bargain she has found,
Than if a hundred Ducats her were sent:
She turns th'embassage she delivers round,
And her persuades, hat she would be content
To take the Dog: and taking so the same,
At such a price, not loose she does, but gain.
At first Argia fair unwilling seems,
Partly, because her faith she would not break,
Partly, because she such reports still deemes
Most false, which she the crafty Nurse heard speak,
Who her persuades, her will from thence she weenes,
Saying, so great a Good, Chance, seeld does reake,
Which causde her point another day when she,
The Dog such wonders work, alone might see.
This second Audience, which Adonio got,
The Judges ruin wrought, and utter fall,
His Dog dischargde such double golden shot,
Such chains of pearl, gems, precious stones withal,
As vanquished heart did yield to the assault so hot,
And sooner was the Breach made in this wall,
When she did know, this Knight her lover was,
Which for her sake from country long did pass.
The counsel still (her Proxy) to her gave,
The prayers of her Lover there in place,
The gain she saw by this which she should have,
The wretched Doctors absence in like case,
The hope that none for this would her deprave,
Each thought most chaste from breast away did chase:
As she the Dog does take, which to requite,
She yeeldes her self a pray to his delight.
Adonio of his lovely Less long time
Did reap the dulcet Sweet, to whom the Fate
So great good would, as she her self did bine
Ay for to stay with her in self same state:
The Sun by order now had passt each sign,
Before the Judge had leave to part: though late*
At last he turns, but yet suspecting sore,
What the Astronomer foretold before.
He being come to the City, strait does go,
Unto the house of this his friend, and prays
He of his Wife, the truth to him would show,
If (yet) she false or true unto him stays,
The Site he of the Poles does figure tho,
And to each Planet gives his Place straightwaies,
And after answered, that most true it was,
That what he first feared, was now come to pass.
That through great gifts cotrupted was his Wife,
By one whom she did love and honor chief:
This to the Doctors heart, went like a knife,
Or far by odds, so pricking was his grief,
Yet for to know the certainty more rife,
(Although too much before, he did belief)
To the Nurse he goes, and takes her apart,
And for to know the same, does use great Art.
Like Blood-hound skild, he winds about the Bush,
Now here, now there, to find this cunning Trace,
But (all in vain,) for all at first was hush,
Although great Art he used in this Case:
For, she as one that knew (at deadly push)
To help, denied each thing with brazen Face:
And (as a crafty Queen) one Month or more,
She held him in suspense, yet doubting sore.
But, had he known what grief the truth would bring,
Most sweet had seemde to him, thus, so to doubt:
When he in vain saw, that not any thing,
From Nurse by Prayers or Gifts, he could bolt out,
He thought to touch another kind of String,
And with great Cunning went the same about:
Watching to see, if they would fall at jar,
For where as Women be, is strife and war.
And as he looked for, so did hap the same:
For at first Breach, which twixt them did arise,
The Beldam (without seeking) to him came,
And, all she knew, bewraid in spightfull wise:
Which when he heard, Grief (so) his heart did pain,
As scarce to tell, no Toungue can well devise.
For little wanted he through Passions sad,
That he became not then stark staring mad.
In the end, overcome with rage, he does dispose
To kill himself, (but first) his Wife to slay,
And that one bloody Sword from both should lose,
From him his Grief, from her, the Shame away:
Incenst with Fury thus, he forthwith goes
To the City, and self mind in him does stay;
Thence, One he trustes, to his Manor he does will
To go, and what he bids, does charge fulfill.
The Charge is this; That to his Wife he tell
From him, to come from Country speedily,
For he an Ague has so sharp and sell,
As if she haste not, (ere she coms,) he will dye,
So as if she will show to love him well,
She come with him, without more Company:
She will come lie knows, and then in midst of way,
Her Throat he bids him cut, without delay,
The Servant, to his Mistress, out of hand,
(As he was wil'd,) does tell his errand strait:
Away she coms, as th'usband did command,
And takes with her her Dog, (that friendly Fate)
Who made her (fore) this Danger t'vnderstand,
Yet bad her go, not doubting her Estate:
For she (foreseeing the same) provided had
To help her, when she should be ill bestadde.
Out of right way, the Servant now was gonne,
By diverse vncooth Paths not used at all,
Chaunsing a River for to light upon,
Which in this Flood, from Th'appenine does fall,
Where was a Wood, on which no Sun had shonne:
From Village wide, and far from Cities Wall:
This secret Place, (for his Intent most fit)
He thought, what he was vvild, for to commit.
He draws his Sword, and his Authority
To his Mistress, (from his Lord) he tells plain,
And therefore wills her, God and World to cry
Mercy, before she dies, for sinful Shame,
I know not how, she vanished suddenly:
But when he thought her, there for to have slain,
No more he saw her, though he sought all day,
So as a Fool he came, he went away.
Back to the Judge returns he much ashamde,
Astonished and amazde with fearful cheer,
And does r'account this Accident so framde;
Anselmo, what to think well of this geere
Knows not, nor that the Manto Fate remaind
At Service of his Wife, he never did hear:
For when to him, the Nurse the rest reuealde,
This only (why I know not) she concealde.
He knows not what to do; for of the spite
He Is not reuengde, nor lessened is his Woe:
What first a Straw was, (now) a Beame's in sight,
So heavy lies it at his Heart below:
The Fault few knew, he now has made so bright,
As shrode he doubts, each one the same will know,
The first Escape might be hid* The second, hard,
And each where would be published afterward.
Too well he knew, that since he had bewraid
His cruel mind, when her, he would have killed,
(Because to turn again she was afraid)
She to some Personage great her self would yield,
Who her would keep, whilst he a Skorne is made,
And only (to his Shame) by The Others held:
Perhaps (who knows) with such one, she may gree,
As may both Ruffian and Adnlterer be.
In haste therefore he sendes, this to prevent,
By Posts, and Letters, for to find her out:
Who (here and there) demanding for her went,
Through all the Cities Lombardie about:
Himself (in the end) does go for this intent,
Leaving no Place, that is not sought by Skout:
But (all in vain) which makes him much to muse,
Where she should bide, he never could have news.
At last, the Man, to whom in trust he past
To kill his Wife, (which Drift the Fate did mar)
He causde to bring him to that place in have,
Where she escapt, to see if she were there:
Might be, she kept in hedge, whilst day did last.
And to some house, when Night was, did repair:
This thought he; So his Man him guides, where he,
In stead of Wood, a Palace strange does see.
Mean time Argia fair, had made the Fate
A Palace, (framde of Alabaster rych
By strange Enchantment) suddenly to make,
All Gold it seemde, and fairer then NONESYCH*
None can of it describe the pompous State:
Fair was it without, richer within by much,
That, of my Lords (which you last night to pass
For Cost did think) to this a Cottage was.
For, not alone the Halles were costly dighte,
And Chambers with rich Hangings fashiond nevve,
But Sellars and the Stables had the like,
And furnished with such Stuff you might them view:
Such Plate, and so much, as count could no Wighr.
All sorts of precious Stone of sundry hevv*
The Cups and Platters were meat for to hold:
And with our end, the Clothes of Silk and Gold.
Now as I said before, it chaunst to be
The Judges luck, to come there in mean space,
Where, then, he not so much did think to see
As Cottage poor, but shaddovving vvoodie Place;
And at this Chance so musde and maruelld he
He knew not where he was, in such a case,
He knew not if he slept, or waken were,
Or if his Brain did swim with double beer.
He spieth an Ethiope, standing at the door,
In shape deformde, so ugly, as in mind,
So bad a Good-face, he never saw before,
Nor possible his match so foul to find,
Than Esope thousand times deformed more,
His Looks, enough to make One (sudden) blind,
Besmeerde, begreasde, Tom Tarrarag in Attire,
Nor yet the half I tell of this sweet Squire.
Anselmo seeing him (seeing none other Man,
Of whom he might demand whose House it is)
Asks him, if he this doubt resolve him can,
Who answers, Yea, And Lord am I of This,
The Judge thinks surely, as he there does stan,
The Moore does mock him, and that it is not his,
But with great Oaths the Negro swears most plain,
His is this Palace, and All in the same.
And offers him to see it, if he like,
To enter, and a view thereof to take,
Requesting him, if aught him there delight,
To use it for himself or his friends sake:
The Judge his Horse gives to his Man, this Sight
To see, and bold of Courtsie this does make:
And being showed Halles, Galleries, Chambers such,
He marketh every Rowme with marvel much.
The Form and Site, the curious Building wrought,
He wonders at, and Golden Treasures rare,
And often says, the Worlds whole Wealth is naught,
In Price to Palace this so rich and fair:
The loathsome Moore, who long these words had soght
Strait said, And yet at Worth they valewed are,
Though Gold nor Silver thou for this can pay,
Yet, what does cost thee less, give me thou may.
And therewithal, does make to him Request,
As did Adonio to his Wife before:
For which Demand the Judge thinks him a Beast,
And Bedlem like to have of wit small store,
Nor (though repulsed often) to leave does rest,
But with so apt persuations eggs him sore,
His Palace for requital offering still,
That he at last yeeldes to his shameless will.
Argia stood (though hid) yet nigh enough,
Who when she saw him in this Error fall,
Leapt forth strait crying, This is goodly stuff,
That I a Doctor find held sage of All,
To do such Sin, and with so foul a Chuffe,
Judge if him (shamde and grieude) she did not gall:
He rather wished he suncke had bin in ground,
Than she with this vile Act, him should have found.
His Wife more for his Shame, and her Excuse,
Begins to thunder Scoldes Shot, mightily,
Saying, to plague thee what way might I choose?
For what thou have done with such a Beast as he,
If I (overcome to do sweet Natures use)
By Lovers prayers, thou thoughtst to murder me,
Who fair and lovely was, and gave me such
A present, as thy House excells by much:
If I one Death deserved in thy mind,
Know, thou to have a hundred worthy art,
And though my self so strong I here do find,
As I might make thee to repent from heart,
Yet will I not to thee be so unkind,
Nor aught Revenge, but this, seek for my part,
Set the Goose giblets, against the Hare his foot,
Forgive me, as I thee, from hearty root.
Lets live in peace for ever and a day,
Remembering never more these Follies past,
That I of thee, nor thou of me, never may
Through malice of these scapes in teeth be cast.
This liked well her Husband every way,
Who to agreement this, was not the last:
So to their House in peace they turnde again,
And (ever after) loving did remain.
Epilogue.
THus by the wisdom of this Lovely Wife,
All former faults (soon) quite forgotten be,
I doubt me (nowadayes) few such are rife,
Which would unto the same so willing gree,
And chiefly when their Husbands sin in life
Against sweet BEVTIES HEIRS so monstrously,
But marvel none, the Doctors Horns were blind,
Where he should go before, he went behind.
Lenuoy.
ANd you (fair Lady) who have heard this Tale,
Vouchsafe to think I am that Loving Knight,
The Judge your Husband, though he does not fail
As the other did, yet fails his Vow once plight,
Not Goods for you, but Life I Will spend and All,
To joy once more the favor of your Sight,
I cannot give a Golden Dog as he,
And yet (perhaps) what shall more pleasing be.
Dixi R. T.
In Napoli agli 27. di Marzo. 1593.

