A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FVNERALLS OF THAT WORTHY AND WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMAN,
MASTER Thomas Dutton of Dutton, Esquire, who yielded to nature the 28. of
December.

By RICHARD EATON Bachelour of Divinity, and Pastor of Great Budworth in
Cheshire.

Deuteronomy. 39. 29. Oh that they were wise, then they would understand this: They
would consider their latter end.



LONDON, Printed by John Legatt for Samuel Man dwelling at the sign of the
Ball in Paul's Churchyard. 1616.

TO THE HONORABLE AND HOPEFVLL YOUNG GENTLEMAN, SIR GILBERT GERRARD, KNIGHT OF
the Noble order of the Bath: The Lady Elenour his wife; together with her
right Worshipful mother Mistress Thomasin Dutton, all increase of true
happiness.
SIR, being called upon to prepare this sermon for an impression: and finding a
necessity laid upon me, to satisfy the importunity of some friends, it came
into my mind to tender the same to you. And I do more then hope that you will
kindly accept it from me, and entertain it as a testimony of my love: because
it was both preached in your hearing; and at the funeral of that worthy and
Worshipful gentleman Master Dutton your father in law. And I am the rather
encouraged to commend it to your use, and to write your name (as it were) in
the front of it; because albeit you lived not under my Ministry, yet in as
much as out of that part of your fair inheritance, which lies here, I receive
some part of my maintenance and sustentati^^, I must needs think it my duty,
to bestow some spiritual gift; by which I might evidence my care of your
souls health, and something further you, in your passage toward that Country
which I trust you seek. Let it not displease y^ therefore, that I have
presented you with these few notes; bu^ vouchsafe them a room of lodging among
your books. I confess in this scribbling age, many are carried with a busy
h^mour, making the times surfeit with their needless papers. ^ would be loath
that any man who has in him any true worth and is of a right religious
understanding, should so think of me^ wherefore to clear my self to every
sober judgment, this I say; I was drawn into this course in presenting this
sermon to public view: by the earnest request of some friends, and by the
good approuement of sundry fearing God. The matter of this sermon is
excellent, if the workmanship were suitable, I might boldly say, It were no
disparagement to you to afford your patronage, and to have your name prefixed.
Whatsoever my defect may be, I beseech you be pleased to accept from me this
small present: small, not in respect of the matter of it, for no man can treat
of a more worthy subject: But in regard of the manner of handling.

Accept it I say, as an undissembled argument of the sincerity of my
affection, as a testimony of my well wishing to your soul, and as a pledge of
my settled purpose to labor to deserve your love: And to be a continual
petitioner to the throne of grace, that you and your good Lady, your
Worshipful mother in law, with the rest of your line and family may be kept
by the power of God, through faith, unto salvation. From Great Budworth in
Cheshire.

Yours in all readiness to do you my best service in Christ Jesus, RICHARD
EATON.

PSALM. 90. 12. Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
to wisdom.
THis Psalm was compiled by Moses, at what time, the spies returning from the
land of Canaan, discouraged their brethren; and the Lord for the murmuring of
the people, pronounced, that all above twenty years old ( Caleb and Joshua only
excepted) should die in the wilderness. Now when Moses heard this general
sentence of death denounced both against himself, and all those that ^ame out
of Egypt with him, he frames this Psalm, and prays thus for him self and
all the rest. But I may not insist in generals: the foundation of my speech
shall only rest upon this 12 verse. The words are so plain and manifest, that
I may say of this Scripture, as Augustine speaks, Desiderat auditorem, Tract.
50. in Iohannem.
magis quam expositorem, It requires rather an attentive hearer, then a
skillful expositor.

I will draw the substance of mine intended speech unto two general heads: the
first a prayer of Moses, Teach us so to number our days. The second a reason
why he prayed thus, That we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

Out of these two general heads, I will distinguish five several conclusions.

Moses makes this prayer in the plural number.

Peach us to number our days; there is a number of days.

Moses mentions not years, nor months, nor weeks, but days.





Thus you see how this Scripture naturally brancheth and deuideth it self into
these particulars. I will not offer any violence in the handling of this text, I
will not set any of these points upon the Rack, I will not proffer to stretch
mine arm higher then my stature may carry it; I will not trouble you with Idle
curiosities, I will return therefore to the head of the race, where I first
began.

What man lives, says David, And Psalm. 89. 48.
shall not see death? The Apostle says, It is appointed unto all men, to dye
once, Heb: 9. 27. And if we look into the catalogue of those long lived
Fathers before the flood, though some of them lived 700. some 800. some 900,
years and upward, yet at length this Epitaph was written over every one of
their heads, Mortuus est, He died. Though every day of our life, were Genesis 5.
as long as the day of Joshua, when the Sun stood still in the midst of the
heaven, yet the Sun will set and go Josh. 10. 13.
down, and it will be night at last. Every man must acknowledge with Job,
Corruption is my father, and the worm is my mother: therefore Esaias witnesses
that ^ob 17. 14. Esaias 40. 6.
All flesh is grass. All these testimonies as a cloud of witnesses, confirm
this doctrine. There are also two reasons to enforce the same.

Genesis 3. 19.
reason is used, Genesis 3. 19.

Genesis 2. 17.
2. 17. And the Apostle, Romans 5. 15 By one man sin Romans 5. 12.
entered into the word, and death by sin: And so death went over all men, in
whom all men have sinned.

Psalm. 49. 10.
perish. Zenacherib in his Ruff for a time, made proud challenges, Where is
the king of Hamah, where Esaias 37. 13.
is the king of Arpad, where is the king of Hena? kings which he had destroyed:
And have the Gods of the nations delivered their Clients and orators, out of my
hands? But a man might soon have asked him, Where is the king of Ashur? And
has Nisroch the God of Assiria, delivered Zenacherib himself? Look into the
grave and show me, where is Dives, and where is Lazarus? where is Alexander
that conquered the whole world, and Zerxes that could not number his army for
multitude? where is Nimri that built his rest in the clouds, and Antiochus that
sealed upon the Mountains? where is Edom that exalted himself like an eagle
in the skies, and said in the swelling of his heart, Who shall bring me down?
Where is Paper the king of Persia, that wrote himself Rex regum, fratersolis
et lunae, par^ceps siderum, king of kings, brother to the sun and moon, and
partner with the stars? where is Samso^ that slew an army with the law bone
ludg. 15. 15.
of an ass? what is become of all those great Roman Lords, Nero, Caligula,
Vespasian, Titus, Domitiam and the rest? Have they not all felt and bin foiled
by the stroke of this all conquering death? who would have Acts 12. 23. a
Kings. 9. 35.
thought that Herod, who was honored as a God, should have bin devoured of
worms? That Iezabel should have bin eaten of dogs? what would he think, that
should have seen Solomon in his glory and Royalty, to see him now lying in
the clay? Yesterday the tallest Cedar in Libanus, to day or to morrow a broken
stick trodden under foot; when death comes, no difference. The bones of
Agamemnon that renowned Captain among the Grecians, and of Thirsites that ill
favored and deformed soldier, shall be mngled together. The bones of Vashti the
most beautiful queen, and the blackest Egiptian bondwoman shall not be found
asunder: look into the grave, and there I say is no difference, but Putidum et
putridum Cadauer, a rotten and a stinking Carkas.

Priora transierunt, Former things are passed away, and it will be said, Come
give an account of thy stewardship. The thriuing of the wicked in the books of
Job and of the Psalms, wants not a learned orator Luke 16. 2. Job 21. 7.
Psalm. 73. 3.
to set it forth at large. But as in the burning of a candle, when it has long
given light, Extremum occupat fumus et caligo, The end is in smoke and in a
stinking savor: so falls it out with the candle of the wicked, In puncto
descendunt in infernum: In the stirring of an eye they go down to hell, where
if there be not famus and caligo, smoke and darkness, and the blackenesse of
darkness, and a stinking savor, and much worse, there is no hell at all.
Lift not up your Psalm. 75. 5.
borne on high, speak not with a stiff neck, for in the hand of the Lord
there is a cup, and the wine is red of the color of blood. My brethren, let
not the pomp of the world deceive you, whether it stand in authority, in
opulencie or voluptuousness of life: I say, let it not deceive you; for as all
the fresh rivers run into the salt sea, so shall all the honors of the world
end in baseness, all the pleasures of the world in bitterness, all the
treasures of the world in emptiness, all the garments of the world in
nakedness, and all the dainties and delicates of the world in loathsomeness
and rottenness. Take heed of too large an indulgence, least God give you a
rent, that has given you a garment; and cloth you with worser then leprosy,
that hitherto has covered you with glory, worship, and dignity.

Nunc dimittis. Oh be not like the foolish virgins that knocked at the gate,
when it was shut, and too late. Oh be not like the unprepared Math. 25. 12.
Math. 22. 13.
guest, that came to the wedding without his wedding garment. Great Jupiter was
careless of his death. Visuntur magniparua sepulchra Iouis. Great Iupi^er had
but a little tomb. And Alexander the Monarch of the world, prepared nothing at
all for his death, he had all other things, saving only a sepulcher, to bury
him in when he was dead. But Abraham provided for his death, for he bought a
field to Genesis 23. 17.
bury his dead in. So did Joseph of Aramathea, for he Genesis 23. 17. Math. 27.
60.
made his tomb in his life time in his garden, to put him in remembrance of
death. Oh imitate these latter: provide and prepare for your last end, and
still look up to death, as the wisemen looked unto the star which stood over
Bethlem, Qui gloriatur viribus corporis, gloriatur viribus carceris. He that
glories in the strength of his body, glories in the strength of his prison.
Plato spoke wittily to one of his scholars, when he saw him too curious in
pampering his belly and his body, Why do thou, said he, make thy prison so
strong?

Belshazzar. Dan. 5. 25.
Mean, mean, God has numbered thy kingdom. So it may be said, Mean mean, God
has numbered the days of our life. To this Job bears witness, Are not his
Job 14. 5.
days determined? thou have appointed his bounds, which he cannot pass. And
the Prophet Jeremy says, The Egyptians could not stand, because the Ierem.
46. 21.
day of their destruction was come, and the time of their visitation.

Dan. 1 1: 36.
all things, says the Prophet. God appointed a time when his Son should come
into the world, Dan. 9.
and he came at the same time. God appointed a time when his blessings should
come upon Joseph: and Gal. 4. 4.
when the appointed time was come, he was exalted. Psalm. 105. 19.
Therefore says Christ, My time is not yet come. Ioh. 7. 8.

to wit; Government and Knowledge. God is not a retchlesse, careless, and
improuident God; Oh no: he is not a God by halues, and in part, not only in
the Mountains, not only in great employments, but also in the valleys, and in
the least matters. He governs all the world, as one that sits in a chair at
ease; his providence is seen in the least things, In Pulice et in Culice, as
Saint Augustine says, in Flies and August. in Psalm. 148.
in Gnats. He is Curiosus et plenus negotii Deus, A curious God, exquisite in
all things, and full of business, says Tullie, against the Atheists and
Epicures of his De natura deorum.
time: he examineth the least moments and titles in the world that can be
imagined: a handful of meal, a Cruise of Oil, in a poor Widows house; the
caluing of Hindes, the feeding of young Lions, and Ravens, the falling of
Sparrowes to the ground: he numbreth the hairs of our heads, he feeds the
Fowls of the heaven, and cloatheth the flowers of Math. 6. ^6.
the field: And if so, then sure this wise and provident God, who holds the
whole Globe of the world in his hand, and orders all things therein, who
keeps a perfect Calendar of all times and seasons, has also prefined the
year, the month, the week; nay, the very day of our departure.



Absolons. If God have appointed a man ^. Sam. 18. 6.
to live long, he has also appointed a means to preserve his life; as Joseph
nourished and cherished his Genesis 47. 12.
father when he was old. But a good mind will never quarrel about these things.

Duo in corpore vno, as it were two in one flesh. There is no remedy when the
time appointed is come, our last garment, which is our skin, must be pulled
off, if God call us away, and say as he said to Abraham, Exi de terratua, Come
out of thy Country wherein thou wast borne. If he call Genesis 12. 1.
to our Spirits, Come out of your houses of Clay wherein you have long dwelt:
there is no Balm at Gilead, there is no Physician there that can preserve us.
All the Physicians that were about Asa King of 3. Chron. 16. 12.
Judah, could not recover him of the Gout in his feet. If a man should spend
all his substance upon Physicians, as the woman did that had a bloody issue
twelve years, yet when the appointed hour is Luke 8. 43.
come, the learned Physician will fail, and all means to prolong life shall
be in vain. Mistake me not, I deny not the lawful use of lawful means, I
know well, a man is bound to further Gods providence in what he may. But to
place our confidence in the outward means, and to neglect the Lord to whom
only the issues of life and death belong, is the common sin of these
faithless times. Trust not therefore in Physic, trust not in thy strength,
trust not in any kind of diet; for thy time is set, thy days numbered, and it
is not in man's power to pass his bounds.

Psalm. 3. 1.
many rise against them; many pits are dug, and much mischief imagined
against the godly. But when all is done, unless they can get Gods leave, they
do but weary themselves in vain for the elect dwell Psalm. 91. 3
in the secret and shadow of the Almighty, and are so safely shrouded under
his wings, that without his permission nothing can touch them. Why then are men
so fearful, as that they dare not stir one finger, without trembling?
surely such men either know not or remember not, that God has limited their
days, and that their life is in his keeping. When the Pharisees said to our
Savior, Depart and go hence, for Herod will kill thee, he answered them: Go
ye and tell that fox, Behold I cast out devils, and will heal still, to day
and to morrow, and the third day I shall Luke 13. 32.
he perfected. This the Apostles likewise acknowledged: Doubtless against
thine holy Son Jesus, whom Acts 4. 27.
thou had anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
people of Israel, gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thy hand and
counsel had determined before to be done. When Pilate the lieutenant of the
Romans, had said unto Christ, know thou not that I have power to crucify
thee, John 19. 10.
and have power to loose thee? Jesus answered, Thou ^ouldst have no power at
all against me, except it were given thee from above. The fury and malice of
the wicked is stinted and restrained, as with a bit and bridle, they cannot
satisfy their lusts, nor accom^lish their designs. The rage of men, and of
the di^els themselves, is stopped, and all the power of dark^esse curbed. The
tyranny of bloody spirits is bound up, and compassed within the listes of the
power of God, and enclosed within the circle of his jurisdiction. They cannot
annoy such as are created after the Image of God, and redeemed with the blood
of Christ, without the divine permission: their power is imprisoned, they can
go no further then the chain, in the which the Lord does hold them. Behold a
great comfort in all our troubles and sufferings, there is a bar laid in the
way of the wicked. Consider the strong hand of God, the years and days, the
very moments and minutes of time are determined. These things spoke Jesus in the
treasury, Ioh. 8. 20.
as he taught in the Temple, and no man laid hands on him, for his hour was
not yet come.

Moses speaks of days, not of years, nor of months, nor of weeks, but uses
the shortest division in nature. There are as many little skuls in Golgotha, as
there be great ones. Parents do as often mourn for the death of their
children, as children do for the death of their Parents. Jacob, when Pharaoh
asked him how old he Genesis 47. 9.
was, answered, that his days had been both few and evil. The Hebrews were
wont to reckon their life thus: first, they did deduct the time of their sleep;
so that if our days be threescore and ten, by this reckoning five and thirty
are stricken off at one blow, because we spend half our time in sleep.
Secondly, from the remainder they took away the time of youth, which Solomon
says is vanity, as Eccl. 11. 10.
though it were not worthy to be called life but vanity. Thirdly, they did
subtract the days of sorrow, because all that time a man finds no sweetness
in life, but is still ready to propound Jobs question, Why Job 3. 20.
is light given to him that is in misery, and life to them that have heavy
hearts? So then these three being ^ducted, to what a small epitome is man's life
brought? ^oses may well speak of days, and of numbering them ^o, for by this
time Jacobs proposition will be found ^^e, that the days of our pilgrimage are
but few. Da^d it seems was well acquainted with this manner of ^ckoning, when
he took so short a mete wand to measure his life by: a cubit is too long, a
span is enough, Behold thou have made my days, as an hand Psalm. 39. 5.
breadth, and mine age is nothing in respect of thee. Psalm. 39. 5.

There are four reasons, why God has appointed man's time to be so short. The
Raven, the Eagle, the Elephant, the Lion, the Heart, fulfill their hundreds. But
man dies before his eye be satisfied with seeing, or before his ear be
satisfied with hearing.





2. Cor. 5. ^.


Iezabel, even but an outside of pleasure. Indeed the wicked seem to live a
pleasant life, none like them; but there is a worm that gripeth and gnaweth
them inwardly, they have many times a trembling heart, and the King of fear
does almost kill them in their secret chambers; The pleasure of this world, is
but like lightning, simul oritur, and moritur, it suddenly appears and
suddenly again vanishes away. It is sweet, but withal short, like hunting
and hauking; much cost and care for a little sport.

though we used it not.

There is but one way of coming into the world, Vnus introitus, but a thousand
ways of going out of the world, Mill exitus. Our life is full of holes, and
we^ are ready to take and let in water at a thousand breaches, Ferro, peste,
fame, vinclis, algore, calore, Mill mod^^ miseros mors rapit vna viros: Our
time slippeth away with great velocitie. It was a worthy answer of Artabanus,
to Xerxes that mighty Emperor of Persia: when the Emperor had viewed his
great army, athousand thousand drinking rivers dry as they went; he fell a
weeping, because it came into his mind, that within the space of an hundred
years, not one of that goodly company should be left alive: I would that
were the worst, said Artabanus. It would grieve a man viewing at this present
so great a congregation, of so many worthy and worshipful persons, so many of
our good friends and honest neighbors: to consider that within an hundred
years, peradventure fourscore, or threescore and ten (for the Psalmist
says, Man's age Psalm. 90. 10.
is therabout) to consider, I say, that not one in this assembly shall be left
alive; but another Preacher in this Pulpit, and other hearers in those pewes
and seats, sitting and treading upon your dead, bodies, where you now you sit
and tread upon others: but I would that were the worst.

John 9. 4.
wherein no man can work: we have a great task and a short time allowed, we
had need to listen to the clock and to count the hours; your life is short,
and the art of salvation is long in learning; The way to heaven cannot be
trodden in a short time. Astronomers say, that the space between heaven and
earth, is nine hundred thousand miles, some speak of much more. The ascent
then will ask both time and labor, ease and delay never brought any thither.
Our Savior when he found his Disciples sleeping, said unto Math. 26. 4^.
them, What, could ye not watch one hour? So may ^ say, Can you not be
contented to fear God, to hear his word, and to pray unto him for a few
days? It may be thou have yet twenty years longer to live in this world,
and will thou not be contented to serve God as a Christian for twenty years,
that thou may live as an Angel for a thousand? It may be thou have but ten
years to continue in this world, and will thou not addict thy self to the
honorable service of God for ten years, that thou may live and reign for
ever with Christ in his presence? Thou would for a worldly preferment serve
ten years, and can thou so far undervalue eternal glory, as to think
that any thing on earth deserves more cost and pains, in the seeking and
obtaining, then the joys of heaven do?

But it may be thou art an old man, and have one foot in the grave already;
then I say as Bias one of the seven wise men of Greece said of a Mariner, Nec
inter viuos ^ec inter mortuos, Thou art not to be reckoned among them that
live, nor among them that be dead: And as Paul speaks of a widow living in
pleasure, that she 1. Tim. 5. 6.
^^ dead while she lives. When will ye begin to abound and to be rich in good
works? Is it not time to begin to be religious, when the pillars of your house
begin to shake, when your windows begin to be dark? do you mean to go
away in a sleep, and shall your life pass away like a dream? Came ye naked
of goodness from your mothers womb, and will ye go back again naked?
brought ye nothing into the world with you, of the best and blessedst riches,
and will you carry nothing out? A great many of you here present, are brought
to the eleventh hour of the day, and there is but a twelfth, a few minutes
between you and judgment? what, do you tarry to be started with the shrillest
Trumpet that ever blew, or to be awakened with the fearefullest voice, that
ever sounded? The night is coming wherein no man can work. Then there will be
everlasting throbbings, and throws of the heart, for endless miseries: then
the eyes will labor for tears which shall ever run down, and then the
teeth will grind one another without ceasing. Oh, says our Savior, that you
had known in this your day! and thus Luke 19. 42.
much for the shortness of man's life.



Moses was willing to remember death, but still his mind did turn from it, and
it did slip out of his mind. Solomon bids us remember that we must come to
judgment, Eccle. 11. 9.
and yet the wicked plead against it, says S. Peter. It is a strange kind of
Arithmeticke, that no man 2. Pet. 3. 4.
can learn it, except God be the schoolmaster and teach it. Men can number
their Coin, their Cattle, their corn, and their land; But no man without the
assistance of Gods Spirit, can number his days; as though our days were
infinite. This prayer of Moses may seem strange. Men are able by art to
measure the Globe of the earth, and the Spheres of heaven, the quantity of
the Stars, with their longitudes, latitudes, altitudes, motions, and
distances from the earth, Flectere per varios docuit qui nomina Casus, Heu
cadit, hunc casum flectere non potuit, The Grammarian that declineth all Nounes
and every case, cannot decline death in any case. It is a hard matter to
remember Death, and we strive to forget it. Teach us to number our days; Oh
no! hold your peace we, may not remember. Amos 6. 10. Teach us to number our
days; Amos. 6. 10.
nay, teach us to multiply our days. Teach us to remember Death; nay, teach us
to forget death, to prolong life, is the common language of our times: Men
cannot abide to think of death, they are sick to ^eare the name of it; they
say to death, as Pharaoh said Exodus 10. 28.
^o Moses, Get thee out of my sight.

There are two reasons why we ought to remember ^eath, and there are four
reasons why we do forget it.



Abraham, send Lazarus to lip the t^^ Luke 16. 42.
of his finger in water to cool my tongue: Desidera^^t guttam (says Saint
Austin) qui non dedit micam, ^^e de^ired a drop of water, that would not give
a ^^um of bread, but it was too late: He should have been picifull; repented,
and prayed in his life time before his death: For in death there is no
remembrance Psalm. 6. 5.
of thee, (says David) and in the grave who shell praise thee?









They are hence to be reproved, that will not suffer this meditation to settle
in their hearts. Behold you despisers, and wonder at the hand of God, you that
are in league with death, and make a covenant and truce with the grave, you
that say to your souls, Tak^ your ease, and live at rest for many years, your
lif^ Luke 12. 19. Amos 6. 3.
hangs by a small thread. Put not the evil day farr^ from you, which the
ordinance of God has put so near; walk not always with your faces toward
the East, sometimes have an eye to the West, where the Sun goes down: sit
not always in the prow of the ship, sometimes go to the stern: stand in
your watch towers, as the creature does in the 8. to the Romans, and wait for
the time of your deliverance; Romans 8. 19.
your bodies are not brass, your strength, is not the strength of stones. The
earth is the womb tha^ has bred you, and the earth is the womb that will
again receive you. Searecloathes, spices, Balm, the Immuring stone or lead,
or a timber coffin, cannot so closely hide you, but the earth will challenge
you for her natural children, and say, You are my bowels: the earth (I say)
your natural mother, will know you again, and receive you into her
possession. Remember 2. Tim. 3. 4.
your mortality, you that are (...), lovers of pleasure more then lovers of
God; when Adam and Eve became subject to death, because of their Genesis 3. 2^.
sin, God clothed them with the skins of dead beasts.

So that the clothes we wear upon our backs, and the graves under our feet,
and the meat which goes into our bodiesies, cry unto us that we must die;
like the fishes, fowls, and beasts, which a little before were living in their
elements, and are now dead in our dishes.

Moses did, That God will give us grace to meditate upon our last end. Though
we forget other things, though we forget our own names, and to eat our bread,
yet our memory does sufficiently stand us in stead, if we can remember our
last end. Satan persuaded our first parents, that they should Genesis 3. 4.
not die at all. Now though he cannot make us believe that, yet he persuades
many, that they shall not die ^t, yea though they be at the brinke of the
grave, and ^t a step between them and death. Many there be ^^t are condemned
in hell, and there do suffer the ^ngeance of eternal fire, who would give the
whole ^orld if it were in their power, for one day or hour in ^is world, that
they might repent and turn unto God. What they would do if they might, let us
do while w^ may; their glass is already run, and ours stands ^^t still: yet
a little while, and the time of hope, grace, and mercy will be past. Let us not
then be so much our o^ne enemies, as to forget what belongs to our peace. ^^e
do not read that Moses, who made this pray^^, did oppose himself by the
least thought of his heart, to the ordinance of God, when it was told him.
Behold the days are come, that thou must die: though Deuteronomy. 34. 7.
h^ might have lived longer; for his eyes were not yet d^mme, nor his natural
strength abated. But rather he s^ake to the people with alacrity of spirit and
cheerfulness of heart, embracing the tidings of death. He was not pulled like
a beast by violence from his den. ^^t on the other side, if a man will not
pray, as Moses ^^d: Death will be a death indeed, and little profit or ^^se to
be found in it. Oh pray that the flight and dep^rture of your spirits, be not
upon the Sabbath day, that is, in the rest and tranquillity of your sins;
pray ^^ God that your departure be not in the frost and win^^ of your hearts:
Oh pray to God that your departure be not in the midnight of your security.
We worth the man, whom the Lord when he comes shall find sleeping. The
untimely fruit is better then that man, it had been much better for him,
never to have been borne.



There are many benefits which come by death, an^ there be many benefits that
come by the remembrance of death; Moses considered the shortness ^ his life:
and therefore was careful to spend his ti^^ well. He chose rather to suffer
affliction with the Heb. 11. 25.
children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sinn^ for a season. The
Prophet Jeremy imputes all the calmities Lam. 1. 9.
and sins of Jerusalem, to this, that she remembered not her last end.





Solomon, Eccl. 11. 9* opposes this memorandum against all vanities as ^ Eccl.
11. 9.
counterpoise, Remember for all these things thou shall come to judgment.

Abraham is an example Genesis 18. 27.
hereof, I am but dust and ashes.

Quo hora and mora incertior est, eo magis vigilandum, By how much the more the
hour o^ our departure is unknown, we must be so much the more watchful and
vigilant. Ideolatet vltimus dies, vt ^eruetur omnis dies. Other farmers know
certainly the ^me of their lease. But we are all Gods tenants at ^l, he may
put us out of house and home, when he ^^. Some landlords set leases for three
lives. But God ^uer demiseth any tenement, longer then for one ^^: we cannot be
secured an hour. The remem^^^nce of death therefore, is like a strainer: all
our th^ughts, words and actions which come through it, ^^clensed and purified,
like a cloth that comes out of the water. The thought of death causes many
si^^es to avoid, as Satan avoided, when Christ alle^^ed Math. 4. 11.
Scripture. Surely if a man did persuade himself, that this were the last day
that ever he should live, he would not defer his repentance till to morrow.
If he did think that this were the last meat that ever he ^o^ld eat, he
would not surfeit: if he did believe, that th^se are the last words that ever
he shall speak, he ^^uld not offend with his tongue: if he were persuaded,
that this were the last Sermon that ever he should he^^e, he would attend
better then ever he did to any. R^member your last end. Alas what are our
Churches and Churchyards, but Humanarum cladium miseranda ^^^^pta, the
lamentable pinfolds of the deaths of (...)? Beware that you offer not to God
the dregs of your life, lest God make you drink the dregs of his anger.
Remember that death ere it be long will set her (...) upon your heads, and your
lips must kiss the dust of the ground: remember that the gravel and slime
of the grave, shall dwell between your hawtie eye^^^^. I have not leisure to
say any more, Quid superbis terra and cinis. Oh earth and ashes, why art thou
so p^^ud? And thus much out of my text.

And now right worshipful and beloved, I know you look that I should speak
something of this gentl^^an, whose shadow is here presented unto our view. I
confess, the licenciousnes of many preachers in c^mending the dead contrary
to desert, is worthily ^^ be censured, as that which grieves the godly;
hardneth the wicked, and makes the ministry of the Go^pell to be evil spoken
of. And yet I have ever though^ it not only lawful but necessary, to speak
somewh^^ liberally, so it might be done warrantably, of mag^strates and
public persons, deserving well of the Church and Commonwealth: my judgment
a^ practice in the present occasion shall accompany eac^ other, while by your
patience I speak a few words ^ Chrysostom. lib. de sacerdo.
his life and death. Sed vereor ne tanti viri lauds orat^ mea eleuarem, magi^
quam exorn^rem. I fear lest while ^ strive to set forth this gentleman in his
own worth rather lessen and diminish his praise, then any way dorne it. But as
I intend not to deny or with hold from him any part of his due, so if all your
expectations: not fully satisfied, let me allege. Bernards words for Bern.
ser. in Cant. 34.
my excuse, Culpetur sane ingenium non voluntas: The fa^ is not willingly
committed, blame them my vnskilfu^nesse. But I will hold you no longer in
suspense. A^^ therefore first of all I say as David said upon the dea^ of
Abner, Hodie cecidit princeps in Israele. This day there fallen a great man in
Israel. I will not speak much 2. Sam. 3. 38.
his birth and progenitors, though it be worthy respe^ to descend from the
loins of those that are worth^ and worshipful. But alas, Stemmata quid
faciunt? Ancie^ and noble pedigrees what are they worth, when t^ line of well
doing continues not? Honor falling v^on an unworthy man, is but as an
ornament in t^ dirt, says Saluian: It does but bring the person of s^^ a one,
with his faults and infirmities to a more op^^ view, which otherwise perhaps
had been either ^^ known or unregarded. I will say little of his nature
parts, of wit, memory volubility of speech, all whi^ were excellent in him,
and commendable in any, espcially when, as Bernard says, Gratia ordinat, quod
^ ^auit creatio. Grace does order and sanctify that which Ber. tract. de gra.
^reation has given and bestowed. But I will come to ^he best, wherein he
deserved to be commended. It is ^ell known he was a good magistrate in his
country. ^he charge is weighty and the burden heavy which is ^^id upon them,
whom the Lord has marked out unto ^^aces of government: which made Chrysostom.
say, Maror si q^is Rectorum, saluaripossit: I marvel (said he) how any
^agistrate can be saved. He was full of courage in ^^e execution of Justice.
Impunitatis spes magna p^ocandi ^^ecebra, Hope to escape unpunished is a great
provocation of transgressing, It is not the Roabe, nor the sword, ^^r the
highest room that makes a magistrate. He co^^^^ered whose Image he did bear,
whose person he did present, what cause he had taken in hand, and whose
Judgment he did execute. It is certain, the vine of the Church does spread out
her branches with much cherfulnesse when magistrates do execute Justice,
without any conniuence. Oh put not honey into the sacrifice, instead of salt;
you that are rulers and governors in this our Israel, execution of justice
upon riotous and inordinate livers, is for the present a sweet smelling
sacrifice unto God, the joy of angels, the comfort of good men, the saving of
souls, and a reuocation of many from des^^uctio^: nor shall your labor be in
vain in the Lord; in respect of your selves, it will procure you even in this
life, ^^ny sweet blessings from above. And hereafter it shall ^^^ a crown upon
your heads, in that day when the just God shall largely recompense your
faithful service.

Secondly, he was to be commended, for his Hospita^^^ie. It is well known, his
house was seldom without strangers. I may in some sort compare him to Abraham
Genesis 18. 1. Genesis 19. 1.
and unto Lot; they sat in their gates and at the doors of their tents, to
inuit strangers. And this gentleman desired his friends and neighbors to come
to his house, and they were unto him welcome guests. In this respect he was
like unto Job, he did not eat his morsels alone. Job. 31. 17.


Thirdly, his love and kindness to his poor friends and neighbors, may not
be forgotten: he was ready to speak for them, to write for them, and to lend
them money in their need. It was his resolution to keep some money by him
always, if God should so bless him and enable him, that he might lend (as he
said) five pounds, ten pounds, or twenty pounds, to any neighbor or
Gentleman upon an urgent occasion; which sure was in him a charitable
consideration, and to you, right worshipful, may be a pattern for imitation.
Want drives many into dangerous extremities; poor men are often forced by
necessity to gage their houses, their lands, and vineyards: and they may justly
complain, as those did in Nehemiah, And now our flesh it is as the flesh of
our brethren, Nehe. 5. 5.
and our sons as their sons; there is no power in our hands, for other men
have our lands. It is charity and mercifulness to lend to such. Oh that they
which be wealthy and rich, would lay aside superfluities and vanities, and
learn frugality and thriftines, as this Gentleman did, and convert their hands
and their hearts to such works of mercy! Oh take something from your bellies
and backs, both in regard of your own souls, to witness humility and
sobriety before God and man: and for your poor brethrens sake, that they may
be comforted and relieved. It is Christ that hungreth, and Christ that must
satisfy you: It is Christ that craves, and Christ that must give unto you. It
is Christ that is indebted and impouerished, and it is Christ that must advance
you to glory. There are many poor men that are ashamed to crave an alms, 1
and yet they would be glad with the Disciples of Christ to rub an ear of
corn between their hands: their bowels sound like shalmes for want of food,
and their teeth are clean. It is charity and mercifulness to lend to such.
And certainly the lower this well of charity is drawn, the clearer and
sweeter, will the water flow up unto you.

Fourthly, he was worthy of much praise and commendation for the civil order
and government of his family; he was excellent that way. I know not well how to
parallel him with any of his rank and place: his servants were obsequious and
officious unto him, both for his credit and his profit; he abhorred idleness
in his servants. Appelles posie was this, Let no day pass witbout a line: he
appointed them such offices and imploiments, that every one in his house, had
either a sweating brow, or a working brain. Alexander Seuerus, that worthy and
learned Emperor, was wont to say that he would not feed his servants with the
bowels of the Commonwealth. And as he required diligence in their places, so
he was liberal and beneficial for their preferments; which he frankly
expressed in his life time toward them: and at his death he gave them
annuities and pensions, and bestowed upon them bountiful legacies: herein also
he was like unto Job. If I should despise my servants, what shall Job. 31. 14
I do when God stands up? and when he shall visit me, what shall I answer?

But you will say, all this is well, these things are commendable, but you say
nothing of his religion. I confess this is the temple that sanctifies the
gold, this the altar which sanctifies the sacrifice: all the former though
excellent in themselves, and glorious in the sight of men; yet without this,
they are but splendida peccata. Whatsoever they seem to be, yet divided from
saving grace, they are but glittering sins, as Saint Augustine calls them.

It happened a little before he fell sick, that he considered of the mercies
and blessings of God, vouchsafed unto him, in great abundance; and rendered
praise and thanksgiving to God, for such favors and benignities. But he
complained in my hearing, that with that plenty and fullness, there was a
great want and defect of the public worship of God upon the Sabbath day. His
determination was this; that with all speed he would have a Preacher in his
house, because his corpulent and vnweildie body would not permit him to
travail unto the Church. He resolved therefore to allow a sufficient
maintenance, and desired me with great earnestness to effect the business,
and made this his purpose known to all his family, and to many others. His
heart was smitten with an awful reverence of Gods Majesty, for the
sanctifying of the Lords Sabbaths, and for the sincere preaching of the Gospel
of Christ Jesus. It is my comfort to see such a happy and friendly aspect of so
many principal Planets together in one place, so many Gentlemen and
Magistrates. Give me leave (I beseech you) to wash my hands in innoceny to free
mine own soul in the sight of God, and to speak a few words, to stir up
your minds, and to quicken your affections, in the behalf of the Lords worship
and service. Think not your dwellings safe enough without the house of God:
sing not at home with your own Muses, absent not your selves from the Lords
sanctuary, as though Jorden lay between you and the Church: say not as the
women did in Esaias; We will eat our own bread, and we are our own garments.
The Sabbath day is the sanctified day of the Lords rest. If you have any love
to that hidden Manna, which perishes not; If you have any desire to those
fruits of the tree of life, in the midest of the Paradise of God: If you have
any sincere affection to those white garments washed in the blood of Christ: If
you desire to shine hereafter as the stars in the firmament, rather then to be
but as a Glow-worme in this world; then help to bring the Lords Sabbaths to
rest, they are shamefullie troubled and disquieted: the common days of the
week are happier in their seasons then the Lords Sabbaths. The sanctifying of
the Sabbath is one of those unchangeable laws, which God himself wrote with
his own finger. Resolve therefore as this Gentleman did, to keep it holy. God
did not ordeine it for carnal pleasures, or that we should give liberty on
that day to our sensual affections. But if you will not regard and obey this,
then behold the dispersion and dissipation of your posterity upon the face of
the earth: behold the ruin, vastation, and desolation of your houses; behold
the detestation of your names, behold the hissing and clapping at your death
and departure, among your neighbors. The want of the word of God, is the want
of your credit and prosperity: the want of the word of God, is the want of your
true comfort, peace and happiness: the want of the word of God, will be the
want of your salvation, if in this open and free time of the Gospel, you
deprive your selves through wilful neglect of that benefit which others
receive by it. Thus you have heard of this Gentleman's life, I must now speak a
word or two of the manner of his death. When the shadow of death was upon his
eyes, his senses began to faint and fail, yet this was obserueable, that in
the time of prayer, his senses were quickened and again revived; so that he was
able to lift up his hands and his eyes at every Petition, and to say Amen to
every conclusion. This was also worthy regard, that the last words he spoke
were these; O Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, and forgive me my sins, O Lord
Jesus receive my spirit. And presently after, his breath and his spirit
departed. So that I may say of him as Jerome reports of Nepotians quiet and
peaceable departure from this life; Non intelligeres illum emor^, sed emigrare,
Thou would not think he died, but rather that he walked forth: And this was
the manner of his death. I must not be tedious, in regard of the present
business, Time at this time must have power over ^y words: I will therefore
conclude, and make an end as I did begin, O Lord teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Amen.

FINIS.

