AN ORDINARY LECTVRE.

Preached at the Black- Friars, by M. Egerton.

And taken as it was uttered by Characterie.

MACTE: OFFICIVM, OFFICII, Fructus.

AT LONDON Printed by John Windet for John Dalderne, and are to be sold in
Canon lane at the sign of the white horse. 1589.

The Preface.
IT has bin (christian Reader) till of late, much wished, that there were an
ordinary way of swift writing, whereby, Sermons and Lectures of godly
Preachers might be preserved for the use of the absent and posterity
hereafter. That whereas no more remains after the hour passed, then so much
as the frailty of memory carries away. By the benefit of speedy writing the
whole body of the Lecture and Sermon might be regestred. This desire of many,
has lately been satisfied, by an Art called Characterie, which I having
learned, have put in practice, in writing sermons thereby to preserve (as it
were) the life of much memorable doctrine, that would otherwise be buried in
forgetfulness: whereof I here give thee a fruit, (christian reader) in
publishing this godly sermon so taken. I have not missed one word; whereby,
either the truth of doctrine might be perverted, or the meaning of the Preacher
altered. Such is the use of the art, which I have learned. And as at this day
God is plentiful in variety of gifts, so if some occasion had not hindered, I
would have made thee partaker, (and may hereafter) of other godly men's labors
in this kind, that, although one cannot hear al: yet by Charactery and my
endeavor, the diverse gifts of God may by this means be communicated to many.
Farewell in the Lord.

Thy well willer A. S.

An ordinary lecture preached at the Blacke-Friers.
Genesis Chap. 12. ver. 17.18.19.20. LEt us mark with reverence that part of
holy Scripture that follows in the 12. Chap. of Genesis the 17.18.19. and 20.
verses.

17 But the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues, because of
Sara Abraham's wife.

18 Then Pharaoh called Abraham and said, why have thou done this unto me?
wherefore did thou not tell me that she was thy wife?

19 Why saidest thou she is my sister, that I should take her to be my wife?
now therefore behold thy wife take her and go thy way.

20 And Pharaoh gave me commandment concerning him, and they conveyed him
forth and his wife, and all that he had.


IN this same first journey and wandering pilgrimage of Abraham, we did observe
the cause which compelled him to take this journey upon him, and also that
which did be fall him in this journey. The cause of his journey, was the famine
and dearth, which did drive him out of the land of his inheritance, which God
had given him, which was the land of Canaan. That which did befall him in this
place, was a grievous temptation and trial, and shaking both of the firmenes
of his faith and confidence, and also of his obedience to God. The occasion of
this same temptation was the favor and beauty of his wife which thing he
considered more deeply, when he beheld the complexion of those women to whom
he went, that is of the Egyptians. The event and issue of this temptation is
partly heavy and grievous, and partly comfortable unto him. For hereby Abraham
was driven to his shifts, he was moved through the malice of the adversary,
and the corruption of his nature to sin against God, and to use a means and a
way which is not prescribed and squared out by the law of God, and partly the
issue of this temptation was comfortable in respect of the providence of God
and his heavenly father, who did not only keep him from suffering wrong at
Pharaohs hand, but also did so guide the heart of that profane and wicked
Prince, that he went away rewarded and largely recompensed.

Out of the former verses, the last time we showed, that these outward
benefits and ornaments, wherewithal God of his love, does beautify and deck
either our body or our person, are fit baits to move us to tempt God. For
such was the occasion that rises here unto Abraham, whom the beauty of his
wife did make to run to this shift, which otherwise he would not have done.
Therefore concerning such benefits, though they be the blesings of god, yet in
respect of our corrupt nature, we must take heed and beware least we be drawn
by them to do those things whereby we may bring upon us many crosses and
calamities. Secondly I noted, that the most dear and faithful servants of
God, though they be persuaded in the general grounds of their faith, yet
oftentimes they trip in the perticulars, and that though they be assured that
God will preserve them, yet concerning the way whereby he will work their
preservation, therein they show the weeknesse that is in all flesh. For
though Abraham had the promises of preservation, yet he was not to look for
it by any inordinate means, for the promises of God are made with a condition
of our duty in the behalf of our selves, as is said after unto Abraham:
Walk before me and be sincere. Out of which we have to learn, that this
must be our wisdom, to rest upon God, and to lean to him, and not to our own
wisdom, as Solomon says.

Again, we observed that it is the property of profane men, and carnal
professors, to take away and to remove whatsoever may hinder them in the
inioying of their lusts. For this was the ground that Abraham did build upon,
and this was his suspicion that he thought he could look for nothing but
wrong and rapine at the hands of the Egyptians. And this has been the
occasion, why the Godly have been always kept under and have bin odious in the
sight of the profane men of this world. Especially the Ministers of the word,
the Physicians of our souls who are to purge of that poyso^ which sleaeth the
soul, in this respect they have been usually abhorred of the world, they are
imprisoned, impouerished, and every way dispitfullie used. This made the
Prophets of god in old time to be so pursued. This made the head of John the
Baptist to be stricken of, because he was a hinderer of the lust of Herod.
Therefore seeing this was so from the beginning, and seeing that Abraham the
father of faithful, and the dear servant of God had experience of it, we
must not think it strange, that we which are his children and come short of
his faith, if we shall be at any time imprisoned, and kept under in respect
that through the calling of Jesus Christ, we are such as must stand in the
gappe to reprove them, and to admonish them, and to tell them that this is not
expedient for them, though they long never so greedily after it. Concerning the
intertainement of Abraham and Sara in Egypt, we noted the property of
carnal men, both of the common people, of Courtiers, and Princes themselves.
How they do more wonder at beauty then at wisdom, more wonder at a fair
and beautiful face, then at a reformed and holy affection, for this is that
Moses here notes in the Princes and officers of Pharaohs Court.

And hereby it comes to pass, that Princes are more commonly informed. What
beautiful personages, what proper tal men they have belonging unto them, then
what religious and obedient, and faithful subjects be in their land, and that
through their own default. For this is the nature of such godless officers,
that they seek to feed the corruptions of their Princes, rather then to remedy
them, and rather to increase them, then by any means to make the^ less. For
surely if they were as well moved in the behalf of the faithful, of the wise,
and of the learned, as they be in the behalf of those that be proud and
beautiful, and Atheistes and such like, they would surely receive such into
their Courts as well as others. Finally, in that Pharaoh did not only take him
up into his palace, but also rewarded him liberally in respect of his wife. I
showed you that his liberallitie and bounty was not a thing unworthy a Prince,
but it was naught in that respect, that he did it even to stop up the mouth of
Abraham, and to close up his eyes and his ears, that he should not see with
his eyes, nor hear with his ears, nor speak of the lust and of the riot and
wrong of the king. Wherein I noted, that it is the property of Princes that are
carnally minded. to spare no cost upon those, by whose silence, or by whose
speech their delight and lust may be furthered and nourished.

If a man will but let them sleep in their sin, if he will but speak so
softly, so slilie, and so warily, that his speech shall not a wake them, but
be unto them as a charm, whereby they shall sleep the more, if he will do but
any of these he shall be well recompensed. Therefore not only traitors and rebels
are enemies to Princes, but dissembling hipocrites are also enemies, yea even
such flattering teachers, which though they understand, yet they do not touch
nor ransacke that sore which they ought to deal withal, and these are such as
the Prophet Ie. makes mention of whom he speaks of the false ptophets of his
time, which would heal the outside, and make it look fair, but afterward
the sore shall break forth, and then it shall be more dangerous and more
deadly than ever it was before. Such are oftentimes willingly, and easily
admitted into the Courts of Princes, which though they be profane, and
careless, yet to hear such, it is a delight, it never troubles them or
disquieth them. They had as leave hear such a one as see a play, for the one
does come no nearer the heart then the other. Such gifts I say though they be
liberal, they are not blessed unto the giver, nor yet to him that takes them
in any such respect. But the Lord will punish and correct such a giver and such
a receiver.

Now concerning these words that follow, we have here set down, how the Lord
did take Abraham's part: how he took his cause into his hand, and how he
pleaded in his behalf, Briefly, we have the reward of that sin and
injustice that was done unto Abraham, though under some color of favorable,
and compassionable dealing, (as indeed it was). For we have many professors
of religion that will not do the like, where is set down both the punishment,
and the fruit that it had in Pharaoh. The punishment was inflicted by the Lord:

The Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house for Sara Abraham's wife. The Lord is
the author of the punishment, who without respect of person does punish, and
that Princes. It is said, that he plagued Pharaoh, and that not with a small
plague, or with few plagues, but with great plagues, and many plagnes. The
cause why, is also lighty touched which was before expressed, because of Sara
Abraham's wife, because of the wrong and injury which was offered by Pharaoh,
who would also have taken away his wife. That work which this punishment had
in Pharaoh, is two fold. The first it drives him to an angry expostulation
with Abraham, and he expostulateth and reasons the matter hotly with him, and
secondly it drives him to a restitution and a restoring of that which he had
taken away before from him, namely, of his wife, with a care that the thing
which he did restore, might remain with him, and might not be taken away from
him by his officers.

This is briefly that which we are to mark in these words. Out of which we
are to learn for our instruction. First, that the lord God is a most faithful
keeper and protector of those which depend upon him, yea although they seem
through the weakness of their faith, at some time to slip and to offend his
Majesty, for this seems to be an infirmity of Abraham, that he would
conceal that part of truth which was most necassary, and would rather hazard
the chastity of his wife, and the displeasure of God which he might provoke
thereby, then he would commit him self to the providence of God. Yet God takes
his part against Princes, which is a general rule and instruction of faith unto
all the children of Abraham which are his children, not according to his
profession, but according to his faith. This is that which is set down in the
hundred and fifth Psalm, where speaking of the covenant which God made unto
Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob. He says the Lord did defend them, although they
were few in number, yea though they were very few, and strangers in the land,
and walked from nation to nation, from one kingdom to another people, yet
suffers he no man to do them wrong, but even rebuked kings for their sake,
saying: Touch not my anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. Here the Lord
speaks roughly unto Pharaoh. He speaks unto him by punishment, the kind
whereof is not here expressed: but it is to be thought, that it was some
greiuous kind of punishment, which might not only correct the sin which
was committed, but also prevent others. For so the Lord directs his
punishment, that thereby he may not only correct them for the sins committed,
but also prevent such as hereafter may be committed.

This is then the first instruction that we have here to learn: an exceeding
great comfort unto all that walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham. Those
that do them wrong, they shall not escape free, the hand of the Lord will be
upon them. Though they be never so strange and unknown, the Lord will be unto
them a friend, and a father to defend them and to guard them, and to restore
their wrongs upon their enemies,

Secondly, in that it is said, that the Lord did plague Pharaoh with great
plagues because of Sara Abraham's wife. We do learn, that the Lord as he is a
punisher of sins without respect of persons, so he is a particular judge of
this sin of adultery, according to that general and holy doctrine in the
thirteenth to the Hebrews, the fourth verse, where he says: that marriage is
honorable among al and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers, and adulterers God
will judge, or as it is here said, God will plague and condemn them, and
correct them whatsoever they be. For the use of marriage is holy, but the
abuse thereof is detestable. For fornication, and adultery, and uncleanness,
are accursed in all and among all.

It is not the power and authority of the prince that does hide and cover the
sin of a Prince. Sin seems as ugly in the eyes of God being committed by
the mightiest monarche of the world, as by the basest beggar of the earth,
Therefore, foolish and blind is that conceit, which has ouer-cast the minds
of many, they cannot see the sins of Princes and Magistrates. They cannot
discern of the deuelishe and horrible uncleanness of these sins that are
committed by Princes and rich men. Especially they themselves think that
because God has set them above others, therefore they have more authority to
sin then others. I confess indeed, they have more means to do it: but that
saying shall be fitly applied unto them: the mighty men shall be mightily
punished for their sins. For as al sins are joined with ingratitude, and by
reason of it are made more sinful: so, especially the sin of rich men, of
wise men, of learned men, is joined with most detestable ingratitude against
the majesty of God, because his benefits to them are far more then to
others.

A third thing is here to be noted, in that it is said, GOD did not only
plague Pharaoh, but his house also: not meaning the walls and the timber of
the house, but his Family, his Servant, his kindsemen, and those that were
of his house. Which teaches us this, that we are not so lightly to think of
the sins of magistrates, of Parents, and of the chief of families, and we
learn also by this, that God does punish oftentimes a whole kingdom, for the
riot, and lust of the governors, and guiders of the same. Therefore we must al
set our hands to this thing, and according to that measure of grace which we
have received, to admonish them, to make suit unto God, for his spirit of
sanctification, to light upon them: and we ought not only to pray for their
long life, but also for the spirit of sanctification and regeneration, that
their hearts may be renewed according to the image of Jesus christ, whereby
their imaginations may be subdued by the working of the spirit of God. For
otherwise we shall not be only fearfully plagued, but our sins shall be
upon our own head, and we shall be accessarie to the punishment, if we have
not performed this duty toward our governors, either in the Church or
Commonwealth. Let us not therefore think the sins of great ones to be
little ones, but even such as touch us to the very skin, and such as will bring
a plague upon our bodies if we do wincke at them, and if we do not endeavor to
prevent them, our punishment is just, and may justly say that we have a part
in those sins, which we did not labor to prevent in them, by whom we have
received benefits.

Lastly, we learn out of this seventeenth verse, that God does not only
punish the act of adultery; the very fact committed, but even the endeavor,
the purpose and resolution to do it, although the same be shadowed with some
excuse of want of the knowledge of the truth. For Pharaoh had not accompanied
with Sara, for the Lord smote him and laid his hand upon him, and destroyed
him by a violent hand, and though he had a resolution to do it, yet not as an
adulterer with an adulteress, but as an husband with his wife, as appears
after by the expostulation that he makes with Abraham. Yet we must know and
acknowledge, that the Lord God is just, and holy, and upright, and equal in
all his ways, and that all the vneuenes, it is in ways and not in his ways.
Therefore even ignorance is not excused when we sin; for though the sin
by it may seem to be less, but yet it cannot make it, but still it shall be a
sin, and such as deserves everlasting condemnation: much more therefore a
bodily punishment. Now, if God without respect of persons, be so just a
punisher of Magistrates and mighty ones of this world: and that only for the
purpose and resolution of continuing sin. How shall we think to escape free,
which make little conscience of the fact it self, when as we make no reckoning
at all, of the purpose and resolution, when as nothing stands between us and
the actual committing of sin, but only the want of occasion. The
commandments of God as touching this sin, are plain, the threatninges
great. No whoremonger shall enter into the kingdom of God, and as it is said
in the Revelation, that the fearful and unbelieving, and abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, etc. shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, who though they had
bin daily revoked, and called back from their unclean conuersasion, yet they
were like horses, that neigh after their neighbors wives and daughters. If
neither the commandment, nor threatninges of God can serve, yet let this
pattern of a king move them to forsake their unclean life. GOD did not spare
that holy and religious king, which was a man after his own heart, I say he
did not spare David, when he committed this sin against God and his Church,
the Lord did plague him fearfully for it. How much more then, shall not such
wretches escape the hand of God, that never sought to frame their hearts
according to Gods mind? and yet they are as confident in sinning, as those that
have all the colors and pretenses in the world, yea oftentimes none more vile
then they which ought to seek unto the Lord, and to work out their own
salvation with fear and trembling.

Then Pharaoh called Abraham and said: Why have thou done this unto me, etc.

Here, behold the Lord did not punish him in vain. His case and condition was
not so desperate, as the estate of those that be the members of the Church,
yea the very Church of God and such as will be counted the only professors:
when it could not be said of him: I have plagued thee in vain. This is the
complaint of God in the first of Esaias. Wherefore should you be smitten any
more, or wherefore should you be plagued? for that is the same in effect.
Seeing that you fall away more and more: so that the very heathen, that have no
knowledge of God, they are many times, more just and more tender hearted then
we, and do more profit by the punishments of God then we, of whom it may be
justly said as it was said of the Jews. Wherefore should I smite and wound
your minds with many sorrows, why should I cast reproach upon you, and give
you over into the hands of your enemies, and of the merciless men. It does no
god, you are nothing the better for it. And what natural father will correct
that child that is hardened and made worse by stripes, then any whit bettered.
For the end of correction is the amendment of the party who is corrected, Now
if no sin be prevented, if the party be not made to fear to do ill, it is
to no purpose. I say let this example and pattern of a heathen king be an
example and a pattern unto us to follow: least it be a witness against us in
the day of judgment, when it shall be laid to our charge, that we have read:
that cruel Pharaoh, merciles Pharaoh, wicked Pharaoh, was made the better: and
the more vigilant, and how he was made the more careful to clear himself: and
we have not labored to make this use of it. If we do not, we are farther from
God then Pharaoh was, though we seem to be never so near unto him.

The first part then is the expostulation with Abraham, and a clearing of
himself, wherein he does accuse Abraham of a double fault, both of speech and of
silence: For by these two, he was in danger to have committed this sin, and by
consummating of it, to break wedlock; and whereas Abraham concealeth part of
truth which was expedient to have been opened, and declares that part which
was to no purpose: now he tells him of both. This thing generally in it self
is to be commended, for this is a property of godly sorrow, which as it is in
the 2. Cor. 7. chap. the 11. verse, works in us a clearing of our selves.
Even this kind of defending and clearing of our selves, is good, if it be not
in hypocrisy, as Adam and Euah, but when it is done in truth and sincerity of
heart. But here Pharaohs sorrow and feeling of his sin, did not proceed from
the grief of heart for sin, but from the sharpnes of his punishment which
god had laid upon him. And here is a difference, that is to be put between
the clearing of the children of this world, and of the children of God: for a
punishment hanging over them, does cause them topurge themselves. How much more
then ought the love of God to co^pel us to reconcile our selves unto the Lord,
against whom we have sinned. Another thing in Pharaoh is this: we may see the
corruption of nature, which does rather complain of the instrument of sin,
then of the root and cause of sin which was at home within him. Of this you
hear him not complain: here is no acknowledging of his own sin, therefore
no repentance, and therefore no christian clearing. Here is why did thou that,
or why did thou not this, here is not why did I this or that: or why had I no
more grace to think with my self, and to dread the poison that is within me.
Well, I wish you to look unto this matter: for marriage is a matter of great
weight, a man must not take in hand upon the bare report of some man, as
appears in the 24. chap of Gene. clean contrary to the custom of this
world, wherein men content them selves with any thing that may stop the mouth
of men, and satisfy the law, not considering that God looks into the heart.
It is not enough to plead thus before god, and to say he said this, or she said
that, but it is that which our soul must have respect unto. We must look
whether lust, or riches, or wealth, do move us to marry, for this is a poor
shift before God, to say he said this or that, and I know not what. Again, in
a word we may note this in Pharaoh, whch we shall find many times wanting in
the professors of the gospel, that he does judge the same sin, if it had
gone forward, to have been a more greeueous sin, and so to have brought upon
him a more grievous punishment, for so he expostulateth with Abraham in regard
of his dealing, saying: for by this thy dealing I was like to have taken her to
be my wife, and so to have brought a greater plague upon me. For he did
consider that if he had enlarged and increased his sin, the Lord would have
increased his punishments upon him. The other fruit which this plague that God
laid upon Pharaoh, and his house brought forth, was a restitution of that which
he had taken away.

Now therefore behold thy wife, take her and go thy way here she is.

Where I see yet a farther work that the hand of God has in the heart of
Pharaoh: not only to make him to fume, and to chafe at Abraham, and his
dealing, but it drives him unto a fear and care, and as I may say, (a
conscience) for it was more conscience then many that make a great show of
holiness have, to provide for that, that which he restored, might not be taken
away from him again. Surely if the naked hand of God did make him this wise,
not only to purpose, but also to perform, what shall we think of many at
this time, whom the hand of God joined with his word, cannot compel to restore
that which they have wrested from others. Surely Pharaoh shall be our judge, he
shall stand up before the son of God; and condemn such as have said Lord,
Lord, and yet have not done the will of God; then shall they hear that
terrible and fearful voice. Depart from me ye curssed etc. Here is your
judge, he trembled at my judgments, and restored that which he had taken
away, but you have not. Finally, he does confirm his purspose by giving charge
to his officers, that, that which he had restored, might continue and remain
with Abraham: where we learn that it is not only the duty of a Prince, to
make good and wholesome laws, and iniu^ctions; but also to see them well
ordered, and executed. For if Pharaoh had been as wicked as some Christians
are, though he had said, here is thy wife; yet he would have set others
there, to have taken her away from him, and to have killed him, and all they
that were with him. This then is for our last instruction, that we do not
only yield to that which is good, but to persevere and continue in it, and that
not only before God, but also before men: always dealing uprightly as in the
sight of God.

Let us pray.

