THE PARADYSE of daynty devises.

Containing sundry pithy precepts, learned Counsels, and excellent inventions,
right pleasant and profitable for all estates.

Devised and written for the most part, by M. Edwardes, sometimes of her
Majesty's Chapel: the rest, by sundry learned Gentlemen, both of honor, and
worship, whose names hereafter follow.

EGO SVM VIA ET VERITAS


Jmprinted at London, by Henry Disle, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard, at the
Southwest door of Saint Paul's Church, and are there to be sold.

1578.

blazon or coat of arms IE NE CHERCHE Q'VNE


Saint Barnard E. O. Lord Vaux, the elder. VV. Hunis. Jasper Heyvvod. F.
Kindlemarsh. D. Sand. M. Yloop.
TO THE RIGHT HOnorable Sir Henry Compton Knight, Lord Compton of Compton.
RIGHT HONORABLE, AND my very good Lord, (presuming upon your curtesy) I am
bold to present unto your honor, this small volume Entitled The Paradise of
deyntye devises, being penned by diverse learned Gentlemen and collected
together through the travel of one, both of vvorshippe and credit, for his
private use: who not long sine departed this life, which when I had perused
over, not without the advice of sundry my friends, I determined by their good
motion, to set the^ in print, who thereunto greatly persuaded me, with these
and like words: The vvryters of them, were both of honor and worship,
besides that our own country men, and such as for their learning and
gravity, might be accounted of among the wisest. Furthermore, the dittis both
pithy and pleasant, as well for the invention as meter, and will yield a far
greater delight, being as they are so aptly made to be set to any song in.5.
parts, or song to instrument. Which well considering, I porposed not to
forsake so good an occasion, beseching your honor to accept it in good part,
cheefely for the authors sake: who though some of them are departed this
life, yet their worthy doings shall continue for ever: for like as the shadow
follows the body, so praise follows virtue: and as the shadow goes sometimes
before, and sometimes behind, so does praise also to virtue: but the later it
comes, the greater it is. and to be the better esteemed. Thus fearing to
offend your honor with these my rude speeches, I end, wishing your L. many
years of joy

Your good Lordships wholly to command. H. D.

The translation of the blessed S. Barnards verses, containing the unstable
felicity of this wayfaring world.
CVR mundus militat, sub vana gloria, cuius prosperitas est transitoria?
Tam cito labitur, eius potentia quam vasa figula, que sunt fragilia.
WHY does each state apply it self to worldly praise?
And undertake such toil, to heap up honors gain:
Whose seat, though seeming sure, on fickle fortune stays,
Whose gifts were never proved, perpetual to remain.
But even as earthen pot, with every fillip fayles,
So fortunes favor flits, and fame with honor quayles.
Plus creed litteris, scriptis in glacia, quam mundi fragilis, venae fallabiae.
Fallsax in premijs, vertutis specie, que nunquam habuit, tempus fiduciae.
Think rather firm to find, a figure graven in Ise,
Whose substance subject is, to heat of shining sun:
Then hope for steadfast stay, in wanton worlds devise,
Whose feigned fond delights, from falshed forge do come.
And under Virtues veyle, are largely dealt about,
Deceiving those, who think their date will never out.
Magis credendu^ est viris fallacibus, quam mundi miseris prosperitatibus
Falsis insanijs and voluptatibus, falsis quoquae studijs and vanitatibus.
The trifeling truthles tongue, of rumors lying lips,
Deserves more trust, then does the highest happy hap:
That world to worldlinges gives, for see how honor slippes,
To foolish fond conceytes, to pleasures poisoned sap.
To studyes false in proof, to arts applied to gain,
To fickle fancies toys, which wisdom deemeth vain.
Dic vbi Solomon, olim tam nobilis? vel vbi Sampson est, dux inuincibilis?
Vel dulcis Ionathas, multum amabilis? vel pulcher Absoln, vultu mirabilis
Where is the sacred king, that Solomon the wise?
Whose wisdom, former time of duty did commend:
Where is that Sampson strong, that monstrous man in syze?
Whose forced arm, did cause the mighty pillars bend.
Where is the pearls Prince, the freendly Ionathas?
Or Absolon, whose shape and favor did surpass.
Quo Caesar abijt? celsus imperio, vel dives splendidus, totus in prandio.
Dic vbi Tullius, clarus eloquio, vel Aristoteles, summus ingenio.
Where is that Caesar now, whose high renowned fame,
Of sundry conquestes won, through out the world did sound:
Or Dives rich in store, and rich in richly name,
Whose chest with gold and dishe with daynties did abound.
Where is the passing grace of Tullies pleding skill?
Or Aristotle's vain, whose pen had wit and will?
O esca vermium, o massa pulueris, o ros, o vanitas, cur sic extolleris?
Ignoras penitus vtru^ cras vixeris, fac bonum omnibus, quam diu poteris.
O food of filthy worm, oh lump of loathsome clay,
O life full like the dew, which morning sun does wast:
O shadow vain, whose shape with sun does shrink away.
Why gloriest thou so much, in honor to be plaste?
Since that no certain hour of life thou doste enjoy,
Most fyt it were thy time to goodness to employ.
Quam breue festu^ est, haec mundi gloria, vt vmbra hominu^, sic eius gaudia.
Que semper subtrahit aeterna praemia, and ducunt hominum, ad dura eruia.
How short a banquet seems the pomp of high renown?
How like the senseles shape of shiuering shadow thine?
Are wanton worldly toys, whose pleasure plucketh down,
Our hearts from hope, and hands from works, which heaven should win.
And takes us from the trod, which guides to enlesse gain,
And sets us in the way, that leads to lasting pain
Haec mundi gloria, quae magni penditur, sacris in litteris, flos faeni
dicitur.
Vt leave folium, quod vento rapitur, sic vita hominum, hac vita tollitur.
The pomp of worldly praise, which worldlings hold so dear,
In holy sacred book, is likened to a flower:
Whose date does not conteyne, a week, a moonth, or year,
But springing now, does fade again within an hour.
And as the lightest leaf, with wind about is thrown,
So light is life of man, and lightly hence is blown.
FINIS.
My luke is loss.
1. Our pleasures are vanities.
Behold the blast, which blows the blossoms from the tree,
The end whereof, consumes and comes to naught we see:
Ere thou therefore, be blown from life that may not last,
Begin for grace to call, for time misspent and past.
Have mind on brittle life, whose pleasures are but vain,
On death likewise bethink, how thou may not remain:
And fear thy Lord to grieve, which sought thy soul to save,
To sin no more be bent, but mercy ask and have.
For death who does not spare, the kings on earth to kill,
Shall reap also from thee, thy pleasure, life, and will:
That life which yet remaynes, and in thy breast appears,
Has sown in thee such seeds, you ought to weed with tears.
And life that shall succeed, when death is worn and past,
Shall spring for ever then, in joy or pain to last:
Where death on life has power ye see, that life also,
Has mowen the fruits of death, which never more shall grow.
FINIS.
W. Hunis.

2. Who wayteth on this wavering world, and veweth each estate.
By trial taught shall learn it best, to live in simple rate.

AMid the vale the sclender shrubbe, is hid from all mishap,
When taller tree that stands aloft, is rent with thunder clap.
The Turrets tops which touch the clouds, are beat with every blast,
Soon shiuered are their stones with storm, and quickly over cast.
Best bodyed tree in all the wood, for timber beam is found,
And to the axe the sturdiest Ox, does yield and fall to ground.
The highest hill does soonest feel, the flash of lightnings flame,
And soon decays the pomp and pride, of high renowned name.
Of all the heard the huntman seeks, by proof as does appear,
With double forked arrowe head, to wound the greatest Dear.
The hautiest head of all the drove, enioyes the shortest life,
And stains the slaughter house with blood, at prick of butchers knife.
Thus what thing highest place atteynes, is soonest overthrown,
What ever Fortune sets a loft, she threats to throw it down.
And though no force resist thy power, nor seek thee to confound,
Yet does the payse of weighty things, decline it self to ground.
For restless tipe of roulling wheel, example has it tryde,
To heavy burden yield it must full soon, and slip aside.
What vayles the rich his bed of down, yt sighs for sleplesse thought,
What time in couch of flock the poor, sleeps sound and fears naught.
At homely board his quiet food, his drinks in treene be taken,
When often the proud in cups of gold, with wine receive their bane.
The bed, the board, the dread in dout, with train to be oppressed,
When fortune frounes, their power must yield, as wyre unto ye wrest.
If Icarus had not presumed to high to take his flight,
He had not yet ben drowned in Seas, that now Itarion hight.
If Phaeton had not enterprised to guide his fathers seat,
His fires had not enflamed the world, nor ben destroyed with heat.
But who so climes above the mean, there is no hope of stay,
The higher up the sonner down, and nearer his decay.
Then you that here in pomp or place, to guide the golden mase,
Let crown and Septer both obey the mean of Virtues race.
For neither shall renowned Virtue see the pit of hell,
Nor yet in toombe of Marble stone, she may abide to dwell.
But from Sepulcher flies she hence, beyond the skies above,
And glistering in the blisful stares, she raines with mighty Jove.
FINIS.
Jasper Heywood.

3. The perfect trial of a faithful friend
NOt stayed state, but feeble stay, not costly robes, but bare array:
Not passed wealth, but present want, not heped store but scle^der ska^t
Not plenties purse, but poor estate, not happy hap, but troward fate:
Not wish at will, but want of joy, not hearts good health but hearts annoy:
No fredomes use, but prisoners thrall, not costly seat, but lowest fall:
Not weal I mean, but wretched woe, does truly try, ye feend from foe:
And nowght but froward Fortune proves, who fauning faines, or simply loves.
FINIS.
M. Yloop.

4. Being asked the occasion of his white head, he annswereth thus.
WHere seething sighs and sorrow sobbes,
Has slain the slippes that nature set:
And skalding showers with stony throbbes,
The kindly sap from them has fet.
What wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
Where thought has thrild and thrown his spears,
To hurt the heart that harmeth him not:
And groaning grief has ground forth tears,
Mine eyne to stain, my face to spot.
What wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
Where pinching pain himself has plaste,
There peace with pleasures were possessed:
And where the walls of wealth lie waste,
And pouertye in them is pressed.
What wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
Where wretched woe will weaue her web,
Where care the clewe can catch and cast:
And flooddes of joy are fallen to ebb,
So lo, that life may not long last.
What wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
These hears of age are messengers,
Which bid me fast, repent, and pray:
They be of death the harbingers,
That does prepare and dress the way,
Wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such hears to be.
They be the lines that lead the length,
How far my race is for to run:
They say my youth, is fled with strength,
And how old age is weak begun.
The which I feel, and you may see,
Upon my head such lines to be.
They be the stringes of sober sound,
Whose music is harmonicall:
Their tunes declare a time from ground
I came, and how there to I shall.
Wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such stringes to be.
God grant to those that white hears have,
No worse them take then I have meant:
That after they be laid in grave,
Their souls may joy their lives well spent.
God grant likewise that you may see.
Upon your head such hears to be.
FINIS.
W. Hunis.

5. Beware of had I wist.
BEware of had I wist, whose fine brings care and smart,
Esteem of all as they deserve, and deem as deemd thou art;
So shall thy perfect friend, enjoy his hoped hyre,
And faithless fawning foe, shall miss theffect of his desire.
Good will shall have his gain, and hate shall heap despite,
A faithless friend shall find distrust, and love shall reap delight.
Thy self shall rest in peace, thy friend shall joy thy fate,
Thy foe shall fret at thy good hap, and I shall joy thy state.
But this my fond advise, may seem purchaunce but vain,
As rather teaching how to lose, then how a friend to gain.
But this not my intent, to teach to find a friend,
But safely how to love and leave, is all that I entend.
And if you prove in part, and find my counsel true,
Then wysh me well for my good will, it is all I crave adue.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
6. M. Edwards MAY.
WHen MAY is in his prime, then MAY each heart rejoice,
When MAY bedecks each branch with green, each bird streins forth his voice
The lively sap creepes, up into the bloming throne,
The flowers, which cold in prison kept, now laughes ye frost to skorne.
All natures Impes triumphs, whiles joyful may does last,
When MAY is gone, of all the year the pleasant time is past.
MAY makes the cheerful hue, MAY breeds and bringes new blood.
MAY marches throughout every lim, MAY makes ye merry mood.
MAY pricketh tender hearts, their warbling notes to tune,
Full strange it is, yet some we see, do make their MAY in June.
Thus things are strangly wrought, whiles joyful MAY does last,
Take MAY in time, when MAY is gone, the pleasant time is past.
All ye that live on earth, and have your MAY at will,
Rejoice in MAY, as I do now, and use your MAY with skill.
Use MAY, while that you may, for MAY has but his time,
When all the fruit is gone, it is to late the tree to clime.
Your liking and your lust, is fresh whiles MAY does last,
When MAY is gone, of all the year, the pleasant time is past.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

7. Fair words make fools feign.
JN youthful years when first my young desires began,
To prick me forth to serve in Court a sclender tal young man:
My fathers blessing then I asked upon my knnee,
Who blessing me with trembling hand, these words began say to me:
My son, God guide thy way, and shild thee from mischaunce,
And make thy just desartes in Court, thy poor estate to advance:
Yet when thou art become one of the Courtly train,
Think on this proverb old (quoth he) that fair words make foles fain.
This counsel gravely given, most strange appears to me,
Till tract of time with open eyes, had made me plainly see:
What subtle fleightes are wrought by painted tales devise,
When hollow hearts with freendly shows the simple do entise.
To think all gold that shines to feed their fond desire,
Whose sheuering cold is warmde with smoke, in stead of flaming fire:
Since talk of tickle trust, does breed a hope most vain,
This proverb true by proof I find, that fair words make fools fain.
Fair speech always does well, where deeds ensue fair words,
Fair speech again always does evil, that bushes gives for birds.
Who hopes to have fair words, to try his lucky lot.
If I may counsel, let him strike it while the iron is hot.
But them that feed on cloddes, in stead of pleasant grapes,
And after warning often given, for better luck still gapes
Full loath I am, yet must I tell them in words plain,
This proverb old proves true in them, that fair words makes fools feign.
Woe worth the time that words, so slowly turn to deeds,
Woe worth the time ye fair sweet flouers, are grown to rotten weeds
But thrice woe worth the time, that truth away is fled,
Wherein I see how simple hearts, with words are vaynely fed.
Trust not fair words therefore, Where no deeds do ensue,
Trust words, as skilful falkeners do trust Hawks that never flewe.
Trust deeds, let words be words, which never wrought me gain,
Let my experience make you wise, and let words make foles feign.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

8. In his extreme sickness.
WHat greeues my bones, and makes my body faint?
What pricks my flesh and tears my head in twain?
Why do I wake, when rest should me attaint?
When others laugh, why do I live in pain?
I toss, I turn, I change from side to side,
And stretch me often, in sorrows linkes betyde.
I toss, as one betost in waves of care,
I turn, to flee the woes of loathsome life:
I change, to spy if death this corpse might spare,
I stretch, to heaven to rid me of this strife:
Thus do I stretch, and change, and toss, and turn,
While I in hope of heaven my life do burn.
Then hold the still, let be thy heaviness,
Abolish care, forgeat thy pining woe:
For by this means soon shall thou find redress,
When often betost, hence thou to heaven must go.
Then toss, and turn, and tumble frank and free,
O happy thryse, when thou in heaven shall be.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

9. For Christmas day.
Rejoice rejoice with heart and voice,
In Christ's birth this day rejoice.
FRom Virgins womb this day did spring,
The precious seed that only saved man:
This day let man rejoice and sweetly sing,
Since on this day salvation first began.
This day did Christ man soul from death remove.
With glorious saints to dwell in heaven above.
This day to man, came pledge of perfect peace,
This day to man, came love and unity:
This day man's grief began for to surcease,
This day did man receive a remedy.
For each offense and every deadly sin,
With guilty heart that erst he wandered in.
In Christ's flock, let love be surely plaste,
From Christ's flock, let concord hate expel:
Of Christ's flock let love be so embraste,
As we in Christ, and Christ in us may dwell.
Christ is the author of all unity,
From whence proceeds all felicity.
O sing unto this glittering glorious king,
O praise his name let every living thing:
Let heart and voice like Belles of silver ring,
The comfort that this day did bring.
Let Lute, let Shalme, with sound of sweet delight,
The joy of Christ's birth this day resight.
FINIS.
F. Kindlemarsh.

10. For Easter dcy.
ALl mortal men this day rejoice, in Christ that you redeemed has,
By death with death sing we with voice, to him yt has appesd gods wrath
Due unto man for sinful path, wherein before he went astray,
Give thanks to him with perfect faith that for man kind has made this
glorious day.
This day he rose from tomb again, wherein his precious corse was laid,
Whom cruelly ye Jews had slain, with blooddy wounds full il araid:
O man be now no more dismayed, if thou henceforth from sin do stay,
Of death thou need not be afraid, Christ conquered death for this his
glorious day.
His death prevailed had not whitt, As Paul ye apostle well does write:
Except he had vprisen yet, from death to life by Godlike might:
With most triumphant glittering light,
This day his glory shined I say, and made us brighte as sun this glorious
day
O man arise with Christ therefore, since he from sin has made thee fre,
Beware thou fall in sin no more, but rise as Christ did rise for thee:
So may thou him in glory see, when he at day of doom shall say,
Come thou my child and dwell with me, God grant us all to see that glorious
day.
FINIS.
qoth Jasper Haywood.

11. For Whitsunday.
COme holy ghost eternal God, and ease the woeful grief,
That through the heaps of heavy sin, can no where find relief.
Do thou O God redress
The great distress
Of sinful heaviness.
Come comfort the afflicted thoughts of my consumed heart,
O ryd the pearcing pricking pains of my tormenting smart:
O holy ghost grant me
That I by thee
From sin may purged be.
Thou art my God, to thee alone I will commend my cause,
Nor glittering gold nor precious stone, shall make me leave thy laws:
O teach me then the way
Whereby I may
Make thee my only stay.
My lips, my tongue, my heart and al, shall spread thy mighty name,
My voice shall never cease to sound, the praises of the same:
Yea every living thing
Shall sweetly sing
To thee (O heavenly king.)
FINIS.
F. K.

12. No pleasure without some pain.
Sweet were the joys that both might like and last,
Strange were the state exempt from all distress:
Happy the life that no mishap should tossed,
Blessed the chance might never change success.
Were such a life to lead, or state to prove,
Who would not wish that such a life were love.
But O the soury sauce of sweet unsure,
When pleasures fly and flit with wast of wind:
The trustlesse traynes that hoping hearts allure,
When sweet delights do but allure the mind.
When care consumes and wastes the wretched wight,
While fancy feeds and draws of her delight.
What life were love, if love were free from pain?
But O that pain with pleasure match should meet:
Why did the course of nature so ordain,
That sugared sour must sause the bitter sweet.
Which sour from sweet might any means remove,
What hap, what heaven, what life, were like to love.
FINIS.
W. R.

13. Who minds to bring his Ship to happy shore
Must care to know the laws of wisdoms love.

MY friend, if thou will credit me in ought,
To whom the truth by trial well appears:
Naught worth is wit til it be dearly bought,
There is no wisdom but in hoary hears.
Yet if I may of wisdom often define,
As well as others have of happiness:
Then to my words my friend thy ear incline,
The things that make thee wise are these I guess,
Fear God, and know thy self in each degree,
Be friend to all, familiar but to few:
To light of credit see thou never be,
For trial ought in trust does treason show.
To others faults cast not too much thy eye,
Accuse no man of guilt, amend thy own:
Of meddling much does mischief ought arise,
And often debate by tickle tongue is sown.
What thing thou will have hyd, to none declare,
In word or deed beware of had I wist:
So spend thy good that some thou ever spare,
For friends like Hawks do soar from empty fist.
Cut out thy coat according to thy cloth,
Suspected persons see thou always flee,
Believe not him that once has broke his troth,
Nor yet of gift with out desert be free.
Time quickly slips beware how thou it spend,
Of wanton youth repents a paynful age:
Begin nothing without an eye to thend,
Nor how thine ear from counsel of the sage.
If thou too far let out thy fancy slip,
And witless will from reasons rule outstart:
Thy folly shall at length be made thy whip,
And sore the stripes of shame shall cause the smart.
To do too much for old men is but lost,
Of freendship had to women comes like gain:
Bestow not thou on children too much cost,
For what thou do for these is all in vain.
The old man, or he can requite, he dies,
Unconstant is the woman's wavering mind:
Full soon the boy thy freendship will despise,
And him for love thou shall vngreatfull sind.
The aged man is like the barraine ground,
The woman like the Reed that wagges with wind:
There may no trust in tender years be found,
And of the three, the boy is most unkind.
If thou have found a faithful friend in deed,
Beware thou lose not love of such a one:
He shall sometime stand thee in better steed,
Then treasure great of gold or precious stone.
FINIS.
Jasper Heywood.

14. Of the unconstant stay of Fortunes gifts.
Jf Fortune be thy stay, thy state is very tickle,
She bears a double face, disguised, false, and fickle:
This day she seems to smile, to morrow will she frown,
What now she sets aloft, anon she throws down:
Fly Fortunes slye deceytes, let Virtue be thy guide,
If that you do intend in happy state to abide.
Upon the settled rock thy building surest stands,
Away it quickly wears, that rests on the sands:
Dame Virtue is the rock, that yeeldes assured stay,
Dame Fortune is the sand, tha skoureth soon away:
Choose that is certain, let thing uncertain pass,
Prefer the precious gold, before the brittle glass.
Sly Fortune has her slightes, she plays upon the pack,
Look whom she favors most, at length she turns to wrack:
But Virtue simply deals, she shuns deceitful train,
Who is by Virtue raised up, shall never fall again:
Stick fast to Virtue then, that gives assured trust,
And fly from Fortunes frekes, that ever prove unjust
FINIS.
F. K.

15. Promise is debt.
JN my account the promise that is vowed,
Among the good is holden such a debt:
As he is thought no whit to be allowed,
That sets light his promise to forget.
And for my part I will not link in love,
With fickle folk whose fancies ought remove.
My happy gain I do esteem for such,
As few have found in these our doubtful days:
To find a friend I think it be as much,
As to win a fort full fraught of noble praise.
Of all the goods that there may be possessed,
A faithful friend I judge to be the best.
O freendly league although to late begun,
Yet time shall try our troth as well employed:
And that we both shall see that we have won,
Such fastened faith as can not be destroyed.
By envious rage or slanders bitter blow,
That always seeks the good to overthrow.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

16. No words, but deeds.
THE wrong is great, the pain above my power,
That yeeldes such care in doubtful dens to drown:
Such hap is hard where Fortune does so lower,
As freendly look is turned to froward frown.
Is this the trust that faithful friends can find?
With those that yet have promise broke?
By deeds in dout, as though no words can bind,
A vowed friend to hold him to his yoke.
O faithless friend, what can assure your mind,
That doubts so soon before you have cause why?
To what hard hap does Fortune here me bind,
When words nor deeds can no where satisfye.
What can I write? that has not often bine said,
What have I said? that has not bind affyrmed:
What not approved? that ought to be assayed,
Or what is vowed? that shall not be performed.
Cast of mistrust, in have no credit give,
To this or that, that breeds friends unrest:
No doubt at all, but trust me if I live,
My deeds shall prove, that all is for the best.
And this believe, the Sea shall cease to flow,
The Sun to shine within the settled sky:
All things on earth shall leave to spring and grow,
Yea every Foul shall want his wings to fly.
Ear I in thought shall seem once to retire,
If you my friend remain as I desire:
Now lose no time, but use that while you may,
Forget not this, a dog shall have a day.
FINIS.
R. D.

17. He desires exchange of life.
THE day delayed, of that I most do wish,
Wherewith I feed and starve in one degree:
With wish and want still served in one dishe,
Alive as dead, by proof as you may see.
To whom of old this proverb well it serves,
While grass does grow, the selly horse he sterues.
Tweene these extremes thus do I rome the race,
Of my poor life, this certainly I know:
Tweene would and want unawarely that do pass,
More swift then shot out of Archers bow.
As Spider draws her line all day,
I watch the net, and others have the pray.
And as by proof the greedy dog does gnawe,
The bared bone all only for the taste:
So to and fro this loathsome life I draw,
With fancies forced and fed with vain repast.
Narsissus brought unto the water brinke,
So aye thirst I, the more that I do drink.
Lo thus I dye, and yet I seem not sick,
With smart unseen my self, my self I wear:
With prone desire and power that is not quick,
With hope aloft now drenched in despair.
Trained in trust for no reward assignd,
The more I have, the more I come behind.
With hurt to heal, in frozen yse to fry,
With loss to laugh, this is a wondrous case:
Fast fetred here, is forced away to fly,
As hunted Hare, that Hound has in the chase.
With wings and spurs, for all the have I make,
As like to lose, as for to draw the stake.
The days be long that hang upon desert,
The life is irke of joys that be delayed:
The time is short for to requite the smart,
That does proceed of promise long unpaid.
That to the last of this my fainting breath,
I wish exchange of life for happy death.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

18. Of the instabilitie of youth.
WHEN I look back and in my self behold,
The wandering ways that youth could not descry:
And marked the fearful course that youth did hold,
And met in mind, each step youth strayed a wry.
My knees I bow, and from my heart I call,
O Lord, forget these faults and folies all.
For now I see, how void youth is of skill,
I see also his prime time and his end:
I do confess my faults and all my ill,
And sorrow sore, for that I did offend,
And with a mind repentant of all crimes,
Pardon I ask for youth, ten thousand times.
The humble heart, has daunted the proud mind,
Eke wisdom has given ignorance a fall:
And wit has taught, that folly could not find,
And age has youth, her subject and her thrall.
Therefore I pray, O Lord of life and truth,
Pardon the faults committed in my youth.
Thou that did grant the wise-king his request,
Thou that in the Whale, thy prophet did preserve:
Thou that forgauest the wounding of thy breast,
Thou that did save the thief in state to sterue.
Thou only God, the giver of all grace,
Wipe out of mind, the path of youths vain race.
Thou that by power, to life did raise the dead.
Thou that restorest the blind to sight:
Thou that for love, thy life and love out bled,
Thou that of favor, made the lame go right.
Thou that can heal, and help in all assayes,
Forgive the gilth, that grew in youths vain ways.
And now since I, with faith and doubtless mind,
Do fly to thee by prayer to appease thy ire:
And since that thee I only seek to find,
And hope by faith to attain my just desire.
Lord mind no more youths error and vnskill,
And able age, to do thy holy will.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

19. Most happy is that state alone,
Where words and deeds agree in one.

BY painted words, the silly simple man,
To trustlesse trap, is trained now and than:
And by conseyt, of sweet alluring tale,
He bites the baits, that breeds his bitter bale.
To beawties blaze, cast not thy rouing eye:
In pleasant green, do stinging serpents lie.
The golden Pill, has but a bitter taste,
In glittering glass, a poison ranckest plaste.
So pleasant words, without performing deeds:
May well be deemed to spring of Darnel seeds.
The freendly deed is it, that quickly tryes:
Where trusty faith, and freendly meaning lies.
That state therefore most happy seems to be:
Where words and deeds, most faithfully agree.
My friend if thou will keep thy honest name:
Fly from the blot, of barking slanders blame.
Let not in word thy promise be more large:
Then thou in deed, art willing to discharge.
Abhorred is that false dissembling brood:
That seems to bear two faces in one hoode.
to say a thing, and not to mean the same:
Will turn at length to loss of thy good name.
Wherefore my friend, let double dealing go:
In stead whereof, let perfect playnenesse flow.
Do thou no more, in idle words exceed:
Then thou intendes to do, in very deed.
So good report, shall spread thy worthy praise:
For being just in word and deed always.
You worldly wightes that worldly dooers are:
Before you let your word slip out to far,
Consider well, what inconvenience springes:
By breach of promise made, in lawful things.
First, God mislikes where such deceit does swarm:
Next, it renoundeth unto thy neighbors harm.
And last of all, which is not least of all:
For such offense, thy conscience suffer shall.
As barren grounds, bringes forth but rotten weeds:
From barren words, so fruitless chafe proceeds.
As sauery flowers, do spring in fertile ground:
So trusty friends, by trial soon are found.
To shun therefore the woorst, that may ensue:
Let deeds always, approve thy sayings true.
FINIS.
F. K.

20. Who will aspire to dignity.
By learning must advanced be.

THE poor that live in needy rate, by learning do great riches gain:
The rich that live in welthy state, by learning do their wealth maintain.
Thus rich and poor, are furthered still,
By sacred rules of learned skill.
All fond conceits of frantic youth, the golden gift of learning stays:
Of doubtful things to search the truth, learning sets forth the reddy ways.
O happy him do I repute,
Whose breast is fraught with learning fruit.
There grows no corn within the field, that Ox and Plough did never till,
Right so the mind no fruit can yield, that is not lead by learnings skill.
Of ignorance comes rotten weeds,
Of learning springes right noble deeds.
Like as the Captain has respect, to train his soldiers in array:
So learning does man's mind direct, by Virtues staff his life to stay.
Though Friends and Fortune waxes skant,
Yet learned men shall never want.
You Impes therefore in youth be sure, to fraught your minds with learned things,
For learning is the fountain pure, out from the which all glory springes.
Who so therefore will glory win,
With learning first must needs begin.
FINIS.
F. K.

21. Man's flittyng life finds surest stay.
Where sacred Virtue bears sway.

THE sturdy Rock for all his strength, by raging Seas is rent in twain:
The Marble stone is pearst at length, with little drops of drifling rain.
The Ox does yield unto the yoke,
The Steel obeys the hammer stroke.
The stately Stagge that seems so stout, by yalping hounds at bay is set:
The swiftest bird that flees above, is caught at length in Fowlers net.
The greatest Fish in deepest Brook,
Is soon deceived with subtle hook.
^e man him self, unto whose will, all things are bounden to obey:
For all his wit and worthy skill, does fade at length and fall away.
There is nothing, but time does wast,
The Heavens, the Earth, consume at last.
But Virtue sittes triumphing still, upon the Trone of glorious Fame:
Though spitfull death man's body kill, yet hurtes he not his virtuous name.
By life or death, what so betides,
The state of Virtue, never slides.
FINIS.
M. Y.

22. Nothing is comparable unto a faithful friend,
Since this our time of Freendship is so skant,
Since Freendship now in every place does want.
Since every man of Freendship is so hollow,
As no man rightly knows which way to follow.
Sease not my Muse, sease not in these our days,
To ring loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
If men be now, their own peculier friends,
And to their neighbors freendship none pertendes.
If men of Freendship show them selves so bare,
And of their brethren take no Freendly care.
Forbear not then my Muse, nor fear not then,
To ring disprayse of these vnfreendly men.
Did man of Freendship know the mighty power?
How great effects it works every hour.
What store of hidden freendship it retaynes,
How still it powers forth aboundaunt gains.
Man would with thee my muse in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
Freendship releeueth man's necessity,
Freendship, comfort man's adversity.
Freendship augmenteth man's prosperity,
Freendship preferres man to felicity.
Then ring my muse, ring out in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred freendships praise.
Of Freendship, grows love and charity,
By Freendship, men are linked in amity:
From Freendship springs all commodity,
The fruit of Freendship, is fidelity.
Oh ring my muse, ring out in these our days,
Peale upon peale, of sacred Freendships praise.
That man with man, true freendship may embrace,
That man to man, may show a freendly face:
That every man, may sow such freendly seeds,
As freendship may be found in freendly deeds.
And join with thee my Muse in these our days,
To ring loud peales of sacred Freendships praise.
FINIS.
F. K.

23. Remember thy end.
TO be as wise as CATO was, or rich as CRESVS in his life:
To have the strength of Hercules, which did subdue by force or strife.
What helps it when Death does call,
The happy end exceeds all.
The Rich may well the Poor relieve, the Rulers may redress each wrong:
The learned may good counsel give, but mark the end of this my song:
Who does these things, happy they call,
Their happy end exceeds all.
The happiest end, in these our days, that all do seek, both small and great:
Is ey^ther for Fame, or else for Praise, or who may sit in highest seat.
But of these things, hap what hap shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
A good beginning ought we see, but seeldome standing at one stay:
For few do like the mean degree, then praise at parting some men say.
The things whereto each wight is thrall,
The happy end exceeds all.
The mean estate, that happy life, which lives under governance:
Who seeks no hate, nor breeds no strife, but takes in worth his happy chance.
If contentation him befall,
His happy end exceeds all.
The longer-life that we desire, the more offense does daily grow:
The greater pain it does require, Except the Judge some mercy show.
Wherefore I think and ever shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
FINIS.
D. S.

24. He persuades his friend,
from the fond Affectes of love.

WHY art thou bound and may go fre, shall reason yield to raging will?
Is thraldom like to liberty? will thou exchange thy good for ill?
Then shall thou learn a childish play, and of each part to taste and prove:
The lookers on shall judge and say, lo this is he that lives by love.
Thy wits with thoughts, shall stand at stay, thy head shall have but heavy
rest.
Thy eyes shall watch for wanton prays, thy tongue shall show thy hearts request.
Thy ears shall hear a thousand noise, thy hand shall put thy pen to pain:
And in the end, thou shall disprayse, thy life so spent, for such small gain.
If love and list might ever cope, or youth might run in reasons race:
Or if strong suit might win sure hope, I would less blame a lovers case.
For love is hot, with great desire, and sweet delight makes youth so fond,
That little sparks will prove great fire, and bring free hearts to endless
bond.
First count the care and then the cost, and mark what fraud in faith is
found:
Then after come and make thy bost, and show some cause why thou art bound.
For when the wine does run full low, you shall be feign to drink the lies:
And eat the flesh full well I know, that has been blown with many flies.
We see where great devotion is, the people kneel and kiss the cross:
And though we find small fault of this, Yet some will gilld a bridles bosse.
A fool his babble will not change, not for the septer of a king,
A lovers life is nothing strange, for youth delights none other thing.
FINIS.
Tho. Churchyard.

25. Wanting his desire he complayneth.
THe sailing ships with joy at length, do touch their long desired port,
The hewing axe the Oak does wast, the battring Canon breaks the fort.
Hard hagard hawks stoop to the lure, wild coltes in time the bridle tames:
There is nothing so out of ure, but to his kind long time it frames.
Yet this I find in time, no time can win my suit,
Though often the tree I climb, I can not catch the fruit.
And yet the pleasant branches often, in yielding wise to me do bow,
When I would touch they spring aloft, soon are they gone I wot not how
Thus I present the fleeting floode, like Tantalus in hell below,
Would God my case she understood, whirh can full soon relieve my woe
Which if to her were known, the fruit were surely mine,
She would not let me groan, and brouse upon the rine.
But if my ship with tackle torn, with rented sails must needs retire.
And stream and wind has plainly sworn, by force to hinder my desire
Like one yt stricks upon ye rocks, my weary wrack I should bewail
And learn to know false fortunes mockes, who smiles on me to small avail.
Yet since she only can, my rented ship restore,
To help her wracked man, but once I seek no more.
FINIS.
M. Ewardes.

26. Try before you trust.
IN friends are found a heap of doubts, that double dealing use,
A swarm of such I could find out, whose craft I can accuse:
A face for love, a heart for hate, these feigned friends can bear,
A tongue for troth, a head for wyles, to hurt each simple ear.
In humble port, is poison pact, that plainness can not spy.
Which creadites all, and can not see, where stinging serpents lie.
Through hasty trust, the harmless heart, is easily hampred in,
And made believe it is good gold, when it is lead and tin.
The first deceit that bleares mine eyes, is feigned faith professed,
The second trappe is grating talk, that gripes each strangers breast.
The third deceit is greeting words, with colors painted out,
Which bids suspect to fear no smart, nor dread no dangerous doubt.
The fourth, and last is long repair, which creepes in freendships lap,
And daily hauntes, that under trust, deuiseth many a trap.
Lo how false friends can frame a fetch, to win the will with wills,
To sauce their slightes with sugared sops, and shadow harm with smiles.
To serve their lusts, are sundry sorts, by practice diverse kinds,
Some carries honnie in their mouths, and venime in their minds.
Me thinks the stones within the streets, should cry out in this case,
And every one that does them meet, should shun their double face.
FINIS.
D. S.

27. A Lady forsaken complayneth.
JF pleasures be in paynfulnes? in pleasures does my body rest,
If joys accord with carefulnes? a joyful heart is in my breast:
If prison strong is liberty? in liberty long have I been,
If joys accord with miserye? who can compare a life to mine.
Who can unbind yt is sore bound? who can make free yt is sore thrall,
Or how can any means be found to comfort such a wretch withal.
None can, but he yt has my heart, convert my pains to comfort then.
Yet since his servant I became, most like a bondsman have I been:
Since first in bondage I became, my words and deeds were ever such,
That never once he could me blame, except from loving him too much.
Which I can judge no just offense, nor cause that I deserve disdain,
Except he mean through false pretense, through forged love to make a train.
Nay, nay, alas, my fained thoughts, my fre^ded and my fained ruth
My pleasures past my present plaints, show well I mean but to much truth
But since I can not him attain, against my will I let him go.
And lest he glory at my pain, I will attempt to cloak my woe.
Youth, learn by me, but do not prove, for I have proved to my pain,
What grievous griefs do grow by love, and what it is to love in vain.
FINIS.
M. D.

28. Finding worldly joys but vanities, he wishes death.
Forlorn in filthy froward fate, wherein a thousand cares I find,
By whom I do lament my state, annoid with fond afflicted mind
A wretch in woe, and dare not cry,
I live, and yet I wish to dye.
The day in dole, that seems long, I pas with sighs and heavy cheer.
And with these eyes I vewe the wrong, that I sustain by living here:
Where my mishaps as rife do dwell,
As plagues within the pit of hell.
A wailing wight I walk alone, in desert dens there to complain,
Among the savage sort to moan, I flee my friends where they remain:
And pleasure take to shun the sight,
Where erst I felt my great delight.
A captain clapped in chains of care, lapt in the laws of lethal love,
My flesh and bones consumed bare, with crauling greefes full strange to prove:
Though hap does bid me hope at least,
Whiles grass does grow, yet starues the beast.
A seeged fort with foreign force, for want of aid, must yield at last,
So must my weried pined corse, submit it self to bitter taste:
Of crauling care, that carkes my breast,
Till hope or death, shall breed my rest.
FINIS.
F. M.

29. A reply to M. Edwards MAY.
J Read a maying rhyme of late delighted much my ear,
It may delight as many more, as it shall read or hear.
To see how there is showed, how May is much of price,
And eake to May when that you may, even so is his advice.
It seems he meant to may himself, and so to use his skill,
For that the time did serve so well, in May to have his will.
His only May was ease of mind, so far as I can guess,
And that his may his mind did please, a man can judge no less.
And as himself did reap the fruits, of that his pleasant May,
He wills his freende the same to use, in time when as he may.
He is not for him self it seems, but wishes well to all,
For yt he would they should, take May in time when it does fall.
So use your May, you may, it can not hurtful be,
And May well used in time and place, may make you merry gle:
Modest maying mettest is, of this you may be suer,
A modest maying quietness, to Mayers does procure.
Who may and will not take, may wish he had so done,
Who may and it does take, may think he took too sone.
So join your May with wisdoms lore, and then you may be suer,
Who makes his May in other sort, his unrest may procuer.
Some May before May come, some May when May is past,
Some make their May to late, and some do May posthast.
Let wisdom rule I say your May, and thus I make anende,
And May, that when you list to May, a good may God you send.
FINIS.
M. S.

30. Having married a worthy Lady, and taken away by death, he complayneth his
mishap.
JN youth when I at large did lead, my life in lusty liberty,
When heavy thoughts no one did spread, to let my pleasant fantasy:
No fortune seemd, so hard could fall,
This freedom then, that might make thrall.
And twenty years I skarse had spent, when to make full my happy fate
Both treasures great were on me cast, with lands and titles of estate:
So as more blessed then I, stood than,
Eke as me thought was never man.
For of Dame Fortune who is he, could more desire by just request,
Then health, with wealth, and liberty, al which at once I this possessed:
But masking in this ioly joy,
A soden sight, prooud al a toy.
For passing on these merry days, with new device of pleasures great,
And now and then to view ye rays of beauties works with cunning feat:
In heavenly hewes, all which as one,
I often beheld, but bound to none.
And one day rolling thus my eyes, upon these blessed wights at ease,
Amongst ye rest one did I se, who straight my wa^dring lokes did sease:
And stayed them firm, but such a sight,
Of beauty yet saw never wight.
What shall I seek to praise it more, where tongs cannot well praise ye sa^e
But to be short to lovers lore, I straight my senses all did frame:
And were it wit, or were it chance,
I woonne the Garland in this dance.
And thus where I before had thought, no hap my fortu^e might encrese
A double blis this chance forth brought, so did my ladies love me please
Her faith so firm, and constant such,
As never heart, can praise too much,
But now with torments strange I taste, ye fickle stay of fortunes whele,
And where she raised from high to cast, with greater force of grefe to feel:
For from this hap of soden frown,
Of Princes face she threw me down,
And thus exchange now has it made, by liberty a thing most dear,
In hateful prison for to fade, where sundred from my loving fear,
My wealth and health, stands at like stay,
Obscurely to consume away.
And last when humain force was none, could part our love wherein we lived,
My ladies life alas is gone, most cruel death has it bereued:
Whose virtues, her, to God, has won,
And left me here, a man undone.
FINIS.
F. G.

31. A worthy ditie, song before the Queens Majesty at Bristowe.
MIstrust not troth, that truly means, for every ielous freke,
In stead of wrong, condemn not right, no hidden wrath to wreke:
Look on the light of faultlesse life, how bright her virtues shine,
And measure out her steps each one, by leuel and by line.
Deem each desert by upright guess, whereby your praise shall live,
If malice would be match with might, let hate no judgment give:
Enforce no fear with wresting wits, in quiet conscience breast.
Lend not your ears to busy tongues, which breeds much unrest.
In doubtful drifts wade not to far, it weries but the mind,
Seek not to search the secreat hearts, whose thoughts are hard to find
Avoid from you those hateful heads, that helps to heap mishap,
Be slow to hear the flatterers voice, that creeps in your lap.
Embrace their love that wills you good, and sport not at their praise,
Trust not too much unto your self, for feeble are your stays:
How can your seat be settled fast, or stand on steadfast ground,
so propped up with hollow hearts, whose surety is unsound.
Give faith to those that fear for love, and not that love for fear,
Regard not them that force compels, to please you every where:
All this well waid and borne away, shall stablish long your state,
Continually with perfect peace, in spite of pussing hate.
FINIS.
D. S.

32. An Epitaph upon the death of Sir Edward Saunders. Knight, Lord chief
Boron of the Exchequer.
YOU Muses wear your mourning weeds, strike on ye fatal Drome
Sound Triton out the trumpe of fame, in spite of Pareas dome.
Distill Parnassus pleasant drops, possess Pierides plase,
Apollo help with doleful tune, to wayle this woeful case.
Wring hard you hands, wail on you loss, lament the fate that fell,
With sobs and sighs to Saunders say, oh Saunders now farewell.
Whom Phoebus fed with Pallas pappe, as one of Sibils seed,
Lo here where death did rest his corpse, the vermin foul to feed.
Whom Impes of Jove with Necter sweet, long in Libethres noursht,
Behold how dreadful death him brought, to yt whence he came first.
Lycurgus he for learned laws, Rhadamanthus race that ran,
Another Nestor for advise, Zalucus fame that wanne.
A Damon dear unto his friend, in faith like Phocion found,
A Cato that could counsel give, to prince a subject sound.
Not Athens for their Solon sage, not Rome for Numa wail,
As we for Saunders death have cause, in fods of tears to sail.
Not Sparta card for Chilos death, ne proud Prienna pressed,
To weep for Bias as we wayle, for Saunders late possessed.
His learned paths his talentes rare, so now by death appears,
As he that Solomon sought to serve, in prime and youthful years,
His counsel sad, his rules, his laws, in country soil so wrought,
As though in Cuma he had benn, of sage Sibilla taught.
His virtuous life was such I say, as Virtue did embrace,
By Virtue taught in Virtues school, to grow in virtues race.
Might tender babes, might orphants weak, might widows rere yt cry,
The sound thereof should pearce the clouds, to skale ye empire sky.
To bid the gods to battle bend, and to dissend in sight,
Though ffarre unfit, and mates unmeet, with mortal men to fight.
Too late (alas) we wish his life, to soon deceived us Death.
Too little wit we have to seek, the dead again to breath.
What helpless is, must careless be, as Natures course does show,
For death shall reap what life has sown, by nature this we know.
Where is that ferce Achilles fled, where is king Turnus shroude,
What is be come of Priamus state, where is Periander proud:
Hector, Hanno, Hanibal, dead, Pompei, Pirrhus spild,
Scipio, Cirus, Caesar slain, and Alexander killed.
So long there Fortune fast did floe, and charged Fame to sound,
Till frowning Fortune foyld by fate, which fawning fortune found:
Shun Fortunes feats, shake fortune of to none is fortune sound,
Since none may say of Fortune so, I Fortune faithful found.
Behold where Fortune flowed so fast, and favored Saunders lure,
Till fickle Fortune false again did Saunders death procure.
Lo clothed could in cloddes of clay, in drossy dust remain,
By fate returned from whence he came, to his mothers womb again.
Who welnigh thirty years was Judge, before a Judge did fall,
And judged by that mighty Judge, which Judge shall judge us all.
The heavens may of right rejoice, and earth may it bewail,
Since heaven wan, and earth has lost, the guide and arc of veil.
There gain is much, our loss is great, there mirth our moan is such,
That they may laugh as cause do yield, and we may weep as much:
O happy he, unhappy we, his hap does aye increase,
Happy he, and hapless we, his hap shall never cease.
We live to dye, he dyed to live, we want, and he possessed,
We bide in bands, he bathes in bliss, the Gods above him blessed.
Being borne to live, he lived to dye, and dyed to God so plain,
That birth, that life, that death, do show, that he shall live again:
His youth to age, his age to death, his death to fame applied,
His fame to time, his time to God, thus Saunders lived and dyed.
O happy life, O happier death, O ten times happy he,
Whose hap it was, such hap to have, a Judge this age to be.
Oh joyful time, oh blessed soil, where Pallas rules with wit,
O noble state, O sacred seat, where Saba sage does sit.
Like Susan sound, like Sara sad, with Hesters mace in hand,
With Iudiths sword Bellona like, to rule this noble land.
I had my will, you have your wish, I laugh, rejoice you may,
I wan now much, you gain no less, to see this happy day.
Wherein I dyed, wherein you live, Oh treble happy cost,
Wherein I ioyed in glory great, wherein you triumpth most.
Kneel on your knees, knock hard your breasts, sound forth ye joyful drome
Clap loud your hands, sound Echo say, the golden world is come.
Rejoice you Judges may of right, your mirth may now be such,
As never erst you Judges had, in England mirth so much.
Here Cuma is, here Sibill reigns, on Delphos seat to sit,
Here she like Phoebus rules, that can Gordius knot vnknitte.
I lived to nature long enough, I lived to honor much,
I lived at wish, I died at will, to see my country such.
As neither needs it Numas laws, nor yet Apollos sweard,
For Mauger Mars, yet Mars shall be of this our Queen afeard.
O peerlesse pearl, O Diamond deer, O Queen of Queens farewell,
Your royal majesty God preserve in England long to dwell.
Farewell the Phaenix of the world, farwell my sovereign Queen,
Farwell most noble virtuous prince, Mineruas mate I ween.
No Iuel, Gemme, no Gold to give, no pearls from Pactolus lo,
No Persian Gaze, no Indian stones, no Tagus sands to show.
But faith and will to native soil a live and dead I find,
My heart my mind, my love I leave unto my prince behind.
Farwell you nobles of this land, farwell you Judges grave,
Farwell my fellows, friends and mates, your Queen I say God save.
What rise in time, in time does, fall, what flows in time does ebb,
What lives in time, in time shall dye, and yield to Parcas web.
The sun to darkness shall be turned, the stars from skies shall fall.
The Moon to blood, the world with fire shall be consumed all.
As smoke or vapor vanish straight, as bubbles rise and fall.
As clouds do pass or shadow shifts we live, we dye so all.
Our pomp our pride, our triump most, our glory great herein,
Like shattering shadow pass away, as though none such had bin.
Earth, water, air, and fire, as they were erst before,
A lump confused, and Chaos called, so shall they once be more,
And all to earth, that came from earth, and to the grave descend,
For earth on earth, to earth shall go, and earth shall be the end.
As Christ ascended up in clouds, so Christ in clouds shall come,
To judge both good and bad on earth, at dreadful day of dome.
From whence our flesh shall rise again, even from the drossy dust,
And so shall pass I hope, unto the mansion of the just.
FINIS.
Lodowick LLoyd.

33. His good name being blemished, he bewayleth.
FRamd in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery.
I stayles stand tab i would the shocke of shame and infamy.
My life through lingering long is lodge, in lare of loathsome ways.
My death delayed to keep from life, the harm of hapless days:
My sprites, my heart, my wit and force, in deep destresse are dround,
The only loss of my good name, is of these greefes the ground.
And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice, and tongue are weak:
To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare, and speak:
Such pearsing plaintes, as answer might, or would my woeful case,
Help crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face:
Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air be found,
To wail with me this loss of mine, as of these greefes the ground.
Help gods, help saints, help sprits and powers, yt in ye heaven do dwell,
Help ye the are to wail aye wont, ye howling hounds of hell:
Help man, help beasts, help birds, and worms, that on ye earth does toil
Help fish, help foul, that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil.
Help echo that in air does flee, shril voices to resound,
To wail this loss of my good name, as of these greefes the ground.
FINIS.
E. O.

34. Of Fortunes power.
POlicrates whose passing hap, causd him to lose his fate,
A golden ring cast in the seas to change his constant state,
And in a fish yet at his bourd, the same he after found,
Thus Fortune lo, to whom she takes, for bounty does abound.
The myzers unto might she mounts, a common case we see,
And mighty to great misery, she sets in low degree:
Whom she to day does rear on hie, upon her whirling wheel,
To morrow next she dingeth down, and casts at her heel.
No measure has she in her gifts, she does reward each sort.
The wise that counsel have, no more, then fools that makes sport.
She uses never partial hands, for to offend or please,
Give me good Fortune al men says, and throw me in the seas.
It is no fault or worthiness, that makes men fall or rise,
I rather be borne Fortunate, then to be very wise.
The blindest man right soon, that by good Fortune guided is,
To whom that pleasant Fortune pipes, can never dance amiss.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

36. Though Triumpth after bloody wars, the greates brags do bear.
Yet Triumph of a conquered mind, the crown of fame shall wear.

WHo so does mark the careless life, of these unhappy days,
And sees what small and slender hold, the state of virtue stays,
He finds, that this accursed trade, proceeds of this ill,
That men be given too much to yield, to their untamed will,
In lack of taming witless will, the poor we often see,
Enuies the rich, because that he, his equal cannot be:
The rich aduauncd to might by wealth, from wrong does not refrain,
But will oppresses weaker sort, to heap excessive gain.
If Fortune were so blind to give to one man what he will,
A world would not suffice the same, if he might have his fill:
We wish, we search, we strive for all, and have no more therein,
Then has the slave, when death does come, though Cresus welsh he win.
In getting much, we get but care, such brittle wealth to keep,
The rich within his walls of stone, does never soundly sleep:
When poor in weak and slender house, do fear no loss of wealth,
And have no further care but this, to keep themselves in health.
Affection may not hide the sword of sway in judgment seat,
Least partial favor execute, the law in causes great:
But if the mind in constant state, affection quite do leave,
The higher state shall have their rights, the poor no wrong receive.
It is accounted greater praise to Caesers lofty state,
Against his vanquist foes, in wars to bridle wrekeful hate:
Then when to Rome he had subdued the people long unknown,
Whereby as far as land was found, the same abroad was blown.
If honor can self will refuse, and justice be upright.
And private state desires but that, which good appears in sight:
Then virtue shall with sovereign show, to every eye reveal,
A heavenly life, a wealeful state, a happy common weal.
Let virtue then the triumph win, and govern all your deeds,
Your yielding to her sober heastes, immortal glory breeds:
She shall vpreare your worthy name, shining into the skies,
Her beams shall blaze in grave obscure, where shrined carcass lies.
FINIS.
M. Edwards.

37. Of perfect wisdom.
WHo so will be accounted wise, and truly claim the same,
By joining virtue to his deeds, he must atchieue the same:
But few there be, that seek thereby true wisdom to attain,
O God so rule our hearts therefore, such fondness to refrain.
The wisdom which we most esteem, in this thing does consist,
With glorious talk to show in words, our wisdom when we list.
Yet not in talk, but seemly deeds, our wisdom we should plase,
To speak so fair, and do but ill, does wisdom quite disgrace,
To bargain well, and shun the loss, a wisdom counted is,
And thereby through the greedy coin, no hope of grace to mis:
To seek by honor to advance his name to brittle praise,
Is wisdom, which we daily see, increases in our days.
But heavenly wisdom sower seems to hard for them to win,
And weary of the suit they seem, when they do once begin:
It teaches us to frame our life, while vital breath we have,
When it dissolueth earthly mass, the soul from death to save.
By fear of God to rule our steps, from sliding into vice,
A wisdom is, which we neglect, although of greater price:
A point of wisdom also this, we commonly esteem,
That every man should be in deed, that he desires to seem.
To bridle that desire of gain, which forces us to ill,
Our hauty stomachs Lord repress, to tame presuming will:
This is the wisdom that we should, above each thing desire,
O heavenly God from sacred throne, that grace in us inspire.
And print in our repugnant hearts, the rules of wisdom true,
That all our deeds in worldly life, may like thereof ensue:
Thou only art the living spring, from whom this wisdom flows,
O wash therewith our sinful hearts, from vice that therein grows.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes:

38. A freendly admonition.
YE stately wightes, that live in quiet rest,
Through worldly wealth, which God has given you.
Lament with tears and sighs from doleful breast:
The shame and power that vice obtains now.
Behold how God does daily profer grace,
Yet we disdain repentance to embrace.
The suddes of sin do soke into the mind,
And cancred vice does virtue quite expel:
No change to good alas can resting find,
Our wicked hearts so stoutly do rebel.
Not one there is that hastes to amend,
Though God from heaven his daily threats down send.
We are so slow to change our blameful life,
We are so pressed to snach aluring vice:
Such greedy hearts on every side be rife,
So few that guide their will by counsel wise,
To let our tears lament the wretched case,
And call to God for undeserved grace.
You worldy wightes, that have your fancies fixed,
On slipper joy of terreine pleasure here:
Let some remorse in all your deeds be mixed,
Whiles you have time let some redress appear.
Of sudden death the hour you shall not know,
And look for Death although he seems slow.
Oh be no judge in other men's offense,
But purge thy self and seek to make thee free,
Let every one apply his diligence,
A change to good within him self to see.
O God direct our feet in such a stay,
From cancred vice to shun the hateful way.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

39. Sundry men sundry affectes.
JN every wight some sundry sort of pleasure I do find,
Which after travail he does seek to ease his toyling minn.
Diana with her trayning chase, of hunting had delight,
Against the fearful Dear, she could direct her shot aright.
The lofty years in every age, does still embrace the same,
The sport is good, if virtue do assist the cheereful game.
Minerua in her chattering arms her courage does advance,
In trial of the bloody wars, she gives luckie chance.
For sauegard men embrace the same, which do so needful seem
That noble hearts their chief delights in use thereof esteem,
In warlike games to ride or try the force of arms they use,
And base the man we do account that does the same refuse.
The silver sound of musickes cords, does please Apollos wit,
A science which the heavens advance, where it deserves to sit,
A pleasure apt for every wight, celeefe to careful mind,
For woe redress, for care a salve, for sadness help we find.
The sovereign praise of Music still, does cause the Poets feign.
That whirling Spheres, and eake the heavens do hermonie retain.
I hard, that these three powers, at variance lateli fell,
Whiles each did praise his own delight, the other to excel.
Then Fame, as an indifferent judge, to end the case they call,
The praise pronounced by her to them, indifferently does fall.
Diana health and strength maintain, Minerua force does tame,
And Music gives a sweet delight, to further others game.
These three delights to hawtie minds the worthiest are esteemed,
If virtue be annexed to them, they rightly be so deemed.
With joy they do revive the wit with sorrow often oppressed,
And never suffer solemn grief to long in mind to rest.
Be wise in mirth, and seek delight, the same do not abuse,
In honest mirth a happy joy we ought not to refuse.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

40. Of a Friend and a Flatterer.
A Trusty friend is rare to find, a fawning foe may sone be got:
A faithful friend bear still in mind, but fawning foe regard thou not
A faithful friend no cloak does crave, to color knavery withal:
But Sicophant a Goun must have, to bear a port what ere befall.
A nose to smell out every feast, a brazen face to set it out:
A shamles child or homly geast, whose life does like to range about.
A fauning foe while wealth does last, a thief to rob and spoil his friend:
As strong as oak til wealth does last, but rotten stick does prove in the end
Look first, then leap, beware the mire:
Burnt Child is warnd to dread the fire.
Take heed my friend, remember this.
Short horse (they say) soon curried is.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

41. Of sufferaunce comes ease.
TO seem for to revenge each wrong in hasty wise,
By proof of guiltless men, it has not been the guise.
In slanders loathsome brute, where they condemned be,
With ragelesse mood they suffer wrong, where truth shall try them free.
These are the pacient pagnes, that pass within the breast,
Of those, that feel their cause by mine, where wrong has right oppressed.
I know how by suspect, I have been iudgd awry,
And granted gilty in the thing, that clearly I deny.
My faith may me defend, if I might loved be,
God judge me so, as from the guilt I know me to be free.
I wrote but for my self, the grief was all mine own,
As, who would prove extremity, by proof it might be known.
Yet are there such, that say they can my meaning deem,
Without respect of this old troth, things prove not as they seem.
Whereby it may befall, in judgment to be quick,
To make them selves suspect therewith, that needed not to kick.
Yet in resisting wrong, I would not have it thought,
I do amiss, as though I knew by whom it might be wrought.
If any such there be, that herewithall be vexed,
It were their virtue to beware, and deem me better next.
L. Vaux.

43. All things are Vain:
ALthough the purple morning, bragges in brightness of the sun,
As though he had of chased night, a glorious conquest won:
The time by day, gives place again to force of drowsy night,
And every creature is constraind to change his lusty plight.
Of pleasures all, that here we taste:
We feel the contrary at last.
In spring, though pleasant Zephirus, has fruteful earth inspired,
And nature has each bush, each branch, with blossoms brave attired:
Yet fruits and flowers, as buds and blomes full quickly withered be,
When stormy winter comes to kill, the summers iolitie.
By time are got, by time are lost,
All things wherein we pleasure most.
Although the Seas so calmely glide, as dangers none appear,
And dout of storms, in sky is none, king Phoebus shines so clear:
Yet when the boistrous winds break out, and raging waves do swel,
The seely bark now heaues to heaven, now sinckes again to hell.
Thus change in every thing we see,
And nothing constant seems to be.
Who flows most in worldly wealth of wealth is most unsure,
And he that cheefely tastes of joy, does sometime woe endure:
Who vaunteth most of numbered friends, forgo them al he must,
The fairest flesh and liuelest blood, is turned at length to dust.
Experience gives a certain ground,
That certain here, is nothing found.
Then trust to that which aye remains, the bliss of heavens above,
Which Time, nor Fate, nor Wind, nor Storm, is able to remove,
Trust to that sure celestial rock, that restes in glorious throne,
That has been, is, and must be still, our anchor hold alone.
The world is but a vanity,
In heaven seek we our surety.
FINIS.
F. K.

44. A Virtuous Gentlewoman in the praise of her love.
J Am a Virgin fair and free, and freely do rejoice,
I sweetly warble sugared notes, from silver voice:
For which delightful joys, yet thank I courtesy love,
By whose almighty power, such sweet delights I prove.
I walk the pleasant fields, adornd with lively green,
And view the fragrant flowers, most lovely to be seen:
The purple Columbine, the Couslippe and the Lilly,
The Violet sweet, the Daizie and Daffadillie.
The Wodbines on the hedge, the red Rose and the white,
And each fine flowers else, that renders sweet delight:
Among the which I choose, al those of seemeliest grace,
In thought, resembling them to my dear lovers face.
His lovely face I mean, whose golden flouring gifts,
His ever living Fame, to loftye sky vpliftes:
Whom loving me I love, only for virtues sake,
When virtuously to love, al only care I take.
Of al which fresh fair flowers, that flower that does appear,
In my conceit most like to him I hold so dear:
I gather it, I kiss it, and eake devise with it,
Such kind of lovely speech, as is for lovers fit.
And then of all my flowers, I make a garlond fine,
With which my golden wire hears, together I do twine:
And set it on my head, so taking that delight,
That I would take, had I my lover still in sight.
For as in goodly flowers, mine eyes great pleasure find,
So are my lovers gifts most pleasant to my mind:
Upon which virtuous gifts, I make more sweet repast,
Then they that for love sportes, the sweetest joys do taste.
FINIS.
F. K.

45. Oppressed with sorrow he wishes death.
JF Fortune may enforce, the careful heart to cry
And griping grief constrain, the wounded wight lament:
Who then alas to mourn, has greater cause then I,
Against whose hard mishap, both Heaven and earth is bent.
For whom no help remains, for whom no hope is left,
From whom all happy happ is fled, and pleasure quite bereft.
Whose life naught can prolong, whose health, naught can procure.
Whose passed proof of pleasant joy,
Mischaunce has changed to greefes anoy:
And lo, whose hope of better day,
Is over whelmd with long delay.
Oh hard mishap.
Each thing I plainly see, whose virtues may avail,
To ease the pinching pain, which gripes the groaning wight:
By Phisicks sacred skill, whose rule does seldom fail,
Through labors long inspect, is plainly brought to light.
I know, there is no fruit, no leaf, no root, no rind,
No herb, no plant, no juice, no gum, no metal deeply mind:
No Pearl, no precious stone, ne Ieme of rare effect,
Whose virtues, learned Gallens books, at large do not detect.
Yet al their force can not appease,
The furious fittes of my disease:
Nor any drugge of phisickes art,
Can ease the grief that gripes my heart.
Oh strange disease.
I hear the wise affirm, that Nature has in store,
A thousand secret salues, which Wisdom has out found:
To cool the scorching heat of every smarting sore,
And heals deepest scarce, though grievous be the wound.
The ancient proverb says, that none so festred grief,
Does grow, for which the gods them selves, have not ordained relief.
But I by proof do know, such proverbs to be vain,
And think that nature never knew the plague that I sustain.
And so not knowing my distress,
Has left my grief remediless:
For why, the heavens for me prepare,
To live in thought, and dye in care.
Oh lasting pain.
By change of air I see, by hant of healthful soil,
By diet duly kept, gross humors are expeld:
I know that greefes of mind, and inwards hearts turmoile,
By faithful friends advise, in time may be repeld.
Yet all this naught auailes, to kill that me anoyes,
I mean to stop these floods of care that ouerflow my joys.
No none exchange of place, can change my lucklesse lot,
Like one I live, and so must dye, whom Fortune has forgot.
No counsel can prevail with me,
Nor sage advise with grief agree:
For he that feels the panges of hell,
Can never hope in heaven to dwell.
Oh deep despair.
What lives on earth but I, whose travail reapes no gain,
The wearied Horse and Ox, in stal and stable rest:
The Ante with summers toil bears out the winters paigne,
The foul that flies al day, at night returns to rest.
The Ploughmans weary work, amid the winters mire,
Rewarded is with summers gain, which yeeldes him double hire:
The silly laboring soul, which drudges from day to day,
At night his wages truly paid, contented goth his way.
And coming home, his drowsy head,
He cowcheth close in homely bed:
Wherein no sooner down he lies,
But sleep has straight possessed his eyes,
Oh happy man.
The Soldier biding long the brunt of mortal wars,
Where life is never free, from dint of deadly foil:
At last comes joyful home, though mangled all with scarres,
Where frankly, void of fear, he spends the gotten spoil.
The Pirate lying long, amid the fooming floods,
With every flaw in hazard is to loose both life and goods:
At length finds view of land, where wished Port he spies,
Which once obtained, among his mates, he parts the gotten prise,
Thus every man, for travail past,
Does reap a just reward at last:
But I alone, whose troubled mind,
In seeking rest, unrest does find.
Oh lucklesse lotte.
Oh cursed caitife wretch, whose heavy hard mishappe,
Does wish ten thousand times, that thou had not ben borne:
Since fate has thee condemned, to live in sorrows lap,
Where waylings waste thy life, of all redress forlorn.
What shall thy grief appease? who shall thy torment stay?
Will thou thy self, with murdering hands, enforce thy owndecay?
No, far be thou from me, my self to stop my breath,
The gods forbid, whom I beseech, to work my joys by death.
For lingering length of loathsome life,
Does stir in me such mortal strife:
That whiles for life and death I cry,
In death I live, and living dye.
Oh froward fate.
Lo here my hard mishap, lo here my strange disease,
Lo here my deep despair, lo here my lasting pain:
Lo here my froward fate, which nothing can appease,
Lo here how others toil, rewarded is with gain.
While lucklesse, lo I live, in loss of labors due,
Compeld by proof of torment strong, my endless grief to rue:
In which, since needs I must, consume both youth and age,
If old I live, and that my care no comfort can assuage.
Henceforth I banishe from my breast,
All frustrate hope of future rest,
And trthlesse trust to times reward,
With all respects of joys regard.
Here I forswear.
47. Where reason makes request, there wisdom ought supply
With freendly answer pressed, to grant or else deny.

I Sigh, why so? for sorrow of her smart.
I morn, wherefore? or grief that she complaynes:
I pity, what? her oppressed heart,
I dread what harm? the danger she sustaines.
I grieve whereat? at her oppressing pains.
I feel, what force the fittes of her disease,
Whose harm does me and her, alike displease.
I hope, what hap? her happy healthes retire,
I wish, what wealth? no wealth, nor worldly store:
But crave, what craft? by cunning to aspire,
Some skill, whereto? to salve her sickly sore.
What then? why then would I her health restore,
Whose harm me hurtes, how so? so works my will,
To wish my self and her, like good and ill.
What moves thy mind, whereto? to such desire,
Ne force, ne favor, what then? free fancies choice:
Art thou to chose? my charter to require,
Each Ladies love is fred by custumes voice,
Yet are there grauntes, the evidence of their choice.
What then, our freedom is at large in choosing,
As Women's wills is froward in refusing.
Wotes she thy will? she knows what I protest,
Daynde she thy suit? she daungerd not my talk:
Gave she consent? she granted my request,
What did thou crave? the root, the fruit, the stalk,
I asked them all, what gave she, Cheese, or chalk?
That taste must try, what taste? I mean the proof,
Of friends, whose wills withhold there bow aloof.
Meanst thou good faith? what else, hopest thou to speed?
Why not, O fool untaught in carpel trade,
Know not what proofs from such delays proceed,
Will thou like headless Cock be caught in glade?
Art thou like ass, too apt for burden made?
Fie, fie, will thou for saint adore the shrine?
And woo her friend, ear she be wholly thine?
Who drewes this drift? moved she, or thou this match?
It Was I: oh fool unware of women's wyles,
Long may thou wait, like hungry hounde at hatch,
She crafty Fox, the seely Goose beguiles.
Thy suit is shaped so fit for long delay,
That she at will may chek, from yea to nay.
But in good soothe, tell me her friends intent:
Best learn it first, their purpose I not know,
Why then thy will to worse and worse is bent,
Do thou delight, the vnkindled cole to blow?
Or childlike love, in anckred bote to row,
What mean these terms? who since thy suit is such,
Know of or on, or thou afect too much.
No haste but good, why no, the mean is best,
Admit she love, mislike in lingering grows:
Suppose she is caught, then Woodcocke on thy crest,
Til end approues, what skorneful seeds she sowes.
In loytring love, such daugers ebbes and flows,
What help herein? why wake in dangerous watch,
That too, nor fro, may make thee mar the match:
Is that the way to end my weary work?
By quick dispatch, to lesson long turmoyle,
Well well, though loss in lingering wontes to lurk,
And I a fool, most fit to take the foil:
Yet proof from promise, never shall recoyle.
My words with deeds, and deeds with words shall wend,
Til she or hers, gainsay that I intend.
Art thou so fond? not fond, but firmly fast,
Why fool her friends wot how thy will is bent:
Yet thou like doult, whose wit and sense is past,
Sest not what frumpes, do follow thy intent.
Ne know, how love in lewe of skorne is lent,
Adewe, for sightes such folly should prevent.
Well well, their skoffes with scorns might be repayd,
If my requests were fully yead or nayd,
Well, well, let these with wisdoms payse be wayd,
And in your chest of cheifest secreates laid.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
48. What joy to a contented mind.
THe faith that fayles, must needs bethought untrue,
The friend that faines, who holds not unjust,
Who likes that love, that changes still for new:
Who hopes for truth, where troth is void of trust,
No faith, no friend, no love, no troth so sure,
But rather fails then steadfastly endure.
What head so stayed? that alters not intent,
What thought so sure? that steadfast does remain,
What wit so wise? that never needs repent:
What tongue so true? but sometime wonts to feign,
What foot so firm? that never treades awrie.
What sooner dimde? then sight of clearest eye.
What heart so fixed? but sone enclines to change,
What mood so mild? that never moved debate:
What faith so strong, but lightly likes to range,
What love so true? that never lernd to hate.
What life so pure? that lasts, without offense,
What worldly mind? but moves with ill pretense.
What knot so fast? that may not be untied,
What seal so sure? but fraud or force shall break:
What prop of stay? but one time shrinkes aside,
What ship so stauche? that never had a leke.
What grant so large? that no exception makes,
What hoped help, but friend at need forsakes.
What seat so high? but low to ground may fall,
What hap so good? that never found mislike:
What state so sure? but subject is to thrall.
What force preuailes? where Fortune list to strik.
What wealth so much? but time may turn to want,
What store so great? but wasting makes skant.
What profits hope in depth of dangers thrall.
What ruste in time, but waxes worse and worse:
What helps good heart, if Fortune froun withal,
What blessing thriues, against heavenly helples curse.
What winnes desire to get and can not gain,
What botes to wish and never to obtain.
FINIS.
My luck is loss
47. Donec eris Felix multos numerabis amicos.
Nullus ad a missus ibit amicus opes.

EVen as the Raven, the Crow, and greedy Kite,
Do swarming flock, where carren corpse does fall:
And tiring tear with beak and talentes might,
Both skin and flesh to gorge their guts withal.
And never cease, but gather more to more,
Do all to pull the carkase to and froe,
Till bared bones at last they leave behind,
And seek elsewhere some fatter food to find.
Even so I see, where wealth does wax at will,
And Gold does grow to heaps of great increase:
There friends resort, and profering freendship still,
Full thick they throng, with never ceasing prease.
And slilie make a show of true intent,
When naught but guile, and inward hate is meant:
For when mischance shall change such wealth to want,
They pack them thence to place of richer haunt.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
49. Amantium irae amoris redinti graciae est.
IN going to my naked bed as one that would have slept,
I hard a wife sing to her child, that long before had wept:
She sighed sore and sang full sweet, to bring the babe to rest,
That would not cease but cried still, in sucking at her breast.
She was full weary of her watch, and grieved with her child,
She rocked it and rated it, til that on her it smilde:
Then did she say now have I found, this proverb true to prove,
The falling out of faithful friends, renewing is of love.
Then took I paper, pen and ynke, this proverb for to write,
In regester for to remain, of such a worthy wight:
As she proceeded thus in song unto her little bratt,
Much matter uttered she of weight, in place whereas sh^e satt.
And proved plain, there was no beast, nor creature bearing life,
Could well be known to live in love, without discord and strife:
Then kissed she her little babe, and swear by God above,
The falling out of faithful friends, renewing is of love,
She said that neither king ne prince, ne lord could live aright,
Until their puissaunce the did prove their manhod and their might.
When manhood shall be matched so, that fear can take no place,
Then weary works make warriors, each other to embrace,
And leaued their forse that failed them, which did consume the rout,
That might before have lived their time, and nature out:
Then did she sing as one that thought, no man could her reprove,
The falling out of faith full friends, renewing is of love.
She said she saw no fish ne foul, nor beast within her haunt,
That met a stranger in their kind, but could give it a taunt:
Since flesh might not endure, but rest must wrath succeed,
And forse the fight to fall to play, in pasture where they feed,
So noble nature can well end, the work she has begone,
And bridle well that will not cease, her tragedy in some:
Thus in song she often reherst, as did her well behoue,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renewing of love.
I marvel much pardy quoth she, for to behold the route,
To see man, woman, boy and beast, to toss the world about:
Some knele, some crouch, some beck, some chek, and some can smothly smile
And some embrace others in arm, and there think many a wile.
Some stand aloufe at cap and knee, some humble and some stout,
Yet are they never friends in deed, until they once fall out:
Thus ended she her song, and said before she did remove,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renewing of love.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

43. Think to dye.
THe life is long, which lothsomly does last,
The doleful days draw slowly to their date:
The present panges, and painful plages sorepast,
Yeldes grefe aye grene, to stablish this estate.
So that I feel in this great storm and strife,
That death is sweet, that shortneth such a life.
And by the stroke of this strange overthrow,
All which conflict in thraldom I was thrust:
The Lord he praised, I am well taught to know,
From whence man came, and eke whereto he must.
And by the way, upon how feeble force.
His term does stand, till death does end his course.
The pleasant years that seems so sweetly run,
The merry days to end, so fast that flete:
The joyful wightes, of which days draws so sone,
The happy hours which (...) do miss then mete.
Do all consume as snow against the Sun,
And death makes end of all that life begun.
Since death shall dure till all the world be wast,
What means man to dread death then so sore?
As man might make, that life should always last,
Without regard the Lord has led before.
The dance of death, which all must run on row,
The hour wherein only himself does know.
If man would mind, what burdeins life does bring,
What grievous crimes to God he does commit:
What plagues, what peril thereby spring,
With no sure hour in all his days to sit.
He would sure think, as with great cause I do,
The day of death is happier of the two.
Death is the door whereby we draw to joy,
Life is the lake that drowneth all in pain:
Death is so dole it seaseth all away,
Life is so leude, that al it yelds is vain.
And as by life, in bondage man is brought,
Even so by death is freedom likewise wrought.
Wherefore with Paul let all men wish and pray,
To be disolued of this foul fleshly mass:
Or at the least be armd against the day,
That they be found good soldiers pressed to pass.
From life to death, from death to life again,
And such a life as ever shall remain.
FINIS.
D. S.

51. If thou desire to live in quiet rest,
give care and se but say the best.

If thou: delight, in quietness of life,
Desire: to shoun, from bralls, debate and strife,
To live: in love with god, with friend and foe,
In rest: shall sleep: when others cannot so.
Give ear: to all, yet do not all believe,
And see: the end, and then do sentence ge eve:
But say: for truth of happy lives assind,
The best: has he that quiet is in mind.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

52. Being forsaken of his friend he complains.
WHy should I longer long to live,
In this desease of fantasy,
Sins fortune does not cease to give,
Things to my mind most contrary.
And at my joys does lowre and frown,
Till she has turned them vpsidowne,
A freende I had to me most dear,
And of long time faithful and just:
There was no one, my heart so near,
Nor one in whom I had more trust.
Whom now of late without cause why,
Fortune has made my enemy.
The grass me thinks should grow in sky,
The stars, unto the earth cleave fast:
The water stream should pass awrie,
The winds should leave their strength of blast.
The Sun and Moon by one assent,
Should both forsake the firmament.
The fish in air should fly with finne,
The fowls in flood, should bring forth fry:
All things methinkes should erst begin,
To take their course unnaturally.
Before my friend should alter so,
Without a cause to be my foe:
But such is Fortunes hate I say,
Such is his will on me to wreake:
Such spite he has at me always,
And ceasseth not my heart to break.
With such despite of cruelty,
Wherefore then longer live should I.
FINIS.
E. S.

53. Prudens. The history of Damacles, and Dionise.
WHo so is set in princely throne, and craves rule to bear,
Is still beset on every side, with peril and with fear.
High trees by stormy winds are shakt, and rent up from the ground,
And flashy flackes of lightning flames on turrets do rebound.
When little shrubs in sauetie lurk, in covert all allow,
And freshly flourish in their kind, what ever wind do blow.
The cruel king of Scisili: who searing Barbars hands.
Was wont to sings his beard himself, with cole and fire brands.
Has taught us this, the proof whereof, full plainly we may see,
Was never thing more lively touched, to show it so to be.
This king did seem to Damacles, to be the happiest wight,
Because he thought none like to him, in power or in might.
Who did alone so far excel the rest in his degree,
As does the Sun in brightness clear, the darkest star we see.
Will thou (then said this cruel king) prove this my present state,
Possess thou shall this seat of mine, and so be fortunate.
Full gladly then this Damacles, this proferd honor took,
And shooting at a princely life, his quiet rest forsook.
In honors seat then was he plast, according to his will,
Forthwith a banquet was prepared, that he might feast his fill.
Nothing did want wherein it was thought, that he could take delight,
To feed his eye, to fill his mouth, or please the appetite.
Such store of plate, I think in Greece, there scarsly was so much,
His seruitours did angels seem, their passing shape was such.
No daynty dish but there it was, and thereof was such store,
That through out Greece so princly cheer, was never seen before.
Thus while in pomp and pleasures seat, this Damacles was plast,
And did begin with gladsome heart, each dainty dish to taste.
At length by chance cast up his eyes, and began the house to vewe,
And saw a sight that him enforst, his princely state to rewe.
A sword forsooth with downward point, that had no stronger thread,
Then one horse here that peised it, direct upon his head.
Wherewith he was so sore amasde, and shoke in every part,
As though the sword that hong above, had stroke him to the heart.
Then all their pleasures took their leave, and sorrow came in place,
His heavy heart the tears declard, that trickled down his face.
And then forthwith with sobbing voice, besought the king of grace,
That he would license him with speed, to depart out of that place.
And said that he full long enough, had tried now with fear,
What it is to be a happy man, and princely rule to bear.
This deed of thine oh Dionise, deserves immortal fame,
This deed shall always live with praise, though thou did live with shame
Whereby both kings be put in mind, their dangers to be great,
And subjects be forbid to clime, high steps of honors seat.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

48. Fortitude. A young man of Egypt, and Valerian.
Each one deserves great praise to have, but yet not like I think,
Both he that can sustain the yoke of pains, and does not shrink.
And he whom Cupids covert craft can nothing move at all,
Into the hard and tangled knottes of Venus snares to fall.
Besturre you then who so delights in virtues race to run,
The flying boy with bow ibent, by strength to over come.
As one did once when he was young, and in his tender days,
Whose stout and noble deed of his, has got immortal praise.
The wicked Romans did pursue the sely Christians than,
What time Valerian Emperor was a wicked cruel man.
Who spared not with bloody draughtes, to quench his own desire,
Dispatching all that stuck to Christ with hot consuming fire.
At length a man of tender years was brought before his sight,
Such one as Nature seemed to make a witness of her migh.
For every part so well was set, that nothing was depraved,
So that the cruel king himself, would gladly him have saved.
So loath he was to see a work, so rare of Natures power,
So finely built so suddenly destroyed within an hour.
Then means he sought to overcome, or win him at the lest,
To slip from Christ whom he before had earnestly professed.
A bed preparde, so finely dect, such diverse pleasant smells,
That well it might appear a place, where pleasure only dwells,
By him he laid a naked wench, a Venus darling sure,
With sugared speech and lovely toys, that might his mind allure.
Such wanton lewres as these he thought, might easly him entise,
Which things he knew with lusty youth, had always ben in prise.
Such ways I think the Gods themselves, could have invented none,
For flattering Venus ouercomes the senses every chone,
And he himself was even at point, to Venus to consent,
Had not his stout and manly mind resisted his intent.
When he perceived his flesh to yield to pleasures wanton toys,
And was by flight almost provoked, to taste of Venus joys.
More cruel to himself then those, that glad would him undo,
With bloody toth, his tender tongue, bote quite and clean in two.
Thus was the pain so passing great of this his bloody bite,
That all the fire and carnal lust, was quenched every whitt.
Do ill and all thy pleasures then full sone will pass away,
But yet the shame of those thy deeds, will neuermore decaie.
Do well and though thy pains be great, yet sone each one will cease,
But yet, the praise of those thy deeds will evermore increase.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

58. Justice. Zaleuch and his Son.
LEt rulers make most perfect laws, to rule both great and small
If they them selves obey them not, it boteth not at all.
As laws be naught but rulers dome, continyng egall might,
So rulers should be speaking Laws, to rule by line of right.
Zaleuch the Prince of Locrine once, appoincted by decree,
Each Lecherer should be punished, with loss of either eye.
His son by chance offended first, which when his father saw,
Lord God how earnest then was he, to execute the Law.
Then ran the people all by flocks, to him with weepyng eyes,
Not one among the route there was, but pardon, pardon cries.
By whose outcries and earnest suit, his son in hope did stand,
That he thereby should then obtain, some pardon at his hand.
But all in vain, for he is found to be the man he was,
And makes haste so much the more, to have the Law to pass.
The people yet renewed their suit, in hope of some relief,
Whose faces all besprent with tears, did testify their grief.
And cried all for pities sake, yield now to our request,
If all you will not clean remit, yet ease the pain at least.
Then somewhat was the father moved, with all the peoples voice,
And every man did give a shoot, to show they did rejoice.
Well then quod he, it shall be thus, the Law shall be fulfilde,
And yet my son shall favor have, according as you wild.
One eye of his shall be pulde out, thus has his lewdness got,
And likewise so shall one of mine, though I deserve it not.
This word no sooner was pronounced, but strait the deed was done,
Two eyes, no mo were left, between the father and the son.
Say now who can, and on my faith Apollo he shall be,
Was he more gentle father lo? or iuster Judge trow ye.
This man would not his Laws belike, the webbs the Spiders weue,
Wherein they lurk when they intend, the simple to deceive.
Wherewith small flies full sone be caught, and tangled ere they wiste,
When great ones fly and escape away, and break them as they list.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

59. Temperaunce. Spurina and the Roman Ladies.
IF nature bear thee so great Love, that she in thee have beauty plast
Full hard it is as we do prove, to keep the body clean and chaste:
Twixt comeliness and chastity,
A deadly strife is thought to be.
For beauty which some men suppose, to be as tware a golden ill,
Provoke strief and many foes, that seek on her to work her will:
Assaults to Tounes if many make,
No Town so strong but may be take.
And this Spurina witness can, who did for beauty bear the bell,
So clean a wight so comely made, no dame in Rome but loved well
Not one could cool her hot desire,
So burning was the flame of fire.
Like as when bait cast in the flood, forthwt does cause the fishes come
Tha^ pleasauntly before did play, now presently to death to run:
For when they see the bait to fall,
Straight way they swallowe hook and all.
So when Spurina they did see, to him they flocked out of hand,
She happest dame was thought to be, that in his favor most did stand
Not knowing under sweet deceits,
How Venus hides her poisoned baits.
But when he saw them thus to range, who^ love had linked in his chain
This means he sought for to assuage, these Ladies of their grievous pain.
His shape intendyng to disgrace,
With many wounds he scorcht his face,
By which his deed it came to pass, that he that seemed an angel bright
Even now so clean disfigured was, that he became a loathsome wight.
And rather had he be foul and chaste,
Then fair, and filihie joys to taste.
What pen can write, or tongue express, the worthy praises of this deed,
Me think that God ca^ do no less, then grant him heaven for his meede
Who for to save him self upright,
Him self has first destroyed quite.
Finis
M. E.

60. A bunche of herbs and flowers.
IF that each flower, the Gods have framed, or shapt by sacred skill,
Where as I would (no wrong to wish) and mine to wear at will.
Or else each tree, with lusty top, would lend me leave to Love,
With spriggs displaied to spread my suit, a wailyng heart to prove.
Upon my helm sone should you see, my hedde advanced hie,
Some slipp for solace there to set, and wear the same would I.
Yet would I not for great delight, the Daises strange desire,
The Lilly would not like my lust, nor Rose would I require.
The Marigolde might grow for me, Rosemarie well might rest,
The Fenell to, that is more fit, for some unfriendly geste.
Nor Cowslopps would I crave at all, sometimes they seem to coye,
Some ioly youth the Gelliflower, estemeth for his joy.
The Lauender sometimes alofte, alures the lookers eyes,
The Paunsie shall not have the praise, where I may give the prise.
And thus no flower my fancy feeds, or likes so my lust,
As that I may subject my self, to toys of tickle trust.
For flowers though they be fair and fresh, of sent excellyng sweet,
Yet grow they on the ground below, we tread them with our feet.
And shall I then go stoop to such? or else go seek to those,
Shall flowers enforce me once to faune, for fear of friends or foze.
Yet rather yield I to the right, as reason has assinde,
Mine aucthour said there was no salve, in flowers for me to find.
And yet perhaps some Tree there is, to shroude me from the shower,
That with her arms may salve the soul, that yeldeth to her power.
Where I may find some pleasant shade, to salve me from the Sun
Each thing we see that reason has, unto the Trees do run.
Both men and beasts such fowls as flies, the treasures are the trees,
And for my part when branches fall, I wish no other fees.
But when that storms besett me round, such succor God me send.
That I may find a friendly Tree, that will me well defend.
No Tree there is which yelds no good, to some that does it seek:
And as they are of diverse kinds, their uses are unlike.
The Eve tree serves the Bowyers turn, the Ash the Coupers art,
The puissaunt Oak does make the post, the Pine some other part.
The Elm does help to hide the birds, in weary Winters night,
The Briers I guess are nothing worth, they serve but for despite.
The Willowe wished I far from hence, good will deserve no wrong,
The Sallowe well may serve their states, that sing so sad a song.
The Box and Beeche each for him self, above the rest does boste,
The Eglantine for pleasure often, is pricked upon the post,
The Hauthorne so is had in prise, the Baies do bear the bell,
And that these Baies did bring no bliss, I like it not so well.
As erst I do that semely Tree, by which those Baies I found,
And where withal vnwittyngly, I took so great a wound.
As if the Tree by which I lent, does lend me no relief,
There is no help but down I fall, so great is grown my grief.
And therefore at the last I crave, this favor for to find,
When every Tree that here is told, beginns to grow unkind.
The B. for beauty whom I boste, and shall above the rest,
That B. may take me to her trust, for B. does please me best.
It liks me well to walk the way, where B. does keep her bower,
And when it Raines to B. I run to save me from the shower.
This branch of B. which here I mean, to keep and chiefly crave,
At beck unto this B. I bow, to serve that beauty brave.
What shall I say the time does pass, the tale to tedious is,
Though loathe to leave, yet leave I must, and say no more but this.
I wish this B. I might embrace, when as the same I see,
A league for life then I require, between this B. and me.
And though unworthy, yet good will, does work the way herein
And B. has brought the same about, which beauty did begin.
Finis.
62. In commendation of Music.
WHere griping grief ye heart would wound, and dolfull du^pes ye mind oppress,
There Music with her silver sound, is wont with speed to give redress:
Of troubled mynds for every sore, sweet Music has a salve in store.
In joy it maks our mirth abound, in grief it chers our heavy sprits,
The careful head relief has found, by Musicks pleasant sweet delits:
Our senses, what should I say more, are subject unto Musicks lore.
The Gods by Music has their pray, the foul therein does joy,
For as the Romain Poets say, in seas whom Pirates would destroy,
A Dolphin saude from death most sharp, Arion plaiyng on his harp
Oh heavenly gift, yt turns the mind, like as the stern does rule ye ship,
Of music who^ the gods assignde to comfort man, whom cares would nip
Since you both man and beast do move, what wisema^ the^ will thee reprove.
FINIS.
63. A dialog between the auctour and his eye.
Auctour. MY eye why did thou light on that, which was not thine?
Why have thou with thy sight, thus slain an heart of mine?
O thou unhappy eye, would God thou had been blind,
When first thou did her spy, for whom this grief I find.

Eye. Why sir it is not I, that do deserve such blame,
Your fancy not your eye, is causer of the same:
For I am ready pressed as page that serves your ease,
To search what thing is best, that might your fancy please.

Aucthour. I sent thee forth to see, but not so long to bide,
Though fancy went with thee, thou were my fancies guide:
Thy message being done, thou mights return again,
So Cupid Venus son, no whit my heart should pain.

Eye. Where fancy bears swaye, there Cupid will be bold,
And reason flies away, from Cupids shafte of gold:
If you find cause thereby, some deal of painful smarte,
Alas blame not your eye, but blame consent of heart.

Auctour. My heart must I excuse, and lay the fault on thee,
Because thy sight did choose, when heart from thought was free:
Thy sight thus brought consent, consent has bred my grief,
And grief bids be content, with sorrow for relief.

FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

64. Fyndyng no joy, he desires death.
THe Conie in his cave, the Feret does annoye,
And fleyng thence his life to save, him self he does destroy.
His Berrie round about beset, with Hunters snares,
So that when he to escape starts out, is caught therein unawares,
Like choice poor man have I, to bide and rest in Love,
Or else from thence to fly, as badde a death to prove.
I see, in Love to rest, unkindness does pursue,
To rent the heart out of his breast, which is a Lover true:
And if from Love I starte, as one that Love forsaks,
Then pensive thoughts my heart does pearce, and so my life it taks.
Then thus to fly or bide, hard is the choice to choose,
Since death has campd, and trenched each side, and says life now refuse.
Content I am therefore, my life therein to spend,
And death I take a salve for sore, my weary days to end.
And thus I you require, that faithful Love profess,
When carcas cased is in cheste, and body laid on hearse.
Your brinishe tears to save, such as my corse shall move,
And therewith write upon my grave, behold the force of Love.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

Hope well and have well.
IN hope the Shipman hoiseth sail, in hope of passage good,
In hope of health the sick man, does suffer loss of blood:
In hope the prisoner linckt in chains, hopes liberty to find,
Thus hope breds health, and health breds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope desire getts victory, in hope great comfort spryngs,
In hope the Lover lives in joys, he fears no dreadful styngs:
In hope we live and may abide, such storms as are assignde,
Thus hope breds health, and health breds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope we easily suffer harm, in hope of future time,
In hope of fruit, the pain semes sweet, that to the tree does clime:
In hope of Love such glory grows, as now by propfe I find,
That hope breds health, and health breds ease to every troubled mind.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

He requesteth some friendly comfort, affirmyng his constancy.
THe mountains hie whose lofty topps, does mete the hautie sky
The craggie rock that to the sea, free passage does deny:
The aged Oak that does resist, the force of blustryng blaste,
The pleasant herb that every where, a fragrant smell does cast.
The Lions force whose courage stout, declares a princelike might,
The Eagle that for worthiness, is borne of kings in fight:
The Serpent eke whose poisoned iaws, does belche out venime vile,
The loathsome Tode that shumeth light, and lives in exile.
These these I say and thousands more, by trackt of time decaie,
And like to time do quite consume, and bade from time to claie:
But my true heart and service vowed, shall last time out of mind,
And still remains as thine by dome, as Cupid has assingde.
My faith lo here I vow to thee, my trothe thou know right well,
My goods my friends, my life is thine, what need I more to tell?
I am not mine, but thine I vow, thy hests I will obey,
And serve thee as a servant ought, in pleasyng if I may:
And sith I have no fliyng wyngs, to see thee as I wish,
Ne sins to cut the silver streams, as does the glidyng fish.
Wherefore leave now forgetfulness, and send again to me,
And strain thy azured veins to write, then I may gretyng see:
And thus farewell more dear to me, then chiefest friend I have,
Whose Love in heart I mind to shrine, till death his fee do crave.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

His complaneth his mishapp.
SHall rigor reign where ruth has run, shall fancy now forsake?
Shall fortune lose that favor won, shall not your anger slake?
Shall hateful heart be had in you, that friendly did pretend,
Shall slipper thought and faith untrue, that heart of yours defend?
Shall nature show your beauty fair, that gentle semes to be?
Shall frowardness your fancies heir, be of more force then she?
Shall now disdain the dragg of death, direct and lead the way?
Shall all the imps upon the earth, rejoice at my decaie?
Shall this the service of my youth, have such reward at last?
Shall I receive rigor of ruthe, and be from favor cast?
Shall I therefore berent my hears, with wights that wish to dye?
Or shall I bathe my self with tears, to feed your fickle eye.
No, no, I shall in pain lie still, with turtle Dove most true,
And vow my self to wit and will, their counsels to ensue:
Good Ladies all that Lovers be, and that to be pretend,
Give place to wit, let reason seem, your enemy to defend.
Lest that you think as I have thought, your self to strove in vain,
And so to be in thraldom brought, with me to suffer pain.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

No foe to a flatterer.
I Would it were not as I think I would it were not so,
I am not blind although I wink, I feel what winds do blow:
I know where craft, with smilyng cheer, creps into boldned breaste.
I hear how fained speech speaks fair, where hatred is possess.
I see the Serpent lie and lurcke, under the green allow,
I see him watch a time to work, his poison to bestow.
In friendly looks such fraud is found, as faith for fear is fled,
And friendship has receiude such wound, as he is almost ded.
And hateful heart with malice great, so boiles in cankred mind,
That flattery flearyng in the face, had almost made me blind.
But now I see all is not gold, that glittereth in the eye,
Nor yet such friends as they profess, as now by proof I try.
Though secret spite by craft, has made a coat of Panter skin,
And thinks to find me in the shade, by sleight to wrapp me in,
Yet God be praised my eye is clear, and can behold the Sun:
When falsehood dare not once appear, to end that he begun,
Thus time shall try the thing amiss, which God save shortly send,
And turn the heart that fained is, to be a faithful friend.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

His comparison of Love.
THe Spider with great skill, does travel day by day,
His lymmes no time lie still, to set his house in state:
And when he has it wrought, thinkyng therein to reign,
A blaste of wind unthought, does drive it down again.
The proof whereof is true, to make his work endure,
He pains him self a new, in hope to dwell more sure:
And in some secret place, a corner of a wall,
He frames him self a pace, to build and rest withal.
His pleasure sweet to stay, when he to rest is bent,
An ugly shamble Flee, approaches to his tent:
And htere entendes by force, his labors great to win,
Or else to yield his corse, by fatal death therein.
Thus is the Spiders nest, from time to time thrown down,
And he to labor pressed, with endless pain unknown:
So such as Lovers be, like travel do attain,
Those endless works ye see, are always full of pain.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

A Lovers joy.
I Have no joy, but dream of joy, and joy to think on joy,
A joy I withstoode, for to enjoy, to finishe mine annoye,
I hate not without cause alas, yet Love I know not why,
I thought to hate, I can not hate, although that I should dye.
A foe most sweet, a friend most sower, I joy for to embrace.
I hate the wrong, and not the wight, that workt my woeful case:
What thing it is I know not I, but yet a thing there is,
That in my fancy still perswads, there is no other bliss.
The joys of life, the pangs of death, it make me feel each day,
But life nor death, this humor can, devise to wear away.
Feign would I dye, but yet in death no hope I see remains,
And shall I live? since life I see, a course of sorry pains:
What is it then that I do seek, what joy would I aspire,
A thing that is divine belike, to high for man's desire.
FINIS.
F. K.

Evil to him that evil thinks.
THe subtle stilie sleghts, that worldly men do work,
The friendly shows, under whose shade, most craft does often lurk:
Enforces me alas, with yernfull voice to say,
Woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decaie,
The bird that dreads no guile, is sonest caught in snare,
Each gentle heart deuoide of craft, is sonest brought to care:
Good nature sonest trapt, which gives me cause to say,
Woe worth the wily heads, that seeks the simple man's decaie.
I see the Serpent vile, that lurkes under the grene,
How subtly he shroods him self, that he may not be seen:
And yet his fosters bane, his leryng looks bewraie,
Woe worth the wily heads that leeks, the simple man's decaie.
Woe worth the feinyng looks, on favor that we do wait,
Woe worth the feined friendly heart, that harbors deep deceit:
Woe worth the Vipers brood, oh thrice woe worth I say,
All worldly wily heads, that seeks the simple man's decaie.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

He assures his constancy.
WIth painted speech I list not prove, my cunnyng for to try,
Nor yet will use to fill my pen, with gilefull flattery:
With pen in hand, and heart in breast, shall faithful promise make
To love you best, and serve you most, by your great vertuts sake.
And sure dame Nature has you decked, with gifts above the rest,
Let not Disdain a harbor find, within your noble breast:
For Love has lead his law alike, to men of each degrre,
So that the Beggar with the Prince shall Love as well as he.
I am no Prince I must confess, nor yet of Princes line,
Nor yet a brutishe Beggar borne, that feeds among the Swine:
The fruit shall try the Tree at last, the blossoms good or no,
Then do not judge of me the worse, till you have tried me so.
As I deserve, so then reward, I make you judge of all,
If I be false in word or deed, let Lightnyng Thunder fall:
And Furies fell with frantic fi^ts, bereue and stay my breathe,
For an example to the rest, if I shall break my faith.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

Complainyng his mishapp to his friend, he complains wittely.
A. THe fire shall freze, the frost shall fry the frozen mou^tains hie

B. What strange things has dame natures force, to turn her course awrie

A. My Love has me left, and taken a new man:

B. This is not strange, it happes often times, the truth to scan,

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain.

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is this not strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. By skillful means I here reclaim, to stoop unto my lure,

B. Such haggard Hawks will soar away, of them who can be sure

A. With silver bells and hoode, my joy was her to deck,

B. She was full gorgde, she would the sooner give the check,

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain:

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. Her chirpyng lips should chirpe to me, sweet words of her desire

B. Such chirpyng birds who ever saw, to preach still on one brire,

A. She said she loved me best, and would not till she die,

B. She said in words, she thought it not, as time does try.

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain:

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A, Can no man win a woman so, to make her Love endure,

B. To make the Fox his wiles to leave, what man will put in ure?

A. Why then there is no choice, but all women will change,

B. As men do use, so some women do Love to raunge.

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain,

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A, Since slipper gain falls to my lot, farewell that glidyng pray,

B. Since that the dice does run awrie, betymes leave of thy play.

A. I will no more lamente, the thing I may not have,

B. Then by exchange the loss to come, all shall thou save.

A. Love will I refrain,

B. thereby thou shall gain,

A, With loss I will leave,

B. she will thee deceive:

A. That is not strange,

B. then let her raunge.

FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

No pains comparable to his attempt.
LIke as the doleful Dove, delights alone to be,
And does refuse the bloumed branche, chusyng the leaflesse tree.
Whereon wailyng his chance, with bitter tears besprent,
Does with his bill, his tender breaste often pearse and all to rent.
Whose grievous gronyngs tho: whose grips of pinyng pain,
Whose ghastly looks, whose bloody streams out flowyng from each vain.
Whose falling from the tree, whose pantyng on the ground,
Examples be of mine estate, tho there appear no wound.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

He repents his folly.
A Lack when I look back, upon my youth thatz paste,
And deeply powder youths offense, and youths reward at last.
With sighs and tears I say, O God I not deny,
My youth with folly has deserved, with folly for to die.
But yet if ever sinful man, might mercy move to ruthe,
Good Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth.
In youth I rangde the feelds, where vices all did grow,
In youth alas I wanted grace, such vise to overthrow,
In youth what I thought sweet, most bitter now do find,
Thus has the follies of my youth, with folly kept me blind
Yet as the Egle casts her bill, whereby her age renueth,
So Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

No pleasure without some pain.
HOw can the tree but wast, and wither away,
That has not sometime comfort of the Sun:
How can that flower but fade, and sone decaie,
That always is with darcke clouds run.
Is this a life, nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
What foodlesse beast can live long in good plight?
Or is it life, where senses there be none:
Or what avails eyes without their light?
Or else a tongue, to him that is alone.
Is this a life? nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
Whereto serve ears, if that there be no sound
Or such a head, where no devise does grow:
But all of plaints, since sorrow is the ground,
Whereby the heart does pine in deadly woe.
Is this a life, nay death you may it call,
That feles each pain, and knows no joy at al.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

The fruit of feined friends.
IN choice of friends what hap had I, to choose one of Cire^s kind
whose harp, whose pipe, whose melody could feed my ears and make me blind
Whose pleasant voice made me forget, yt in sure trust is great deceit.
In trust I see is treason found, and man to man deceitful is,
And whereas treasure does abound, of flatterers there do not miss:
Whose painted speech, and outward show, do seem as friends and be not so.
Would I have thought in thee to be, the nature of the Crocadill:
Which if a man a sleep may see, with bloody thirst desires to kill:
And then with tears a while began weep, the death of him thus slain a sleep
O fauell false, thou traitor borne, what mischief more might you devise
Then thy dear friend to have in scorn, and him to wound in sundry wise
Which still a friend pretends to be, and are not so by proof I see,
Fie, fie, upon such treachery. W. H.
If such false Ships do haunte the shore,
Strike down the sail and trust no more.
M. Edwardes.

A dialogue between a Gentleman and his Love.
A. SHall I no way win you, to grant my desire?

B. What woman will grant you, the thing you require:

A. You only to Love me, is all that I crave,

B. You only to leave me, is all I would have.

A. My dear alas, now say not so,

B. To Love you best I must say no:

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

B. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not.

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. The swifter I follow, then you fly away,

B. Swift hauks in their fliyng, often times miss their pray,

A. Yet some kills deadly, that fly to the mark:

B. You shall touch no feather, thereof take no carke.

A. Yet hope shall further my desire,

B. You blow the coals, and raise no fire,

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt,

B. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B, I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. To Love is no danger, where true Love is meant,

B. I will Love no ranger, least that I repent:

A. My Love is no raunger, I make God auow,

B. To trust your smothe saiyngs, I sure know not how.

A. Most truth I mean, as time shall well try,

B. No truth in men, I often epsy,

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

B. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. Some women may say naie, and mean Love most true,

B. Some women can make fools, of as wise men as you:

A. In time I shall catch you, I know when and where:

B. I will sone dispatche you, you shall not come there.

A. Some speds at length, that often have miste,

B. I am well armde, come when you list.

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. Yet work your kind kindly, grant me Love for Love,

B. I will use you friendly, as I shall you prove:

A. Most true you shall find me, I this do protest,

B. Then sure you shall bind me, to grant your request.

A. O happy threede, now have I spunne,

B. You sing before the conquest won.

A. Why then, will you swerve,

B. even as you desarue:

A Love still,

B. I will,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. come to me than.

FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

Exclamyng upon his unkind Love, his friend replieth wittely.
M. WHat death may be, compared to Love?

H. What grief therein, now do thou prove?

M. My pains alas, who can express,

H. I see no cause of heaviness.

M. My Ladies looks, my woe has wrought:

H. Then blame thine eyes, that first has sought,

M. I burn alas, and blow the fire,

H. A fool consumes by his desire,

M. What shall I do than?

H. come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy?

M. My sugared sweet, is mixed with gall,

H. Thy Lady can not do with all:

M. The more I seek, the less I find,

H. Then strive not with the stream and wind.

M. Her must I Love, although I smarte,

H. With her own sword, thou slaiest thy heart

M. Such pleasant baits, who can refrain,

H. Such baits will sure breed thee great pain,

M. What shall I do than?

H. Come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

M. Her golden beams, mine eyes do daze,

H. Upon the Sun thou may not gaze:

M. She might reward my cruel smarte,

H. She thinks thou hardst a fained heart.

M. She laughs to hear my woeful cries,

H. Forsake her then, in time be wise:

M. No, no, alas, that may not be,

H. No wise man then, will pity thee,

M. What shall I do than?

H. come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

M, A living death, lo thus I prove,

H. Such are the fruits of froward Love:

M. O that I might her Love once gain,

H. Thy gain would not, half quite the pain.

M. Her will I Love, though she be coye,

H. A fool him self, will still annoye:

M. Who will not die, for such a one?

H. Be wise at length, let her alone:

M. I can not do so,

H. then be thy own fo,

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

FINIS.
E. S.

The complaint of a Lover, wearyng Black and Taunie.
A Croune of Baies shall that man wear,
That triumphs over me:
For Black and Taunie will I wear,
Which mournyng colors be.
The more I follow on, the more she fled away,
As Daphne did full long ago, Apollos wishfull pray:
The more my plaints resounde, the less she pities me,
The more I sought, the less I found, that mine she meant to be.
Melpomene, alas with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes Baies shall that man wear, that triumphs over me,
For Black and Taunie will I wear, which mournyng colors be.
Droune me you tricklyng tears, you wailefull wights of woe,
Come help these hands to rent my hears, my rewfull hap to show:
On whom the scorchyng flames of Love, does feed you see,
Ah a lalalantida my dear Dame, has thus tormented me.
Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes Baies shall that man wear, that triumphs over me,
For Black and Taunie will I wear, which mournyng colors be.
An Ancres life to lead, with nails to scratche my grave,
Where yearthly worms on me shall feed, is all the joys I crave:
And hide my self from shame, sith that mine eyes do see,
Ah a lalalantida my dear dame, has thus tormented me.
And all that present be, with doleful tunes help than:
And sing Bis woe worth on me, forsaken man,
FINIS.
E. O.

Findyng no releef, he complains thus.
INquest of my releef, I find distress,
In recompense of Love, most deep disdain:
My langour such, as words may not express,
A shower of tears, my watrishe eye does rain.
I dream of this, and do divine of woe,
I wander in the thoughts of my sweet foe.
I would no peace, the cause of war I fly,
I hope, I fear, I burn, I chill in Froste:
I lie a low, yet mounts my mind on hie,
Thus doubtful storms, my troubled thoughts have toste,
And for my pain, this pleasure do I prove,
I hate my self, and pine in others Love.
The world I graspe, yet hold I naught at all,
At liberty I seem, in prison pent:
I taste the sweet, more sower then bitter gall,
My shipp semes sound, and yet her ribbs be rent.
And out alas, on Fortune false I cry,
Look what I crave, that still she does deny.
Both life and death, be equal unto me,
I do desire to die, yet crave I life.
My wits with sondrie thoughts do disagree,
My self am with my self at mortal strife.
As warmth of Sun, does melte the silver Snow,
The heat of Love, behold consumes me so.
FINIS.
R. Hall.

A Lover disdained, complains.
IF ever man had love to dearly bought,
Lo I am he that plays within her maze:
And finds no way, to get the same I sought,
But as the Dear are driven unto the gaze.
And to augment the grief of my desire,
My self to burn, I blow the fire:
But shall I come nigh you?
Of force I must fly you.
What death alas, may be compared to this,
I pray within the maze of my sweet foe:
And when I would of her but crave a kis,
Disdain enforces her away to go.
My self I check: yet do I twiste the twine,
The pleasure hers, the pain is mine,
But shall I come nigh you.
Of force I must fly you.
You courtly wights, that wants your pleasant choice,
Lend me a flood of tears, to wail my chance:
Happy are they in Love, that can rejoice,
To their great pains, where Fortune does advance,
But since my suit alas, can not prevail,
Full freight with care, in grief still will I wail:
Since you will needs fly me,
I may not come nigh you.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Being in Love, he complains.
IF care or skill, could conquer vain desire,
Or reasons reigns, my strong affection stay
Then should my sighs to quiet breast retire,
And shun such signs, as secret thoughts bewraie.
Uncomely Love, which now lurks in my breast,
Should cease my grief, through wisdoms power oppressed.
But who can leave, to look on Venus face?
Or yeldeth not, to Iunos high estate:
What wit so wise, as gives not Pallas place,
These virtues rare, each Gods did yield amate.
Save her alone, who yet on earth does reign,
Whose beauties stryng, no God can well destraine.
What worldly wight, can hope for heavenly hire,
When only sights, must make his secret move:
A silent suit, does selde to grace aspire,
My hapless happ does roll the restless stone,
Yet Phebe fair, disdainde the heavens above,
To joy on earth, her poor Edimions love.
Rare is reward, where none can justly crave,
For chance is choice, where reason maks no claim:
Yet luck sometimes, dispairyng souls does save,
A happy Star made Giges joy attain.
A slauishe Smithe, of rude and rascal race,
Found means in time, to gain a Gods grace.
Then lofty Love, thy sacred sails advance,
My sithyng seas shall flow with streams of tears:
Amidds disdain, drive forth my doleful chance.
A valiant mind, no deadly danger fears.
Who loves alofte, and setts his heart on hie,
Deserves no pain, though he do pine and die.
FINIS,
E. O.

A Lover rejected, complains.
THe tricklyng tears, that falls along my cheeks,
The secret sighs, that shows my inward grief:
The present pains perforce, that Love aye seeks,
Bidds me renew, my cares without relief.
In woeful song in dole displaie,
My pensive heart for to bewraie.
Bewraie thy grief, thy woeful heart with speed,
Resign thy voice, to her that causde thy woe:
With irksome cries, bewail thy late done deed,
For she thou love, is sure thy mortal foe,
And help for thee, there is none sure,
But still in pain, thou must endure.
The stricken Dear has help to heal his wound,
The haggerd Hawk, with toil is made full tame:
The strongest Tower, the Canon lays on ground,
The wisest wit, that ever had the fame.
Was thrall to Love, by Cupids sleights,
Then way my case with equal weights.
She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
She is my pain, she is my ease therefore:
She is my death, she is my life also,
She is my salve, she is my wounded sore.
In fine, she has the hand and knife,
That may both save, and end my life.
And shall I live on earth to be her thrall?
And shall I sue, and serve her all in vain?
And kiss the stepps, that she letts fall,
And shall I pray the Gods, to keep the pain.
From her, that is so cruel still.
No, no, on her work all your will.
And let her feel the power of all your might
And let her have her most desire with speed:
And let her pine away, both day and night,
And let her moan, and none lament her need,
And let all those, that shall her see,
Despise her state, and pity me.
FINIS.
E. O.

Not attainyng to his desire, he complains.
I Am not as seem to be, nor when I smile, I am not glad:
A thrall although you count me free, I most in mirth, most pe^siue sad:
I smile to shade my bitter spite, as Haniball that saw in sight:
His country soil with Carthage town: by Romain force defaced down.
And Caesar that presented was, with noble Pompeis princely head,
As twere some judge to rule the case a flould of tears he semde to shed
Although in deed it sprung of joy, yet other thought it was annoye,
Thus contraries be used I find, of wise to cloak the covert mind.
I Haniball that smiles for grief, and let you Cesars grief suffice,
The one that laughs at his mischief, the other all for joy that cries:
I smile to see me scorned so, you weep for joy to see me woe,
And I a heart by Love slain dead, presents in place of Pompeis head.
O cruel happ, and hard estate, that forces me to love my fo,
Accursed be so foul a fate, my choice for to prefixe it so:
So long to fight with secret sore, and find no secret salve therefore,
Some urge their pain by plaint I find, but I in vain do breath my wind.
FINIS.
E. Ox.

His mind not quietly settled, he writes thus.
EVen as the wax does melte, or dew consume away
Before the Sun, so I behold through careful thoughts decaie:
For my best luck leads me, to such sinister state,
That I do waste with others Love, that has my self in hate.
And he that beats the bushe, the wished bird not getts,
But such I see as sits still, and holds the foulyng netts.
The Drone more Honey sucks, that labors not at all,
Then does the Be, to whose most pain, least pleasure does befall:
The Gardner sowes the seeds, whereof the flowers do grow,
And others yet do gather them, that took less pain I know.
So I the pleasant Grape have pulled from the Vine,
And yet I languishe in great thirste, while others drink the wine.
Thus like a woeful wight, I woue the webb of woe,
The more I would weed out my cares, the more they seem to grow:
The which betokens, forsaken is of me,
That with the careful Culuer climes, the worn and withered tree.
To entertain my thoughts, and there my happ to moan,
That never am less idle lo, then when I am alone.
FINIS.
E. Ox.

That Love is requited by disdain.
IN search of things that secret are, my mated muse began,
What it might be, molested most the head and mind of man.
The bendyng brow of princes face, to wrath that does attend,
Or want of parents, wife or child, or loss of faithful friend.
The roryng of the Canon shot, that makes the piece to shake,
Or terror such as mighty Jove, from heaven above can make.
All these in fine may not compare experience so does prove,
Unto the torments sharp and strange, of such as be in love.
Love looks a loft and laughs to scorn all such as grefe anoye.
The more extreme their passions be, the greater is his joy.
Thus Love as victor of the field, triumps above the rest,
And joys to see his subjects lie, with living death in breast.
But dire disdain letts drive a shaft, and gauls this braggyng fool,
He plucks his plumes, vnbendes his bow and sets him new to scole,
Whereby this boy, that bragged late, as conqueror over all,
Now yelds him self unto disdain his vessall and his thrall.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Of a contented state.
IN wealth we se some wealthy men, abound in wealth most welthely
In wealth we se those men again, in wealth do live most wretchedly.
And yet of wealth having more store,
Then erst of wealth they had before.
These welthy men do seem to want, they seem to want ye most they have
The more posts, ye more they crave, the more they crave ye greater store
That most they have, they think but skant.
Yet not content, woe be therefore,
The simple men that less wealth have with lesser wealth we se content,
Content are they twixt wealth and scath, a life to lead indifferent.
And thus of wealth these men have more,
Then those of which we spoke before.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Being disdained, he complains.
IF friendless faith? if giltlesse thought may shield?
If simple truth that never meant to swerve:
If dear desire accepted fruit do yield,
If greedy lust in loyal life does sarue.
Then may my plainte bewail my heavy harm:
That seeking calm, have stumbled on the storm.
My wonted cheer, ecclipsed by the cloud,
Of deep disdain, through error of report:
If weary woe enwrapped in the shroude,
Lies slain by tongue of the unfriendly sort.
Yet heaven and earth and all that Nature wrought,
I call to vow of my unspotted thought.
No shade I seek in part, to shield my tainte,
But simple truth, I hunte no other suit:
On that I gape, the issue of my plainte,
If that I quail, let Justice me confute.
If that my place, emongs the giltlesse sort,
Repaie by dome, my name and good report.
Go heavy verse, pursue desired grace,
Where pity shrinde in cell of secret breast:
Awaits my haste, the rightful lot to place,
And lothes to see, the giltlesse man oppressed.
Whose virtues great, has crounde her more with fame,
Then kyngly state, though largely shine the same.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Of the mean estate.
THe higher that the Ceder tree, unto the heavens do grow,
The more in danger is the top, when sturdie winds began blow,
Who Judges then in princely throne, to be deuoide of hate,
Does not yet know, what heaps of ill, lies hid in such estate.
Such dangers great, such gripes of mind, such toil do they sustain
That often times, of God they wish, to be vnkyngde again.
For as the huge and mighty rocks, withstand the ragyng seas,
So kingdoms in subjection be, whereas dame Fortune please:
Of brittle joy, of smilyng cheer, of Honey mixte with Gall,
Allotted is to every Prince, in freedom to be thrall.
What watches long, what steps unsure, what grefes and care of mind
What bitter broiles, what endless toiles, to kingdoms be assingde.
The subject then may well compare, with prince for pleasant days,
Whose silent nighe bryngs quiet rest, whose steps no storm bewraies:
How much be we, then bound to God, who such provision makes,
To late our cares upon the Prince, thus does he for our sakes.
To him therefore, let us lift up our hearts, and pray a maine,
That every Prince that he has plast, may long in quiet reign.
FINIS.
W. H.

Of a contented mind.
WHen all is done and said, in the end thus shall you find,
The most of all does has in bliss, that has a quiet mind:
And clear from worldly cares, to deame can be content,
The sweetest time, in all this life, in thinkyng to be spent,
The body subject is, to fickle Fortunes power,
And to a million of mishapps, is casual every hour:
And death in time does change it to a clodde of claie,
When as the mind which is divine, runs never to decaie.
Companion none is like, unto the mind alone,
For many have been harmde by speech, through thinking few or none:
Few often times restrains words, but maks not thoughts to cease,
And he speaks best that has the skill, when for to hold his peace.
Our wealth leaves us at death, our kinsmen at the grave,
But virtues of the mind, unto the heavens with us have:
Wherefore for virtues sake, I can be well content,
The sweetest time of all my life, to deem in thinkyng spent.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Try before you trust.
TO counsel my estate, abandonde to the spoil,
Of forged friends whose grosest fraud, it set with finest foil.
To verify true dealyng wights, whose trust no treason dreads,
And all to dear thacquaintaunce be, of such most harmfull heads.
I am advised thus who so does friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next he feared, for to become a fo.
To have a fained friend, no peril like I find,
Often fleryng face may mantell best, a mischief in the mind:
A pair of angels ears often times, does hide a serpents heart,
Under whose gripes who so does come, to late complains the smart.
Wherefore I do advise, who so does friend friend so,
As though to morrow next he should become a mortal fo.
Refuse respectyng friends, that courtly know to feign,
For gold that winnes for gold, shall lose, the self same friend again:
The Quail needs never fear, in foulers netts to fall,
If he would never bend his ear to listen to his call.
Therefore trust not to sone, but when you friend friend so,
As though to morrow next, ye feared for to become a fo.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

He renounceth all the affectes of Love.
LIke as the Heart that lifts up his ears,
To hear the hounds, that has him in the chase:
Does cast the wind, in dangers and in fears,
With fliyng foot, to pass away apace,
So must I fly of Love the vain pursuit,
Whereof the gain is lesser then the fruit.
And I also must loathe those learyng looks,
Where Love does lurk still with his subtle slaite,
With painted mocks, and inward hidden hoks,
To trapp by trust, that lies not inwaite.
The end whereof, assaie it who so shall,
As sugared smart, and inward bitter gall.
And I must fly such Cirian songs,
Wherewith that Circes, Ulysses did enchaunt:
These wily Watts I mean, with filed tongs,
That hearts of steel, have power to daunt,
Who so as Hawk, that stoupeth to their call,
For most desarte, receives least of all.
But woe to me that first beheld these eyes,
The trapp wherein I say, that I was taken:
An outward salve, which inward me destroies,
Whereto I run, as Rat unto her bane.
As to the fish, sometime it does befall,
That with the bait, does swallow hook and al.
Within my breast, wherewith I daiely fedd,
The vain repast of amourous hott desire:
With loitryng lust, so long that has me fedd,
Till he has brought me to the flaming fire.
In time as Phoenix ends her care and carks,
I make the fire, and burn my self with sparks.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Bethinking him self of his end, writes thus.
WHen I behold the baier, my last and postyng horse,
That bare shall to the grave, my vile and carren corsse.
Then say I seely wretch, why do thou put thy trust,
In things eithe made of claye, that sone will turn to duste,
Do thou not see the young, the hardy and the fair,
That now are paste and gone, as though they never were:
Do thou not see thy self, draw hourly to thy last,
As shafts which that is shot, at birds that flies fast.
Do thou not see how death, through smites with his lance,
Some by war, some by plague, and some with worldly chance:
What thing is there on earth, for pleasure that was made,
But goes more swifte away, then does the Summer shade.
Lo here the Summer flower, that sprung this other day,
But Winter wears as fast, and blows clean away:
Even so shall thou consume, from youth to loathsome age,
For death he does not spare, the prince more then the page.
Thy house shall be of claie, a clotte under thy hedde,
Until the latter day, the grave shall be thy bed:
Until the blowyng trumpe, does say to all and some,
Rise up out of your grave, for now the Judge is come.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Being in Love, he complains.
ENforst by Love and fear, to please and not offend,
Within the words you would me write, a message must I send:
A woeful errande sure, a wretched man must write,
A wrecched tale, a woeful head, besemeth to endite.
For what can he but wail, that has but all he would.
And yet that all, is naught at all, but lack of all he should:
But lack of all his mind, what can be greater grief,
That have and lack, that likes him best, must neds be most mischief.
Now fool what makes thee wail, yet some might say full well,
That haste no harm but of thy self, as thou thy self can tell:
To whom I answer thus, since all my harms do grow,
Upon my self, so of my self, some happ may come I trow.
And since I see both happ, and harm betids to me,
For present woe, my after bliss, will make me not forget thee:
Who has a field of gold, and may not come therein,
Must live in hope till he have forse, his treasure well to win.
Whose joys by hope of dread, to conquer or to lose,
So great a wealth does rise, and for example does disclose,
To win the golden Flese, stood Jason not in dread,
Till that Medeas hope of help, did give him hope to speed.
Yet sure his mind was much, and yet his fear the more,
That has no happ but by your help, may happ for to restore:
The ragyng Bulls he dread, yet by his Ladies charm,
He knew it might be brought to pass, they could do little hame.
Unto whose grace yield he, as I do offer me,
Into your hands to have his happ, not like him for to be:
But as king Priamus, did bind him to the will,
Of Cressed false which him forsook, with Diomed to spill.
So I to you commend my faith, and eke my joy,
I hope you will not be so false, as Cressed was to Troy:
For if I be untrue, her Lazares death I wish,
And eke in thee if thou be false, her clapper and her dishe.
FINIS.
R. L.

Being in trouble, he writes thus.
IN terrors trapp with thraldom thruste,
Their thornie thoughts to taste and try:
In conscience clear from cause unjust,
With carpyng tears did call and cry.
And said O God, yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Thus tremblyng there with tears I trodd,
To totter tide in truths defense:
With sighs and sobs, I said O God,
Let right not have this recompense.
Lest that my foes might laugh to se,
That thou would not deliver me. Bis.
My soul then to repentance ran,
My ragged clothes all rent and torn:
And did bewail the loss it wanne,
With loathsome life so long forlorn.
And said O God, yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Then comfort came with clothes of joy,
Whose semes were faithful steadfastness:
And did bedecke the naked boy,
That erst was full of wretchedness.
And said be glad for God is he,
That shortly will deliver thee. Bis.
FINIS.
W. H.

Being troubled in mind, he writes as follows.
THe bitter sweat that strains my yielded heart,
The careless count, that does the same emrace:
The doubtful hope, to reap my due desarte,
The pensive pathe that guids my restless race.
Are at such war within my wounded breast,
As does bereue my joy and eke my rest.
My greedy will, that seeks the golden gain,
My lucklesse lot, does alwaie take in worth:
My mated mind, that dreades my suits in vain,
My piteous plaint, does help to set it forth.
So that between two waves of ragyng seas,
I drive my days in troubles and desease.
My woeful eyes do take their chief delight,
To feed their fill upon the pleasant maze:
My hidden harms that grow in me by sight,
With pinyng pains, do drive me from the gaze.
And to my hope I reap no other hire,
But burn my self, and I do blow the fire.
FINIS.
I. Haiwood.

Look or you leap.
IF thou in suertie safe wilt sit,
If thou delight at rest to dwell,
Spend, no more words then shall seem fit,
Let tongue in silence talk expel,
In all things that thou see men bent,
Se all, say naught, hold thee content.
In worldly woorks degrees are three,
Makers, doers, and lookers on:
The lookers on have liberty,
Both the others to judge upon,
Wherefore in all, as men are bent,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
The makers often are in fault found,
The doers doubt, of praise or shame:
The lookers on find surest ground,
They have the fruit, yet free from blame,
This does persuade in all here meant,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
The Proverb is not South and West,
Which has be said, long time ago:
Of little medlyng comes rest,
The busy man never wants woe.
The best way is, in all worlds sent,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
FINIS.
Jasper Heywood.

Though Fortune have set thee on hie,
Remember yet that thou shall die.

TO die, Dame nature did man frame,
Death is a thing most perfect sure:
We ought not natures works to blame,
She made nothing, still to endure.
That law she made, when we were borne,
That hence we should return again:
To render right, we must not scorn,
Death is due debt, it is no pain.
The civil law does bid restore,
That thou have taken up of trust:
Thy life is lent, thou must therefore,
Repaie, except thou be unjust.
This life is like a pointed race,
To the end whereof when man has trod,
He must return to former place,
He may not still remain abroad.
Death has in all the earth a right,
His power is great, it stretches far:
No Lord, no Prince, can escape his wight,
No creature can his duty bar,
The wise, the just, the strong, the hie,
The chaste, the meke, the free of heart,
The rich, the poor, who can deny,
Have yielded all unto his darte.
Could Hercules that tamde each wight?
Or else Ulysses with his wit?
Or Ianus who had all foresight?
Or chaste Hypolit escape the pit?
Could Cresus with his bags of gold?
Or Irus with his hungry pain?
Or Signus through his hardiness bold?
Drive back the days of Death again.
Seeing no man then can Death escape,
Nor hire him hence for any gain:
We ought not fear his carraine shape,
He only bryngs evil men to pain,
If thou have led thy life a right,
Death is the end of misery:
If thou in God have thy delight,
Thou die to live eternally.
Each wight therefore while he lives here,
Let him think on his diyng day:
In midst of wealth, in midst of chere,
Let him account he must away.
This thought makes man to God a friend.
This thought does banishe pride and sin:
This thought does bring a man in the end,
Where he of Death the field shall win.
FINIS.
T. Marshall.

The complaint of a Sinner.
O Heavenly God, O Father dear, cast down thy tender eye,
Upon a wretch that prostrate here, before thy throne does lie:
O power thy precious oil of grace, into my wounded heart,
O let the dropps of mercy swage, the rigor of my smarte.
My faintyng foul suppressed sore, with careful clogge of sin,
In humble sort submitts it self, thy mercy for to win:
Grant mercy then O Savior sweet, to me most woeful thrail,
Whose mornfull cry to thee, O Lord, does still for mercy call.
Thy blessed will I have despised, upon a stubborn mind,
And to the swaie of worldly things, my self I have enclinde:
Forgettyng heaven and heavenly powers, where God and saints do dwell
My life had like to tread the pathe, that leads the way to hell.
But now my Lord my lode star bright, I will no more do so,
To think upon my former life, my heart does melte for woe:
Alas I sigh, alas I sobbe, alas I do repent:
That ever my licencious will, so wickedly was bent.
Since thus therefore with yernfull plaint, I do thy mercy crave,
O Lord for thy great mercies sake, let me thy mercy have:
Restore to life the wretched soul, that else is like to die,
So shall my voice unto thy name, sing praise eternally.
Now blessed be the Father first, and blessed be the Son,
And blessed be the holy Ghost, by whom all things are done:
Bless me O blessed Trinity, with thy eternal grace,
That after death my soul may have, in heaven a dwelling place.
FINIS.
F. Kindlemarsh.

The fruit that sprynges from wilful wits, is ruthe and ruins rage:
And sure what heedelesse youth committes, repentance rues in age.

I Rage in restless ruthe, and ruins rule my days,
I rue (to late) my rechlesse youth, by rules of reasons ways:
I ran so long a race, in search of surest way,
That leisure learnde me tread the trace, that led to leude decaie.
I gave so large a rain, to unrestrained bitt,
That now with proof of after pain, I wail my want of wit:
I trifled forth the time, with trust to self conceits,
Whilst plenties use pricked forth my prime, to search for sugared baits
Wherein once learnde to find, I found so sweet a taste,
That due foresight of after speed, self will esteemed waste.
Which will through wilfulness, has wrought my witless fall,
And heedelesse youths unskillfulness, has lapt my life in thrall.
Whereby by proof I know, that pleasure breeds pain,
And he that evil seed does sow, evil fruit must reap again.
Let such therefore whose youth, and purses are in Prime,
Foresee and shun the helpelesse ruthe, which sues misspence of time.
For want is next to waste, and shame does sin ensue,
Evil speedyng proof has heedelesse haste, my self have proved it true.
When neighbors next house burns, it is time thereof take heed,
For Fortunes wheel has choice of turns, which change of chances breed
My sail has been a lofte, though now I bear but low,
Who clims to high selde falls soft, dedst ebb has highest flow.
FINIS.
quod Yloop.
1578.

