OBSERVATIONS, UPON THE FIVE FIRST BOOKS OF CAESAR'S COMMENTARIES, SETTING
FOVRTH THE PRACTICE OF THE ART MILITARY, IN THE TIME OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE.
WHEREIN ARE HANDLED ALL THE CHIEfest points of their discipline, with the true
reasons of every part, together with such instructions as may be drawn from
their proceedings, for the better direction of our modern wars.

BY CLEMENT EDMVNDS.

printer's device. P S



AT LONDON, Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredstreet hill at the sign of
the Star. 1600.

TO HIS HONORABLE FRIEND AND MOST Worthy knight, Sir Francis Vere, chief
commander of her Majesty's forces in the service of the states, in the united
Provinces, and Governor of the Cautionarie town of Briele, in Holland.
SIR, having at length ended this task of observations, it falls necessarily
under your patronage, as well in regard of the continual encouragement, which I
received from the favor you bear to such imploiments; as also for that this
work of Caesar has always been held in your particular recommendation, as
the Breuiarie of soldiers; and thought worthy of as great regard, as ever M.
Brutus attributed to Polybius, or Charles the fifth to Philip de Commines. I
must acknowledge the beginning of this work to have proceeded from Sir John
Scot, a knight deserving great honor for his judgment and skill in matter of
war, whose desire to understand the true sense of this history, and the
mystery of that discipline, first moved me to undertake this labor. The
observations which I have taken, are such as offer themselves to vulgar wits,
upon the consideration of such points as are handled in this discourse: for as
an old Gouernesse well experienced in error, directs her young charge to
virtue, by such documents as rise from her own mistakings; so the fruit of
this work rises chiefly from thence, where the benefit of good direction is
manifest; or where ill atchieuement bears witness of an error. The
specialities of greater consequence, which are either skilfully shadowed, or
necessarily implied in the history, I leave to the wisdom of judicious
commanders, as an object fit for such judgments, and impertinent to conceits of
an inferior condition. That which is already handled shall serve to witness,
that Caesar's works contain matter sufficient to entertain the greatest wits,
and that my desire is to gratify our soldiers with my best labor, which I
recommend chiefly to your Lordship, and rest

Ready to do you service, C. EDMVNDS.

TO THE READER.
I Have adventured to entertain our soldiers, with a relation of part of
Caesar's actions, upon that encouragement which he himself gave to a
fisherman, not to despair of a good passage because he carried Caesar and his
fortunes: wherein I have not tied my self to a litter all translation of the
history, but followed the sense; not daring to make any resemblance of the
sweetness of that style, but desirous to gratify our better sort of
soldiers, with the pourtraiture of that discipline. If my labor be accepted
with that affection as I offer it, I shall think it well spent, and employ
more time to do them service. Howsoever, I hold it reasonable to leave to
every man the free censure of his judgment, as best fitting him that reads
with profit, and not to be taken from any reader whatsoever: and as I look not
to be approved of all; so I make no question but I shall find some favorers,
which is as much as any writer can boast of, Farewell.

READING AND DISCOVRSE, ARE REQVISITE TO MAKE A SOVLdier perfect in the Art
military, how great soever his knowledge may be, which long experience and
much practice of Arms has gained.
WHEN I consider the weakness of man's judgment in censuring things best known
unto it self, and the disability of his discourse in discovering the nature of
vnacquanted obiectes; choosing rather to hold any sensible impression, which
custom has by long practice inured, then to hearken to some other more
reasonable persuasion: I do not marvel that such soldiers, whose knowledge
grows only from experience and consists in the rules of their own
practice; are hardly persuaded, that history and speculatiue learning are of
any use in perfecting of their Art, being so different in nature from the
principles of their cunning, and of so small affinity with the life of action;
wherein the use of Arms and atchieuments of war seem to have their chiefest
being. But those purer spirits embilished with learning, and enriched with the
knowledge of other men's fortunes; wherein variety of accidents affords
variety of instructions, and the mutual conference of things happened,
begets both similitudes and differences, contrary natures, but yet jointly
concurring to season our judgment with discretion, and to enstall wisdom in
the government of the mind: These men I say, mounting aloft, with the wings
of contemplation, do easily discover the ignorance of such Martialistes, as
are only trained up in the school of practice, and taught their rudiments
under a few years experience, which serves to interpret no other author but
it self, nor can approve his maxims, but by his own authority; and are rather
moved to pity their hard fortune, having learned only to be ignorant, then
to envy their skill in matter of war, when they oppose themselves against so
manifest a truth as this: that a mere practical knowledge cannot make a
perfect soldier.

Which proposition that I may the better confirm, give me leave to reason a
little of the grounds of learning, and dispute from the habitude of Arts and
sciences; which are then said to be perfectly attained, when their particular
parts are in such sort apprehended, that from the variety of that
indiuiduality, the intellectual power frames general notions and maxims of
rule, uniting terms of the same nature in one head, and distinguishing
diversities by differences of properties, aptely dividing the whole body into
his greatest and smallest branches, and fitting each part with his
descriptions, duties, cautions and exceptions: for unless the understanding be
in this sort qualified and able by logisticall discourse, to ascend, by way of
composition, from singularity to catholic conceptions; and return again the
same way, to the lowest order of his partitions, the mind cannot be said to
have the perfection of that Art, nor instructed in the true use of that
knowledge: but guiding her self by some broken precepts, feels more want by
that she has not, then benefit by that she has. Whereby it follows, that
a science divided into many branches, and consisting in the multiplicitie of
diverse members, being all so interessed in the Bulk, that is Mayme of the
smallest part causes either debilitie or deformity in the body, cannot be
said to be thoroughly attained, nor conceived with such a profiting
apprehension as steeleth the mind with true judgment, and makes the scholar
master in his Art, unless the nature of these particularities be first had
and obtained.

And for as much as no one science or faculty whatsoever, in multitude and
plurality of parts, may any way be comparable to the Art military,
wherein every small and unrespected circumstance quite alters the nature of
the Action, and breeds such disparitie and difference, that the resemblance
of their equal participating properties is blemished with the dissimilitude of
their disagreeing parts; it cannot be denied, but he that is acquainted with
most of these particular occurrences, and best knows the variety of chances
in the course of war, must needs be thought a more perfect soldier, and
deserves a title of greater dignity in the profession of Arms, then such as
content themselves with a few common precepts and ouer-worne rules: without
which, as they cannot be said at all to be soldiers, so with them and no more,
they no way deserve the name of skillful and perfect men of war. Now whether
mere experience, or experience joined with reading and discourse, do feast
the mind with more variety and choice of matter, or entertain knowledge with
greater plenty of novelties, incident to expeditions and use of Arms, I will
use no other reason to determine of this question, then that which Franciscus
Patricius alleges in his parallely, where he handles this argument which I
entreat of.

He that follows a war (says he) does see either the course of the whole,
or but a part only. If his knowledge extend no farther then a part, he has
learned less then he that saw the whole: but admit he has seen and learned
the instructions of one whole war, he has notwithstanding learned less then
he that has seen the proceeding of two such wars. And he again has not
seen so much as another that has served in three several wars: and so by
degrees, a soldier that has served ten years, must needs know more then
one that has not served so long. And to conclude, he that has received 22
years stipend (which was the just time of service amongst the Romans before a
soldier could be dismissed) has greater means of experience than another that
has not so long a time followed the camp, and cannot challenge a discharge by
order and custom: And hence it consequently follows, that if in one or more
or all these wars, there have happened few or no actions of service, which
might teach a soldier the practice of Arms; that then his learning does not
counteruaile his labor. And if the war through the negligence, or ignorance
of the chief commanders have been ill carried, he can boast of no knowledge,
but that which acquainted him with the corruptions of military discipline; if
the part which he followed were defeated and overthrown, he knows by
experience how to loose, but not how to gain: And therefore it is not only
experience and practice which makes a soldier worthy of his name, but the
knowledge of the manifold accidents which rise from the variety of humane
actions, wherein reason and error, like merchants in traffic, enterchange
contrary euentes of fortune, giving sometime copper for silver, and balm for
poison, and repaying again the like commodity as time and circumstances do
answer their directions. And this knowledge is only to be learned in the
registers of antiquity and in histories, recording the motions of former ages.

Caius Julius Caesar (whose actions are the subject of these discourses) after
his famous victories in France, and that he had gotten the provinces of Spain,
broken the strength of the Roman Empire at Pharsalia, was held a soldier
surmounting envy and all her exceptions; and yet notwithstanding all this, the
battle he had with Pharnaces king of Pontus, was like to have buried the
glory of his former conquestes, in the dishonorable memory of a wilful
overthrow: for having possessed himself of a hill of great advantage, he began
to encampe himself in the top thereof. Which Pharnaces perceiving, (being
lodged likewise with his camp upon a mountain confronting the Romans)
imbattelled his men, marched down from his camp into the valley, and mounted
his forces up the hill, where the Romans were busied about their
intrenchments, to give them battle. All which, Caesar took but for a brauado:
and measuring the enemy by himself, could not be persuaded that any such
foole-hardines could carry men headlong into so dangerous an adventure, until
they were come so near, that he had scarce any time to call the legions from
their work, and to give order for the battle: which so amazed the Romans,
that unless, as Caesar himself says, the advantage of the place and the
benignity of the gods had greatly favored them; Pharnaces had at that time
revenged the overthrow of Pompei and the Senate, and restored the Roman Empire
to liberty. Which may learn us how necessary it is (besides experience,
which in Caesar was infinite) to perfect our knowledge with variety of chances:
and to meditate upon the effects of other men's adventures, that their harms
may be our warnings, and their happy proceedings our fortunate directions.

And albeit amongst so many decades of History, which pregnant wits have
presented to these latter ages, we seldom or never meet with any one accident
which iumpeth in all points with an other of the like nature, that shall
happen to fall out in managing a war, or setting forth of an army; and so
do seem to reap little benefit by that we read, and make small use of our
great travel. Yet we must understand that in the Audit of Reason, there are
many offices, which through the sovereign power of the discoursiue faculty,
receive great commodities by whatsoever falls under their jurisdiction, and
suffer no action to pass without due trial of his nature, and examination of
his state; that so the judgment may not be defrauded of her revenues, nor the
mind of her learning: for notwithstanding disagreeing circumstances, and
differences of forms, which seem to cut off the privilege of imitation, and
frustrate the knowledge we have obtained by reading, the intellectual faculty
has authority to examine the use, and look into the inconveniences of these
wants and diversities, and by the help of reason to turn it to her advantage;
or so to counterpoise the defect, that in trial and execution it shall not
appear any disadvantage. For as in all other sciences, and namely in
geometry, of certain bare elements, and common sentences, which sense
admits to the apprehension, the powers of the soul frame admirable
Theoremes and Problemes of infinite use, proceeding with certainty of
demonstration, from proposition to proposition, and from conclusion to
conclusion, and still make new wonders as they go, besides the strangeness of
their Architecture, that upon such plain and easy foundations, they should
erect such curious and beautiful buildings: so in the Art Military, these
examples, which are taken from histories, are but plain kind of principles,
on which the mind works to her best advantage, and uses reason with such
dexterity, that of inequalities she concludes an equality, and of
dissimilitudes most sweet resemblances; and so she works out her own
perfection by discourse, and in time grows so absolute in knowledge, that her
sufficiency needs no further directions: Lib. 3.
but as Lomazzo the Milinese, in that excellent work which he writ of
picturing, says of a skillful painter, that being to draw a portraiture of
graceful lineaments, will never stand to take the symmetry by scale, nor mark
it out according to rule; but having his judgment habituated by knowledge, and
perfected with the variety of shapes and proportions; his knowledge guides his
eye, and his eye directs his hand, and his hand follows both with such
facility of cunning, that each of them serve for a rule whereby the true
measures of nature are exactly expressed. The like may I say of a skillful
Soldier, or any Artizan in his faculty, when knowledge has once purified his
judgment, and tuned it to the key of true apprehension.

And although there are many that will easily admit a reconciliation of this
disagreement, in the resembla^ce of accidents being referred to the arbitrament
of a well tempered spirit; yet they will by no means acknowledge, that those
monstrous and inimitable examples of valor and magnanimity (whereof antiquity
is prodigal, and spends as though time should never want such treasure) can
any way avail the manners of these days, which if they were as they ought to
be, would appear but conterfeit to the luster of a golden age, nor yet
comparable to silver or brass, or the strength of iron, but deserve no better
title then earth or clay, whereof the frame of this age consists. For what
resemblance (say they) is between the customs of our times, and the actions of
those ancient Heroes? They observed equity as well in war as in peace: for
virtue rather flourished by the natural disposition of men, then by law and
authority; the tenure of their Empire was valor in war and concord in peace;
the greatest treasure which they esteemed, were the deeds of arms which they
had achieved for their country, adorning the temples of their gods with
piety, and their private houses with glory, pardoning rather then prosecuting
a wrong, and taking nothing from the vanquished but ability of doing injury:
But the course of our times has another bias, for covetousness has subverted
both faith and equity, and our valor affects nothing but ambition, pride and
cruelty tyrannize in our thoughts, and subtilty teaches us to carry rather a
fair countenance, then a good nature; our means of getting are by fraud and
extortion, and our manner of spending is by wast and prodigality; not esteeming
what we have of our own, but coveting that which is not ours; men effeminated
and women impudent, using riches as servants to wickedness, and preventing
natures appetite with want on luxurity; supplanting virtue with treachery, and
using victory with such impiety, as though iniuriant facere, were imperio vti:
and therefore the exemplarie patterns of former times wherein true honor is
expressed, may serve to be gazed upon, but no way to be imitated by this age,
being too subtle to deal with honesty, and wanting courage to encounter
valor. I must needs confess, that he that compares the history of Liuie
with that of Guichardine shall find great difference in the subjects which
they handle; for Liuie triumphs in the conquestes of virtue, and in every
page erecteth trophes unto valor, making his discourse like Cleanthes table,
wherein virtue is described in her entire majesty, and so sweetened with the
presence and service of the graces, that all they which behold her are rapt
with admiration of her excellency, and charmed with the love of her
perfection: but Guichardine has more then Theseus task to perform, being to
wind through the labyrinthes of subtilty, and discover the quaint practices of
politians, wherein public and open dessignes are oftentimes but shadows of
more secret proiectes, and these again serve as foiles to more eminent
intentions; being also discolored with dissimulation, and so ensnared in the
sleightes of subtilty, that when you look for war, you shall find peace; and
expecting peace, you shall fall into troubles, dissentions and wars: So crabbed
and crooked is his argument in respect of Liuies fortune, and such art is
required to unfold the truth of these mysteries.

But to answer this objection in a word, and so to proceed to that which
follows, I say those immortal memories of virtue which former time
records, are more necessary to be known, then any strategems of subtler
ages: for equity and valor being truly apprehended so season the motions of
the soul, that albeit in so corrupt a course, they cannot peradventure stir up
imitation; yet they oftentimes hinder many malicious practices, and devilish
devises, when evil is reproved by the knowledge of good, and condemned by the
authority of better ages. And if we will needs follow those steps which the
present course of the world has traced, and play the Cretian with the
Cretian; this objection hinders nothing, but that history, especially these
of latter times; affords sufficient instructions to make a soldier perfect
in that point.

Let not therefore any man despise the sound instructions which learning
affords, nor refuse the helps that history does offer to perfect the
weakness of a short experience, especially when no worth can counteruaile the
weight of so great a business for I take the office of a chief commander, to
be a subject capable of the greatest wisdedome that may be apprehended by
natural means, being to manage a multitude of disagreeing minds, as a fit
instrument to execute a dessigne of much consequence and great expectation, and
to qualify both their affections and apprehensions according to the accidents
which rise in the course of his directions; besides the true judgment, which
he ought to have of such circumstances as are most important to a fortunate
end, wherein our providence cannot have enough either from learning or
experience, to prevent disaduantages, or to take hold of opportunities.
Neither can it be denied, but as this knowledge adds perfection to our
judgment, so it serves also as a spur to glory, and increases the desire of
honor in such as behold the atchieuments of virtue, commended to a perpetual
posterity, having themselves the like means to consecrate their memory to
succeeding ages, wherein they may serve for examples of valor, and reap the
reward of true honor. Or to conclude, if we thirst after the knowledge of our
own fortune, and long to foresee the end of that race which we have taken,
which is the chiefest matter of consequence in the use of Arms; what better
conjecture can be made, then to look into the course of former times, which
have proceeded from like beginnings, and were continued with like means, and
therefore not unlikely to sort unto like ends?

And now if it be demanded whether reading or practice have the first place in
this Art, and serves as a foundation to the rest of the building? Let Marius
answer this question, Salust. de bello Iugur.
who envying at the nobility of Rome, says thus. Qui postquam consules facti
sunt, acta Maiorum and Graecorum militaria praecepta legere caeperint: homines
praeposteri, nam legere quam fieri, tempore posterius, re and vsu prius est.
Whereas (says he) reading ought to go before practice (although it follow it
in course of time, for there is no reading, but of some thing practiced
before,) these preposterous men, after they are made Consuls and placed at the
helm of government, begin to read, when they should practice that which they
had read; and so bewray their insufficiency of knowledge by using out of time
that, which in time is most necessary. This testimony gave Marius of reading
and book learning, being himself an enemy to the same, for as much as all his
knowledge came by mere experience. But howsoever his judgment was good in this
point: for since that all motion and action proceeds from the soul, and
cannot well be produced, until the Idea thereof be first imprinted in the
mind, according to which pattern the outward being and sensible resemblance
is duly fashioned; how is it possible that any action can be well expressed,
when the mind is not directed by knowledge to dispose it in that sort, as
shall best agree with the occurrentes of such natures, as are necessarily
interessed both in the means and in the end thereof? And therefore speculatiue
knowledge as the Tramontane, to direct the course of all practice is first to
be respected.

But that I may not seem partial in this controversy, but carry an equal
hand between two so necessary yoakefellowes, give me leave to conclude in a
word, the benefit of practice, and define the good which comes from
experience; that so nothing that has been spoken may seem to come from
affection, or proceed from the forge of unjust partiality. And first it cannot
be denied, but that practice gives boldness and assurance in action, and
makes men expert in such things they take in hand, for no man can rest upon
such certainty, through the theorike of knowledge, as he that has seen his
learning verified by practice, and acknowledged by the testimony of assured
proof: Besides, there are many other acco^plements gotten only by practice,
which grace the presence of knowledge, and give credit to that which we have
read; as first to learn the use and advantage of the arms which we bear;
secondly, by frequent aspect and familiarity of dangers, and accidents of
terror, to learn to fear nothing but dishonor, to make no difference
between heat and cold, summer and winter, to sleep in all places as on a
bed, and at the same time to take pains and suffer penury, with many other
difficulties which custom makes easy, and cannot be gotten but by use and
practice.

And thus at length, I have brought a shallow discourse to an abrupt end,
wishing with greater zeal of affection then I am able with manifest proof of
reason, to demonstrate the necessity, that both these parts were by our
soldiers so regarded, that neither practice might march in obstinate
blindness without learned knowledge; nor this again be entertained with an
idle apprehension without practice: but that both of them may be respected, as
necessary parts to make a complete nature; wherein knowledge as the
intellectual part gives life and spirit to the action, and practice as the
material substance makes it of a sensible being, and like a skillful workman
expresses the excellency, which knowledge has fore conceived: wishing no man
to despair of effecting that by practice which the Theorike of knowledge
commends. For Cur desperes nunc posse fieri, quod iam toties factum est?

THE SVMME OF THE FIRST BOOK OF CAESAR'S COMMENTARIES, WITH Observations upon
the same, discovering the excellency of Caesar's militia.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this first book, are contained the specialities of two great wars, begun
and ended both in a summer: the first, between Caesar and the Heluetij:
Suitchers.
the second, between him and Ariouistus king of the Germans. The history of
the Heluetians may be reduced to three principal heads: under the first, are
the reasons that moved the Heluetians to entertain so desperate an expedition,
and the preparation which they made for the same. The second, contains their
defeat by Caesar: and the third, their return into their country. That of
Ariouistus deuideth it self into two parts: the first gives the causes that
induced Caesar to undertake that war: the second entreats of the war it
self, and particularly describes Ariouistus overthrow.

CHAP. I.
Gallia described: the Heluetians dislike their native seat, and propound to
themselves larger territories in the continent of Gallia. Orgetorix feeds
this humor, for his own advantage.

GALLIA is divided into three parts, differing one from an other in manners,
Caesar.
in language, and in laws. The first part is inhabited by the Belgae: the
second by the Celtae, whom we call Galli: and the third by the Aquitani. Belgia
is the northeast part of Gallia, bounded on the East with the river Rhene, and
divided from the Celtae, Matrona and Sequena.
with the rivers Marne and Seen. The inhabitants of this Belgia, are without
comparison the stowtest and best men at arms amongst all the Galls: for
besides, that they are far remote from the ciuility of the Roman Province, and
unacquainted with traffike or intercourse of strangers, they are in continual
wars with the Germans, which makes them hardy, expert and valorous. The
Celtae possessed the greatest part of Gallia, and have the Ocean, Seen, Garum,
and the upper part of Rhene for their confines. Aquitania is limited with the
river Garume and the Perinaean hills. In each of these parts are diverse states
and commonweals, governed for the most part by the Annual magistracy of
their nobility, Two states in the duchy of Burgundy.
but all divided into factions and parts; whereof the Hedui and Sequani, are
contrary, chief and opposite ringleaders.

The chiefest reason that moved the Heluetians to forsake their country, was
the good opinion they had of their own virtue and magnanimity, and the small
capacity and circuit of their territories: For Heluetia being bounded with the
famous rivers Rhene and Rhone, The lake of Geneua. Mont ioux.
and with the lake Lemanus, and the high hanging rocks of the hill Iura;
extending it self within these bounds, but 240 miles in length and 180 in
breadth, seemed too narrow a room to contain so warlike a people, that long
before had overflowed the marches of their country, with the conceit they had
of their own valor, and that it heard that nature should oppose it self by
rivers and mountains against the Prowess, which no enemy could ever resist:
and therefore, they resolved to for sake their country, which first gave them
breath and being, rather then it should hinder a correspondent proceeding to
their warlike nature. These coals of ambition were first kindled, and daily
blown, by the earnest persuasions and impulsions of Orgetorix, the chiefest
man of authority amongst the Heluetians, both for his wealth and nobility, who
not contented to be greatest in that manner he was; but affecting the
greatness of princely dignity, thought no means fitter to shadow the
alteration of their state, then the change of their soil, and in their new
seat and place of rest to lay the foundation of a new government.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
HE that will examine this expedition of the Heluetians, by the transmigrations
and flittings of other nations, shall find some unexampled particularities in
the course of their proceeding: for first it has never been heard, that any
people utterly abandoned that country which nature or providence had allotted
them; unless they were driven thereunto by a general calamity, as the
infection of the air, the cruelty and oppression of a neighbor nation, as
were the Sueuians, who thought it great honor to suffer no man to border upon
their confines; or some other universal, which made the place inhabitable and
the people willing to undertake a voluntary exile. But oftentimes we read,
that when the inhabitants of a country were so multiplied, that the place was
over charged with multitudes of offspring, and like a poor father had more
children then it was able to sustain, the abou^ding surplus was sent out to
seek new fortunes in foreign countries, and to possess themselves of a
resting seat; which might recompense the wants of their native country, with a
plenteous revenue of necessary supplementes: And in this sort, we read that
Rome sent out many Colonies into diverse parts of her Empire: And in this manner
the ancient Galls disburdened themselves of their superfluity, and sent them
into Asia. The Goths came from the Islands of the Balticke sea, and in Sulla
his time swarmed over Germany: besides many other nations whose transmigrations
are particularly described by Lazius. But amongst all these, we find none that
so forsook their country, but there remained some behind to inhabit the same,
from whence as from a fountain, succeeding ages might derive the stream of
that ouerflowing multitude, and by them take notice of the causes, which moved
them unto it: for their manner was in all such expeditions, and sending out of
Colonies, to divide themselves into two or three parts, equal both in equality
and number. For after they had parted their common people into even companies,
they divided their nobility with as great equality as they could, among the
former partitions; and then casting lots, that part which went out to seek new
adventures, left their lands and possessions to the rest that remained at
home; and so by industry they supplied that defect which continuance of time
had drawn upon them. And this was the means which the first inhabitants of the
earth found out after the flood, to people the uninhabited places, and to keep
off the inconveniences of scarcity and famine.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
HE that would prognosticate by the course of these several proceedings,
whether of the two betokened better success, has greater reason to foretell
happiness to these which I last spoke of, then to the Heluetians; unless their
valor were the greater, and quitted al difficulties which hatred and envy
would cast upon them: for an action which sauoureth of necessity, (which was
always understood in sending out a colonie) has a more plauisible pasport
amongst men, then that which proceeds from a proud voluntary motion: for as
men can be content to tolerate the one, if it concern not their particular;
so on the other side, they count it gain to punish pride with shame, and to
oppose themselves against the other.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
ORgetorix, thirsting after princely dignity, discovers the humor of vain
glory. For not contented with the substance of honor, being already of greatest
power amongst the Heluetians, and ordering the affairs of the state by his
own direction, thought it nothing without the marks and title of dignity,
unto which the inconveniences of majesty are annexed: not considering that the
best honor sits not always in imperial thrones, nor wears the diadems of
Princes; but oftentimes rests it self in meaner places, and shines better
with obscurer titles. For proof whereof, to omit antiquity, take the family of
the Medices in Florence, and particularly Cosimo and Lorenzo, whose virtue
raised them to that height of honor; that they were nothing inferior to the
greatest potentates of their time, being themselves but private gentlemen in
that state, and bearing their proper names as their greatest titles. But
howsoever the opportunity of changing their soil, was well observed by
Orgetorix, as the fittest means to attempt an innovation; but the success
depended much upon the fortunate proceeding of their expedition: for as a
multitude of that nature, can be content to attribute a great part of their
happiness, wherein every man thinks himself particularly interessed, to an
eminent leader; and in that universal ecstasy of joy will easily admit an
alteration of their state: so if the issue be in any respect unfortunate, no
man will acknowledge himself faulty, but every one desiring to discharge his
passion upon some object: A chief director is likeliest to be the mark, at
which the darts of their discontent will be thrown, and then he will find it
hard to effect what he intends.

CHAP. II.
Orgetorix practices are discovered: his death: the Heluetians continue the
resolution of their expedition, and prepare themselves accordingly.

BUT Orgetorix failed in the first entrance into his proiectes, Caesar.
for seeking to color his attempt by the example of Casticus, a man of the
like authority amongst the Sequani, and Dumnorix among the Hedui, (whom he
persuaded) in their several states to clime the same steps of ambition, he
revealed his intent, and ended it also: for being called by the Heluetians to
answer that treason; before he came to trial, his body was found dead, not
without suspicion of murdering himself. The Heluetians notwithstanding
continued their determined voyage, making preparations correspondent for the
same; and for their better provision of victuals, they thought two years
little enough to study tillage, to furnish themselves with convenient store of
corn; and in the mean time to provide themselves of carts and cariages, that
nothing might be wanting to make the journey easy and the end fortunate. And
that no near borderer might interrupt with new troubles, a dessigne of such
hope, they made peace with all their neighbor nations, and resolved for their
own advantage, to part friends with those, whom they had ever lived with in
continual iars. And lastly, considering the mutability of man's nature, which
scarce continues constant the space of one hour, but alters his
determinations, according as he diversely apprehends the same subject, least
any of them should change their mind, and suffer the difficulties of the
action to ouersway the honor that might ensue thereof: in the heat of their
forwardnes they made a law, which at the end of two years, commanded their
departure.

THE OBSERVATION.
AS these prouisoes were all requisite, so one thing was omitted, which might
have furthered their good fortune more then any thing thought of, The omission
in the Heluetian expedition.
which was to have concealed by all means the time of their departure: for all
the beasts of the wood must needs stand at gaze, when such lions roused
themselves out of their dens, and be then very watchful of their safety when
they knew the instant of time, when some of their spoils must needs be
offered to appease their fury: Or at the least it behooued them so to have
dealt by hostages and treaty, that such as were likeliest and best able to
cross their dessignements, might have been no hinderance of their
proceedings: considering there were but two ways out of their country by
which they might go, the one narrow and difficult between the hill Iura and the
river Rhone, by the country of the Sequani: the other through Prouence far
easier and shorter, but not to be taken but by the permission of the Romans.
But howsoever their error was, that after two years provision to go, and
having made an exterminating decree which enjoined them to go, when they came
to the point they knew not what way to go.

CHAP. III.
Caesar denies the Heluetians passage through the Roman Province: he
fortifieth the passage between the hill Iura, and the lake of Geneua.

CAEsar proconsull of the province in Gallia, Caesar.
being then at Rome, and hearing what course the Heluetians purposed to take,
made great iourneyes to hasten into the Province, least it should receive any
detriment by them: and to that end he gathered what forces he could at his
first arrival, which was but one legion, and caused the bridge at Geneua to be
broken down, to hinder their passage what he might: And then too late the
Heluetians began to perceive their omissions, for finding themselves ready to
depart, they rased all their walled towns being twelve in number, and burnt
400 villages besides private houses, with the rest of the corn which they could
not carry with them, and appointed a day to meet all upon the banks of
Rhone, which day was the fifth of the Calendes of April, in the Consulship of
Lu. Piso, and A. Gabinius: at their arrival understanding of the resistance
which Caesar made; they sent unto him some of the chiefest of their Tribes, to
entreat a quiet passage through the Province. Although Caesar was resolved to
deny the^ their pasport, yet for that time he thought it best to stand
doubtful of an answer; that he might the better provide himself in the mean
time, to make good his denial if it were refused. The reason that moved him to
deny them passage, was grounded upon the overthrow which L. Cassius a Roman
Consul had received by the Heluetians, wherein the Consul himself was
slain, and the soldiers sold for bo^dslaues: And this accident procured
their hinderance for two respects; first, he thought that the people of Rome
could not with the majesty of their Empire, show any favor to a nation that
had so foiled them, least they should seem to stand in fear of such as durst
make head against their armies, and buckle with the strength of their legions.
Secondly, he thought it impossible that the Heluetians having lent them such a
blow, could pass through their Province without further violence: and therefore
in this time of deliberation, he made a ditch, and a rampire from the hill
Iura to the lake of Geneua, containing 19 miles in length. The rampire was 16
foot high with an answerable latitude and depth of the ditch: and this he
fortified with many castles well manned with soldiers, and stored with
munition. Notwithstanding the Heluetians attended peaceably their day of
audience; and then returned and received a denial.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis manner of prolonging of time to renforce the troops or get some other
advantage, as it was then of great use to Caesar, and has oftentimes been
practiced to good purpose; so does it discover to a circumspect enemy, by the
directions in the mean time (which cannot easily be shadowed) the drift of
that delay; and so inuiteth him with greater courage, to take the opportunity
of that present advantage; especially if tract of time may strengthen the one,
and not further the other, which is easily discerned by the circumstances of
the action.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe request of the Heluetians seemed to deserve a facile answer, being in
effect no more then nature had given to the river Rhone, which was to pass
through the province, with as much speed and as little hurt as they could: but
Caesar looking further into the matter and comparing things already past, with
occurrences that were to follow after, found the majesty of the Roman Empire to
be interessed in the answer, being either to maintain her greatness by
resisting her enemies, or to degenerat from ancient virtue, by gratifying such
as sought her ruin, which in matter of state are things of great consequence.
And further, he knew it to be an unsafe course to suffer an enemy to have
means of doing hurt; considering that the nature of man is always prone to
load him with further wrongs whom he has once injured: not but that he could
peradventure be content to end the quarrel upon that advantage; but fearing the
other, whom he wronged, to expect but an opportunity of revenge, he gets what
advantage he can before hand, and so cease not until he have added a bloody
end to an injurious beginning.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
COncerning this marvelous fortification, between the hill and the lake, how
serviceable such works were unto him in all his wars; in what sort, and in
how small time, they were made, I will defer the treatise of them until I
come to the height of Alesia, where he gave some ground of that hyperbolicall
speech: An me deleto, non animaduertebatis december habere lectas quidem legiones
populum Romanum, quae non solum vobis obsister sed etiam coelum diruere possent?

CHAP. IIII.
The Heluetians failing to pass the Rhone, take the way through the country
of the Sequani. Caesar hastes into Italy, and there inrolleth more legions:
and returning, overthrows part of them at the river Arar.

THe Heluetians perceiving Caesar's determination, Caesar.
resolved to redeem the ouerslip they had committed in the course of their
project, with the power of their forces; and to open a way by valor and arms,
where peaceable entreaty had no passage: and therefore, they endeavored some by
boats, and others by fordes and shallowes, to pass the Rhone, and enter into
Province, maugre Caesar and his legion. But being easily repelde by means of
the fortification, they made a virtue of necessity, and took the narrow and
difficult way, through the territories of the Sequani: of whom by Dumnorix
intercession they obtained a friendly through-fare. In the mean time, Caesar
hasted into Italy, and there enrolled two new legions, and took three more
out of their standing camps in Aquileia: and with these five legions returned
speedily into Gallia. At his return he understood, that the Heluetians had
passed the straites, and were now sacking the territories of the Edui, a state
that had always deserved well of the people rf Rome. The Ambari complained in
like manner of the same hostility: and so did the Allobroges which inhabited
beyond the Rhone. Caesar not thinking it convenient to linger any longer, and
understanding that three parts of their troops had already past the river
Arar, and a fourth remained to be transported, he thought it not good to
forslow that advantage: and therefore at the third watch of the night, he
marched out of his camp with three legions, to the place where they lay, and
finding them scattered and dispersed; Zuricke.
he put the greatest part of them to the sword, and the rest escaped into the
woods near adjoining. This part that was thus defeated, was named Pagus
Tigurinus.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis defeat being chiefly a service of execution upon such as were taken at a
dangerous disadvantage, which men call unaware, contains these two aduisoes.
First, not to neglect that advantage which Sertorius by the hairs of his horse
tail has proved to be very important, that beginning with a part, it is a
matter of no difficulty to overcome the whole. Secondly, it may serve for a
caveat, so to transport an Army over awater, where the enemy is within a
reasonable march, that no part may be so severed from the body of the Army,
that advantage may thereby be taken to cut them off all together, and separate
them from themselves. The safest and most honorable way, to transport an Army
over a river, is by a bridge, placing at each end sufficient troops of horse
and foot, to defend the Army from sudden assaults, as they pass over the
water; and thus went Caesar over the Rhene into Germany two several times.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the circumstance of time, when Caesar went out of his camp, which
is noted to be in the third watch, we must understand that the Romans divided
the whole night into four watches, The manner of their watch.
every watch containing three hours; and these watches were distinguished by
several notes and sound of cornets or trumpets, that by the distinction and
diversity thereof, it might easily be known what watch was sounded. The charge
and office of sounding the watches, belonged to the chiefest Centurio^ of a
legion, whom they called Primipilus, or Primus Centurio, at whose pauilion the
trumpeters attended, to be directed by his houre-glasse. The first watch began
always at sunne-setting, and continued three hours, (I understand such hours
as the night contained, being divided into twelve: for the Romans divided their
night as well as their day into twelve equal spaces, which they called hours)
the second watch continued until midnight; and then the third watch began, and
contained likewise three hours; the fourth was equal to the rest, and
continued until sun rising. So that by this phrase de tertia vigilia, we
understand that Caesar went out of his camp in the third watch, which was
after midnight: and so we must conceive of the rest of the watches, as often as
we shall find them mentioned in history.

CAP. V.
Caesar passes over the river Arar: his horsemen incountred with the
Heluetians and were put to the worst.

THE Heluetians having passed the river, Caesar.
Caesar made haste to follow after, and making a bridge he transported over
his legions in one day, which the Heluetians could scarce do in twenty: And
sending all his horse to the number of four thousand which he had raised in
the Province and amongst the Hedui, to discover what way the enemy took, it
happened that they fell so near upon the reregard of the Heluetians, that they
were forced to give battle in a place of disadvantage, and by that means some
of them were slain, and the rest put to flight. The Heluetians made insolent
with this victory, for as much as 500 of their men had put to route so great a
multitude, began now boldly to resist, and sometimes part of their rereward
would violently assault the Roman legions. Caesar held his men from giving
battle, thinking it sufffcient for the present to keep the enemy from
pillaging, forage, and depopulation: and so they marched fifteen days
together in such sort, that there was not above five or six miles between the
rereward of the Heluetians and the vangard of the Romans.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis example of the Heluetians may lesson a commander, not to wax insolent
upon every overthrow which the enemy takes, but duly to way the true causes
of a victory gotten or an overthrow taken; that apprehending the right
current of the action, he may neither vaunt of a blind victory, nor be
dismayed at a casual mishappe. And herein let a heedfull warines so moderate
the sequels of victory in a triumphing spirit, that the care and jealousy to
keep still that sweet sounding fame on foot, may as far surpass the
industry, which he first used to obtain it, as the continuance of happiness
does exceed the beginning of good fortunes. For such is the nature of our
soul, that although from her infancy even to the manhood of her age, she never
found want of that which she lusted after; yet when she meets with a
counterbuffe to check her appetite, and restrain her affections from their
satisfaction; she is as much troubled in that want, as if she had never
received any contentment at all: for our will to every object which it
seeks after, begets always a new appetite, which is not satisfied with a
former quittance, but either seeks present payment, or returns
coffeehouse unto the mind. And as our soul is of an everlasting being, and
cannot think of an end, to her beginning; so she seeks a perpetual
continuance of such things which she lusts after: which he, that means to
hold fortune his friend, will endeavor to maintain.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar sends to get the advantage of a hill, and so to give the Heluetians
battle: but was put off by false intelligence: the opportunity being lost, he
intends provision of corn.

CAESAR being advertised by his discouerers, Caesar.
that the Heluetians lay under a hill, about eight miles distant from his
camp; and understanding that the ascent unto the top of the hill, on the
further side from the enemy was ready and easy: in the third watch he sent
Labienus with two legions, to possess themselves of the said hill, and he
himself followed with the rest of the Army in the fourth watch. His direction
to Labienus was, that as soon as he perceived him to charge the enemy below in
the valley, that then he should descend with as violent a shocke as he could,
and so the Heluetians should be charged both in front and flancke at one
instant. But this intent was at that time frustrated through the causeless
fear of one Publius Considius, a man held very skillful in matter of war,
for his experience first under Sulla, and afterward with Crassus; who being
sent by Caesar to discover whether Labienus had took the Hill, was stricken
with such a terror being so near an enemy of that fame, that seeing the
Roman ensigns displaied upon the mountain, could not be persuaded but they
were the Heluetians, and returned that advertisement to Caesar: whereupon he
desisted for that time from following his purpose, and retired to the next
hill, where he imbattailed his soldiers with advantage of the place. This
opportunity being thus lost, because the day of measuring corn unto the
soldiers, was within two days: he would in no wise omit that care (although
peradventure he might have had the like opportunity within a day or two) but
turned toward Bibracte a great and opulent city of the Hedui 18 miles
distant from his camp, Bray in the county of Retell.
and there purposed to provide corn to pay his soldiers.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe getting of this hill as a place of advantage, was marvelous important to
the happy success of the battle: for the advantage of the place is not only
noted as an especial cause of easy victory, Places of advantage in the Roman
wars.
throughout this history; but in all their wars from the very cradle of their
Empire, it cleared their Armies from all difficulties, to what extremity
soever they were put. The first reason may be in regard of their darts and
slinges, and especially their piles, which being a heavy deadly weapon, could
not any way be so auailable, being cast countremont or in a plain level, as
when the decliuitie and downfall of a swelling bank did naturally second their
violent impression: Neither can the shocke at handy-blowes be any thing so
furious (which was a point of great respect in their battles) when the
soldiers spent their strength in franchising the injury of a rising
mountain, as when the place by a natural inclination did further their
course. And to conclude, if the battle succeeded not according to their
desire, the favor of the place afforded them means of a strong retrait, in
the highest part whereof, they had commonly their camps well fenced and
fortified against all chances. If it be demanded whether the upper ground be
of like use, in regard of our weapons: I answer, that in a skirmish of shot, I
take the advantage to lie in the lower ground rather then on the hill; for the
pieces being hastily charged, as commonly they are after the first volley, if
the bullet chance to lie loose, when the nose of the piece is lower then the
breech, it must needs fly at random, and be altogether ineffectual: but
when the nose shall be raised upward to the side of a hill, the bullet being
rammed in with his own weight, shall fly with greater certainty and fury;
considering the nature of the powder to be such, that the more it is stopped and
shut in, the more it seeks to enlarge his room, and breaks forth with
greater violence and fury. Concerning other weapons, I take the upper ground in
the shocke and encounter, to be aduantagious, as well for the sword as the
pike, and would deserve as great respect, if the controversy were decided by
these weapons, as seldom times it is.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
BY Causidius his demeanor, we see that verified which physicians affirm,
that nothing will sooner carry our judgment out of her proper seat, then the
passion of fear: and that amongst soldiers themselves, whom custom has made
familiarly acquainted with horror and death, it is able to turn a flock of
sheep into a squadron of corselets, and a few canes or osiers into pikes and
lanciers: which may serve to advise a discreet General, not easily to credit a
relation of that nature, when a man of reputation, in so perfect a discipline
and so experienced in the service of three famous Chiefes, was so surprised
with fear, that he could not discern his friends from his enemies: but I will
speak more of this passion in the war, with Ariouistus.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
IN every relation throughout the whole course of this history, the first
words are commonly these, Their manner of victualing
Re frumentaria comparata; as the foundation and strength of every expedition,
without which no man can manage a war, according to the true maxims and
rules of the Art military, but must be forced to relieve that inconvenience,
with the loss of many other advantages of great consequence: Which gave
occasion to Gaspard de Coligni that famous Admiral of France amongst other
oracles of truth, wherewith his mind was maruellously enriched, often to use
this saying: That he that will shape that beast (meaning war) must begin with
the belly: And this rule was diligently observed by Caesar, who best knew how
to express the true portraiture of that beast, in due proportion and lively
resemblance.

The order of the Romans was, at the day of measuring, to give corn to every
particular soldier, for a certain time, which was commonly defined by
circumstances: And by the measure which was given them, they knew the day of
the next payment; for every footman received after the rate of a bushel a
week, which was thought sufficient for him and his servant: for if they had
paid them their whole stipend in money, it might have been wasted in
unnecessary expenses; but by this means they were sure of provision for the
time determined; and the sequel of the war was prouidently cared for by the
General.

The corn being delivered out, was husbanded, ground with hand-milles, which
they carried always with them, and made into hasty cakes, dainty enough for
a soldiers mouth, by no other but themselves and their servants: Neither could
they sell it or exchange it for bread; for Salust reckons this up amongst
other dishonours, of the discipline corrupted, that the soldiers sold away
their corn, which was given them by the treasurer, and bought their bread by
the day. And this manner of provision had many special commodities, which are
not incident to our custom of victualing: for it is impossible, that
victualers should follow an Army upon a service, in the enemies country
twenty or thirty days together, with sufficient provision for an Army: And
by that means the General cannot attend advantages and fittest oportunities,
which in tract of time are often offered, but is forced either to hazard the
whole, upon unequal terms, or to sound an unwilling retrait. And whereas the
victualers are for the most part voluntary, respecting nothing but their
gain; and the soldiers on the other side, careless of the morrow and
prodigal of the present, in that turbulent marmarket, where the seller has an
eye only to his particular, and the buyer respects neither the public good
nor his private commodity, there is nothing to be looked for, but famine and
confusion. Where as the Romans by their manner of provision, imposed the
general care of the public good upon the chief commander, whose duty it was
to provide store of corn for his Army; and the particular care upon every
private soldier, whom it especially concerned to see, that the allowance
which the common weal had in plentiful manner given him, for his maintenance,
might not be wasted through negligence or prodigality; which excellent order,
the nature of our victuals will no way admit. Their provinces and the next
confederate states furnished their Armies continually with corn; as it
appears by this place, that for provision of grain, he depended altogether
upon the Hedui: And when they were in the enemies country, in the time of
harvest, the soldiers went out to reap and gather corn, and delivered it
threshed and cleansed to the treasurer, that it might be kept until the day of
payment. But to leave this frugall and provident manner of provision as
impossible to be imitated by this age, let us return to our history, and see
how the Heluetians were led, by a probable error, to their last overthrow.

CHAP. VII.
The Heluetians follow after Caesar, and overtake the rereward. He imbattaileth
his legions upon the side of a hill: and gives order for the battle.

THE Heluetians, Caesar.
understanding of the Romans departure by fugitives that came unto them, were
fully persuaded that fear was the greatest cause of their retraite: for the
day before having the upper ground, they durst not use the advantage of the
same: and hoping withal to intercept them from victuals, they followed after
them with what speed they could, and as they ouertooke them they charged upon
the rereward. Which when Caesar perceived, he sent his horsemen to sustain the
assault, and in the mean time he drew his forces unto the next hill, and in
the side thereof about the middle of the hill, he made a triple battle of
four old legions, on the top of the hill he placed two new legions, which
he had last enrolled in Italy, with the associate forces; and to these he
commended the baggage and impediments of the whole Army, and filled all the
rest of the hill with light armed men. The Heluetians on the other side,
conuaied their carriage and impedimentes into one place; and having beaten back
Caesar's horsemen, with a thick thronged batallion, they put themselves into a
phalanx, and so pressed under the first battle of the Roman legions.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the true sense of this triple battle, which Caesar made upon the
side of the hill, I understand it according to the ancient custom of the
Romans; The manner of their imbattailing.
who in the infancy of their military discipline, divided their Army into
three sorts of soldiers, Hastati, Principes, and Triarij: for I omit the
velites, as no part of their standing battles, and of these they made three
several battles from front to back: in the first battle were the Hastati,
and they possessed the whole front of the Army, and were called Acies prima.
By triplex Acies.
Behind these in a convenient distance, stood the Principes, in like sort and
order disposed, and were called Acies secunda: and lastly in a like
correspondent distance, were the Triarij imbattelled and made Aciem tertiam.
Their legion consisted of ten companies, which they called cohortes, and every
cohort consisted of three small companies, which they named Manipuli: a maniple
of the Hastati, a maniple of the Principes, and an other of the Triarij, as I
will more particularly set down in the second book. And as these three kinds
of soldiers were separated by distance of place from front to back: so was
every battle divided into his maniples; and these were divided by little
allies and ways, one from an other, which were used to this purpose: The
Hastati being in front did ever begin the battle, and if they found themselves
too weak to repel the enemy, or were happily forced to a retrait, they drew
themselves through these allies or distances, which were in the second battle
between the maniples of the Principes into the space, which was between the
Principes and the Triarij, and there they rested themselves whilst the Princes
took their place and charged the enemy: Or otherwise, if the commanders found
it needful, they filde up those distances of the Principes, and so united with
them into one body, they charged the enemy all in gross; and then if they
prevailed not, they retired into the spaces between the Triarij, and so they
gave the last assault, all the three bodies being joined all into one.

Now if we examine by the current of the history, whether Caesar observed the
same order and divisions in his wars, we shall find little or no alteration
at all, for first this triplex Acies here mentioned, was no other thing but the
division of the Hastati, Principes and Triarij, according to the manner of the
first institution. And least any man should dream of that ordinary division,
which is likewise threefold, the two cornets and the battle, and in that sense
he might say to have made triplicem Aciem, let him understand, that the
circumstances of the division have no coherence with that division; for in that
he says of the Heluetians, successerunt Aciem primam, pressed near the first
battle or vangard, he makes it clear that the Army was divided into a triple
battle from front to back: for otherwise, he would have said, successerint
dextrum aut sinistrum cornu, aut mediam Aciem: for so were the parts of that
division termed. Again, in the retrait which the Heluetians made to the hill,
when he says that the first and second battle followed close upon the
enemy, and the third opposed it self against the Boij and Tulingi, and stood
ready at the foot of the hill, to charge the legions in the flank and on the
back. It is manifest, that no other division can so fitly be applied to this
circumstance, as that from front to back.

But that place in the first of the civil wars takes away all scruple of
controversy, where he uses the very same terms of prima, secunda and
tertia Acies: for being to incampe himself near unto Afranius, and fearing
least his soldiers should be interrupted in their work, he caused the first
and second battle to stand in Arms and keep their distance, to the end they
might shroud and cover the third battle (which was employed in making a ditch
behind them) from the view of the enemy; and this kind of imbattailing Caesar
observed, in most of his fightes: by which it appears that he uses the very
same order and discipline for imbattailing, as was instituted by the old Romans.

Concerning the ancient names of Hastati, Principes and Triarij, which Ramus
in his Militia Iulij Caesaris, urges to be omitted throughout the whole
history: I grant they are seldom used in these Commentaries, in the sense of
their first institution: for the Hastati, when the discipline was first
erected, were the youngest and poorest of the legionarie soldiers. The
Principes were the lusty, and able bodied men: and the Triarij the eldest and
best experienced. But in Caesar's camp, there was little or no difference
either of valor or years, between the Hastati, Principes or Triarij, which
he names Prima, Secunda and Tertia Acies; and therefore were never termed by
those names, in respect of that difference. Notwithstanding in regard of order
and degrees of discipline, that virtue might be rewarded with honor, and that
time might challenge the privilege of a more worthy place, Lib. 1. de bello
Civilly.
the said distinctions and terms were religiously observed: for in the
battle with Perreius at Ilerda in Spain, he mentions the death of Q.
Fulginius, ex primo Hastato legionis quartae decimae: and in the overthrow at
Dirrachium he says, Lib 3. de bello Civilly.
that the eagle bearer, being grievously wounded, commended the safety of his
ensign to the horsemen, all the centurions of the first cohort being slain,
praeter principem Priorem. And for the Triarij, there is no term more
frequent in Caesar then Primipilus, which name by the rules of the ancient
discipline, but to the chiefest Centurion of the first maniple of the Triarij:
whereby it appears that the maniples kept the same names in regard of a
necessary distinction, although peradventure the Hastati were as good
soldiers, as either the Principes or the Triarij. As touching the spaces
between the maniples, whereinto the first battle did retire it self if
occasion urged them, I never found any mention of them in Caesar. Excepting
once here in England, where in a skirmish the Britains so urged the court of
guard, which kept watch before the Roman camp, that Caesar sent out two other
cohortes to succor them, who making distance between them as they stood, the
court of guard retired it self in safety, through that space into the camp;
otherwise we never find that the first battle made any retrait into the
allies between the maniples of the second battle, but when it failed in any
part, the second and third went presently to second them, as appears in the
battle following with Arionistus and in diverse others.

Concerning the use of this triple battle, Lib. 5. de militia Romana.
what can be said more then Lipsius has done? where he lays open the
particular commodities thereof as far forth as a speculatiue judgment can
discern of things so far remote from the use of this age, which never
imitateth this triple battle but only in a march: for then commonly they make
three companies, a vangard, a battle and a rereward: but in imbattailing, they
draw these three companies all in front, making two cornets and the battle,
without any other troops to second them. But let this suffice concerning
Caesar his manner of imbattailing and his triplex Acies, until I come to the
second book, where I will handle more particularly the parts of a legion, and
the commodity of their small battailions.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Macedonian Phalanx is described by Polybius to be a square battle of
pikemen, consisting of 16 in flancke and 500 in front; the soldiers standing
so close together that the pikes of the fifth rank were extended three foot
beyond the front of the battle; A phalanx described.
the rest whose pikes were not serviceable by reason of their distance from the
front, couched them upon the shoulders of those that stood before them, and so
locking them in together in file, pressed forward to hold up the swaie or
giving back of the former ranks, and so to make the assault more violent and
irresistable. The Grecians were very skillful in this part of the Art
military, which contains order and disposition in imbattailing, for they
maintained public professors whom they called Tactici, to teach and instruct
their youth the practice and Art of al forms convenient for that purpose. And
these Tactici found by experience, that 16 in flancke so ordered as they were
in a phalanx, were able to bear any shocke how violently soever it charged
upon them: which number of 16 they made to consist of four doubles, as first
unity makes no order, for order consists in number and plurality; but
unity doubled makes two, the least of all orders, and this is the double:
which doubled again makes the second order of four soldiers in a file,
which doubled the third time makes 8, and this doubled makes 16, which is the
fourth doubling from a unite; and in it they stayed as in an absolute number
and square, whose root is 4 the Quadruple in regard of both the extremes: for
every one of these places, the Tactici had several names, by which they were
distinctly known. But the particular description requires a larger discourse,
then can be comprehended in these short observations: he that desires further
knowledge of them, may read Elianus, that lived in the time of Adrian the
Emperor: and Arianus in his history of Alexander the great: with Mauritius,
and Leo imperator, where he shall have the divisions of Tetrafalangia
difalangia, Phalangia unto a unite, with all the discipline of the Grecians.

The chiefest thing to be observed is, that the Grecians having such skill in
imbattailing, preferred a phalanx before all other forms whatsoever; either
because the figure in it self was very strong, or otherwise in regard that it
fitted best their weapons, which were long pikes and targets. But whether
Caesar termed the battle of the Heluetians a phalanx in regard of their
thick manner of imbattailing only, or otherwise, for as much as besides the
form, they used the natural weapon of a phalanx which was the pike, it
remains doubtful. Brancatio in his discourses upon this place, makes it no
controversy, but that every soldier carried a pike and a target, the target
is particularly named in this history: but it cannot so easily be gathered by
the same, that their offensive weapons were pikes. In the fight at the baggage
it is said, that many of the legionarie soldiers were wounded through the
cart wheels, with tragulas and materas, which are commonly interpreted spears
and iauelins: and I take them to be weapons longer then common darts, but
whether they were so long as the sarissas of the Macedonians, I cannot tell.
Howsoever, this is certain, that the Heluetians have ever been reputed for
the true phalangitae, next unto the Macedonians; and that in their thick and
close imbattailing; they failed not at this time of the form of a phalanx: for
they roofed it so thick with targets, that Caesar says they were sore
troubled, because many of their targets were fastened and tied together, with
piles darted through them: Which argues that their phalanx was very thick
thronged, whatsoever their weapon was.

CHAP. VIII.
Caesar sends away all the horses of ease: exhorts his men: and begins
the battle.

BOTH the Armies being in this forwardness, Caesar.
Caesar to take away all hope of safety by flight, first caused his own horse
and then all the prinate horses of ease, of the Legates, Tribunes, and the rest
of the chief leaders, to be carried out of the battle, and using some motives
of courage, according as the circumstances afforded him occasion, he gave the
sign of battle. The Romans casting their piles with the advantage of the
hill, did easily break the Heluetian phalanx; and then taking themselves to
their swords; they did second the fury of the pile with a rude and violent
close.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe ancient sages found it necessary, Speeches of encouragement before they
gave battle.
to a faithful and serious execution of such an action, to prepare the minds
of their men with words of encouragement, and to take away all scruple out of
their conceits, either of the unlawfulness of the cause, or disadvantage
against the enemy: for if at any time that saying be true, that oration plus
potest quam pecunia, it is here more powerful and of greater effect. For a
donatiue or liberanca, can but procure a mercenarie endeavor ever yielding to a
better offer, and do oftentimes breed a suspicion of wrong, even amongst
those that are willingly enriched with them; and so makes them flacke to
discharge their service with loialtie: yea oftentimes of friends to become
enemies. But in as much as speech discloseth the secrets of the soul, and
discovers the intent and drift of every action, a few good words laying
open the injury which is offered to innocence, how equity is controlled with
wrong, and justice controlled by iniquity (for it is necessary that a
commander approve his cause, and settle an opinion of right in the mind of his
soldiers, as it is easy to make that seem probable which so many offer to
defend with their blood, when indeed every man relieth upon another
knowledge, and respects nothing less the right) a few good words I say, will
so stir up their minds in the feruentnes of the cause, that every man will
take himself particularly engaged in the action by the title of equity; and
the rather for that it iumpeth with the necessity of their condition. For men
are willing to do well, when weldoing agrees with that they would do,
otherwise the Act may formerly be effected, but the mind never approves it by
assent. And this manner of exhortation or speech of encouragement, was never
omitted by Caesar in any conflict mentioned in this history: but he still used
it as a necessary instrument to set virtue on foot, and the only means to
stir up alacrity: Or if it happened that his men were at any time discouraged
by disaster or cross accident, Lib. 7. de bello gallico.
as they were at Gergobia, and at the two overthrows he had at Dirrachium; he
never would adventure to give battle until he had encouraged them again, and
confirmed their minds in valor and resolution. But this age has put on so
scornful a humor, that it cannot hear a speech in this key, sound it never so
gravely, without scoffing and derision: and on the other side discontinuance of
so necessary a part, has bred at length such an inutilem pudorem in our
chief commanders, that they had rather loose the gain of a great advantage,
then buy it with words to be delivered in public.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN this Chapter we may further observe the violence of the Roman pile, The
Roman Pile described
which being a heavy deadly weapon, could hardly be frustrated with any
resistance, and in that respect was very proper and effectual against a
phalanx, or any other thick and close battle, or wheresoeeuer else, the stroke
was certain, or could hardly deceive the aim of the caster: for in such
incounters it so galled the enemy, that they were neither able to keep their
order, nor answer the assault with a resisting counterbuffe. By which it
appears that the only remedy against the pile was, to make the ranks thin,
allowing to every soldier a large podisme or place to stand in, that so the
stroke might of it self fall without hurt, or by foresight be prevented; as it
shall plainly appear by the sequel of this history, which I will not omit to
note, as the places shall offer themselves to the examination of this
discourse. But as touching the pile, which is so often mentioned in the Roman
history, Polybius describes it in this manner. A pile (says he) is a casting
weapon, the staff whereof is almost 3 cubits long, and it has palmarem
diametrum, a hand breadth in thickness. The staves were armed with an head of
iron, equal in length to the staff it self: But in that sort that half the
head was fastened up to the middle of the staff, with plates of iron like the
head of a Halbert: and the other half stuck out at the end of the staff
like a pike, containing a fingers breadth in thicknes, and so decreasing less
and less unto the point which was barbed. This head was so slender toward the
point, that the weight of the staff would bend it as it stuck, as appears
in this battle of the Heluetians. This weapon was peculiar to the Romans, and
was called Pilum, as Varro notes of Pilum a Pestell, quod Hosts feriret vt
Pilum. Lib. 3. de militia Romana.
Lipsius finding that Palmarem diametrum, was too great a thickness to be
managed by any man's hand, interprets it to be four inches in circuit, if the
staff were either round or square, for they had of both sorts, and so he
makes it very manageable; but nothing answerable to the description given by
Polybius either in form or weight. Patricius in his Paralleli, makes the
staff to have palmarem diametrum in the butte end, Lib. 5.
but the rest of the staff he makes to decrease taper wise, unto the head of
iron, where it has the thickness of a man's finger; and so it answers both
in form and weight to a Pestell, as may be seen by the figure, and I take it
to be the meaning of Polybius. Patricius in that place sets down four
discommodities of the Pile. First a furious and hot spirited enemy will
easily prevent the darting of the pile, with a nimble and speedy close: And so
we read, that in the battle which Caesar had with Ariouistus, the Germans came
so violently upon them, that the soldiers cast away their piles, and betook
them to their swords. And likewise in that worthy battle between Cateline
and Marcus Petreius, Salust.
they cast away their piles on either part. The second discommoditie was, that
the piles being so heavy, could not be cast any distance, but were only
serviceable at hand. Thirdly, they could not be cast with any aim, or as they
say point blanke: And lastly the soldiers were to take advantage of ground
backward when they threw them, which might easily disorder their troops, if
they were not very well experienced.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe last thing which I observe in this speciality is, that the legionarie
soldiers had no other offensive weapon, but one pile or two at the most, and
their swords. By which it may be gathered, that all their victories came by
buckling at handy-blowes, for they came always so near before they cast their
pile, that they left themselves no more time then might conveniently serve them
to draw their swords: neither would their arms of defense, which was
complete, besides a large target which they carried on their left arm, suffer
them to make any long pursuit, or continued chase whenever a light armed
enemy did make any speedy retrait, as will more plainly appear by that which
follows.

CHAP. IX.
The Heluetians fainting in the battle, retire to a hill, the Romans follow
after, and the battle is continued.

THE Heluetians were sore troubled with the Roman piles, Caesar.
which stuck so fast in their shields, that they were neither able to pull
them out, nor to use their targets to any purpose: and therefore after a
wearisome toil, they chose rather to cast them away, and to hazard their
nakedness upon agilitie and readiness; then to betray their life with an
vnmanageable weapon: but at length fainting with wounds, they began to give
place, and made their retrait to a hill not far off, the better to save
themselves from the fury of the Romans. Them of Borbon and Loraine.
The hill being taken, and the legions following on to drive them from thence,
the reregard of the Heluetians, which were the Boy and Tulingi, consisting of
15000 men stood ready at the foot of the hill, to charge the Romans in flank
and to inuiron them round about: which the Heluetians no sooner perceived but
they returned and began a fresh from the hill to renew the battle, and so the
legions were set upon both in front and flank at one instant. To remedy this
difficulty, conuersa signa bipartito intulerunt, says the history: the first
and second battle fought against the Heluetians that returned from the hill
and the third battle turned themselves to bear the assault of the rereward,
which stood ready to enclose them about, and to charge them on the back. And
here the fight was doubtful and vehement for a long time, until at length
they were no longer able to endure the violence of the legionarie soldiers,
part of them fled to the top of the hill, and the rest betook themselves to
the place, where their baggage and impediments were lodged. And hitherto, here
was not one man seen to have turned his back in all the conflict, although
the fight continued from the seventh hour until the evening.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the ensigns of the Romans: The ensigns of the Romans
we are to understand that the chiefest ensign of every legion was an Eagle,
which always attended upon the Primipile or chief Centurion of the said
legion. The ensign of a maniple was, either a Hand or a Dragon, a woolfe or a
Sphinx, as it appears (besides the testimony of history) by the Column of
Traiane in Rome, wherein the ensigns are figured, with such purtraitures: so
that these ensigns, resembling the proportions of living creatures, had their
fore parts always carried that way which the legions were to march, or where
they were to fight: and therefore in this history, by the aspect and carrying
of the ensigns, the front of the Army was commonly noted: as in this THE
BATTLE WHICH CAESAR HAD WITH THE HELVETIANS

place it is said, that the ensigns of the first and second battle were
carried toward the hill, whither the Heluetians had made their retrait; and
the ensigns of the third battle looked an other way, toward the Boij and
Tulingi, which stood of the foot of the hill: By which is signified, how the
legions were divided to resist the brunt of the double encounter.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the time of the day: The division of their day.
we are to understand that the Romans used not the same division of the day as
we commonly do: for they divided their artificial (which is the space between
sun rising and setting) into 12 equal parts, which the Astronomers called
unequal or planetarie hours. The first hour of the day began always at
sun rising; the sixth hour was always high noone; and the twelfth hour was
sun setting. And as the day waxed longer or shorter, so these hours were
either greater or less: neither did they agree with equal or equinoctial
hours, such as are now used, but only at the Acquinoctium: so that by this
manner of reckoning, ab hora septima ad vesperum, is meant the battle began
about one of the clock according to our Computation, and continued until the
evening. The like we must understand, throughout this whole history, as often
as there is mention made of the circumstance of time.

CHAP. X.
The Heluetians continue their fight, at the cariages: but at length they left
the field, and marched toward Langiers.

THE like courage was also showed on either side at their baggage, Caesar.
the place being fortified with carts and wagons in steed of a rampire, which
so troubled the Romans that they could not win it until it was late in the
night: for the Heluetians being fenced with their cariages, so galled the
legions with darts and tauelins, under the chariots and from between the
wheels, that the victory was not easily achieved. At last being able no
longer to resist, they left the place and marched all that night, without any
intermission; and the fourth day they came into the Confines of the Langiers.
Lingones, being about 230000 that escaped in the battle.

THE OBSERVATION.
IF we consider the nature of the action, and look into the true causes of
their overthrow, as far as the right sense of the history shall direct our
judgment, we shall find valor not to be wanting in the Heluetians, but rather
superlatiuely abounding in the Romans. For that vehement opinion of their
valiancie and manhood, which carried them out of the streights of the country,
to seek larger fortunes in other kingdoms, was not so abated with the losle
of the fourth part of their Host at the river Arar; nor with the terrible fury
of those veteran legions: but it yielded this effect, which Caesar in his
estimate of valor thought memorable, that for five hours space or more, there
was not one man seen to have turned his back. Their manner of imbattailing,
had not the Romans been the enemy, was irresistable: for being cast into a
phalanx, which in the plains of Asia had made Alexander the great and the
Macedonians famous, they did as far surpass any other form of imbattailing
(supposing that the conueniencie of the place did fit that disposition) wherein
the strength of the whole is divided into many particulars, as the violence of a
great body exceeds the force and motion of his parts, when it is divided
into smaller cantons. For as in a phalanx, many particular soldiers are by a
close and compact order incorporated into one entire body: so their several
virtues are gathered into one head, and are as parts united into one general
force, which easily swalloweth up the ability of many other lesser quantities,
into which a greater strength is equally divided.

The advantage of the place which they got by retrait, and the double charge
wherewith they engaged the Romans both in front and flank, was able in an
indifferent conflict to have made fortune fugitive, and bear arms on their
side; or at the least so to have steemed the swelling tide of victory, which
carried the Romans so violently in the chase, that they might have been equal
sharers in the honor of the day: had it not flowed from an Ocean of valor,
whose course could not be hindered with any stops and oppositions, until it
came to that height, which true valor and unexampled resolution affected. And
yet the height of this courage could not so alaie the heat of the Heluetians
fury; but it brake forth into dangerous flames, when they came to the place
where their cariages were laid, and cost much blood and many men's lives before
they quitted the place: for they fought with that spirit and industry, as
though they meant to make trial whether their fortune would prove no better in
the night then it had done in the day.

The overthrow of the Tigurine Canton at the river Arar, proceeded rather from
want of good directions (which is the less to be marvelled at, considering
they had no chief commander as we read of) then from any defect of valor: for
the rules of military government require especial care in passing over a
water; Periculum semper ab hostibus grauissimum sustinet diuisus and
inordinatus exercitus.
for then especially an Army is in greatest danger, when it is disordered and
divided. And therefore the Romans achieved this victory by the horrible
vigilancie as Tully calls it, of their commander: who always watched
oportunitates rei been gerendae, as necessary and speedy means to overcome
in all his wars.

CHAP. XI.
Caesar after three days respite, follows after the Heluetians: he takes
them to mercy, and sends them back again to the country.

CAESAR abode three days in the place where the battle was fought, Caesar.
as well to bury the dead, as to refresh the wearied spirits of his
ouerlaboured soldiers, that their wounds might the better be cured: and in
the mean time he sent letters to the Langres.
Lingones, not to furnish the Heluetians either with corn, or any other
provisions: for if they did, he would esteem of them as of enemies, and take
them in the number of the vanquished Heluetians; and at the three days end, he
made after them with all his forces. The Heluetians constrained through penury
and want of necessary supplements, sent ambassadors to Caesar to entreat an
acceptance of rendrie: who meeting him on the way, threw themselves at his
feet, and with many tears and supplications, they craved such favorable
conditions of peace, as might best comfort a distressed people, and beseem the
glory of so famous a Conquest. Caesar first sent them word to attend his
coming in the place where they were: and at his coming he commanded them to
deliver unto him a sufficient number of hostages and pledges, 2. to give up all
the Arms and weapons they had, 3. and to deliver up the fugitives that were
fled unto them in the time of the war. Whiles these things were a doing, part
of the Heluetians to the number of 6000, stole out of the camp in the night,
and took their journey toward the Rhene, and the Confines of the Germans:
which when Caesar understood, he sent presently to those cities, through whose
territories the Heluetians had passed; and commanded them to bring them back
again: which being diligently performed, he welcomed them with the
entertainment of an enemy, and put them all to the sword. The rest he commanded
to return into their country from whence they came, and because they had
neither corn nor any other sustenance, he caused the Sauoyens.
Allobroges to supply their necessities, and willed the Heluetians to reedifie
their towns and cities which they had before destroyed, and to inhabit in
those friendly places which had given to their ancestors and themselves greater
fortunes, then could elsewhere be afforded them: Wherein he was the more
careful, least if their country lying waste, the fertility of the soil might
inuit the Germans from beyond the Rhene to taste the sweetness which the Galls
enjoyed, and so the province should be sure of an unquiet neighbor. In the
camp of the Heluetians was found a register, containing the particular sums
of all that were in that journey, amounting to the number of 368000, whereof
92000 were fighting men: they that returned and saw the fortune of both their
states, were 110000. And thus ended that war.

THE OBSERVATION.
THe directions concerning their rendrie and return, were very sound, and of
good consequence. For first in that he commanded them to attend his coming in
the place where they were, he took away al motions of new trouble which often
remoues might have caused, by the opportunity of some accident which might have
happened: assuring himself that their abode in that place would increase their
miseries, and consequently ripen that desire of peace which they made show of;
considering that the Lingones in whose territories they were, durst not for
fear of Caesar's displeasure, furnish the^ with any necessaries in that
extremity. Touching the security which the Romans required of the loialty of
such people as they conquered; their manner was, to take as hostages a
sufficient number of the men children of the chiefest men of that nation, whose
lives depended upon their parents fidelity, and ended with the first
suspicion of their rebellion: which custom besides the present good, promised
the like or better security to the next age, when as those children by
conversation and acquaintance should be so affected to the Roman Empire, that
returning to their own country, their actions might rather tend to the
advancement thereof, then any way be prejudicial to the same. And least the
love of liberty and freedom should prevail more with them, then that
affection which nature had enjoined them to bear to their children: he did
what he could to take away the means and instruments of their rebellion, by
causing them to deliver up such Arms and weapons as were there present: and so
to become suitable to that petition of peace, which they had made. The sum of
all is this. He corrected the insolency of a furious people, and reduced them
to a feeling of their own madness. He kept the^ from sacking the possessions of
many thousands, in the continent of Gallia; and sent them back again to
continue their name and nation in the place, where they first inhabited; which
continues unto this day. And thus we see, that there is no humor so
headstrong, nor so backed with strength of circumstances, but it may meet with
a remedy to qualify the insolency thereof, and make it subject to correction
and controlment.

CHAP. XII.
The states of Gallia congratulate Caesar's victory: they call a council, and
discover their inward grief concerning Ariouistus, and his forces.

THE Heluetian war being so happily ended, Caesar.
the Princes and chief men of all the states of Gallia, came to Caesar to
congratulate the happiness of his victory: and with all they besought him
that with his good liking, they might call a General council; wherein they
had matters of great importance to be handled, which they desired with a common
consent, to prefer to his consideration. Which being granted, and the day of
meeting appointed, they bound themselves by oath not to reveal the causes of
their assembly, but to such as they should make choice of, to be their
Orators. The council being ended, the same Princes returned to Caesar, and in
lamentable manner cast themselves at his feet, contending with as great
earnestness, that those things which they delivered might not be revealed, as
they did to have their petition granted: forasmuch as they saw, that the
discovery of such declarations as they propounded, would necessarily pull on
most grievous afflictions. Diuitiacus the Heduan was made speaker for the rest,
and in effect delivered these words.

That Gallia was unhappily divided into two factions, The people of Auuergne.
the Hedui were the head of the one, and the Auerni of the other. These two
states contending many years for the principality, the Auerni with the
Sequani their Clients, finding themselves the weaker party, hired the Germans
to take their part, who at the first sent them 15000 men to strengthen their
faction: but afterward tasting the sweetness and pleasure of the Galls, the
barbarous people so liked the country, that now there were no less then one
hundred and twenty thousand, that were come out of Germany and seated in
their Territories. With these the Hedui and their Clients had once or twice
fought, hoping by their prowess, both to chastise the malice of the Sequani,
and to clear their country of a barbarous enemy: but their labor effected
nothing but their own calamity, and the utter overthrow of their nobility
and Senate: for they were driven to deliver the chiefest of their city, as
pledges to the Sequani, and to bind themselves by oath never to seek their
release or freedom, nor to implore the aid of the people of Rome, but ever to
remain their perpetual bondmen: Only Diuitiacus amongst all the Hedui could
never be brought to that thraldom, but using that liberty which his
resolution afforded him, he went to Rome and boldly opened his distressed case
unto the Senate. But in the end, the victory became as grievous to the
Sequani, as to the Hedui. For Ariouistus king of the Germans, was already
possessed of the third part of their Territories, and at that instant he
commanded them to let go another third part: for there were 24000 Germans come
newely unto him, that were allotted to that inheritance. If this violent course
were not stayed by the opposition of some greater motion, the Galls would
soon be driven out of their country, and beforced to imitate the Heluetians in
seeking new habitations and seats of rest, far remote from the cruelty of
the Germans. Caesar might by his own authority, or by the presence of his
Army, or by the renown of his late victory, or by the name of the people of
Rome, keep the Germans from transporting any more Colonies into Gallia.

THE OBSERVATION.
IN this relation, there are diverse points worthily recommended to the
discretion of such, as are willing to be directed by other men's misaduentures.
As first into what extremities ambition does drive her thirsty favorites, by
suppressing the better faculties of the soul, and setting such unbridled
motions on foot, as carry men headlong into most desperate attempts: for as it
had deserved commendation in either faction so to have carried their emulation,
that by their own means and strength applied to the rule of good government,
their authority might wholly have swaied the inclinations of the weaker states;
so was it most odious in the Sequani, to call in foreign forces to satisfy
the appetite of their untempered humor, and in the end were accordingly
rewarded. Secondly, it appears how dangerous a thing it is, to make a
stranger a stickler in a quarrel which civil dissension has broched, when
the party that called him in, shall not be as able to refuse his assistance
upon occasion, as he was willing to entertain it for advantage. Lastly, the
often discontents of these states show the force of a present evil, which
possesses so vehemently the powers of the soul, that any other calamity
either already past or yet to come, how great soever, seems tolerable and
easy in regard of that smart which the present grief inflicteth. So the
Sequani chose rather to captiuate their liberty to the Barbarism of a savage
nation, then to endure the Hedui to take the hand of them: and again, to make
themselves vassals to the Romans, rather then endure the usurping cruelty of
the Germans: and finally (as the sequel of the history will discover) to
hazard the loss of life and country, then to suffer the taxes and impositions
of the Romans: So predominant is the present evil in men's affections, and so
it prevails at the seat of our judgment.

CHAP. XIII.
The reasons that moved Caesar to undertake this war.

TO these petitions of the Galls Caesar made an answer, Caesar.
comporting the mildness of his natural disposition, promising them his best
furtherance in the cause, and doubted not but that Ariouistus would be
entreated in any reasonable matter: and so he dismissed the assembly. Amongst
many inducements, there were two of especial importance, which urged him to
undertake this war: the first was the dishonor and blot of infamy,
wherewith the present age might have noted the Roman Empire, if upon complaint
and imploration of aid, they should have suffered a barbarous nation to have
held the Hedui in thraldom, who in the majesty of their Senate had oftentimes
been called their brethren and kinsmen, and graced with such titles of respect,
as by the tenure of loyalty and sincerity of affection, might command greater
duties then these which were required. The second reason was the fear he had,
least the Germans accustoming more and more to transport the superfluity of
their increasing families over the Rhene, and to plant them in the fertile
seats of the Galls, the Roman Province might at length he endangered, and
Italy it self attempted. And therefore it seemed best unto him, to send
ambassadors to Ariouistus, to will him to think of some convenient place of
parley, where they might meet to entreat of matters concerning the public
good.

THE OBSERVATION.
I May here take an occasion, The authority of the Roman Generals
to speak somewhat concerning the authority of the Roman Generals, which we
see to be very large, considering that Caesar of himself, without any further
leave of the Senate and people of Rome (for what may be gathered by this
history) did undertake a war of that consequence, and put in ieopardie the
Legions, the Province, or what other interest the Romans had in Gallia. Wherein
we are to understand, that when the state of Rome did allot the government of
any Province to a Proconsull, they did likewise recommend unto him the careful
managing of such accidents, as might any way concern the good of that
regiment. For considering that such causes as may trouble a well ordered
government, are as well external and foreign, as internal and bred within the
bounds of that Empire: it had been to small purpose to have given him only
authority, to maintain a course of wholesome government at home, and no
means to take away such oppositions, which foreign accidents might set up
against him: And so we see that Caesar undertook the Heluetian war, in
regard of the safety of the Province: And this again with Ariouistus, least
the Germans should so multiply in Gallia, that the Province it self might at
length be endangered. Neither had their Generals authority only to undertake
these wars, but the absolute disposition also of the whole course thereof,
whether it were to treat, capitulate, compound, or what else they thought
convenient for the advancement of the common weal, did wholly rest upon their
direction: repub. been gesta, being the style of the warrant for all their
actions. Neither may we think that any subordinate or depending authority can
be so powerful in the course of businesses, as that which absolutely
commands without controlment, and proceeds according to the opportunity of
time and occasion, further then either prescription or limitation can direct
it. And therefore whenever the Roman affairs were distressed and driven to
an exigent, they created a Dictator that had regiam potestatem, such an
absolute command, that whatsoever power rested either in the Consuls, or in the
Tribunes, in the Senate or in the people, it gave way to the greatness of that
magistrate; that there might be no let or retracting power to weaken that
course, which nothing but an absolute command could establish, for the good of
the common weal. And yet notwithstanding this absolute government, they
attributed such power to the course of humane actions, that by the punishment
which they inflicted upon dissolute and unfortunate leaders, they seemed to
acknowledge that no man, how circumspect soever, could promise more then
likelihoods or probabilities of good fortune, as far forth as his means and
industry could atchieue it. Liuie lib. 8.
For old M. Fabius, pleading for the life of his gallant son, and opposing
the rigor of Papyrius the dictator with examples of antiquity, says: Populi
quidem, penes quem potestas omnium rerum esset, ne iram quidem vnquam
atrociorem fuisse in eos qui temeritate atque inscitia exercitus amisissent,
quam vt pecunia eos multaret: capite anquisitum ob rem male gestam de
imperatore nullum ad eam diem esse. The people (says he) in whom the
sovereign power of things consists, never showed greater displeasure
against such, as had lost an Army either by rashness or unskillfulness, then
imposing a fine upon them: but to bring the life of a General in question for
failing in his endeavors, was never heard of to that day.

The condition of the inferior officers of their camp, was far otherwise in
regard of military discipline: for prescription guided them in all their
services, and the chiefest part of their duty was obedience; although they
saw evident reason to the contrary, and found their directions imperfect in
that behalf: And therefore Caesar says upon that occasion: Lib. 3. de bello
Civilly.
aliae sunt legati parts atque imperatoris, alter omnia agere ad praescriptum,
alter libere ad summam rerum consulere debet. The office of a legate or
lieutenant, differs from that of a general: The one doing all things by
prescription; and the other freely deliberating of whatsoever may concern the
cause. And this course the Romans held, concerning the authority of their
Generals.

CHAP. XIIII.
Ariouistus his answer: a second embassage, with the success thereof.

TO that embassage Ariouistus answered, Caesar.
that if his occasions had required Caesar's assistance, he would have furthered
them with his own presence. And he thought it as reasonable that if it were in
his means to pleasure the Romans, Caesar ought not to think much of the like
labor: for his own part, he durst not come into those quarters without an
Army, neither could he levy an Army without great charge. The thing that he
most wondered at was, what the Romans had to do in that part of Gallia, which
the law of Arms had made his inheritance. Upon the return of this message,
Caesar framed a second embassage, the purport whereof carried this sense: For as
much as he thus requited the honor wherewith the people of Rome had beautified
his best dignity (for in Caesar's Consulship by that controlling authority of
their Empire, they had vouchsafed to esteem of him as a king in his dominions,
and as a friend unto their state) that he disdained to admit of a Parlee
concerning the common good: let him know that these were the things which he
required to be performed by him. First that he should not suffer any more
savage troops of the Germans to be transported over the Rheine into Gallia:
secondly, that he should deliver up those Hostages which he had from the Hedui
and Sequani, and should cease to molest them with further injuries. These
things if he did perform, Caesar would assure him of a grateful acceptance,
in the behalf of the people of Rome: otherwise, for as much as he himself was
Proconsull of the Province in Gallia, his charge extended by the same
commission to the defense of their associates and friends; and therefore he
would not neglect the injury of the Hedui.

To these mandates Ariouistus thus answered: the law of Arms kept this tenure
among all nations, that a conqueror might govern a subdued people according
as he thought best for his own safety. The people of Rome did not direct the
course of their government by another man's prescript, but by their own
arbitrament: and as he had not directed the Romans, so ought not they to hinder
the course of his proceedings. The Hedui having tried the fortune of the war,
and having hazarded their life and liberty in the casualtie of many battles,
were by right become stipendarie to his Empire, whose Hostages he would retain
according to the covenants by which they made their peace. If Caesar would
needs undertake that quarrel; let him know that no man ever contended with
Ariouistus, but to his own destruction. Try when he would, he should find
what valor consisted in the Germans, that for 14 years space were never
covered with any other roof then the Heavens.

THE OBSERVATION.
ANd thus far proceeded Caesar with Ariouistus, in debating the wrongs and
agreeuances of the Hedui: Wherein appears the difference between a matter
handled, according to moral civility in terms of mildness and pleasing
accent, and that which is rudely delivered, and depends rather upon the
plainness of the project, then suited with words fit for persuasion. For that
which Ariouistus alleged, to make good his interest in Gallia, was as
consonant to reason, as any thing to the contrary urged by Caesar. But as the
Lacedemonian said of one, that he spoke the truth otherwise then it should be
spoken: so it may be said of Ariouistus answer, that it wanted that sweeting
humanity which gives credit to verity it self; for as much as it proceeds
from a well tempered spirit, wherein no turbulent passion seems to control
the force of reason, nor hinder the sentence of true judgment; but rather
seasoning her conceptions with humility, does covertly complain of open
wrong, and strengthen her assertions with a pleasing delivery. And therefore
how great soever the controversy be, that party which exceeds not the
bounds of modesty, but makes mildness his chiefest advocate, will so
prevail in any auditorie, that albeit equity does disallow her title; yet the
manner of his carriage will clear him from offering wrong, in that he uses the
sequels of innocence to prove his interest in that which he demands. But to
leave this circumstance, as only to be noted; let us proceed to the war it
self, which I made the second part of this history.

CAP. XV.
The Treuiri bring news of one hundred townships of the Sweui that were come
to the Rhene. Caesar takes in Besanson: his soldiers are surprised with an
extreme fear of the Germans.

AT the same instant, Caesar.
as this countermessage returned from Ariouistus, there came messengers from
the Hedui and Triers.
Treuiri unto Caesar: the Hedui complained that the The country about Co^sta^ce
in Germany.
Harudes, which were lately come into Gallia, did sack their country and
spoil their territories: neither could they conclude any peace with
Ariouistus; but by giving sufficient pledges for their allegiance. The Treuiri
brought news of one hundred towneshippes of the Sueui that were come unto the
river Rhene to seek a passage into Gallia, conducted by Nasua and Cimberius
two brethren. Whereat Caesar being moved thought his best means of prevention
to consist in celerity, least the difficulty of resisting should grow greater,
when those new forces of the Sueui were joined with that power which was
already with Ariouistus. And therefore having provided corn, he made haste to
seek the Germans, and having gone three days journey on his way, he had
intelligence that Ariouistus with all his forces was going to take in Besanson,
and that he was three days journey on his way already. Caesar knowing how
much it imported him to prevent that disadvantage (for as much as the site of
the town, was of that strength that he that commanded it might prolong the
war at his own pleasure, being incircled with the river Le doux.
Alduabis, excepting a small space of 600 foot, which was fortified with an
exceeding high hill, and the hill strengthened with a wall, and so joined to
the town) made all the haste he could to take in the town, and left a strong
garrison in the same. And as he rested there a few days to make provision of
corn, his whole Army was surprised with such an extraordinary fear, that
their minds were not a little troubled therewith. For the Romans enquiring of
the Galls and marchant-men, concerning the quality of the Germans, understood
that they were men of a huge stature, of courage invincible, and of great
practice and experience in feats of Arms: Whereof the Galls had oftentimes
made trial, for when they incountred them they were not able to endure so much
as the sternenes of their countenance, or the fearcenesse of their looks:
whereat the whole Army conceived such a fear, that the courage of his men was
wonderfully appalled. The fear began among the Tribunes, and Prefects, and
such other as accompanied Caesar in this journey, and had small or no skill in
matter of war, these men faining some one excuse, and some an other of very
earnest business which called them home, desired leave to depart. The rest
whom shame would not suffer to forsake the camp, bewraied the like passion by
their countenances and hauiour: For hiding themselves in their tents, they
either bewailed their destiny secretly to themselves; or otherwise with their
acquaintance and familiar friends, they lamented the danger they were all like
to fall into: so that throughout the whole camp there was nothing but making
and signing of testaments. And through the talk and fearfulness of these
men, the old soldiers and Centurions and such as had great experience in the
camp, began by little to apprehend the terror, wherewith the rest were
amazed: and those that would seem to be less fearful, said they feared not
the enemy, but the narrowness of the ways, the greatness of the woods that
were between them and Ariouistus; or otherwise they cast doubts where they
might have provision of corn; and many stuck not to tell Caesar, that
whenever he should give commandment to march forward or to advance the
standarts, the soldiers would refuse to do it.

OBSERVATIONS.
WHerein, for that we find a strange alteration, no way answerable to that
courage, The nature of fear.
which a late gotten victory does usually breed in noble spirits; it shall
not be amiss a little to insist upon the quality of the accident, and to
gather such brief instructions from their weakness, as may best serve to
qualify the amasement of horror, and mitigate the frenzy of so violent a
passion. And albeit my ignorance in the works of nature cannot promise any such
learning, as may discover the true means and secret motions, whereby a sore
conceived fear does trouble the senses and astonish the mind; yet since the
history offers it to our scanning, give me leave only to note the strangenes
of the circumstance, and rudely to delineat the purtraiture of a beast oftener
seen then well known, using the unwieldy pile for my pensile, and suting my
speech to a warlike auditorie. I know not how it happens, but thus it may
happen, that when the senses receive intelligence of an eminent evil, which
may either dispossess the soul of this earthly mansion, or trouble the quiet
wherein she rests: the spirits (as it seems) by the direction of their
sovereign mistress, retire themselves into the inner cabinets and secreter
pauillions of the body, where the chiefest part of the soul is most resident,
and so they leave the frontire quarters of her kingdom naked and vngarrizoned,
the better to strengthen that capital city of the heart, out of which the
life cannot fly but to the utter ruin and destruction of the whole body: For
fear is not only a perturbation of the soul, proceeding from the opinion it
has of some evil to come, but it is also a contraction, and closing up of the
heart, when the blood and the spirits are recalled from the outward parts, to
assist that place which gives life and motion to all the rest. In this chaos
and confusion of Humors and spirits, when the multiplicitie of faculties (which
otherwise require an ordinate distinction in their service, and by the order of
nature should be disposed into several instruments, and be dilated throughout
the body) are thus blended confusedly together, the conceptions of the mind,
which presently rise from these aduertisements, are suddenly choked with the
disordered mixture of so many several properties, and are stifled as it were
in the throng, before they can be transported to our judgment, or examined by
reason, for want of that ordinate uniformity of place which nature requires
in the powers of the mind. And hence proceeds that amazedness and
astonishment, which so daunteth the hearts of men when they are taken with this
passion, that because the soul gives no counsel, the body can afford no
motion, but stands frozen through the extremity of the perturbation,
benumbed in sense, and forsaken of the spirits. So we read that Theophilus the
Emperor in an overthrow which he had given him by the Hagerans, was stricken
with such an excessive fear, that he could not betake himself to flight, Adeo
pauor etiam auxilia formidat, until one of his chief commanders shaking him
by the shoulder, as though he were to awake him out of a deep sleep,
threatened him with present death if he would not prevent the ruin of the
Empire, by using that means, which was only left for his safety.

Again, if in that turbulent consistory, the spirits chance distinctly to
receive any apprehension proceeding from the forging faculty of the soul,
they carry it presently to execution before it be examined by reason, and
follow the action with such vehemency, that they leave no place for better
advice and reknowledgment. And this is the cause that oftentimes through
extremity of fear to avoid one evil we run headlong into a worse, and find
a greater danger in the means we use to avoid a less, because reason did not
first try the apprehension before it was delivered to external agents. And so
we find in the battle between Germanicus and the Almains, that two gross
troops of soldiers were driven into such an ecstasy of fear, that taking
contrary courses to avoid one and the same danger, they eihther of them fled
to that place, which the other had quitted: neither could they be advised by
each others flight, that the places which they sought after afforded them no
remedy.

And albeit reason be called to counsel, when a parlee is summoned of
composition, yet it bears so small a sway in the consultation, that the will
of it self concludes to betraie virtue to dishonor; and so to purchase peace
with the loss of the souls chiefest treasure: which ought ever to be
estimated at a higher rate, then any other happiness which can betide the
mind. For among all the sensible things of this world, there is no creature
that has such a confused fear, or is more amazed therewith, then man is:
neither is there any misery greater, or any bondage more shameful, servile,
or vile, then this which makes men very abiects, of all other creatures, to
redeem the evil which the danger threatens: and then does shame follow after
so base a part, and aggrauatethe burden of the sin with loathsome disgrace,
and penitent coffeehouse, adding oftentimes aloes to wormwood, and making
the end grieuouser then the beginning. And thus does danger breed fear, and
fear yields to dishonor, and dishonor brings shame, and shame being
always mingled with wrath and anger, reuengeth it self upon it self, and
brings more peril then the first danger could threaten. Whereby it appears,
that as the affections of the mind are bred one of another: so on the contrary
part, some are bridled and restrained by others; for as envy, hatred and
anger, rise oftentimes of love; so is joy lessened with grief, envy with
mercy, and fear with shame.

But for as much as all such perturbations proceed of ignorance and
inconsiderateness, whereby we think that the evil is greater then indeed it
is; let us consider what disposition of our judgment best moderateth the
violent heat of these affections. And first touching the passages, whereby the
soul receives her aduertisements, as they are of diverse natures, the chiefest
whereof are the eye and the ear, so are their auisos different in quality,
and require a several consideration to be rightly discerned. The intelligence
by the eye is more certain, then that which comes by the way of hearing:
forasmuch as the eye is a witness it self of every action, whereof it takes
notice; neither is it deceived in her proper object: and therefore the judgment
is not much troubled, to determine definitiuely how great or how small the
danger is, when the relations carry always that certainty. And albeit the ear
in like manner be not deceived in her proper object, for it faithfully gives
up that sense, which sound has delivered unto it: yet for as much as the
fantasy has greater scope to coin her vain conceptions, in regard of the
absence of the action, it is necessary that the discoursing faculty be called
for an assistant before the judgment can truly determine: and then it will
appear, that the truth does not always answer the report which is made
thereof, in as much as diseased spirits will not stick to dilate or qualify
relations, according to the key wherein they themselves are tuned. And
therefore this first comes to be considered of in all such violent
commotions, by which of these two senses the first intelligence was received.
But concerning the judgment it self this is most certain, that the more it is
infected with the corruptions of the flesh, the more violent are the affections
of the soul: And again, the purer the judgment is, and the higher it is
lifted up from earthly natures, being no further interessed therein, then to
hold a resolution of well doing, the fewer and lighter are the affections,
which trouble and molest it; for then it better discerns the truth and
falsehood, good or evil that is in things.

To redress this inconvenience, Caesar betook himself to the fittest and
most proper remedy, which was by the authority of his speech to restore
reason to her former dignity, and by discourse which fear had interrupted in
them, to put down a usurping passion which had so troubled the government of
the soul; recalling it to the mean of true resolution, which was to moderat
audacity with warines, but not to choke valor with beastly cowardice: for
these Oratorie inducing persuasions were not the least point of their
discipline, considering how they framed the inward habit of the mind (being
the fountain and beginning of all motion) to give life and force to those
actions which the severity of outward discipline commanded. For as laws and
constitutions of men enforce obedience of the body: so reason and persuasions
must win the souls consent, according to that saying, homines duci volunt,
non cogi.

CAP. XVI.
Caesar his speech to the Army, concerning this fear.

CAESAR calling a Council of war, Caesar.
wherein the Legates, Tribunes and Centurions of all the orders and degrees
were assembled, he greatly blamed them: First, that any man should be so
inquisitiue as to imagine to himself, whither and upon what service they were
carried. Concerning Ariouistus, he had in the time of Caesar's Consulshippe,
most earnestly sued for the friendship of the people of Rome; and why then
should any man misdeeme, that he should so unadvisedly go back from his
duty? For his own part he was verelie persuaded, that if Ariouistus once knew
his demandes, and understood the reasonable offers that he would make him, that
he would not easily reject his friendship, nor the favor of the people of
Rome. But if he were so mad, as to make war upon them, why should they be
afraid of him? or why should they despair either of their own prowess, or
of Caesar's circumspectnesse? For if it came to that point, the enemy that they
were to encounter, had been tried what he could do twice before. First, in
their fathers days, when the Cimbri, a nation came out of Germany and drove
out the Aduatici and are now the Zelanders. Teutoni, Germans.
Cimbri and the Teutoni were vanquished by Marius; and now of late again in
Italy, at the insurrection of the bondmen, who were not a little furthered
through the practice and discipline which they received of the Romans, whereby
it might be discerned how good a thing it is to be constant and resolute: in as
much as whom for a time they feared without cause being naked and unarmed, the
same men afterward (although well armed and Conquerors withal) they nobly
overcame. And to be short, these were no other Germans, then those whom the
Heluetians had vanquished in diverse conflicts, not only in their own country
where the Heluetians dwelt themselves, but also even at home at their own
doors; and yet the same Heluetians were not able to make their party good
against our Armies. Concerning the Galls, they were overcome more by cunning
and policy, then by force; which although it took place against savage and
unskillful people, yet was not Ariouistus so simple as to think that he could
ensnare our Armies with the like subtilties. As for those that fained the cause
of their fear to be the difficulty of provision of corn, and the
dangerousnesse of the way, they took more upon them then became their place,
in presuming to teach their General what he had to do, as if he had not
known what pertained to his duty. The Sequani and Lingones had undertook that
charge, and what the ways were, should shortly be seen: Whereas it was
reported that the soldiers would not obey his mandates, nor advance their
standarts, he little esteemed it; for he was well assured, that if an Army
refused to be obedient to their General, it was either because he was thought
unfortunate in his enterprises; or else for that he was notoriously convicted
of Avarice: but the whole course of his life should witness his innocence,
and the overthrow of the Heluetians his happiness. And therefore that which he
was minded to have put off for a longer time, he would now put in execution out
of hand: for the night following at the fourth watch he would dislodge from
thence, that without further delay he might understand, whether shame and
respect of duty would prevail more with them, then fear and cowardice. And
though he wist that no man else would follow him: yet notwithstanding he would
go with the tenth legion alone, of which he doubted nothing, and would accept
it as the chief band and guard of his person. Upon the making of his speech,
the minds of all men were wonderfully changed: for it bred in every one a
great alacrity and desire to fight: neither did the tenth legion forget to
give him thanks by their Tribunes, for the good opinion he had of them,
assuring him of their readiness to set forward to the war.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the speech it self are presented many specialities, both concerning their
discipline and military instructions, which deserve examination; amongst which
I note first, the extraordinary number admitted to the Council, Omnium
ordinum ad id concilium adhibitis Centurionibus: Whereas there were usually no
more admitted to their council of war but the Legates, Questor, Tribunes,
and the Centurions of the first orders, which I understand to be the first
Hastate, the first Princeps, and the first Pilum of every legion. And this is
manifestly proved out of the fifth Commentary where Cicero was besieged by
Ambiorix, in which amongst other there were two valiant Centurions, Pulfio, and
Varenus: between whom there was every year great emulation for place of
preferment, and iam primis ordinibus appropinquabant, says Caesar, that is,
they had passed by degrees through the lower orders of the legion, and were
very near the dignity of the first cohort, wherein as in all the rest there
were 3 maniples, and in every maniple two orders.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe first motive which he uses to recall their exiled judgment, discovered
their breach of discipline: for contrary to the course of military
government, they had presumed not only to make inquiry, but to give out
whither, and upon what service they were carried; which in the rigor of camp
policy, could not pass without due punishment: for what can more contradict
the fortunate success of an expedition, then to suffer to be measured with the
vulgar conceit? or waied in the balance of such false judgments? especially
when those weak Censors are to be Actors, and executioners of the dessigne:
for then every man will suit the nature of the action according to his own
humor, although his humor be led with blindness, and have no other direction,
then an uncertain apprehension of profit or disadvantage. And in this case
there cannot be a better president then nature has prescribed: for as natural
Agents, whilst they concur to produce a work of absolute perfection,
neither know what they do, nor can discern the things they look upon; but
yield themselves to be guided by a moderator of infinite knowledge: so ought a
multitude to submit their ability to the direction of some wise and prudent
captain, that beholds the action in true honor; and balanceth the loss of
many particulars, with the health and safety of the public good. For if every
man should prescribe, who should obey? Tam nescire quaedam milites, quam scire
oportet, says Otho in Tacitus upon the like disorder: and again, parendo
potius quam imperia ducum sciscitando res militares continentur; which proves
that the greatest virtue which is required in a soldier is obedience, as a
thing wherein the force of all discipline consists.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
IN the reason which he uses to prove their disparitie of valor, Whether men
have greater courage in their own or in a strangers country.
in regard of the Romans, being superior to the Heluetians that had oftentimes
overthrown the Germans; he strengthens the argument with the advantage of
the place, and says that the Heluetians had put them to the worst, not only
where the Heluetians dwelt themselves; but even in their own country, and at
home at their own doors: as though an enemy were charged with greater fury
in the presence of a man's own country and dearest friends, then in a strange
and unknown land. This question was handled in the Roman Senate, by Fabius
Maximus, and Scipio surnamed Africanus, when they sat in counsel how to rid
their country of that subtle Carthaginian, that for sixteen years space had
fretted like a canker the beauty of Italy, wasted the land and brought it to
desolation: sacked their confederates, or alienated them from their duty,
overthrown their Armies, slain their Consuls, and threatened their imperial
city with ruin and destruction. Fabius upon the motion to make war in
Afric, thought it agreeable to nature, first to defend that which was their
own, before they attempted other men's possessions: when peace was established
in Italy, then let war be set on foot in Afric; and first let them be
without fear themselves, before they went about to terrify others: for those
forces afforded little hope of victory in another kingdom, that were not able
to free their own country from so dangerous an enemy. Alcibiades overthrew
the Athenian common weal with the like couusel: and concerning Hannibal, let
them be sure of this, that they should find him a sorer enemy in his own
country, then in an other kingdom. Scipio on the other side, carried on with
the honor of so glorious an enterprise, wanted neither reasons nor examples to
impugn Fabius his authority: for he showed that Agathocles the Syracusian
king, being a long time afflicted with the Punicke war, auerted the
Carthaginean from Cicily, by transporting his forces into Afric: but how
powerful it was to take away fear, by retorting danger upon the oppressor,
could there be a presenter example then Hanniball? There was great difference
in the nature of the action, between the spoil and wast of a strangers
country, and to see their own native country wasted with sword and
destruction: plus animi est inferenti periculum, quam propulsanti, for he that
inuadeth an others kingdom, easily discovers both the advantage which may be
taken against the enemy, and the strength whereupon he rests: And amongst the
variable events of war, many unexpected occasions arise which present victory
to him that is ready to take it; and many strange chances so alter the course
of things, that no foresight can discern what may happen. With these and the
like remonstrances, this question of no less doubt then importance, was
handled by two famous and worthy Captains, whose minds as it seemed, were
entangled with such particular affections for the present, as might rather draw
them to wrest reason to their own humor, then to determine in sincerity of
judgment, upon what specialities the truth was grounded, in the contrariety of
their positions. But to leave other commodities or disaduantages, which are
annexed unto either part, I will only set down some reasons to prove how
valor and courage may either grow or be abated, by the accidents which rise in
a war of that nature. And first this cannot be denied, the testimony of an
infallible truth being grounded upon the property of man's nature; that as
advantage brings hope of victory, and hope conceiueth such spirits as
usually follow, when the thing which is hoped for, is effected; and thereby the
courage becomes hardy and resolute in victory: so on the other side
disadvantage and danger breed fear, and fear so checketh valor, and
controlleth the spirits, that virtue and honor give place to distrust, and
yield up their interest to such directors, as can afford nothing but
diffidencie and irresolution: Neither can it be denied, but he that sets
upon an enemy in a strange country, and so preuenteth such attemptes as might
be made upon his own territories, has that advantage which gives life unto
action, and steeleth his enterprise with resolution; for besides the commodity
of leaving when he list, and proceeding as far forth as he shall find his
means able to fortunate his attemptes; he knows that the strife and
controversy is not for his native country, which he quietly enjoys, and is
reserved at all times to entertain him, howsoever fortune shall favor his
dessignes: but for a strangers kingdom which his ambition thirsts after;
wherein for as much as the riches and wealth of that state are laid before
them as the recompense of their labor, besides the honor which is achieved
thereby, every man's valor soareth at a high pitch, and their courage is
increased without any trouble or disturbance of the other faculties of the
mind. But when a Prince shall be assaulted in his own kingdom, and in the
sight of his subjects have his land consumed with ruin and destruction: the
danger will so disturb the powers of the soul, that through the turbulent
disorder of the weaker parts, the better faculties will lose their prerogative
of aduising how the enemy may be best resisted; when as every man shall
apprehend the terror of the danger, and few or none conceive the true means
to avoid it. And albeit the presence of such things as are dearest to his
soul, as the piety and respect of aged parents, the tender affection toward
wife and children, are sufficient to raise valor to the highest point of
resolution: yet the motives are of such weight as will rather make them
diffident of their own worth as insufficient to maintain so great a cause,
then hold them in that key which true honor affects: for as much as the
terror and fear of so great a danger will present a greater measure of woes
to their mind, then the hope of victory can afforde them joy. Hence therefore
grows the difference between him, that seeks to maintain that estate
which he has in possession by force of Arms; and an other, that seeks to
increase his means by valor. For the former is presented with the danger of
loosing all his estate, which affrighteth and troubles, having no other reward
propounded unto him; and the other looks upon the advantage, which he gains
by ouercomming; which much increases his valor, without any loss or
disadvantage, if he chance to be put to the worst. And therefore there is
always great ods between him that has already lost his goods, and is by
that means become desperate, having nothing further to loose; and another,
that yet keeps his substance, but is in danger to loose it: for fear will so
dismay his mind, that he will rather distrust his own ability, then entertain
a resolution of valor. To prove this, we need not seek other examples, then
those imperial cities, in whose cause this controversy was first moved. For
when Hanniball was come into Italy and had defeated Sempronius the Consul at
Trebeas, the Romans were driven into such an ecstasy of terror, that they
believed verily that the enemy was then coming to assault the city; neither
had they any hope or aid in themselves to keep or defend the same. On the
other side, Scipio was no sooner landed in Afric, but there was such a tumult
in Carthage, as though the city had been already taken: neither could the
opinion of victory, which Hanniball by a conquering Army in Italy had
confirmed for sixteen years together, prevail in the apprehension of so
imminent a danger: And then that which Fabius borrowed of nature to teach the
Romans (that first men ought to defend their own, before they seek other men's
possessions) was carefully followed by the Carthaginians: for with all speed
they sent for Hanniball out of Italy, to be their Champion against young
Scipio. If therefore other things be correspondent, as there are many other
particularities concerning the power and strength of either nation to be
considered, I take it much better for a Prince to invade an enemy in his own
country, then to attend him at home in his own kingdom.

THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
THe last circumstance which I note in this speech, was the trust which he
reposed in the tenth legion, being in it self peradventure as faulty as any
other: wherein he showed great art and singular wisdom. For he that has once
offended and is both burdened with the guilt of conscience, and vpbraided with
the reproach of men, can hardly be persuaded that his fault can be purged with
any satisfaction. And although the punishment be remitted, yet the memory of
the fact will never be blotted out with any virtuous action; but still
remains to cast dishonor upon the offender, and to accuse him of
disloialtie: And therefore it oftentimes happens, that an error being once
rashly committed, through despair of remission admits no true penitencie,
but either draws on more grievous crimes, confirming that of the Poet,
Scelere scelus luendum est; or maintains his error by wilful obstinacy: as
it is said of the Lion that being found by hunters in a cave, will rather die
in the place then quit it, for shame that he was found in so base a place of
refuge; and therefore his property is thus expressed, ingrediendo caecus,
exeundo proteruus. This did Caesar wisely prevent, by clearing the tenth legion
of that, which he accused the rest of the Army, which made them so much the
more earnest to answer his expectation, in as much as they were witness to
themselves of a common error: and the other legions, envying at their fortune,
resolved to show as great alacrity in the sequel of the war, and to deserve
more then the judgment of the Emperor had imputed to their fellows.

CHAP. XVII.
The treaty between Caesar and Ariouistus.

THE rest of the legions in like manner dealt with their Tribunes and chiefest
Centurions, Caesar.
to satisfy Caesar of their obedience, affirming that they never doubted nor
feared, no nor so much as thought that it belonged to them, to determine any
thing concerning the course of the war, but that it was only left to their
Emperor; their purgation accepted, and good instructions being taken by
Diuitiacus, in the fourth watch he marched forward according to the purport of
his former speech. The seventh day as he continued on his journey, his
espialles brought him word, that Ariouistus with all his forces was within 24
miles of that place: who as soon as he understood of Caesar's coming, sent
ambassadors unto him, declaring that forasmuch as he was come somewhat nearer,
and that he might do it without danger, he was content to admit of a parlee,
upon this condition, that Caesar would bring no footmen to the meeting (for he
feared to be surprised by treachery) but only horsemen, and in that sort he
would meet him. Caesar accepted of the condition, hoping at length that he
would harken to reason and desist from wilful obstinacy: and because he durst
not commit himself to the French horsemen, he thought it best to take their
horses, and to set the soldiers of the tenth legion upon them, that if he
stood in need he might have a faithful guard of his friends about him. There
was a great and open plain, and in the midst thereof a rising mount, and
thither they came to the parlee: the legion which Caesar had brought with him
on horseback, he placed 200 paces from the said mount; and likewise the
horsemen of Ariouistus stood in the same distance: Ariouistus requested that
they might talk on horseback, and bring each of them ten persons to the
parlee. Their expostulations were the same in effect, with those messages which
were carried between them by ambassadors. Much unkindness took by Caesar,
considering the friendship which the Romans had showed unto Ariouistus, that he
would not vouchsafe to treat with them: and on the other side as great injury
conceived by him, forasmuch as the law of nations gave no such prerogative to
any one people that they should challenge in other countries by desert: but
that generally it had given dominion to valor, and kingdoms to conquering
armies. But while the treatise thus continued, it was told Caesar that
Ariouistus his horsemen were coming nearer unto the mount, and that they began
to skirmish with his soldiers; whereupon Caesar brake off the treaty, and
withdrewe himself to his men, commanding them that they should not cast a
weapon at the enemy: for although he perceived that without peril of his
legion he might have incountered with Ariouistus men, yet he would not give
occasion by putting them to flight, to have it said, that he had entrapped them
under pretense of parlee. At his return, when it was reported to the common
soldiors, how arrogantly Ariouistus had carried himself in the treaty,
forbidding the Romans all Gallia, and that his men of arms did offer to
assault the legion, insomuch that the treaty was thereby broken off; the
soldiors were more desirous of battle then before, and by these degrees they
obtained it. Two days after Ariouistus sent again to Caesar, to have those
things perfited which were begun in the treaty. Caesar thought it not good to
make any further meeting in his own person, and the rather because the
Germans had no stay of themselves the day before, but they threw darts
and stones at his men; and whom soever of his men he should send unto him
should go into great danger, as cast into the hands of a savage people. The
best way he could think of was, to send Valerius Procillus, a well accomplished
young man, that spoke the French tongue well, and had no way offended the
Germans, and with him he sent Marcus Titius, a man well known to Ariouistus,
using sometimes to resort as a guest unto him: To these he gave in charge that
they should diligently mark, and justly report unto him what Ariouistus
said; But as soon as Ariouistus saw them in his camp, he cried out to them
in the presence of his army, asking them what they ahd to do there, and whether
they came as spies? And as they went about to make their answer, he would not
hear them, but caused them to be cast into irons. The same day he removed, and
encamped under the side of a hill 6. miles from Caesar's camp; the next day he
came two miles beyond Caesar, nearer to the midst of Gallia, of purpose to
cut off all corn and conuoie as should be sent unto the Romans, by the Hedui
and Sequani. From that day forward, by the space of five days together,
Caesar imbattailed his men before his camp, to the intent that if Ariouistus
pleased to give battle, he might have liberty when he would; but Ariouistus
all this while kept his army within his camp, and daily sent out his horsemen
to skirmish with the Romans. This was the manner of fighting which the
Germans had practiced: there were 6000. horsemen, and as many strong and
nimble footmen, whom the horsemen had selected out of the whole host, every
man one for his safeguard; these they had always at hand with them in battle,
and unto these they resorted for succor; if the horsemen were ouercharged,
these ever stepped into help them, if any one were wounded and unhorsed, they
stood about him and succored him: if the matter required either to adventure
forward, or to retire speedily back again; their swiftness was such through
continual exercise, that hanging on the horse maine by the one hand, they
would run as fast as the horses.

THE OBSERVATION.
IT may seem strange unto the soldiers of our time, that the footmen should
be mingled pell mell amongst the horsemen, Foot men intermingled amongst
horsemen.
without hurt and disadvantage to themselves: so unlikely it is that they
should either succor the horsemen in any danger, or annoy the enemy: and
therefore some have imagined that these footmen in the encounter cast
themselves into one body, and so charging the enemy assisted the horsemen. But
the circumstances of this place, and of others which I will allege to this
purpose, plainly euince that these footmen were mingled indifferently amongst
the horsemen, to assist every particular man as his fortune and occasion
required: and therefore the choice of these footmen, was permitted to the
horsemen, in whose service they were to be employed, that every man might take
his friend in whom he reposed greatest confidence: When they were ouercharged
these stepped in to help them; if any man were wounded or unhorsed he had his
footeman ready to assist him; and when they were to go upon any speedy
service, or suddenly to retire upon advantage, they stayed themselves upon the
maine of the horses with one hand, and so ran as fast as the horsemen could
go: which services they could not possibly have performed without confusion
and disorder, if the footmen had not severally attended upon them, according
to the affection specified in their particular election. The principal use of
these footmen of the Germans consisted in the aid of their own horsemen
upon any necessity, not so much regarding their service upon the enemy, as
the assistance of their horsemen. But the Romans had long before practiced the
same Art to a more effectual purpose, namely as a principal remedy not only
to resist, but to defeat far greater troops of horse, then the enemy was able
to oppose against them. Whereof the most ancient memory which history
mentions, is recorded by Liuie in the second punicke war, at the siege of
Capua, under the regiment of Quintus Fuluius the Consul: where it is said, that
in all their conflicts, as the Roman legions returned with the better; so
their caualry was always put to the worst: and therefore they invented this
means to make that good by Art which was wanting in force. Out of the whole
army were taken the choicest young men, both for strength and agilitie, and to
them were given little round bucklers, and seven darts apeece in steed of their
other weapons; these soldiers practiced to ride behind the horsemen, and
speedily to light from the horses at a watchword given, and so to charge the
enemy on foot: And when by exercise they were made so expert that the nouelty
of the invention no whit affrighted them, the Roman horsemen went forth to
encounter with the enemy, every man carrying his foot soldior behind him, who
at the encounter suddenly alightning charged upon the enemy with such a fury,
that they followed the^ in slaughter to the gates of Capua: And hence says
Liuie grew the first institution of the Velites, which ever after that time
were enrolled with the legions. The author of this strategem is said to be one
Q. Nauius a Centurion, and was honorably rewarded by Fuluius the consul for
the same. Salust, in the history of Iugurth, says, that Marius mingled the
Velites with the Caualrie of the associates, vt quacunque inuaderent equitatus
hostium propulsarent. The like practice was used by Caesar, as appears in the
third book of the Civil war; saving that instead of the velites, he
mingled with his horsemen 400. of the lustiest of his legionarie soldiers, to
resist the caualrie of Pompei, while the rest of his army passed over the
river Genusum, after the overthrow he had at Dirrachium, qui tantum profecere,
says the text; Vt equestri praelio commisso, pellerent omnes, complures
interficerent, ipsique incolumes ad agmen se reciperent. Many other places
might be recited, but these are sufficient to prove, that the greatest
Captains of ancient times strengthened their caualrie with footmen dispersed
amongst them. Lib. 6.
The Roman horsemen, (says Polibius) at the first carried but a weak limber
pole, or staff, and a little round buckler; Lib. 3. de excid.
but afterward, they used the furniture of the Grecians, which Josephus
affirms to be a strong lance or staff, and three or four darts in a
quiver with a buckler, and a long sword by their right side. The use of their
lance was most effectual when they charged in troop, pouldron to pouldron;
and that manner of fight afforded no means to intermingle footmen: but when
they used their darts, every man got what advantage of ground he could, as
our Carbins for the most part do, and so the footmen might have place among
them: or otherwise, for so good an advantage, they would easily make place
for the footmen to serve among them: But howsoever it was, it appears by this
circumstance how little the Romans feared troops of horse, considering that
the best means to defeat their horse was by their foot companies. But to
make it more plain, of many examples I will only allege two; the one out of
Liuie, Lib. 3.
to prove that the Roman horsemen were not comparable for service to
footmen: De bello Africano.
the other out of Hirtius, to show the same effect against strangers, and
Numidian horsemen, In the Consulships of L. Valerius, and Marcus Horatius:
Valerius having fortunately overthrown the Equi and the Volsci, Horatius
proceeded with as great courage in the war against the Sabines, wherein it
happened, that in the day of battle, the Sabines reserved 2000. of their men
to give a fresh assault upon the left cornet of the Romans, as they were in
conflict, which took such effect, that the legionarie footmen of that cornet
were forced to retreit. Which the Roman horsemen being in number 600.
perceiving, and not being able with their horse to make head against the enemy;
they presently forsook their horses; and made haste to make good the place on
foot; wherein they carried themselves so valiantly, that in a moment of time
they gave the like advantage to their footmen, against the Sabines; and the^
betook themselves again to their horses, to pursue the enemy in chase as they
fled. For the second point. The Numidians, as Caesar witnesses, were the best
horsemen that ever he met with, and used the same Art as the Germans did,
mingling among them light armed footmen: an Ambuscado of these Numidians
charging the legions upon a sudden, the history says, that primo impetu
legionis Equitatus and leuis armatura hostium, nullo negotio, loco pulsa and
deiecta est de colle. And as they sometimes retired, and sometimes charged upon
the rerewarde of the army, according to the manner of the Numidian fight; the
history says, Caesariani interim, non amplius tres aut quatuor milites
veterani si se conuertissent and pila viribus contorta in Numidas infestos
coniecissent, amplius duorum millium ad vnum terga vertebant. So that to free
himself of this inconvenience, he took his horsemen out of the rereward, and
placed his legions there, ita vim hostium per legionarium militem commodius
sustinebat. And ever as he marched he caused 300. soldiers of every legion
to be free and without burden, that they might be ready upon all occasions,
Quos in Equitum Labieni immisit. Tum Labienus, conuersis equis, signorum
conspectu perterritus turpissime contendit fugere, multis eius occisis,
compluribus vulneratis, milites legionarij ad sua se recipient signa, atque
iter inceptum ire caeperunt. I allege the very words of the history, to
take away all suspicion of falsifying, or wresting any thing to an affected
opinion. If any man will look into the reason of this disparitie, he shall
find it to be chiefly the work of the Roman pile, an irresistable weapon,
and the terror of horsemen, especially when they were cast with the advantage
of the place, and fell so thick, that there was no means to avoid them.

But to make it plain, that any light armed footmen could better make head
against a troop of horse, then the Caualry of their own party, although they
bare but the same weapons: Let us consider how nimble and ready they were,
that fought on foot, either to take an advantage, or to shun and avoid any
danger; casting their darts with far greater strength and more certainty,
then the horsemen could do. For as the force of all the engines of old time,
as the Balistae, Catapultae and Tolenones, proceeds from that stabilitie and
resting Center, which nature affords as the only strength and life of the
engine; so what force soever a man makes, must principally proceed from that
firmenes and stay, which nature by the earth or some other immovable rest,
gives to the body, from whence it takes more or less strength, according to
the violence which it performs; as he that lifts up a weight from the
ground, by so much treads heavier upon the earth, by how much the thing is
heavier then his body. The footmen therefore, having a surer stay to
counterpoise their forced motion, then the horsemen had, cast their darts with
greater violence, and consequently with more certainty.

CHAP. XVIII.
Caesar preuenteth Ariouistus of his purpose, by making two Camps. The
superstition of the Germans.

WHEN Caesar perceived that Ariouistus meant nothing less then to fight,
Caesar.
but kept himself within his camp; least peradventure he should intercept the
Sequani and other of his associates, as they came with conuoies of corn to the
Romans, beyond that place wherein the Germans abode about 600 paces from their
camp; he chose a ground meet to incampe in: and marched thither in three
battles, commanding two of them to stand ready in Arms, and the third to
fortify the camp. Ariouistus sent 15000 footmen, and all his horse to
disturb the soldiers, and to hinder the intrenchment. Notwithstanding Caesar
as he had before determined, caused two battles to withstand the enemy, and
the third to go through with the work: which being ended, he left there two
legions, and part of the associate forces, and led the other four legions
back again into his greater camp, and so he rested secure concerning the
conuoies from the Sequani, and by his greater camp cut off the passages
between Ariouistus and the Rhene. The next day Caesar according to his
custom, brought his whole power out of both his camps, and marching a little
from the greater camp, he put his men in array and proffered battle to the
enemy; but perceiving that Ariouistus would not stir out of his trenches,
about noone he conuaied his Army into their several camps. Then at length
Ariouistus sent part of his forces to assault the lesser camp: the encounter
continued very sharp on both parts, until the evening; and at sunsetting
after many wounds given and taken, Ariouistus conuaied his army again into
their camp. And as Caesar made inquiry of the captains what the reason was,
that Ariouistus refused battle: he found this to be the cause, The Germans had
a custom, that their women should by casting of lots, and southsaying, declare
whether it were for their behoof to fight or no, and that they found by their
Art, the Germans could not get the victory if they fought before the new
moon.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst we may observe what especial importance, this manner of incamping
carried in that absolute discipline which the Romans observed, and by which
they conquered so many nations: for besides the safety which it affoorded
their own troops, it served for a hold well fenced and manned, or as it were a
strong fortified town in any part of the field, where they saw advantage, and
as often as they thought it expedient, either to fortify themselves, or impeach
the enemy by cutting off his passages, hindering his attempts, blocking up his
camp, besides many other advantages, all auetring the saying of Domitius
Corbulo: dolabra vincendum esse hostem: a thing long time neglected, but of
late happily renewed by the commanders of such forces as serve the states in
the united provinces of Belgia: whom time and practice of the wars has
taught to entertain the use of the spade, and to hold it in as great
reputation as any weapons whatsoever, which may be thought worthy
executioners of the deeds of Arms.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN the second place we may observe, that there was no nation so barbarous (for
I understand the Germans to be as barbarous in regard of the motions of
religion as any known nation of that time, being in a Climate so near the
North, that it afforded no contemplation at al) that could not make use in
their greatest affairs, of that superstition to which their mind was
naturally inthralled; and forge prophesies and diuinations as well to stir up
as to moderate the irregular motions of a multitude, according as they might
best serve to advantage their proceedings. Neither did Caesar let slip the
occasion of making use of this their religion: for understanding by their
prisoners, that their diuinations forbad them to fight before the new moon,
he used all the means he could to provoke them to battle; that their
religious opinion of mischieuing might prejudice their resolution to return
conquerers: Which may serve to prove that a superstitious people are subject to
many inconveniences, which industry or fortune may discover to their overthrow.
It is recorded that Columbus, being General of some forces, which Ferdinando
king of Castile sent to discover the west Indies, and suffering great penury
for want of victuals in the I Will of Iamaica: after that he had observed how the
Ilanders worshipped the moon, and having knowledge of an Eclipse that was
shortly after to happen, he told the inhabitants that unless they would
furnish him with such necessaries as he wanted for the time, the wrath of their
God should quickly appear toward them, by changing his bright shining face
into obscurity and darkness: which was no sooner happened, but the poor
Indians, stricken with a superstitious fear of that which the course of nature
required, kept nothing back that might assist their enemies to depopulate, and
over run their own country.

CHAP. XIX.
Caesar seeks means to give them battle, and the Germans dispose themselves
thereunto.

CAESAR foreslowed not that advantage: Caesar.
but the next day in the morning leaving a sufficient garrison in each of his
camps, for as much as the number of his legionarie soldiers was small in
respect of the multitude of the Germans, he placed all the auxiliarie troops,
for a show before the lesser camp, and putting his legions into a triple
battle, he marched toward the camp of Ariouistus. And then at length were
the Germans constrained to bring out their power, setting every tribe and
people by it self, in a like distance and order of battle, and inuironing
their whole Army with their carts and carriage, that there might be no hope at
all left to save any man by flight, that durst not abide the fortune of the
battle: In these chariots they placed their women, that they by their
outstretched hands and tears moving pity, might implore the soldiers as
they descended by course into the battle, not to deliver them, the authors of
their life and being, into the bondage and thraldom of the Romans. Caesar
assigned to every legion a Legate and a Questor, that every man might have an
eye witness of his valor: and he himself began the battle with the right
cornet; for as much as he perceived that part of Ariouistus Army to be the
weakest.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THE Romans even from the infancy of their state were ever zealous admirers
of true honor, and always desired to behold with the eye, to what measure of
virtue every man had attained; that the tongue with greater feruency of spirit
might sound out the celebration of Macte virtute, which imported more honor
then any wealth that could be heaped upon them. Neither was this the least part
of their wisdom, considering that the most precious things that are, loose
much of their worth, if they be not suited with other correspondent natures,
whose sympathy adds much more excellency then is discerned, when they
appear by themselves without such assistance. For how small is the beauty
which nature has given to the eiepleasing diamond, when it is not adorned with
an artificial form? or what perfection can the form give without a foil to
strengthten it? or what good is in either of them if the light do not
illuminate it? or what avail all these where there wants an eye to admire
it, a judgment to value it, and an heart to embrace it? such a union has
nature imprinted in the diversity of creatures concurring to perfection, and
especially in moral actions, in whose carriage there is a far greater exactnes
of correspondency required to approve them honorable, then was requisite to
make the jewel beautiful. And this did Caesar in all his battles; amongst the
rest that at Alesia is particularly noted in this manner, Quod in conspectu
imperatoris res gerebatur, neque recte aut turpiter factum celari poterat,
vtrosque and laudis cupiditas and timor ignominiae ad virtutem excitabat. And
when Liuie would express how valiantly an action was carried, he says no more
but in conspectu imperatoris res gerebatur, which is as much to say, that
forasmuch as the Romans were diligent obseruers of every man's worth,
rewarding virtue with honor, and cowardice with reproach; every man bent his
whole endeavor to deserve the good opinion of his General, by discharging
that duty which he owed to the common wealth, with all loyalty and faithfulness
of spirit.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Romans had four forms of the front of their battle, the first was
called Acies recta, when neither the cornets nor the battle was advanced one
before another, but were all carried in a right line, and made a straight front;
and this was their most usual manner of imbattailing.

The second form of the front was called obliqua, when as one of the cornets
was advanced nearer unto the enemy then the rest, to begin the battle: and
this was commonly as Vegetius notes, the right cornet: for the right cornet of
an army had great advantage against the left of the enemies, in regard of
their weapons and furniture: But Caesar did it in this place, because he
perceived that the enemy was weakest in that part; following a maxim of great
authority, that the weakest part of an enemy is in the beginning to be
charged with the strength of an army: for so favorable are men's judgments to
that which is already happened, that the sequel of every action depends for
the most part upon the beginning, Dimidium facti qui been caepit habet, (says
a Poet) and not without great reason, so forcible continually is the beginning,
and so connexed to the sequel by the nature of a precedent cause, that the end
must needs err from the common course, when it does not participate of that
quality which was in the beginning. Neither can there be any good end without
a good beginning: for although the beginning be oftentimes disastrous and
unlucky, and the end fortunate and happy, yet before it came to that end there
was a fortunate beginning: for the bad beginning was not the beginning of a
good, but of an evil end. And therefore that his men might foresee a happy
end in a good beginning, it behooued him with the best of his army to assault
the weakest part of the enemy.

The third form of the front is called Sinuata, when both the cornets are
advanced forward, and the battle stands backwarde off from the enemy, after
the fashion of a half moon. Scipio used it in Spain, having observed some
days before, that the enemy continually so disposed of the battle, that his
best soldiers were always in the midst; and therefore Scipio put all his old
soldiers in the cornets, and brought them out first to charge upon the weakest
part of the enemy, that those might decide the controversy, before the other
that were in the midst could come to fight.

The last form is called gibbosa or gibbera Acies, when the battle is
advanced, and the two cornets lag behind. This form did Haniball use in the
battle of Cannas, but with this Art, that he strengthened his two cornets with
the best of his soldiers, and placed his weakest in the midst, that the
Romans following the retreit of the battle, which was easily repeld, might
be enclosed on each side with the two cornets.

CHAP. XX.
The battle between Caesar and Ariouistus.

THE sign of battle was no sooner given, but the Romans charged upon the
enemy so fiercely, Caesar.
as though they meant to give themselves the lie: for seeming to acknowledge
that they once conceived any fear of the Germans; and the enemy on the
other side returned so speedy a counterbuffe, that the legions had no time to
cast their Piles, and therefore they speedily betook them to their swords.
But the Germans putting themselves according to their manner into a Phalanx,
received the force of their swords, without any danger or loss at all. In the
battle there were many legionarie soldiers, that were seen to keep upon the
phalanx, and to pull up with their hands the targets that covered it, and so to
wound and kill those that were underneath: and by that means, they brake and
dispersed it, and so the left cornet of the enemy, was overthrown and put to
flight. Now while the right cornet was thus busied, the left cornet was
ouercharged with an unequal multitude of the Germans, which young Crassus the
Prefect of the horsemen no sooner perceived (having more scope and liberty
then any of the commanders that were in the battle) he sent tertiam Aciem, the
third battle, to rescue and aid their fellows that were in danger, by means
whereof the fight was renewed, and all the enemy was put to flight and never
looked back until they came to the Rhene, which was about five miles from the
place where they fought; where some few of them saved themselves by swimming,
others found a few boats and so escaped; Ariouistus lighting upon a little
bark tied to the shore, with much a do recovered the other side of the Rhene,
and so saved himself: the rest were all slain by the horsemen. As Caesar
pursued the German horsemen, it was his chance to light upon Valerius
Procillus, as he was drawn up and down by his keepers, bound with three
chains, which accident was as grateful to him as the victory it self; being
so fortunate to recover his familiar friend, whom the barbarous enemy,
contrary to the law of nations, had cast into prison; and in his own presence
had three several times cast lots upon his life, whether he should be then
burned or repriued unto another time; and still he was saved by the fortune of
the lots: and Marcus Titius was found in like manner and brought unto him. The
fame of this battle being carried beyond the Rhene: the Sueui that were come to
the banks of Rhene, returned home again, whom the inhabitants belonging to
the said river pursued, and slew a great number of them. Caesar having thus
ended two great wars in one summer, he brought his Army into their wintering
camps, somewhat sooner then the time of the year required.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis phalanx here mentioned, can hardly be proved to be the right Macedonian
Phalanx; but we are rather to understand it to be so termed, by reason of the
close and compact imbattailing, rather then in any other respect: and it
resembled much a testudo, as I said of the Heluetian phalanx. Secondly, I
observe, that Caesar kept the old rule concerning their discipline in fight:
for although the name of Triaries be not mentioned in his history; yet he
omitted not the substance, which was, to have primam, secundam, and tertiam
Aciem; and that prima Acies should begin the battle, and the second should
come fresh and assist them; or peradventure if the enemy were many and strong,
the first and second battle were joined together, and so charged upon the
enemy with greater fury and violence: but at all adventures, the third
battle was ever in subsidio, as they termed it, to succor any part that
should be ouercharged; which was a thing of much consequence, and of great
wisdom. For if we either respect the encouragement of the soldiers, or the
casualtie of fortune; what could be more added to their discipline in this
behalf, then to have a second and a third succor, to give strength to the
fainting weakness of their men, and to repair the disadvantage which any
accident should cast upon them? or if their valor were equally balanced, and
victory stood doubtful which of the two parties she should honor, these
always stepped in, being fresh, against weary and over labored spirits, and so
drew victory in despite of casualtie unto themselves.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning use of lots, The use of lots.
it shall not be amiss to look into the nature of them, being in former times
so general, that there was no nation civil or barbarous, but were directed in
their greatest affairs, by the sentence of lots. As we may not refuse for an
undoubted truth, that which Solomon says the 16 of Proverbs: The lots are cast
into the lap: but the direction thereof belongs to the Lord: Through the
knowledge whereof, Joshua was directed to take Achan, the Mariners Jonas, and
the Apostles, to consecrate Matthias. So whether the heathen and barbarous
people, whose blindness in the way of truth could direct them no further then to
senseless superstition, and put them in mind of a duty which they owed; but
could not tell them what it was, nor how to be performed: whether these I say,
were persuaded that there was any supernatural power in their lotteries, which
directed the action to the decree of destenie, and as the Gods would have it,
it remains doubtful. Aristotle the wisest of the heathen, concerning things
natural, names that event casual, or proceeding from fortune; of which the
reason of man could assign no cause, or (as he says) which has no cause: So
that whatsoever happened in any action besides the intent of the agent and
workman, was termed an effect of fortune, or chance of habnab. For all other
effects which depended upon a certain and definite cause, were necessarily
produced; and therefore could not be casual or subject to the inconstancy of
chance: And because many and sundry such chances daily happened, which like
terrae filij had no father, and could not be warranted, as lawful children,
either to nature or to reason, by the appearance of an efficient cause, they
reduced them all to the power of fortune; as the principal efficient and
sovereign Motor of all such unexpected events, that is, they made nothing else
the gouernesse, and directresse of many things: which afterward grew to such
credit amongst men, that it surpassed in dignity all natural causes, and was
deified with celestial honor, as the Poet says, Nos te facimus fortuna deam
caeloque locamus. By the providence of this blind goddess which held her
deity by the tenure of men's ignorance, were all casual actions directed, and
especially lots; the event whereof depended only upon her pleasure and decree:
neither could their direction be assigned to any other power, for then their
nature had been altered from chance to certainty, and the event could not have
been called Sors, but must have been reputed in the order of necessary effects,
whereof discourse of reason acknowledges a certain foregoing cause. Whereby
we see upon how weak an axletree, the greatest motions of the godless world
were turned, having irregularitie and uncertainty, for the intelligentiae,
that governed their reuolutions. All herein all sorts of men, (although in
diverse respects) rested as well contented, as if an Oracle had spoken unto
them, and revealed the mysteries of fatal destiny.

Rome directed the maine course of her government, by the fortune of this mock
destiny. For although their Consuls and Tribunes were elected by the people,
who pleased their own fancy with the free choice of their commanders, and
suited their obedience with a well liking authority: yet the public affairs,
which each Consul was severally to manage, was shared out by lots. For if an
enemy were entered into their confines to depopulate and wast their
territories, the lots assigned this Consul for the government of the city;
and the other to command the legions, and to manage the war. If forces were to
be sent into diverse provinces and against several enemies, neither the Senate
nor the people could give to either Consul his task: but their peculiar
charges were authorized by lots. If any extraordinary action were to be done
in the city, as the dedication of a temple, the sanctifying of the Capitol
after a pollution, Sors omnia versat, did all in all. And yet (notwithstanding
the weak foundation of this practice in their Theology and deepest divinity)
we may not think but these skillful Architectors of that absolute government,
wherein virtue joined with true wisdom, to make an unexampled pattern: we may
not think I say, but they foresaw the manifold danger, which in the course of
common actions could no otherway be prevented, but by the use of lots. For when
things are equally leueled between diverse objects, and run with indifferency
to equal stations, there must be some controlling power, to draw the current
toward one coast, and to appropriate it unto one channel, that the order of
nature be not inuersed, nor a well established government disturbed: So the
state of Rome casting many things with equal charge upon her two sovereign
magistrates, which could not be performed but by one of them; what better
means could there be invented to interesse the one in that office and to
discharge the other, then to appoint an arbiter, whose decree exceeded humane
reason? Of which it could not be said why it was so, but that it was so: for
if the wisdom of the Senate had been called to counsel, or the voices of the
people calculated to determine of the matter; it might easily have burst out
into civil discord, considering the often contentions between the Senate and
the people, the factions of Clients, and the constant mutabilitie of every man's
private affections necessarily inclining unto one, although their worth were
equal and by true reason indiscernable; which might have made the one proud of
that which peradventure he had not, and cast the other lower then would have
well beseemed his virtues: And therefore to cut off these, with many other
inconveniences, they invented lots; which without either reason or will might
decide such controversies. By this it appears how little the ancient
lawmakers respected the ground and reason of an ordinance, so the commodity
were great, and the use important to the good of the state: for as they saw the
thing it self to be casual, so they saw that casual things are sometimes
more necessary, then demonstratiue conclusions: neither ought the nature, and
speculatiue consideration of laws and statutes, belong to the common people:
but the execution and obedience thereof makes the common weal flourish. And
thus ends the first Commentary of Caesar his war in Gallia.

THE SECOND COMMENTARY OF THE WARS IN GALLIA.
THE ARGUMENT.
LIke as when a heavy body lies upon the skirt of a larger continued
quantity, although it cover but a small parcel of the whole surface; yet the
other quarters are burdened and kept under with a proportionable measure of
that weight; and through the union and continuation which binds all the parts
into one totality, feel the same suppression which has really seized but upon
their fellow part: In like manner the Belgae, inhabiting the furthest skirt of
that triple continent, seemed to repine at that heavy burden, which the
Roman Empire had laid upon the Province, the Hedui, and other states of that
kingdom. And least it might in time be further removed and laid directly upon
their shoulders, they thought it expedient whilst they felt it but by
participation to gather their several forces into one head, and try whether
they could free their neighbor nations from so grievous a yoke; or at the
least keep it from coming any nearer unto themselves: And this is the
Argument of this second book, which deuideth it self into two parts: the
first containing the wars between Caesar and all the states of Belgia united
together: the second recording the battles which he made with some of the
states thereof in particular, as time and occasion gave him means to effect it.

CHAP. I.
Caesar hastes to his army, marches toward the confines of the Belgae, and
takes in the men of Rheims.

THE report of this confederacy being brought unto Caesar, whilst he wintred
beyond the Alps, Caesar.
as well by letters from Labienus, as by the common hearesay of the world: he
levied two new legions in Lumbardie, and sent them by Q. Pedius into Gallia,
and as soon as there was any forage in the fields he himself came to the
army. At his arriual, understanding by the Senones and the rest of the Galls
that bordered upon the Belgae (to whom he gave in charge to learn what was
done amongst them,) that there was nothing in Belgia but mustering of
soldiers, and gathering their forces into one head: he thought it not safe to
make any further delaie, but having made provision of corn, he drew out his
army from their wintering camps, and within fifteen days he came to the
borders of the Belgae. As Soon as he was come thither, which was much sooner
then was looked for; the men of Rheimes being the uttermost of the Belgae, next
adioining to the Celtae, thought it best to entertain a peaceable resolution,
and sent Iccius and Antebrogius, two of the chief men of their state, unto
Caesar, to submit themselves and all that they had, to the mercy of the Roman
Empire; affirming that they were innocent both of the counsel of the Belgae,
and of their conspiracy against the Romans: For proof whereof they were
ready to give hostages, to receive them into their towns, and to furnish them
with corn or what other thing they stood in need of. That the rest of the
Belgae were al in arms, and the Germains on the other side of the Rhene had
promised to send them succor: yea their madness was so great, that they
themselves were not able to hold back the Suessones from that attempt, being
their brethren and kinsmen in blood, and using the same laws and customs as
they did, having both one magistrate and one form of government; but they
would needs support the same quarrel which the rest of the Belgae had
undertaken.

THE OBSERVATION.
I Might here take occasion to speak somewhat of a particular reuoult in a
general cause; and how a confederate state may in regard of their own
safety forsake a common quarrel, or whatsoever the universal society has
enacted prejudicial to their common weal: but that I only intend to
discover warlike practices, leaving these questions of law and policy to men
of greater judgment and better experience. Only I observe in the behalf of
the Roman government, that such cities as yielded to the Empire, and became
tributarie to their treasury (howsoever they were otherwise combined by
confederacy) seldom or never repented them of their fact, in regard of the
noble patronage which they found in that state, and of the due respect observed
toward them.

CHAP. II.
The power of the Belgae, and their preparation for this war.

CAesar inquiring of the Ambassadors which came from Rheimes what the states
were that had taken arms, Caesar.
and what they were able to do in matter of war: found the Belgae to be
descended from the Germans; who passing over the Rhene time out of mind,
drove away the Galls and seated themselves in their possessions: and that
these only of all the Galls kept the Cimbri and Teutoni from entering into
their country: and in that regard they challenged to themselves great
authority, and vaunted much in their feats of arms. Concerning their number
they had these aduertisements; the The country about Beauuois.
Bellouaci exceeded all the Belgae in prowess, authority, and number of men,
and promised 60000. men: and in that regard they demanded the administration of
the whole war. The The country about Soissons
Suessones inhabiting a large and fertile country, and having 12. walled
towns, promised to set out 50000. The The people about Turnai
Neruij as many; the Arras.
Attrebatij 15000. the Amyens.
Ambiani 10000. the Velocassij, and Vermandois.
Veromandui as many; the Terwene
Morini 25000. the Menapij 7000. the Caletani 10000. the Catuaci 19000. the
Liege. 296000 in all.
Eburones, Condrusones, and others 40000. Caesar encouraging the men of Rheimes
to persist their faithfulness to the Roman Empire, propounded unto them great
offers and liberal promises of recompense, and commanded all their senate to
come before him, and bring with them their noble men's sons to be given up for
hostages, which they diligently performed by a day appointed. And having
received two especial aduertisements from the men of Rheimes, the one
concerning the multitude of the enemy; and the other touching the singular
opinion which was generally held of their manhood: he provided for the first
by persuading Diuitiacus the Heduan, that it much imported the whole course of
those businesses, to keep asunder the power of the enemy; and to withhold
their forces from making a head, that so he might avoid the dange of
incountering so great a power at one instant. Which might easily be brought to
pass, if the Hedui would enter with a strong power into the marches of the
Bellouaci, and sack their territories with sword and confusion, which
Diuitiacus promised to perform, and to that purpose he speedily returned into
his country. Upon the second advertisement which presented unto him the great
valor and manhood of his enemies, he resolved not to be too hasty in giving
them battle, but first to prove by skirmishing with his horsemen what his
enemies by their prowess could do, and what his own men durst do.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis rule of making trial of the worth of an enemy, has always been
observed by prudent and grave commanders, as the surest principle whereon the
true judgment of the event may be grounded. For if the doctrine of the old
Philosophers, which teaches that the word non putabam was never heard out of
a wise ma^s mouth, have any place in the course of humane actions, it ought
especially to be regarded in managing these main points, whereon the state of
kingdoms and empires depends. For unless we be persuaded that blind chance
directs the course of this world with an uncertain confusion, and that no
foresight can swaie the balance of our hap into either part of our fortune; I
see no reason why we should not by all means endeavor to ground our knowledge
upon true causes, and leuel our proceedings to that certainty which rises from
the things themselves. And this is the rather to be urged, inasmuch as our
leaders are oftentimes deceived when they look no further then to match an
enemy with equality of number, referring their valor to be tried in the
battle; not considering that the eye of it self cannot discern the
difference between two champions of like presence and outward carriage, unless
it see their strength compared together and waied as it were in the scale of
trial: which Caesar omitted not diligently to observe, before he would
adventure the hazard of battle. For besides his own satisfaction, it gave
great encouragement to his men, when they saw themselves able to countermatch
an enemy, and knew their task to be subject to their strength: Neither did he
observe it only at this instant, but throughout the whole course of his
actions; for we find that he never incountered any enemy, but with sufficient
power, either in number or in valor to make head against them: which equality
of strength, being first laid as a sure foundation, he used his own industry
and skill, and the discipline wherein his men were trained, as advantages to
ouersway his adversary: and so drew victory maugre fortune unto himself, and
seldom failed in any of his battles.

CHAP. III.
Caesar passes his Army over the river La disne.
Axona, leaving Titurius Sabinus encamped on the other side with six cohorts.

AS SOON as Caesar understood, Caesar.
as well by his discourers, as from the men of Rheimes, that all the power of
the Belgae was assembled together into one place, and was now making toward
him no great destance off; he made all the haste he could to pass his Army
over the river Axona, which divided the men of Rheimes from the other Belgae.
Whereby he brought to pass, that no enemy could come on the back of him to
work any disadvantage: and that corn might be brought unto him from Rheimes,
and other cities without danger. And further, that he might command the passage
back again, as occasion should serve to his best advantage, he fortified a
bridge which he found on the river, with a strong garrison of men, and caused
Titurius Sabinus a Legate, to incampe himself on the other side of the river
with six cohortes, commanding him to fortify his camp with a rampire of 12
foot in altitude, and a trench of 18 foot in breadth.

OBSERVATION.
IF it be demanded, why Caesar did pass his Army over the river, leaving it
on his back; and did not rather attend the enemy on the other side, and so
take the advantage of hindering him, if he should attempt to pass over? I will
set down the reasons in the sequel of this war, as the occurrences shall
fall out to make them more evident. In the mean time let us enter into the
particularitie of these six cohortes, that we may the better judge of such
troops which were employed in the services of this war: but that we may the
better conjecture what number of soldiers these six cohortes did contain, it
seems expedient, a little to discourse of the companies and regiments, which
the Romans used in their Armies.

And first we are to understand, A legion what it was. Lib. 4. De vita Romuli.
that the greatest and chiefest regiment in a Roman Army, was termed by the
name of Legio: as Varro says, quod leguntur milites in delectu: or as Plutarch
speaks, quod lecti ex omnibus essent militares; so that it takes the name
Legio of the choice and selecting of the soldiers. Romulus is said to be the
first author and founder of these legions, making every legion to contain
3000 soldiers: but shortly after they were augmented, as Festus records unto
4000: and afterward again from 4000 to 4200. And that number was the common
rate of a legion until Hanniball came into Italy, Liu. lib. 22.
and then it was augmented to 5000, but that proportion continued only for
that time. And again, when Scipio went into Afric, the legions were
increased to 6200 footmen, and 300 horse. And shortly after the Macedonian
war, the legions that continued in Macedonie to keep the Province from
rebellion, consisted of 6000 footmen and 300 horse. Out of Caesar it cannot be
gathered, that a legion in his time did exceed the number of 5000 men; but
oftentimes it was short of that number: for he himself says, that in this
war in Gallia his soldiers were so wasted, that he had scarce 7000 men in two
legions. And if we examine that place out of the 3 of the civil war, where he
says, that in Pompei his Army were 110 cohorts, which amounted to the number
of 55000 men: And being manifest as well by these number of cohortes, as by the
testimony of diverse authors, that Pompei his Army consisted of 11 legions; if
we divide 55000 into 11 parts, we shall find a legion to consist of 5000 men.
Which number or thereabout, being generally known to be the usual rate of a
legion, the Romans always expressed the strength of their Army by the number
of legions that were therein: as in this war it is said, that Caesar had
eight legions, which by this account might arise to 40000 men, besides
associates, and such as necessarily attended the Army. Further we are to
understand, that every legion had his peculiar name, by which it was known and
distinguished from the rest, and that it took either from their order of
muster, or inrolment; as that legion which was first enrolled, was called the
first legion; and that which was second in choice, the second legion; and so
consequently of the rest; and so we read in this history, the seventh, the
eighth, the ninth, the tenth, the eleventh and twelfth legion: or otherwise
from the place of their warfare, and so we read of legiones Germanicae,
Panonicae, Britannicae, and such others; and sometime of their General, as
Augusta, Claudia, Vitellianae, legiones, and so forth. Or to conclude, from
some accident or quality, Tacitus 3. hist.
as Rapax, Victrix, Fulminifera and such like. And this much of the name and
number of a legion, which I must necessarily distinguish into diverse kinds of
soldiers, according to the first institution of the old Romans, and the
continual observation thereof unto the decay of the Empire, before I come to
the description of these smaller parts, whereof a legion was compounded.

First therefore we are to understand, that after the Consuls had made a
genenerall choice and sworn the soldiers, Velites.
the Tribunes chose out the youngest and poorest of all the rest, and called
them by the name of Velites. Their place in regard of the other soldiers was
both base and dishonorable: not only because they fought a far off, and were
lightly armed; but also in regard they were commonly exposed to the enemy, as
our forelorne hopes are. Having chosen out a competent number for this kind,
they proceeded to the choice of them which they called Hastati, Hastati.
a degree above the Velites, both in age and wealth, and termed them by the
name of Hastati; forasmuch as at their first institution they fought with a
kind of Iauelin, which the Romans called Hasta: but before Polybius his time
they used Piles; notwithstanding their ancient name continued unto the latter
time of the Empire. Principes.
The third choice which they made was of the strongest and lustiest bodied men,
who for the prime of their age were called Principes; the rest that remained
were named Triarij, as Varro says, Quod tertio ordine extremis subsidio
deponuntur: These were always the eldest and best experienced men, and were
placed in the third division of the battle, as the last help and refuge in
all extremity. Lib. 6.
Polybius says, that in his time the Velites, Hastati, and Principes, did
consist of 1200 men a piece; and the Triarij never exceeded the number of 600.
although the general number of a legion were augmented: Lib. 1. de mil. Romans
whereof Lypsius allegeth these reasons. First because these Triarij consisted
of the best of the soldiors, and so might counteruaile a greater number in good
worth and valor. Secondly, it seldom came to buckle with the enemy, but when
the controversy grew very doubtful. Lastly, we may well conjecture that the
voluntaries and extraordinary folowers, ranged themselves amongst these
Triaries, and so made the third battle equal to either of the former; but
howsoever, they never exceeded the number of 600. And by this it appears,
that in Polybius his time the common rate of a legion was 4200.

In this division of their men consisted the ground of that well ordered
discipline; for in that they distinguished them according to their years and
ability, they reduced their whole strength into several classes; and so
disposed of these different parts, The use of this division.
that in the general composition of their whole body every part might be
fitted with place and office, according as his worth was answerable to the
same: and so they made not only a number in gross, but a number distinct by
parts and properties, that from every accident which met with any part of the
army, the judgment might determine how much or how little it imported the
whole body: besides the great use which they made of this distinction in
their degrees of honor and preferment; a matter of no small consequence, in the
excellency of their government.

The soldiers, The distinction of their companies. Manipuli.
at their inrolement being thus divided according to their years and
ability, they then reduced them into smaller companies, to make them fitter
for command and fight: and so they divided the Hastati, Principes, and Triarii,
each of them into 10 companies, making of those 3. sorts of soldiers 30.
small regiments, which they called Manipuli: And again, they subdeuided
every maniple into two equal parts, Ordo.
and called them Ordo, which was the least company in a legion; and according
to the rate set down by Polybius, contained 60. soldiers. In every Ordo there
was a Centurion, or Captain, and a Lieuetenant, whom they named Optio or
Tergiductor. The maniples of the Triarii were much lesser then the maniples of
either the Hastati or the Principes; for as much as their whole band consisted
but of 600. men. The Velites were put into no such companies, but were equally
distributed amongst the other Maniples; and therefore the Hastati, Principes,
and Triarij were called subsignanos milites, to make a difference between them
and the Velites, which were not divided into bands; and so consequently had no
ensign of their own, but were distributed amongst the other companies: so that
every Maniple had 40. Velites attending upon it. And now I come to the
description of a cohort, which the history here mentions.

The word Cohors in latin does signify that part of ground which is
commonly enclosed before the gate of a house, Cohors. Lib. 3. de re rust.
which from the same word we call a court: and Varro gives this reason of the
metaphor. As in a farm house, says he, many out-buildings joined together
make one enclosure; so a cohort consists of several maniples joined together
in one body. This cohort consisted of three maniples; for every legion had ten
cohorts, which must necessarily comprehend those thirty maniples: but these 3.
maniples were not al of one and the same kind of soldiors, as three maniples of
the Hastati, 3. of the Principes, and 3. of the Triarij, as Patricius in his
Paralleli seems to affirm; for so there would have remained an odd maniple
in every kind, that could not have been brought into any cohort: But a cohort
contained a maniple of the Hastati, a maniple of the Principes, and a maniple
of the Triarij; and so all the 30. maniples were included into 10. cohorts; and
every cohort was as a little legion; forasmuch as it consisted of al those
sorts of soldiers that were in a legion. So that making a legion to contain
5000. men; a cohort had 500. and so these 6. cohorts, which he encamped on the
other side of the river, under the command of Titurius Sabinus, contained 3000.
soldiers: but if you make a legion to consist but of 4200. which was the more
usual rate, there were 2520. soldiers in these six cohortes.

By this therefore it may appear, that a legion consisted of four sorts of
soldiers, which were reduced into ten cohorts, and every cohort contained 3.
maniples; and every maniple 2. orders; and every order had his Centurion
marching in the head of the troop; and every Centurion had his optionem, or
Lieutena^t, that stood in the tail of the troop.

When a legion stood ranged in battle ready to confront the enemy, Alegion
ranged in battle.
the least body or squadron that it contained was a maniple; wherein the two
orders were joined together, making jointly ten in front, and twelve in file:
and so every five files had their Centurion in front, and Lieutenant in the
rereward, to direct them in all adventures. In the time of the Emperors, their
battailions consisted of a cohort, and never exceeded that number how great
soever the army were.

Polybius distinguishing a maniple into two centuries or orders, The first order
says, that the Centurion first chosen by the Tribunes, commanded the right
order, which was that order which stood on the right hand, known by the name
of Primus ordo: and the Centurion elected in the second course, commanded the
left order; and in the absence of either of them, he that was present of them
two, commanded the whole maniple. And so we find that the Centurion of the
first place was called Prior Centurio: in which sense Caesar is to be
understood, where he says, 3. De bello civilly.
that all the Centurions of the first cohorte were slain, praeter principem
priorem. From whence we gather two specialities, first; the prioritie between
the Centurions of the same maniple: for a cohorte consisting of 3. maniples,
whereof the first maniple were Triarij, the second Principes, and the third
Hastati; and every maniple containing two orders; and every order a
Centurion: he says, that all the Centurions of this cohort were slain;
saving the first or upper Centurion of the Principes. Prima cohors
The second thing which I observe, is the title of the first cohort: for these
10. cohortes, whereof a legion consisted, were distinguished by degrees of
worthiness; and that which was held the worthiest in the censure of the
Electors, took the prioritie both of place and name, and was called the first
cohort: the next, the second cohort; and so consequently unto the tenth and
last.

Neither did the legions want their degrees of prehemine^ce, both in
imbattailing and in inca^ping, according either to the seniority of their
inrolement, or their favor of their General, or their own virtue: And so we
read that in these wars in Gallia, the tenth legion had the first place in
Caesar's army. And thus much concerning the divisions, and several companies of
a legion, and the degrees of honor which they held in the same.

Upon this description it shall not be amiss, briefly to lay open the most
apparent commodities depending upon this discipline; The benefit of this
discipline
the excellency whereof more plainly appears, bein compared to that order,
which nature has observed in the frame of her worthiest creatures: for it is
evident, that such works of nature come nearest to perfect excellency, whose
material substance is most particularly distinguished into parts, and has
every part endued with that property, which best agrees to his peculiar
service. For being thus furnished with diversity of instruments, and these
directed with fitting abilities; the creature must needs express many
admirable effects, and discover the vvorth of an excellent nature: whereas
those other bodies, that are but slenderly labored, and find less favor in
natures forge, being as abortiues, or barbarously composed, vvanting the
diversity both of parts and faculties; are no way capable of such excellent
uses, nor fit for such distinct services, as the former that are directed with
so many properties, and enabled with the power of so well distinguished
faculties. Which better works of nature the Romans imitated in the
Architecture of their army, dividing it into such necessary and serviceable
parts, as were best fitting all uses and imploiments: as first into legions,
and legions into cohorts, and cohorts into maniples, and maniples into
centuries or orders, and these into files; wherein every man knew his place,
and kept the same without exchange or confusion. And thus the universal
multitude was by order disposed into parts, until it came unto a unity: for
it cannot be denied, but that these centuries were in themselves so sensibly
distinguished, that every Soldiour carried in his mind the particular Map of
his whole centurie: for in imbtttailing, every centurie was disposed into 5.
files, containing twelve in a file, whereof the leaders were always certain,
and never changed but by death or some other especial occasion: and every
leader knew his follower, and every second knew the third man, and so
consequently unto the last.

Upon these particularities it plainly appears, how easy a matter it was, to
reduce their troops into any order of a march or a battle, to make the front
the flank, or flank front, when they were broken and disrankt to rallie them
into any form, when every man knew both his own and his fellows station. If
any companies were to be employed upon sudden service, the general Idea of the
Army being so deeply imprinted in the mind of the commanders, would not
suffer them to err in taking out such convenient troops, both for number and
quality, as might best agree with the safety of the Army, or nature of the
action: At all occasions and oportunities, these principles of advantage
offered themselves, as ready means, to put in execution any dessigne, or
stratagem whatsoever; the project was no sooner resolved of, but every man
could readily point out the companies that were fit to execute the intention.
And which is more important, in regard of the life and spirit of every such
part, their sodalitie was sweetened, or rather strengthened with the mutual
acquaintance, and friendship one of another, the captain marching always in
the head of the troop, the ensign in the midst, and the lieutenant in the
rereward, and every man accompanied with his neighbor and his friend; which
bred a true and unfeigned courage, both in regard of themselves, and of their
followers. Besides these specialities, the places of title and dignity
depending upon this order, were no small means to cut off all matter of
civil discord, and intestine dissension: for here every man knew his place
in the file, and every file knew his place in the Centurie, and every
Centurie in the Maniple, and every Maniple in the Cohort, and every Cohort in
the Legion, and every Legion in the Army; and so every soldier had his
place, according to his virtue; and every place gave honor to the man,
according as their discipline had determined thereof.

The want of this discipline has dishonored the martial government of this
age, with bloodshed and murders; whereof France is too true a witness, as
well in regard of the French themselves, as of our English forces that have
been sent thither to appease their tumults: for through defect of this order,
which allotteth to every man his due place, the controversy grew between Sir
William Drurie and Sir John Bowrowes, the issue whereof is too well known to
the world: wherein as our commanders in France have been negligent, so I may
not forget to give due comme^dation to the care which is had of this point
amongst the English troops, in the service of the states in the united
provinces, where they are very curious in appointing every man his place in
the file, and every file in the troop, and find much benefit thereby, besides
the honor of reviving the Roman discipline.

To conclude this point, The benefit of small battailions: and the disadvantage
of great squadrons*
I will only touch in a word the benefit, which the Romans found in their
small battailions, and the disadvantage, which we have in making great
squadrons. And first it cannot be denied, but that such troops stand best
appointed for disposition and array of battle, which standing strong to
receive a shocke, bring most men to fight with the enemy: for the principal
things which are required in setting of a battle, are so to order the
troops, that the depth in flank may serve conveniently to withstand the
assault, taking up no more men then may well serve for that purpose; and giving
means to the rest to fight with the enemy; and in these two points, were both
their defensive and offensive considerations comprehended. But smaller troops
and battailons afforde this conueniencie better then great squadrons, which
drown up many able men in the depth of their flanks, and never suffer them
to appear, but when the breaking of the squadron does present them to the
butcherie of the enemy. The Macedonian Phalanx, as I have noted in the first
book, never carried above 16 in flank, and brought 500 to fight in front. And
these little battailons (considering them as they stood in battle ray) made as
great a front or greater, then that of the Phalanx, keeping a depth answerable
to the same; besides the 2 and 3 battle, which always were to succor them,
which the Phalanx wanted: neither would their thick and close imbattailing
admit any such succor behind them. Now if we compare the advantages and
discommodities, which by place and accident were incident to either of these,
we shall find great ods between them. These great squadrons are not faisable,
but in plain and open places, where they may either stand immovable, or make
easy and slow motions without shaking, or disordering their body: but the
lesser are a scantling for all places, champion or wooddie, level or uneven,
or of what site or quality soever. And to conclude, if two or three ranks of
these great battailons chance to be broken and disordered, the whole body is as
much interessed in the disorder, as the said ranks are; and has less means
to rally it self, then any other lesser company: but if any violence chance
to rout a maniple, it proceeds no further in the Army, then that part which
it takes: Neither can the disranking of any one part, betraie the safety of
the Army to disorder and confusion; for as much as their distinction served to
cut off such inconveniences, and yet no way hindered the general uniting of
their strength into one body. More may be said concerning this matter, but I
only point at it, and leave the due consideration thereof, to the judgment of
our commanders, and return to our history.

CHAP. IIII.
The Belgae attempt the surprise of Bray in the county of Retell.
Bibrax: Caesar sends succor unto it.

THere was a town called Bibrax, belonging to the state of Rheimes, about
eight mile from Caesar's camp; which the Belgae thought to have surprised, as
they came along to meet with Caesar, and suddenly assaulted it with such
fury, that the townsmen could hardly hold out the first day. The Celtae and
Belgae use one and the same manner, in assaulting a town: for having beset the
whole compass of the wall with ranks of soldiers, they never cease flinging
of stones until they find the wall naked of defendantes; and then casting
themselves into a Testudo, they approach to the gate and undermine the walls.
As Soon as the night had made an end of the assault, Iccius of Rheimes, a man
of great birth and authority in his country, who at that time was governor
of the town, and had been before with Caesar, to treat and conclude a peace:
sent him word by messengers, that if there came not present succor, he was not
able to hold out any longer. The same day about midnight (using the same
messengers for guides) he sent both Numidian and Cretian Archers, and slingers
of the Isles of Baleares, to relieve the town; by means whereof, the townsmen
were put in good hope to make their party strong, and the enemy made hopeles
of winning the town: and therefore after a small stay, having populated their
fields, and burned their villages and out-buildinges, they marched with all
their power toward Caesar's camp, and within less then two miles of his
Army, they encamped their whole host: which, as was gathered by the smoke
and fire, occupied more ground then eight miles in breadth.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the description of their assault, we are to observe two circumstances: The
first is, To take a town by surprise.
the manner they used in a sudden surprise: The second is, the form and
quality of a Testudo. Although Caesar seems to attribute this manner of
assaulting a town, as peculiar, to the Galls; yet we may not think but
that the Romans used it, as often as they had occasion to surprise any city:
but because the Galls knew no other means to take a town but this, therefore
he sets it down as peculiar unto them. The Romans called this manner of
assault Corona; and so we read oftentimes this phrase, Cingere vrbem corona:
for as much as the soldiers enclosed the town with a circle, and so resembled
a crown or garland. Ammianus speaks of a triple crown of soldiers, which
incompased a town: And Josephus tells of Iotapatam, which the Romans
besieged duplici peditum corona: and besides these, there was a third circle of
horsemen utmost of all. There is no further matter to be observed but this,
that in surprising a town, they incircled it round about with thick continued
ranks of men, and where they found the wall weakest, there they entered as
they could.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Testudo requires a larger discourse, A Testudo described. Lib. 44.
and is lively described in Liuie, after this manner. In the Amphitheater,
where the people did often assemble to see strange sightes and public shows,
were brought in (says he) 60 Iustie young men, who after some motion, and
seemly march, cast themselves into a square troop, and roofing their heads
close with their targets, the first rank which made the front of the Testudo,
stood upright on their feet; the second rank bowed it self somewhat lower;
the third and fourth ranks did more incline themselves, and so consequently
unto the last rank, which kneeled on the ground, and so they made a body
resembling half the side of an house, which they called Testudo. Unto this
squadron thus strongly combined together, came two soldiers running some
fifty foot off, and threatening each other with their weapons, ran nimbly up
the side of the roof; and sometimes making as though they would defend it
against an enemy, that would have entered upon it; sometimes again incountering
each other in the midst of it, leaped up and down as steddily as if they had
been upon firm ground. And which is more strange, the front of a Testudo being
applied to the side of a wall, there ascended many armed men upon the said
Testudo, and fought in an equal height with other soldiors, that stood upon
the said wall to defend it. The dissimilitude in the composition was this, that
the soldiors that were in front, and in the sides of the square, carried not
their Targets over their heads, as the other did; but covered their bodies with
them, and so no weapons either cast from the wall, or otherwise thrown against
it, could any way hurt them; and whatsoever weight fell upon the Testudo, it
quickly glided down by the decliuitie of the roof, without any hurt or
annoyance at all.

Thus far Liuie goes, neither do I know what to say further of it: the
chiefest use thereof was in a surprise or sudden attempt against a town,
before the towns men were thoroughly prepared to defend the same. This
invention served them to approach the wall with safety, and so either to
undermine it, or to clime up: and to that end they oftentimes erected one
Testudo upon another. Tacitus says, that the soldiers climed upon the wall,
super iteratam testudinem, by one Testudo made upon an other; and this was the
ancient form and use of a Testudo in a sudden assault or surprise.

Dio Cassius in the acts of Anthony, Lib. 49.
says, that being galled with the Parthian Archers, he commanded his whole
army to put it self into a Testudo, which was so strange a sight to the
Parthians, that they thought the Romans had sunk down for weariness and
faintness; and so forsaking their horse, drew their swords to have made
execution: and then the Romans at a watch-worde given, rose again with such
a fury, that they put them all to sword and flight. Dio describes the said
Testudo after this manner, They placed, says he, their baggage, their light
armed men and their horsemen, in the midst; and those heavy armed footmen
that carried long gutter-tiled Targettes, were in the utmost circles next unto
the enemy; the rest which bare large Ouall Targettes were thronged together
throughout the whole troop, and so covered with their Targets both themselves
and their fellows, that there was nothing discerned by the enemy but a roof
of Targets, which were so tiled together, that men might safely go upon them.

Further, we oftentimes read, that the Romans cast themselves into a
Testudo, to break through an enemy, or to route and disranke a troop. And
this use the Romans had of a Testudo in field services, and only by the
benefit of their Target. It was called a Testudo, in regard of the strength,
for that it covered and sheltred, as a shell covers a fish. And let this
suffice concerning a Testudo.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly we may observe, The necessity of good discovery.
how carefully Caesar provided for the safety of such succors, as he sent
unto Bibrax: for he commanded the same messengers to direct them that came
from the town, as the best and surest guides in that journey, least
peradventure through ignorance of the way, they might fall into inconveniences
or dangers: a matter of no small consequence in managing a war, but deserves
an extraordinary importunity, to persuade the necessity of this diligence.
For a General that has perfectly discovered the nature of the country,
through which he is to march, and knows the true distances of places, the
quality of the ways, the compendiousnesse of turnings, the nature of the hills
and the course of the rivers, has all these particularities as maine
advantages, to give means of so many several attempts upon an enemy: And in
this point Hanniball had a singular dexterity, and excelled all the commanders
of his time in making use of the way, by which he was to pass. But he that
leads an army, by an unknown and undiscovered way, and marches blindfold
upon uncertain adventures, is subject to as many casualties and disaduantages,
as the other has opportunity of good fortune. Let every man therefore
persuade himself, that good discouerers are as the eyes of an army, and serve
for lights in the darkness of ignorance, to direct the resolutions of good
providence, and make the path of safety so manifest, that we need not stumble
upon casualties. Caesar in his journey to Ariouistus used the help of
Diuitiacus the Heduan, in whom amongst all the Galls, he reposed greatest
confidence to discover the way, and acquaint him with the passages; and before
he would undertake his voyage unto Now England.
Britanie, he well informed himself by merchants and trauailers, of the
quantity of the Island, the quality of the people, their use of war, and the
opportunity of their havens: Neither was he satisfied with their relations, but
he sent Caius Volusenus in a ship of war, to see what he could further
discover, concerning these points. Suetonius adds moreover, that he never
carried his army, per insidiosa itinera, unless he had first well discovered
the places.

Concerning the order, which skillful leaders have observed in discoueries, The
order which is to be observed in discovery.
we are to know that this point consists of two parts: the one in
understanding the perfect description of the country; and the second in
observing the motions of the enemy. Touching the first, we find as well by
this as other histories, that the Romans used the inhabitants of the country
for guides, as best acquainted with their native places, that they might not
err in so important a matter; provided always, that their own scoutes were
ever abroad to understand what they could of themselves, that they might not
altogether rely upon a strangers direction. The motions of the enemy were
observed by the horsemen, and these for the most part were Veterani, well
experienced in the matter of war, and so the general received sound
aduertisements: and yet they were not too forward upon any new motion, unless
they found it confirmed by diverse ways: for some espials may err, either
through passion or affection, as it happened in the Heluetian war. If
therefore the use and benefit, which prudent and wise commanders made of this
diligence, or the misfortune which the want of this knowledge brought upon the
ignorant, have any authority to persuade a circumspect care herein, this
little that has been spoken may be sufficient, for this point.

THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
THe soldiers which Caesar sent to relieve Bibrax, Slingers with their art
and use.
were Archers of Creta and Numidia, and slingers of the Isles Baleares, which
are now called Maiorica, and Minorica: which kind of weapon, because it
seems ridiculous to the soldiers of these times, whose conceits are held up
with the fury of these fiery engines; I will in brief discover the nature
and use of this weapon.

The Latins (says Isodore) called this weapon funda: quod ex ea fundantur
lapides. Pliny attributes the invention thereof to the Insulairs called
Baleares. Florus in his third book and eighth chapter, says, that these
Baleares used three sorts of slinges, and no other weapon besides: for a boy
had never any meat given him, before he had first struck it, with a sling.
Strabo distinguishes these three sorts of slings, which the Baleares used;
and says that they had one sling with long raines, which they used when they
would cast a far off: and another with short raines, which they used near at
hand: and the third with raines of a mean sise, to cast a reasonable distance.
Lipsius says, that in Columna Antonina at Rome, he observed that the Balearean
was made with one sling about his head, another about his belly, and the third
in his hand; which might be their ordinary manner of carrying them. The matter
whereof they were made was threefold, the first was hemp or cotton, the second
hair, and the third sinews: for of either of these stuffes, they commonly
made them: the form and fashion of a sling resembled a platted rope, somewhat
broad in the midst, with an Ouall compass; and so by little and little
decreasing into two thongs or raines. Their manner of slinging was to whirle it
twice or thrice about their head, and so to cast out the bullet. Virgill
speaking of Mezentius says, Ipse ter adducta circum caput egit habena. But
Vegetius prefers that skill, which cast the bullet with once turning it
about the head. In Suidas we find, that these Baleares did commonly cast a
stone of a pound weight, which agrees to these dames in Caesar, fundas,
librales. The leaden bullets are mentioned by Salust, in the war with
Iugurth; and by Liuie, where he says, that the Consul provided great store of
arrows, of bullets, and of small stones to be cast with slings. This weapon
was in request amongst diverse nations, as well in regard of the readiness, and
easy reiterating of the blow, as also for that the bullet fled very far,
with great violence: the distance which they could easily reach with their
sling, is expressed in this verse, Fundum Varro vocat, quem possis mittere
funda. Which Vegetius interprets to be 600 foot: Lib. 2.
Their violence was such, as the same author affirms in his first book and
sixteenth chapter, that neither helmet, gaberdine, nor corselet could bear out
the blow; but he that was hit with a sling, was slain sine inuidia sanguinis,
as he says in the same place. Lucrece, Ovid, and Lucan, three of the Latin
Poets say, that a bullet skilfully cast out of a sling, Lib. 2. natu:
questions.
went with such violence that it melted as it flew: whereof Seneca gives this
reason, motion (says he) does extenuate the air, and that extenuation or
subtilitie does inflame: and so a bullet cast out of a sling melts as it
flies. But howsoever, Diodorus Siculus affirms, that these Balearean
slingers brake both target, headpiece, or any other armor whatsoever.

There are also two other sorts of slings, the one mentioned by Liuie; and the
other by Vegetius: that in Liuie is called Cestrophendo, which cast a short
arrowe with a long thick head: the other in Vegetius, is called fustibalus,
which was a sling made of a coard and a staff. But let this suffice for
slinges and slingers, which were reckoned amongst their light armed soldiers,
and used chiefly in assaulting, and defending towns, and fortresses, where
the heavy armed soldiers could not come to buckle; and present the place of
our Hargebusiers, which in their proper nature, are leuis armaturae milites,
although more terrible then those of ancient times.

CHAP. V.
Caesar confronted the Belgae in form of battle, but without any blow given:
the Belgae attempt the passing of the river Axona; but in vain, and to their
loss: they consult of breaking up the war.

CAESAR at the first resolved not to give them battle, Caesar.
as well in regard of their multitude, as the general fame and opinion
conceived of their valor: notwithstanding he daily made trial by light
skirmishes with his horsemen, what the enemy could do, and what his own men
durst do. And when he found that his men were nothing inferior to the Belgae,
he chose a convenient place before his camp and put his Army in battle: the
bank where he was encamped rising somewhat from a plain level, was no larger
then would suffice the front of the battle; the two sides were steep, and the
front rose a slope by little and little, until it came again to a plain,
where the legions were imbattailed. And least the enemy abounding in
multitude, should circumuent his men and charge them in flank as they were
fighting, he drew an overthwart ditch behind his Army, from one side of the
hill to the other, 600 paces in length; the ends whereof he fortified with
bulwarks, and placed therein store of engines: and leaving in his camp the
two legions which he had last enrolled in Lombardie, that they might be ready
to be drawn forth when there should need any succor, he imbattailed his
other six legions in the front of the hill, before his camp. The Belgae also
bringing forth their power, confronted the Romans in order of battle. There
lay between both the Armies a small Marish, over which the enemy expected
that Caesar should have passed; and Caesar on the other side, attended to see
if the Belgae would come over, that his men might have charged them in that
troublesome passage. In the mean time the Caualrie on both sides incountered
between the two battles, and after long expectation on either side, neither
party aduenturing to pass over, Caesar having got the better in the skirmish
between the horsemen, thought it sufficient for that time, both for the
encouraging of his own men, and the contesting of so great an Army; and
therefore he conuaied all his men again into their camp. From that place the
enemy immediately took his way to the river Axona, which lay behind the
Romans camp, and there finding foordes they attempted to pass over part of
their forces, to the end they might either take the fortress which Q.
Titurius kept, or to break down the bridge, or to spoil the territories of
the state of Rheimes, and cut off the Romans from provision of corn. Caesar
having advertisement thereof from Titurius, transported over the river by the
bridge all his horsemen and light armed Numidians, with his slingers and
archers, and marched with them himself* the conflict was hot in that place,
the Romans charging their enemies as they were troubled in the water, slew a
great number of them; the rest like desperate persons, aduenturing to pass
over upon the dead carkases of their fellows, were beaten back by force of
weapons: and the horsemen encompassed such as had first got over the water, and
slew every man of them.

When the Belgae perceived themselves frustrated of their hopes, of winning
Bibrax, of passing the river, and of drawing the Romans into places of
disadvantage, and that their own provisions began to fail them: they called a
council of war, wherein they resolved, that it was best for the state in
general, and for every man in particular, to break up their camp, and to
return home unto their own houses: and into whose confines or territories
soever, the Romans should first enter to depopulate and waste them in hostile
manner, that thither they should hasten from al parts, and there to give them
battle, to the end they might rather try the matter in their own country,
then abroad in a strange and unknown place; and have their own household
provision always at hand to maintain them. And this the rather was concluded,
for as much as they had intelligence, that Diuitiacus with a great power of the
Hedui, approached near to the borders of the Bellouaci, who, in that regard,
made haste homeward to defend their country.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst we may observe the Art, which he used to counteruaile the strength of
so great a multitude, by choosing out so convenient a place, which was no
broader in front then would suffice the front of his battle; and having both
the sides of the hill so steep, that the enemy could not ascend nor clime up,
but to their own overthrow; he made the back part of the hill strong by Art,
and so placed his soldiors as it were in the gate of a fortress, where they
might either issue out, or retire at their pleasure. Whereby it appears how
much he preferred security and safety before the vain opinion of
foole-hardie resolution, which sauoreth of Barbarism rather then of true
wisdom: for he ever thought it great gain, to loose nothing; and the day
brought always good fortune, that delivered up the army safe unto the evening;
attending, until advantage had laid sure principles of victory: and yet Caesar
was never thought a coward.

And now it appears, what use he made by passing his army over the river,
and attending the enemy on the further side, rather then on the side of the
state of Rheimes: for by that means he brought to pass, that whatsoever the
enemy should attempt in any part or quarter of the land, his forces were
ready to trouble their proceedings; as it happened in their attempt of Bibrax:
and yet notwithstanding, he lost not the opportunity of making slaughter of
the^, as they passed over the river. For by the benefitte of the bridge which
he had fortified, he transported what forces he would, to make head against
them, as they passed over; and so he took what advantage either side of the
river could afford him.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
ANd here the reader may not marvel, if when the hills are in labor, they
bring forth but a mouse; for how soon is the courage of this huge army abated?
or what did it attempt worthy such a multitude? or answerable to the report
which was bruted of their valor? But being hastily carried together by the
violence of passion, were as quickly dispersed upon the sight of an enemy,
which is no strange effect of a sudden humor. For as in nature all violent
motions are of short continuance, and the durabilitie, or lasting quality of
all actions, proceeds from a slow and temperate progression; so the
resolutions of the mind that are carried with an intemperate violence, and
savor so much of heat and passion, do vanish away even with the smoke
thereof, and bring forth nothing but leasurable repentance: and therefore it
were no ill counsel for men of such natures, to qualify their hasty
resolutions, with a mistrustfull lingering, that when their judgment is well
informed of the cause, they may proceed to a speedy execution.

But that which most bewraieth their indiscreet intempera^ce, in the hot
pursuit of this enterprise, is, that before they had scarce seen the enemy, or
had opportunity to contest him in open field, their victual began to fail them:
for their minds were so carried away with the conceit of war, that they had
no leisure to provide such necessaries, as are the strength and sinewe of the
war: It was sufficient for every particular man, to be known for a soldiour
in so honorable an action, referring other matters in the care to the state.
The states in like manner thought it enough to furnish out forty or fifty
thousand men a piece, to discharge their oath, and to save their hostages,
committing other requisites to the general care of the confederacy: which,
being directed by as unskillful governors, never looked further then the
present multitude, which seemed sufficient to overthrow the Roman Empire. And
thus each man relied upon an others care, and satisfied himself with the
present garb; so many men of all sorts and qualities, so many helmets and
plumed crests, such strife and emulation, what state should seem in greatest
forwardness; were motives sufficient to induce every man to go, without
further inquiry, how they should go. And herein the care of a General ought
especially to be seen, considering the weakness of particular judgments,
that having the lives of so many men depending altogether upon his providence,
and engaged in the defense of their state and country; he do not fail in these
maine points of discipline, which are the pillars of all warlike dessignes. To
conclude this point, let us learn by their error, so to carry a matter
(especially of that consequence) that we make it not much worse by ill
handeling it, then it was before we first toooke it to our charge; as it here
happened to the Belgae. For their tumultuous arms sorted to no other end,
then to give Caesar just occasion to make war upon them, with such assurance
of victory, that he made small account of that which was to follow, in regard
of that which had already happened: considering that he should not in all
likelihood, meet with the like strength again, in the continuance of that
war. And this was not only grauius bellum successori tradere, as it often
falls out in the course of a long continued war; but to draw a dangerous
war upon their heads, that otherwise might have lived in peace.

CHAP. VI.
The Belgae brake up their Camp; and as they return home, are chased and
slaughtered by the Romans.

THIS general resolution being entertained by the consent of the whole
Council of war; Caesar.
they departed out of their Camp with a great noise and tumult, without any
order (as it seemed) or government: every man pressing to be foremost on his
journey in such a turbulent manner, that they seemed all to run away: Whereof
Caesar having notice by his spies, and mistrusting some practice, not as yet
perceiving the reason of their departure, he kept his army within his Camp.
In the dawning of the day, upon certain intelligence of their departure, he
sent first his horsemen to stay the rerewarde, commanding Labienus to follow
after with three legions; these ouertaking the Belgae, and chasing them many
miles, slew a great number of them: And while the rerewarde stayed, and
valiantly received the charge of the Romans, the vantguarde being out of
danger, and under no government, as soon as they heard the alarm behind them,
brake out of their ranks and betook themselves to flight; and so the Romans
slew them as long as the sun gave them light to pursue them; and then
sounding a retrait, they returned to their camp.

OBSERVATION.
IT has been an old rule amongst soldiers, that a great and negligent
error committed by an enemy, is to be suspected as a pretense to treachery. We
read of Fuluius a Legate in the Roman army, lying in Tuscanie, the Consul
being gone to Rome to perform some public duty: the Tuscanes took occasion
by his absence to try whether they could draw the Romans into any
inconvenience; and placing an ambuscado near unto their camp, sent certain
soldiers, attired like shepheardes, with droues of cattle to pass in view of
the Roman army, who handled the matter so, that they came even to the rampire
of the camp; whereat the Legate wondering as at a thing void of reason, kept
himself quiet until he had discovered their treachery, and so made frustrate
their intent: In like manner Caesar not persuaded that men should be so
heedles, to carry a retrait in that disorderly and tumultuous manner, would not
discampe his men to take the opportunity of that advantage, until he had found
that to be true, which in all reason was unlikely. And thus 296000. Belgae were
chased and slaughtered by three legions of the Romans, for want of government
and order in their departure.

CHAP. VII.
Caesar follows after the Belgae into the Country of the Suessones; and
there besieges Noyon:
Nouiodunum.

THE next day after their departure, Caesar.
before they could recover themselves of their fear and flight; or had time to
put themselves again in breath: Caesar as it were continuing still the chase
and victory, led his army into the country of the Soyssons.
Suessones, the next borderers unto the men of Rheimes: and after a long
journey came unto Nouiodunum, a town of good importance, which he attempted to
take by surprise, as he passed along by it. For he understood, that it was
altogether unfurnished of defensive provision, having no forces within to
defend it: but in regard of the breadth of the ditch and height of the wall,
he was for that time disappointed of his purpose: and therefore having
fortified his camp, he began to make preparation for a siege. The night
following the whole multitude of the Suessones, that had escaped by flight,
were received into the town: howbeit when the Vineae were with great
expedition brought unto the wall, the mount raised, and the turrets built; the
Galls being amazed at the highness of the works, such as they had never seen
nor heard of before, and the speed which was made in the dispatch thereof,
sent ambassadors to Caesar, to treat of giving up the town, and by the
mediation of the men of Rheimes obtained their suite.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN this relation we may observe the industrious art, which the Romans used in
assaulting, and taking holds and towns; wherein we find three sorts of
engines described, Vinea, Agger, and Turres.

Vinea is thus described by Vegetius: * Lib. 4. A vinea or vine described.
A little strong built house or houell, made of light wood, that it might be
removed with greatest ease; the roof was supported with diverse pillars of a
foot square, vvherof the foremost were 8 foot high, and the hindmost 6; and
between every one of these pillars, there was 5 foot distance: it was always
made with a double roof; the first or lower roof was of thick plankes, and
the upper roof of hurdles, to break the force of a weight, without further
shaking or disioyning the building: the sides were likewise walled with
hurdles, the better to defend the soldiers that were under it: the whole
length was about 16 foot, and the breadth 7: the upper roof was commonly
covered with green or raw hides, to keep it from burning, Many of these
houels were joined together in rank, when they went about to undermine a
wal: the higher end was put next unto the wall, that all the waights which
were thrown upon it might easily tumble down, without any great hurt to the
engine: the four sides and groundsils, had in every corner a wheel, and by
them they were driven to any place as occasion served: the chiefest use of
them was to cover and defend the soldiers, as they undermined or overthrew a
wal. This engine was called Vinea, which signifies a vine, for it sheltered
such as were under the roof thereof, as a vine covers the place where it
grows.

Agger; Agger or mount.
which we call a mount, is described in diverse histories to be a hill or
elevation made of earth and other substance, which by little and little was
raised forward, until it approached near unto the place, against which it was
built; that upon this mount they might erect fortresses and turrets, and so
fight with an advantage of height. The matter of this mount, was earth and
stones, fagots, and timber. Josephus says, that at the siege of Jerusalem, the
Romans cut down all the trees within 11 mile compass, for matter and stuff
to make a mount. The sides of this Agger were of timber to keep in the loose
matter; the forepart which was toward the place of service, was open without
any timber work: for on that part they still raised it and brought it nearer
the walls. That which was built at Massilia was 80 foot high, and that at
Auaricum 80 foot high and 30 foot broad. Josephus and Egesippus writ, that
there was a fortress in Judea, 300 cubits high, which Sulla purposing to vvin
by assault, raised a mount 200 cubits high; and upon it, he built a castle of
stone 50 cubits high, and 50 cubits broad; and upon the said castle he
erected a turret of 60 cubits in hight, and so took the fortress. The Romans
oftentimes raised these mounts in the mouth of a haven, and commonly to
ouer-toppe a town, that so they might fight with much advantage.

Amongst other engines, Towers or Turrets described.
in use amongst the Romans, their moveable Turrets were very famous; for they
were built in some safe place out of danger, and with wheels put under them,
were driven to the walls of the town. These Turrets were of two sorts,
either great or little: the lesser sort are described, by Vitruuius, to be 60
cubits high; and the square side 17 cubits; the breadth at the top was a fifth
part, of the breadth at the base; and so they stood sure without any danger of
falling: the corner pillars were at the base, 9 inches square; and 6 inches at
the top: there were commonly 10 stories in these little turrets, and windows
in every story. The greater sort of towers were 120 cubits high, and the
square side was 24 cubits, the breadth at the top was a fifth part of the hase;
and in every one of these were commonly 200 stories. There was not one and the
same distance kept between the stories, for the lowest commonly was 7 cubits,
and 12 inches high: the highest story 5 cubits, and the rest 4 cubits, and a
third. In every one of these stories, were soldiers and engines, ladders, and
casting bridges, by which they got upon the wall and entered the town. The
forepart of these Turrets were covered with iron, and wet couerings, to save
them from fire. The soldiers that removed the tower to and fro, were always
within the square thereof, and so they stood out of danger. The new water-worke
by broken Wharfe in London much resembles one of these towers.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
Upon the building of these mighty engines, it was no marvel if the Suessones
submitted themselves to such powerful industry. For whatsoever is strange and
unusual, does much affrighte the spirits of an enemy, and breed a motion of
distrust and diffidencie, when as they find themselves ignorant of such
warlike practices: for novelty always breeds wonder, in as much as the true
reasons and causes being unknown, we apprehend it, as diverse from the usual
course of things, and so stand gazing at the strangeness thereof: and wonder
as it adds worth to the novelty; so it infers diffidencie, and so
consequently fear, the utter enemy of martial valor.

CHAP. VIII.
Caesar carries his Army to the Territories of the Bellouaci, Ambiani and the
Neruij.

CAESAR taking for pledges the chiefest of their city, Caesar.
upon the delivery of all their Arms, received the Suessones to mercy: and
from thence led his Army against the Bellouaci; The Bellouaci taken to mercy.
who having conuaied both themselves and their goods into the town, called
Bratispantium, and understanding that Caesar was come within five mile of the
place, all the elder sort came forth to meet him, signifying their
submission, by their lamentable demeanor. For these Diuitiacus became a
mediator (who after the Belgae had broken up their camp, had dismissed his
Heduan forces and was returned to Caesar) the Hedui (says he) have always
found in the Bellouaci, a faithful and friendly disposition to their state:
and if they had not been betrayed by their nobility, (who made them believe,
that the Hedui were brought in bondage by the Romans, and suffered all
villainy and despite at their hands,) they had never withdrawn themselves
from the Hedui, nor consented to conspire against the Romans. The authors of
this counsel, perceiving into what great misery they had brought their
country, were fled into Britanie: wherefore not only the Bellouaci, but the
Hedui also in their behalf besought him to use his clemency toward them.
Caesar in regard of the Hedui and Diuitiacus, promised to receive them to
mercy; but forasmuch as the state was very great and populous, he demanded
600. hostages: Which being delivered, and their armor brought out of the
town, The Ambiani yield up themselves.
he marched from thence into the coast of the Ambiani, who without further
lingering, gave both themselves and all that they had into his power. Upon these
bordered the Neruij, of whom Caesar found this much by inquiry, that there was
no recourse of merchants unto them; neither did they suffer any wine, or what
thing else might tend to riot, to be brought into their country: for they
were persuaded, that by such things their courage was much abated, and their
virtue weakened. Further, he learned that these Neruij were a savage people,
and of great valor, often accusing the rest of the Belgae, for yielding their
necks to the Roman yoke, openly affirming, that they would neither send
ambassadors nor take peace upon any condition.

Caesar having marched three days journey in their country, The Neruij.
he understood that the river Sa^bre near Namours.
Sabis was not past ten miles from his camp; and that on the further side of
this river, all the Neruij were assembled together, and there attended the
coming of the Romans: with them were joined the Attrebatij, and Veromandui,
whom they had persuaded to abide the same fortune of war with them. Besides,
they expected a power from the Aduatici; the women and such as were unmeet for
the field, they bestowed in a place inaccessible for any army, by reason of
fens and bogs, and marshes. Upon this intelligence, Caesar sent his
discouerers and Centurions before, to choose out a fit place to incampe in.

Now whereas many of the surrendered Belgae, and other Galls were continually
in the Roman army, certain of these (as it was afterward known by the
captives) observing the order which the Romans used in marching, came by
night to the Neruij and told them, that between every legion went a great
sort of cariages; and that it was no matter of difficulty, as soon as the
first legion was come into the camp, and the other legions yet a great way
off, to set upon them, upon a sudden, before they were disburdened of their
cariages; and so to overthrow them: which legion being thus cut off, and their
stuff taken, the rest would have small courage to stand against them. It much
furthered this advice, that, forasmuch as the Neruij were not able to make any
power of horse, that they might the better resist the caualrie of their
borderers, whenever they made any road into their marches; their manner was
to cut young trees half asunder, and bowing the tops down to the ground,
plashed the boughs in breadth, and with thorns and briers planted between
them, they made them so thick, that it was impossible to see through them, so
hard it was to enter or pass through them; so that, when by this occasion, the
passage of the Roman army must needs be hindered, the Neruij thought the
foresaid counsel not to be neglected.

CAESAR'S march where in every Legion had his Cariadges in front

CAESAR'S march where the Enemy was nearer at hand



The place which the Romans chose to incampe in, was a hill, of like level
from the top to the bottom, at the foot whereof ran the river Sabis: and with
the like level, on the other side, rose an other hill directly against this,
to the quantity of 200. paces; the bottom whereof was plain and open, and the
upper part so thick with wood, that it could not easily be looked into:
within these woods the Neruians kept themselves close, and in the open ground,
by the river side were only seen a few troops of horse, and the river in
that place was about 3. foot deep,

Caesar sending his horsemen before, followed after with all his power; but the
manner of his march differed from the report which was brought to the Neruii:
for inasmuch as the enemy was at hand; Caesar (as his custom was) led 6.
legions always in areadines, without burden or carriage of any thing, but
their arms: after them he placed the impediments of the whole army. And the
two legions which were last enrolled were a rereward to the army, and guarded
the stuff.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis treacherous practice of the surrendered Belgae, has fortunately
discovered the manner of Caesar's march, The manner of the Roman march.
as well in safe passages, as in dangerous and suspected places: which is a
point of no small consequence in martial discipline, being subject to so many
inconveniences, and capable of the greatest art that may be showed in managing
a war. Concerning the discreet carriage of a march; The two respects which
Caesar had in ordering a march. 1 Safety. 2 Conuenie^cy
by this circumstance it may be gathered, that Caesar principally respected
safety: and secondly conueniency. If the place affoorded a secure passage, and
gave no suspicion of hostility, he was content in regard of conueniency, to
suffer every legion to have the oversight of their particular cariages, and to
insert them among the troops, that every man might have at hand such
necessaries as were requisite, either for their private use or public
discipline. But if he were in danger of any sudden attempt, or stood in hazard
to be impeached by an enemy; he then omitted convenient disposition, in regard
of particular use, as disaduantageous to their safety: and carried his legions
in that readiness, that if they chanced to be engaged by an enemy, they might
without any alteration of their march, or encumbrance of their cariages receive
the charge, in that form of battle, as was best approved by their military
rules, and the ancient practice of their fortunate progenitors.

The old Romans observed likewise the same respects, for in unsafe and
suspected places, Agmen quadratum.
they carried their troops agmine quadrato, which as Liuie seems to note, was
free from all carriage and impediments, which might hinder them in any sudden
alarm. Neither does that of Lib. 8. de bell. Gall.
Hirtius any way co^tradict this interpretation, where he says, that Caesar so
disposed his troops against the Bellouaci, that 3. legions marched in front,
and after them came all the cariages, to which the 10. legion served as a
rereward; and so they marched, pene agmine quadrato. 60. Epistle.
Seneca in like manner notes the safety of agmen quadratu^, where he says, that
where an enemy is expected, we ought to march agmine quadrato, ready to
fight. The most material consequence of these places alleged is, that as often
as they suspected any onset or charge, their order in a march little or
nothing differed from their usual manner of imbattailing; and therefore it was
called agmen quadratum, or a square march, inasmuch as it kept the same
disposition of parts, as were observed in quadrata Acie. For that triple form
of imbattailing, which the Romans generally observed in their fights, having
respect to the distances between each battle, contained almost an equal
dimension of front and file: and so it made Aciem quadratam; and when it
marched, Agmen quadratum.

Polybius expresses the same in effect, Lib. 6.
as often as the place required circumspection; but alters it somewhat in
regard of the cariages: for he says that in time of danger, especially where
the country was plain and Cha^pion, and gave space and free scope to clear
themselves, upon any accident, the Romans marched in a triple battle, of
equal distance one behind an other, every battle having his several cariages in
front: And if they were by chance attacked by an enemy, they turned themselves
according to the opportunity of the place, either to the right or left hand,
and so placing their cariages on the one side of their army, they stood
imbattailed ready to receive the charge.

The contrary form of marching, where the place afforded more security, and
gave scope to conueniency, Agmenlongu^
they named agmen longum; when almost every maniple or order, had their several
cariages attending upon them, and strove to keep that way which they found most
easy, both for themselves and their impediments. Which order of a march, as it
was more commodius then the former, in regard of particularity, so was it
unsafe and dangerous, where the enemy was expected: And therefore Caesar much
blamed Sabinus and Cotta, for marching, when they were deluded by Ambiorix,
Lib. 5. de bell. Gallico.
longissimo agmine; as though they had received their aduertisements from a
friend, and not from an enemy.

And albeit our modern wars are far different, in quality, from them of
ancient times; The use that may be made of this in our modern wars
yet in this point of discipline, they cannot have a more perfect direction,
then that which the Romans observed, as the two poles of their motions,
safety and conueniency: whereof the first depends chiefly upon the provident
disposition of the leaders; and the other will easily follow on, as the
commodity of every particular shall give occasion.

Concerning safety in place of danger, what better course can be taken then
that manner of imbattailing, which shall be thought most convenient, if an enemy
were present to confront them? for a well ordered march must either carry the
perfect form of a battle, or contain the distinct principles and elements
thereof, that with little alteration it may receive that perfection of
strength, which the fittest disposition can afford it. First therefore, a
prudent and circumspect leader, that desires to frame a strong and orderly
march, is diligently to observe the nature and use of each weapon in his army,
how they may be placed for greatest use and advantage, both in respect of
their different and concurring qualities, as also in regard of the place
wherein they are managed: and this knowledge will consequently infer the
best and exactest disposition of imbattailing, as the said forces are capable
of; which if it may be observed in a march, is no way to be altered. But if
this exactnes of imbattailing will not admit convenient carriage of such
necessary adjuncts, as pertain to an army; the inconvenience is to be
relieved, with as little alteration from that rule, as in a wary judgment
shall be found expedient: that albeit the form be somewhat changed; yet the
principles and ground wherein their strength and safety consists, may still
be retained.

Neither can any man well descend to more particular precepts in this point: he
may exemplify the practices of many great and experienced commanders; what
sort of weapon marched in front, and what in the rereward, in what part of the
Army the Munition marched, and where the rest of the carriage was bestowed,
according as their several judgments thought most expedient, in the particular
nature of their occurrences. But the issue of all will fall out thus; that he
that observed this rule before prescribed, did seldom miscarrie through an
unsafe march. Let a good Martialist well know their proper use in that
diversity of weapons in his Army; how they are serviceable or disaduantageous,
in this or that place, against such or such an enemy: and he will speedily
order his battle, dispose of his march, and bestow his cariages, as shall best
fall out both for his safety, and conueniencie.

Caesar's custom was, to send his Caualrie and light armed footmen, before the
body of his Army, both to discover and impeach an enemy; for these troops
were nimble in motion and fit for such services: but if the danger were greater
in the rereward then in the front, the horsemen marched in the tail of the
Army, and gave security where there was most cause of fear. But if it
happened that they were found unfit to make good the service in that place, as
oftentimes it fell out, and especially in Africa against the Numidians: he then
removed them, as he best found it convenient, and brought his legionarie
soldiers, which were the sinews and strength of his forces, and marched
continually in the bulk of the Army, to make good that which his horsemen
could not perform. And thus he altered the antique prescription, and
uniformity of custom, according as he found himself best able to
disadvantage an enemy, or make way to victory.

CHAP. IX.
The Romans begin to fortify their camp: but are interrupted by the Neruij.
Caesar makes haste, to prepare his forces to battle.

THE Roman horsemen, Caesar.
with the slingers and archers, passed over the river, and incountered the
Caualrie of the enemy: who at first retired back to their companies in the
wood, and from thence sallied out again upon them: but the Romans durst not
pursue them further then the plain and open ground: in the mean time the six
legions that were in front, having their work measured out unto them, began to
fortify their camp. But as soon as the Neruij perceived their former cariages
to be come in sight, which was the time appointed amongst them to give the
charge, as they stood imbattailed within the thicket, so they rushed out with
all their forces, and assaulted the Roman horsemen: which being easily beaten
back, the Neruij ran down to the river, with such an incredible swiftness,
that they seemed at the same instant of time to be in the woods at the river,
and charging the legions on the other side: For with the same violence, having
passed the river, they ran up the hill to the Roman camp, where the
soldiers were busied in their intrenchment. Caesar had all parts to play at
one instant, the flagge to be hung out, by which they gave the soldiers
warning to take arms, the battle to be proclaimed by sound of trumpet, the
soldiers to be recalled from their work, and such as were gone far off to
get turfe and matter for the rampire, to be sent for; the battle to be
ordered, his men to be encouraged, and the sign of battle to be given: the
most of which were cut off by shortness of time, and the sudden assault of the
enemy.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
AS the Romans excelled all other nations in many good customs; The
description of the Roman camp, with all the parts belonging unto it
so especially in their campe-discipline, they strove to be singular: for it
seemed rather an Academie, or a city of civil government, then a camp of
soldiers: so careful were they both for the safety, and skillful experience
of their men at arms. For touching the first, they never suffered their
soldiers to lodge one night without a camp; wherein they were enclosed with
ditch and a rampire, as in a walled town: neither was it any new invention or
late found out custom in their state, but in use amongst the ancient Romans,
and in the time of their kings; their manner of incamping was included within
these circumstances.

The Centurions, The Centurions made choice of the place.
that went before to choose out a convenient place, having found a fit
situation for their camp, first assigned the standing for the Emperors
pauillion, which was commonly in the most eminent place of the camp; from
whence he might easily ouerview all the other parts, or any alarm or signum
pugnae, might from thence be discovered to all quarters. This pauillion was
known by the name of Praetorium, The Praetorium.
for as much as amongst the ancient Romans the General of their Army was
called Praetor: in this place where the Praetorium was to be erected, they
stuck up a white ensign, and from it they measured every way 100 foot, and
so they made a square containing 200 foot in every side, the Area, or content
whereof, was almost an acre of ground: the form of the Praetorium was round
and high, being as eminent among the other tents, as a temple is amongst the
private buildings of a city: and therefore Josephus compares it to a church.
In this Praetorium was their Tribunal or chair of the estate, and the place of
divination, which they called Augurale, with other appendices of majesty and
authority.

The Generals tent being thus placed, The lodging of the legions.
they considered which side of the pauillion lay most commodious for forage
and water, and on that side they lodged the legions, every legion divided one
from another by a street or lane of 50 foot in breadth; and according to the
degree of honor, that every legion had in the Army, so were they lodged in
the camp, either in the midst which was counted most honorable, or toward
the sides, which was of meaner reputation. And again, according to the place
of every cohort in his legion, so was it lodged nearer the pauillion of the
Emperor, toward the heart of the camp; and so consequently every maniple
took place in the cohort, distinguishing their pre-eminence, by lodging them
either toward the middle or to the outsideward; according as they distinguished
the place of their legions, there went a street of fifty in breadth
overthwart the midst of all the legions, which was called Quintana; Quintana.
for that it divided the fifth cohort of every legion from the sixth.

Between the tents of the first maniples in every legion and the Praetorium,
there went a way of 100 foot in breadth throughout the whole camp; which was
called Principia; Principia.
in this place the Tribunes sat to hear matters of justice; the soldiers
exercised themselves at their weapons, and the leaders and chief commanders
frequented it as a public place of meeting; and it was held for a reverent
and sacred place, and so kept with a correspondent decency. On either side the
Emperors pauillion, in a direct line to make even and straight the upper side
of the Principia, The tents of the Tribunes.
the Tribunes had their tents pitched, every Tribune confronting the head of
the legion whereof he was Tribune: above them, toward the head of the camp,
were the Legates and Treasurer: the upper part of the camp was strengthened
with some select cohorts and troops of horse, according to the number of
legions that were in the Army.

Polybius describing the manner of incamping which the Romans used in his time,
when as they had commonly but two legions in their Army, with as many
associates, places the Ablecti and extraordinarij, which were select bands
and companies, in the upper part of the camp; and the associates on the
outsides of the legions.

The ditch and the rampire, that compassed the whole camp about, was 200 foot
distant from any tent: The space between the tents and the rampire.
where of Polybius gives these reasons; first, that the soldiers marching
into the camp in battle array, might there dissolve themselves into maniples,
centuries, and decuries, without tumult or confusion: for order was the thing
which they principally respected, as the life and strength of their martial
body. And again, if occasion were offered to sallie out upon an enemy, they
might very conveniently in that spacious room, put themselves into companies
and troops: and if they were assaulted in the night, the darts and fire
works, which the enemy should cast into their camp, would little indammage
them, by reason of the distance between the rampire and the tents.

Their tents were all of skins and hides, held up with props, and fastened
with ropes: there were 11 soldiers, as Vegetius says, in every tent, and
that society was called Contubernium, Contuberniu^.
of whom the chiefest was named Decanus, or Caput Contubernij.

The ditch and the rampire were made by the legions, The ditch and the rampire.
every maniple having his part measured out, and every Centurion ouerseeing
his Centurie; the approbation of the whole work belonged to the Tribunes.
Their manner of intrenching was this: the soldiors being girt with their swords
and daggers, dug the ditch about the camp, which was always 8 foot in
breadth at the least, and as much in depth, casting the earth thereof inward;
but if the enemy were not far off, the ditch was always 11. or 15. or 18.
foot in latitude, and altitude; according to the discretion of the General: but
what scantling soueer was kept, the ditch was made directis lateribus, that is,
as broad in the bottom as at the top. The rampire from the brim of the ditch
was three foot in height, and sometimes four, made after the manner of a wall,
with green turfes cut all to one measure, half a foot in thickness, a foot
in breadth, and a foot and a half in length. But if the place, wherein they
were encamped, would afford no such turfe; they then strengthened the loose
earth, which was cast out of the ditch, with boughs and fagots, that it might
be strong and well fastened. The rampire they properly called Agger: Agger.
the outside whereof, which hung over the ditch, they used to stick with thick
and sharp stakes, fastened deep in the mound, that they might be firm; and
these for the most part were forked stakes, which made the rampire very strong,
and not to be assaulted but with great difficulty. Varro says, Vallum.
that the front of the rampire thus stuck with stakes, was called vallum, a
varicando, for that no man could stride or get over it.

The camp had four gates, Praetoria porta.
the first was called praetoria porta, which was always behind the Emperors
tent: and this gate did usually look either toward the east, or to the enemy,
or that way that the army was to march. The gate on the other side of the camp
opposite to this, Porta Decumana.
was called Porta Decumana a decimis cohortibus, for the tenth or last Cohort
of every legion, was lodged to confront this gate: by this gate the soldiers
went out to fetch their wood, their water, and their forage, and this way
their offenders were carried to execution. Portae principales. Laeua. Dextra.
The other two gates were called Portae principales, forasmuch as they stood
opposite to either end of that so much respected place, which they called
principia, only distinguished by these titles, laeua principalis and dextra,
all these gates were shut with doors, and in standing Camps fortified with
Turrets, upon which were planted Engines of defense, as Balistae, Catapultae,
Tolenones and such like.

The Romans had their summer Camps, which they termed Aestiua, and their
winter Camps, Castra Aestiua.
which they called Hiberna, or Hibernacula: their summer camps were in like
manner differenced, according to the time, which they continued in the^. For if
they remained in a place but a night or two, they called the^ Castra or
Mansiones; but if they continued in them any long time, they called the^
Aestiuas or Seeds: And these were more absolute, as well in regard of their
tents, as of their fortification, Hiberna.
then the former, wherein they stayed but one night. The other which they
called Hiberna, had greater labor and coast bestowed upon them, that they might
the better defend them from the vvinter season. Of these we read, that the
tents were either thatched with straw, or roofed with boards, and that they had
their armory, hospital, and other public houses. These ca^ps have bin the
beginning of many famous towns, especially when they continued long in a place,
as oftentimes they did upon the banks of Euphrates, Danow, and the Rhene. The
Porta Proetoria THE ROMAN CAMP

order which they always observed in laying out their camp, was so uniform,
and well known to the Romans, that when the Centurions had limited out every
part, and marked it with different ensigns and colors, the soldiers entered
into it, as into a known and familiar City: wherein every society or small
contubernie, knew the place of his lodging: and which is more, every
particular man could assign the proper station of every company, throughout
the whole army.

The use and commodity of this incamping, The commodity of this incamping.
I briefly touched in my first book: But if I were worthy any way to commend
the excellency thereof to our modern soldiers, or able by persuasion to
restablish the use of incamping in our wars; I would spare no pains to
atchieue so great a good, and vaunt more in the conquest of negligence, then if
my sense had compassed a new found out means; and yet reason would deem it a
matter of small difficulty, to gain a point of such worth, in the opinion of
our men, especially when my discourse shall present security to our forces,
and honor to our leaders, majesty to our armies, and terror to our enmies,
wonderment to strangers, and victory to our nation. But sloth has such
interest in this age, that it commends vain glory and foole-hardinesse,
contempt of virtue, and derision of good discipline, to repugne the dessignes
of honor, and so far to ouermaister reason, that it suffers not former
harms to bear witness against error, nor correct the ill atchieuements of
ill directions: and therefore ceasing to urge this point any further, I will
leave it to the careful respect of the wise.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe fury of the enemy, and their sudden assault, so disturbed the ceremonies
which the Roman discipline observed, The ceremonies which they used in their
preparation to battle
to make the soldiers truly apprehend the weight and importance of that
action, which might cast upon their state either sovereignty or bondage; that
they were all for the most part omitted; notwithstanding they are here noted
under these titles, the first was vexillum proponendum, quod erat insigne cum
ad Arma concurri oporteret: for when the General had determined to fight, he
caused a skarlet coat or red flag to be hung out upon the top of his tent,
that by it the soldiers might be warned, to prepare themselves for the
battle; and this was the first warning they had, which by a silent aspect
presented blood and execution to their eyes, as the only means to work out
their own safety, and purchase eternal honor. The second was Signum tuba
dandum; this warning was a noise of many trumpets, which they termed by the
name of classicum a calando, which signifies calling: for after the eye was
filled with species suitable to the matter intended; they then hasted to
possess the ear, and by the sense of hearing to stir up warlike motions, and
fill them with resolute thoughts, that no diffident or base conceits might take
hold of their minds. The third was, milites cohortandi, for it was thought
convenient to confirm this valor, with motives of reason, which is the
strength and perfection of al such motions. the use and benefit whereof I
somewhat enlarged in the Heluetian war, and could afford much more labor to
demonstrate the commodity of this part, if my speech might carry credit in
the opinion of our soldiers, or be thought worthy regard to men so much
addicted to their own fashions. The last was signum dandum, which, as some
think, was nothing but a word, by which they might distinguish and know
themselves from their enemies. Hirtius in the war of Afrike says, that Caesar
gave the word Felicity; Brutus and Cassius gave Liberty; others have given
Virtus, Deus nobiscum, Triumphus Imperatoris, and such like words, as might be
ominous to a good success: Besides these particularities, the manner of their
delivery gave a great grace to the matter. And that was distinguished by
times, and cues: whereof Caesar now complains; that all these were to be done
at one instant of time: for without all controversy, there is no matter of
such consequence in it self, but may be much graced with ceremonies and
complements, which like officers or attendants ad much respect and majesty to
the action; which otherwise being but barely presented, appears far meaner
and of less regard.

CHAP. X.
The battle between Caesar and the Neruij.

IN these difficulties, Caesar.
two things were a help to the Romans; the one was, the knowledge and
experience of the soldiers: for by reason of their practice in former battles,
they could as well prescribe unto themselves, what was to be done, as any other
commander could teach them. The other was, that notwithstanding Caesar had
given commandment to every Legate, not to leave the work or forsake the
legions, until the fortifications were perfited; yet when they saw extremity
of danger, they attended no countermaund from Caesar: but ordered all things
as it seemed best to their own discretion. Caesar having commanded such
things as he thought necessary, ran hastily to encourage his soldiers,
and by fortune came to the tenth legion, where he used no further speech, then
that they should remember their ancient valor, and valiantly withstand the
brunt of their enemies. And therefore I rather take it to be something else
then a word.
And for as much as the enemy was no further off, then a weapon might be cast
to encounter them, he gave them the sign of battle: and hastening from thence
to another quarter, he found them already closed and at the encounter. For the
time was so short and the enemy so violent, that they wanted leisure to put on
their headpieces, or to uncase their targets: and what part they lighted into
from their work, or what ensign they first met withal, there they stayed;
least in seeking out their own companies, they should loose that time as was
to be spent in fighting. The Army being imbattailed rather according to the
nature of the place, the decliuitie of the hill, and the brevity of time, then
according to the rules of art; as the legions incountered the enemy in diverse
places at once, the perfect view of the battle being hindered by those thick
hedges before spoken of, there could no succors be placed any where; neither
could any man see what was needful to be done: and therefore in so great
uncertainty of things, there happened diverse casualties of fortune.

The soldiers of the ninth and tenth legion, as they stood in the left part of
the Army, casting their piles, with the advantage of the hill, did drive the
Attrebatij, breathles with running and wounded in the encounter, down into the
river; and as they passed over the water, slew many of them with their swords:
Neither did they stick to follow after them over the river, and adventure into
a place of disadvantage, where the battle being renewed again by the enemy,
they put them to flight the second time. In like manner two other legions, the
11 and the 8, having put the Veromandui from the upper ground, fought with them
upon the banks of the river; and so the front and the left part of the camp
was well near left naked. For in the right cornet were the 12 and the 7
legions, where as all the Neruij, under the conduct of Boduognatus, were heaped
together; and some of them began to assault the legions on the open side, and
other some to possess themselves of the highest part of the camp.

At the same time the Roman horsemen, and the light armed footmen that were
intermingled amongst them, and were at first all put to flight by the enemy,
as they were entering into the camp, met with their enemies in the face, and
so were driven to fly out another way. In like manner, the pages and soldiers
boys, that from the Decumane port and top of the hill, had seen the tenth
legion follow their enemies in pursuit over the river, and were gone out to
gather pillage, when they looked behind them, and saw the enemy in their
camp; betook them to their heels as fast as they could. Which accident so
terrified the horsemen of the Treuiri (who for their prowess were reputed
singular amongst the Galls, and were sent thither by their state, to aid the
Romans) first when they perceived the Roman camp to be possessed, by a great
multitude of the enemy, the legions to be ouercharged and almost enclosed
about, the horsemen, slingers, and Numidians to be dispersed and fled, that
without any further expectation they took their way homeward, and reported
to their state, that the Romans were utterly overthrown.

Caesar departing from the tenth legion, to the right cornet, found his men
exceedingly ouercharged, the ensigns crowded together into one place, and the
soldiers of the 12 legion so thick thronged on a heap, that they hindered
one another; all the Centurions of the fourth cohort being slain, the ensign
bearer killed and the ensign taken, and the Centurions of the other cohorts
either slain, or sore wounded; amongst whom Pub. Sextus Baculus, the Primipile
of that legion, a valiant man, so grievously wounded, that he could scarce
stand upon his feet; the rest not very forward, but many of the hindmost
turning tail and forsaking the field; the enemy on the other side, giving no
respite in front, although he fought against the hill, nor yet sparing the open
side, and the matter brought to a narrow issue, without any means or succor,
to relieve them: he took a target from one of the hindmost soldiers (for he
himself was come thither without one) and pressing to the front of the
battle, called the Centurions by name, and encouraging the rest, commanded the
ensigns to be advanced toward the enemy, and the Maniples to be enlarged,
that they might with greater facility and readiness use their swords.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Publius Sextus Baculus was the chiefest Centurion of the 12 legion, The
place and office of a primipile.
being the first Centurion of that Maniple of the Triarij, that was of the
first Cohort in that legion; for that place was the greatest dignity that
could happen to a Centurion; and therefore he was called by the name of
Centurio primipili, or simply Primipilus, and sometimes Primopilus, or Primus
Centurio. By him were commonly published, the mandates and edicts of the
Emperor, and Tribunes: and therefore the rest of the Centurions, at all times
had an eye unto him; and the rather for that the eagle, which was the peculiar
ensign of every legion, was committed to his charge and carried in his
Maniple. Neither was this dignity, without special commodity, as may be
gathered out of diverse authors. We read further, that it was no disparagement
for a Tribune, after his Tribunality was expired, to be a Primipile in a
legion; notwithstanding, there was a law made, I know not upon what occasion,
that no Tribune should afterward be Primipile. But let this suffice concerning
the office and title of P. S. Baculus.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
ANd here I may not omit to give the Target any honor I may, The Target
described.
and therefore I will take occasion to describe it in Caesar's hand, as in the
place of greatest dignity, and much honoring the excellency thereof. Polybius
makes the Target to contain two foot and an half in breadth, overthwart the
conuexsurface thereof; and the length four foot, of what form or fashion
soever they were of: for the Romans had two sorts of Targets amongst their
legionarie, the first carried the proportion of that figure, which the
Geometricians call Ouall, a figure of an unequal latitude, broadest in the
midst, and narrow at both the ends, like unto an egg, described in Plano: the
other sort was of an equal latitude, and resembled the fashion of a
guttertile; and thereupon was called Scutum imbricatum. The matter whereof a
target was made, was a double board, one fastened upon another, with lint and
Bulls glue; and covered with an Ox hide, or some other stiff leather; the
upper and lower part of the target were bound about with a plate of iron, to
keep it from cleaving; and in the midst there was a bosse of iron or brass,
which they called Vmbo. Romulus brought them in first amongst the Romans,
taking the use of them from the Sabines. Lib. 16. c. 40.
The wood whereof they were made, was for the most part either sallow, alder,
or figtree: whereof Pliny gives this reason, for as much as these trees are
cold and waterish, and therefore any blow or thrust that was made upon the
wood, was presently contracted and shut up again. But for as much as the
Target was of such reputation amongst the Roman Arms, and challenged such
interest in the greatest of their Empire, let us enter a little into the
consideration of the use and commodity thereof; which cannot be better
understood, then by that conference, which Polybius has made between the
weapons of the Romans and the Macedonians: and therefore I have thought it good
to insert it in these discourses. And thus it follows.

Of the difference of the Roman and Macedonian Weapons.
I Promised in my sixth book that I would make a comparison, between the weapons
of the Romans, and Macedonians. And that I would likewise write of the
disposition of either of their armies; how they do differ one from another: and
in what regard, the one, or the other, were either inferior, or superior:
which promise I will now with diligence endeavor to perform. And for as much as
the armies of the Macedonians have given so good testimonies of themselves by
their actions, by ouercomming the armies as well of those of Asia, as of Greece;
and that the battles of the Romans have conquered, as well those of Africa as
all the Eastern countries of Europe: It shall not be amiss, but very
profitable, to search out the difference of either; especially seeing that
these our times have not once, but many times seen trial, both of their
battles and forces; that knowing the reason why, the Romans do overcome, and
in their battles carry away the better: we do not as vain men were wont to
do, attribute the same to fortune, and esteem them without reason happy
victors; but rather looking into the true causes, we give them their due
praises, according to the direction of reason, and sound judgment. Concerning
the battles between Hanniball and the Romans; and concerning the Romans their
losses, there is no need that I speak much. For their losses are neither to
be imputed to the defect of their Arms, or disposition of their Armies; but to
the dexterity and industry of Hanniball: but we have entreated thereof when
we made mention of the battles themselves, and the end it self of that war
does especially confirm this our opinion. For when they had gotten a
captain equal with Hanniball, even consequently with all his victories
vanished. And he had no sooner overcome the Romans, but by and by, rejecting
his own weapons, he trained his Army to their weapons, and so taking them up
in the beginning, he continued them on unto the end.

And Pyrrhus in his war against the Romans, did use both their weapons and
order, and made as it were a medlie both of the cohort, and phalanx: but
notwithstanding it served him not to get the victory, but always the event by
some means or other, made the same doubtful: concerning whom it were not
unfit, that I should say something, least in being altogether silent, it might
seem to prejudice this mine opinion. But notwithstanding I will hasten to my
purposed comparison.

Now touching the phalanx, if it have the disposition, and forces proper to it,
nothing is able to oppose it self against it, or to sustain the violence
thereof; as may easily by many documents be approved. For when an armed man
does stand firm in the space of three foot in so thick an array of battle,
and the length of their pikes being according to the first basis, or scantling
sixteen foot; but according to the true and right conueniencie of them, 14
cubits, out of which are taken four allowed for the space between the left
hand, which supporteth the same, and the butte end thereof, vvhiles he stands
in a readiness to attend the encounter: being thus ordered, I say, it is
manifest that the length of ten cubits does extend it self before the body
of every armed man, where with both his hands he does advance it ready to
charge the enemy: By which means it follows, that some of the pikes do
not only extend themselves before the second, third, and fourth rank, but
some before the foremost, if the phalanx have his proper and due thickness,
according to his natural disposition, both on the sides and behind, as Homer
makes mention when he says, that one target does enclose and fortify
another; one headpiece is joined to another, that they may stand united and
close together.

These circumstances being rightly and truly set down, it must follow, that
the pikes of every former rank in the phalanx, do extend themselves two
cubits before each other, which proportion of difference they have between
themselves: by which may evidently be seen the assault, and impression of the
whole phalanx, what it is, and what force it has, consisting of 16 ranks in
depth, or thickness; the excess of which number of ranks above five. For as
much as they cannot commodiously couch their pikes, without the disturbance of
the former, the points of them not being long enough to enlarge themselves
beyond the foremost ranks, they grow utterly unprofitable, and cannot man, by
man, make any impression, or assault: but serve only, by laying their pikes
upon the shoulders of those which stand before them, to sustain and hold up
the swaies and giving back of the former ranks, which stand before them to
this end, that the front may stand firm and sure; and with the thicknes of
their pikes they do repel all those darts, which passing over the heads of
those that stand before, would annoy those ranks which are more backward.

And farther by moving forward, with the force of their bodies, they do so
press upon the former, that they do make a most violent impression. For it is
impossible that the foremost ranks should give back.

This therefore being the general and particular disposition of the phalanx:
we must now speak on the contrary part, touching the properties and
differences, as well of the arms, as of the whole disposition of the Roman
battle. For every Roman soldier for himself, and his weapon is allowed three
foot to stand in, and in the encounter, are moved man, by man, every one
covering himself with his target; and mutually moving whenever there is
occasion offered. But those which use their swords, do fight in a more thin
and distinct order; so that it is manifest, that they have three foot more
allowed them to stand in both from shoulder to shoulder, and from back to
belly, that they may use their weapons with the better commodity. And hence
it comes to pass, that one Roman soldiour takes up as much ground, as two
of those which are to encounter him of the Macedonian Phalanx: so that one
Romain is as it were to oppose himself against ten pikes, which pikes the
said one soldior can neither by any agilitie come to offend, or else at handy
blows otherwise annoy: And those which are behind him, are not only unable
to repel their force, but also with conueniencie to use their own weapons.
Whereby it may easily be gathered, that it is impossible, that any battle
being assaulted, by the front of a phalanx, should be able to sustain the
violence thereof, if it have his due and proper composition.

What then is the cause that the Romans do overcome, and that those that do
use the phalanx are void of the hope of victory? (Even from hence) that the
Roman armies have infinite commodities, both of places, and of times, to
fight in. But the the phalanx has only one time, one place, and one kind,
whereto it may profitablie apply it self: so that if it were of necessity,
that their enemy should encounter them at that instant, especially with their
whole forces, it were questionless not only, not without danger, but in all
probability likely, that the phalanx should ever carry away the better. But
if that may be avoided, which is easily done: shall not that disposition then,
be utterly unprofitable, and free from all terror? And it is farther evident,
that the phalanx must necessarily have plain and champion places, without any
hindrances, or impediments; as ditches, uneven places, valleys, little hills
and rivers: for all these may hinder and disioine it. And it is almost
impossible to have a plain of the capacity of 20. stadia, much less more,
where there shall be found none of these impediments. But suppose there be
found such places, as are proper for the phalanx: If the enemy refuse to come
unto them, and in the mean time, spoil, and sack the cities, and country
round about; what commodity, or profit shall arise by an army so ordered? for if
it remain in such places, as has been before spoken of; it can neither
relieve their friends, nor preserve themselves. For the Conuoies which they
expect from their friends, are easily cut off by the enemy, whiles they remain
in those open places.

And if it happen at any time, that they leave them upon any enterprise, they
are then exposed to the enemy. But suppose, that the Roman army should find
the phalanx in such places, yet would it not adventure it self in gross at
one instant; but would by little and little retire it self, as does plainly
appear by their usual practice. For there must not be a conjecture of these
things by my words only, but especially by that which they do. For they do not
so equally frame their battle, that they do assault the enemy altogether,
making as it were but one front: but part make a stand, and part charge the
enemy, that if at any time the Phalanx do press them, that come to assault
them and be repelled; the force of their order is dissolved. For whether they
pursue those that retire, or fly from those that do assault them, these do
disioyne themselves from part of their army; by which means there is a gap
opened to their enemies, stauding and attending their opportunity: so that
now they need not any more to charge them in the front, where the force of
the phalanx consists: but to assault where the breach is made, both behind,
and upon the sides. But if at any time the Roman army may keep his due
propriety, and disposition, the phalanx by the disadvantage of the place,
being not able to do the like: does it not then manifestly demonstrate the
difference to be great, between the goodness of their disposition, and the
disposition of the phalanx?

To this may be added the necessities imposed upon an army, which is to march
through places of all natures, to encampe themselves, to possess places of
advantage, to besiege, and to be besieged; and also contrary to expectation
sometimes to come in view of the enemy: For all these occasions necessarily
accompany an army; and oftentimes are the especial causes of victory, to
which the Macedonian phalanx is no way fit, or convenient: Forasmuch as neither
in their general order, nor in their particular disposition, without a
convenient place, are able to effect any thing of moment: but the Roman army
is apt for all these purposes. For every soldiour amongst them, being once
armed and ready to fight, refuses no place, time, nor occasion; keeping
always the same order, whether he fight together with the whole body of the
army, or particularly by himself, man to man.

And hence it happens, that as the commodity of their disposition is
aduantagious: so the end does answer the expectation.

These things I thought to speak of at large, because many of the Grecians are
of an opinion, that the Macedonians are not to be overcome. And again, many
wondered, how the Macedonian phalanx should be put to the worst by the Roman
army, considering the nature of their weapons.

Thus far goes Polibyus, in comparing the weapons and imbattailing of the
Romans, with the use of arms amongst the Macedonians: wherein we see the
Pike truly, and exactlie ordered, according as the wise Grecians could best
proportion it with that form of battle, which might give most advantage to
the use thereof: so that if our squadrons of Pikes iumpe not with the perfect
manner of a phalanx, (as we see they do not) they fall so much short of that
strength, which the wisdom of the Grecians and the experience of other
nations, imputed unto it. But suppose we could allow it that disposition, in
the course of our wars, which the nature of the weapon does require; yet
forasmuch as by the authority of Polybius, the said manner of imbattailing is
tied to such dangerous circumstances of one time, one place, and one kind of
fight: I hold it not so profitable a weapon, as the practice of our times does
seem to make it, especially in woody countries, such as Ireland is; where the
use is cut off by such inconveniences, as are noted to hinder the managing
thereof. And doubtless, if our commanders did but consider of the incongruity of
the Pike and Ireland, they would not proportion so great a number of the^ in
every company, as there is; for commonly half the company are pikes, which is
as much to say in the practice of our wars, that half the army has neither
offensive nor defensive weapons, but only against a troop of horse. For they
seldom or never come to the push of pike, with the foot companies, where they
may charge and offend the enemy: and for defense, if the enemy think it not
safe to buckle with the^ at hand, but makes more advantage to play upon the^ a
far off with short; it affords small safety to shake a long pike at them, and
stand fair in the mean time, to entertain a volleie of shot with the body of
their battailion. As I make no question, but the pike in some services is
profitable, as behind a rampire, or at a breach; so I assure my self, there
are weapons if they were put to trial, that would counteruaile the pike even
in those services, wherein it is thought most profitable.

Concerning the Target, we see it take the hand, in the judgment of Polybius,
of all other weapons whatsoever, as well in regard of the diverse and sundry
sorts of imbattailing, as the quality of the place whersoeuer: for their use
was as effectual in small bodies and centuries, as in gross troops and great
companies; in thin and spacious imbattailing, as in thick thronged
Testudines. Neither could the nature of the place make them unserviceable; for
whether it were plain or covert; leuel or unequal; narrow or large, if there
were any commodity to fight, the Target was as necessary to defend, as the
sword to offend: besides the conueniency, which accompanies the Target in any
necessity imposed upon an army, whether it be to march through places of all
natures, to make a fast march, or a speedy retraite, to incampe themselves, to
possess places of advantage, to besiege and to be besieged, as Polybius says,
with many other occasions which necessarily accompany an army. The use of
this weapon has been too much neglected in these latter ages, but may be
happily renewed again in our nation, if the industry of such as have labored
to present it unto these times, in the best fashion, shall find any favor in
the opinion of our commanders. Concerning which Target, I must needs say
this much, that the light Target will prove the Target of service, whenever
they shall happen to be put in execution: for those which are made proof, are
so heavy and vnwieldie, (although it be somewhat qualified with such helps as
are annexed to the use thereof,) that they ouercharge a man, with an
unsupportable burden, and hinder his agilitie and execution in fight, with a
weight disproportionable to his strength. For our offensive weapons, as namely
the Hargebusiers and musketeers, are stronger in the offensive part, then any
arms of defense, which may be made manageable and fit for service. Neither did
the Romans regard the proof of their Target further, then was thought fit for
the ready use of them in time of battle, as it appears in many places, both
in the civil wars and in these Commentaries: for a Roman pile has often
times darted through the Target, and the body of the man that bare it, and
fastened them both to the ground, which is more then a musket can well do; for
the bullet commonly rests in the body. And although it may be said that this
was not common, but rather ye effect of an extraordinary arm; yet it serves
to prove, that their Targets were not proof to their offensive weapons, when
they were well delivered and with good direction. For I make no doubt, but in
their battles there were oftentimes some hindrances, which would not suffer
so violent an effect, as this which I speak of: for in a volley of shot, we
must not think that all the bullets fly with the same force, and fall with
the like hurt; but as armor of good proof will hardly hold out some of them;
so slender arms and of no proof, will make good resistance against others.
And to conclude, in a battle or encounter at hand, a man shall meet with more
occasions, suting the nature and commodity of this light Target, then such as
will advantage the heavy Target of proof, or counteruaile the surplus of
weight, which it earieth with it.

Some men will urge, that there is use of this Target of proof, in some places
and in some services: which I deny not to those, that desire to be secured
from the extremity of peril: but this falls out in some places and in some
particular services, and hinders not but that the universal benefit of this
weapon consists in the multitude of light Targetiers, who are to manage the
most important occasions of a war.

This much I am further to note, concerning the sword of the Targetiers, that
according to the practice of the Romans, it must always hang on the right
side; for carrying the Target upon the left arm, it cannot be that the sword
should hang on the left side, but with great trouble and annoiance: And if any
man say, that if it hang on the right side, it must be very short, otherwise
it will never be readily drawn out. I say that the sword of the
Targetiers, in regard of the use of that weapon, ought to be of a very short
scantling, when as the Targetier is to command the point of his sword within
the compass of his Target, as such as look into the true use of this weapon,
will easily discover. But let this suffice concerning the use of the pike and
the Target.

CHAP. XI.
The battle continues, and in the end Caesar overcomes.

AT the presence of their General, the soldiers conceived some better hopes;
Caesar.
and gathering strength and courage again, when as every man bestirred
himself in the sight of the Emperor, the brunt of the enemy was a little
stayed. Caesar perceiving likewise the seventh legion, which stood next unto
him, to be sore ouerlaide by the enemy, commanded the Tribunes by little and
little, to join the two legions together, and so by ioining back to back, to
make two contrary fronts; and being thus secured one by another from fear of
being circumuented, they began to make resistance with greater courage. In the
mean time the two legions, that were in the rerewarde to guarde the cariages,
hearing of the battle, doubled their pace, and were discried by the enemy upon
the top of the hill. And Titus Labienus, having won the camp of the Neruij,
and beholding from the higher ground what was done on the other side of the
reuer, sent the tenth legion to help their fellows, who understanding by the
horsemen and Lackies that fled, in what case the matter stood, and in what
danger the camp, the legions, and the General was, made all the haste they
possibly could. At whose coming there happened such an alteration and change
of things, that even such as were sunk down, through extreme grief of their
wounds, or leaned upon their Targets, began again to fight a fresh, and the
Pages and the boys perceiving the enemy amazed, ran upon them unarmed, not
fearing their weapons: the horsemen also striving with extraordinary valor,
to wipe away the dishonor of their former flight, thrust themselves in all
places before the legionarie soldiers. Howbeit the enemy in the utmost peril
of their lives, showed such manhood, that as fast as the foremost of them were
overthrown, the next in place bestrid their carkases, and fought upon their
bodies: and these being likewise overthrown, and their bodies heaped one upon
another, they that remained, possessed themselves of that mount of dead carkases
as a place of advantage, and from thence threw their weapons, and intercepting
the piles, returned them again to the Romans. By which it may be gathered,
that there was great reason to deem them men of hautie courage, that durst
pass over so broad a river, climb up such high rocks, and adventure to
fight in a place of such inequality. The battle being thus ended, and the
nation and name of the Neruij being well near swallowed up with destruction,
the elder sort with the women and children, that before the battle were
conuaied into Islands and Bogs, when they heard thereof; sent ambassadors to
Caesar, and yielded themselves to his mercy; and in laying open the misery of
their state affirmed, that of 600 Senators they had now left but three; and of
60000 fighting men, there was scarce five hundred that were able to bear
Arms. Caesar, that his clemency might appear to a distressed people,
preserved them with great care, granting unto them the free possession of their
towns and country, and straightly commanding their borderers, not to offer
them any wrong or injury at all.

OBSERVATIONS.
ANd thus ends the relation of that great and dangerous battle, Li. de
militia Iu. Cae.
which Ramus complains of as a confused narration: much differing from the
direct and methodicall file, of his other Commentaries. But if that rule hold
good, which learned Rhetoritians have observed in their Oratorie, that an
imperfect thing ought not to be told in a perfect manner; then by Ramus leave,
if any such confusion do appear, it both sauoureth of eloquence, and well
suteth the turbulent carriage of the action, wherein order and skill gave place
to fortune, and providence was swallowed up with peradventure. For that which
Hirtius says of the overthrow he gave to Pharnaces, may as well be said of
this; that he got the victory, plurimum adiuuante deorum benignitate, qui cum
omnibus belli casibus intersunt, tum praecipue ijs quibus nihil ratione potuit
administrari. For so it fell out in this battle, and the danger proceeded from
the same cause, that brought him to that push in the battle with Pharnaces:
for he well understood that the Neruij attended his coming on the other side
the river Sabis: Neither was he ignorant how to fortify his camp in the face
of an enemy, without fear or danger, as we have seen in his war with
Ariouistus; when he marched to the place where he purposed to incamp himself
with 3 battles, and caused two of them to stand ready in arms to receive any
charge, which the enemy should offer to give, that the third battle in the
mean time might fortify the camp. Which course would easily have frustrated
this stratagem of the Neruij, and made the hazard less dangerous; but he
little expected any such resolution, so contrary to the rules of military
discipline, that an enemy should not stick to pass over so broad a river, to
clime up such steep and high rocks, to adventure battle in a place so
disaduantagious, and to hazard their fortune upon such inequalities. And
therefore, he little mistrusted any such unlikely attempt, wherein the enemy
had plotted his own overthrow, if the legions had been ready to receive them.
Which may teach a general that which Caesar had not yet learned, that a leader
cannot be too secure in his most assured courses; nor too careful in his best
advised directions; considering that the greatest means may easily be
prevented, and the safest course weakened with an unrespected circumstance: so
powerful are weak occurrences in the maine course of the waightiest actions;
and so infinite are the ways, whereby either wisdom or fortune may work.
Neither did this warn him, to provide for that which an enemy might do, how
unlikely soever it might seem unto him, as appears by that accident in the
battle with Pharnaces: which practice of attempting a thing against reason and
the art of war, has found good success in our modern wars; as appears
by the French histories: notwithstanding, it is to be handeled sparingly, as no
way savoring of circumspect and good direction, forasmuch as temeritas non
semper felix, as Fabius the great answered Scipio.

The chiefest helps which the Romans found, were first the advantage of the
place; whereof I spoke in the Heluetian war. Secondly, the experience, which
the soldiers had got in the former battles, which much directed them in this
turbulent assault; wherein they carried themselves as men acquainted with such
casualties: lastly, the valor and undaunted judgment of the General, which
ouerswaied the peril of the battle, and brought it to so fortunate an end.
Wherein we may observe, that as in a temperate course, when the issue of the
battle rested upon his directions, he wholly intended warines and
circumspection, so in the hazard and peril of good hap, he confronted extremity
of danger with extremity of valor, and ouertopt fury, with a higher resolution.

CHAP. XII.
The Aduatici betake themselves to a strong hold, and are taken by Caesar.

THE * Aduatici before mentioned, Caesar. either Doway or Bosleduke in Brabant.
coming with all their power to aid the Neruij, and understanding by the way
of their overthrow, returned home again; and forsaking all the rest of their
towns, and castles, conuaied themselves and their wealth into one strong and
well fortified town, which was compassed about with mighty rocks and stiepe
downefals, saving in one place of 200. foot in breadth, where there was an
entry by a gentle and easy ascent, which passage they had fortified with a
double wall of a large altitude, and had placed mighty great stones and sharp
beams upon the walls ready for an assault. This people descended from the
Cimbri and Teutoni, who in their journey into Italy had left such cariages on
this side of the Rhene, as they could not conveniently take along with them,
in the custody of these forces; who after the death of their fellows, being
many years disquieted by their neighbors, sometimes inuading other states, and
sometimes defending themselves, at length procured a peace, and chose this
place to settle themselves in. At the first coming of the Roman army, they
sallied out of the town, and made many light skirmishes with them: but after
that Caesar had drawn a rampire about the town of 12 foot in height, 15 miles
in compass, and had fortified it with castles very thick about the town;
they kept themselves within the wall: And as they beheld the vines framed, the
mount raised, and a tower in building a far off; at first they began to laugh
at it, and with scoffing speeches from the wall, began to ask: with what hands,
and with what strength, especially by men of that stature (for the Romans
were but little men in respect of the Galls) a tower of that huge massy
weight should be brought unto the walls? But when they saw it removed, and
approaching near unto the town, as men astonished at the strange and
unaccustomed sight thereof, they sent ambassadors to Caesar, to entreat a peace
with this message: They believed that the Romans did not make war, without
the special assistance of the gods, that could with such facility transport
engines of that height, and bring them to encounter at hand, against the
strongest part of their town: and therefore they submitted both themselves, and
all that they had, to Caesar's mercy; desiring one thing of his mere clemency,
that he would not take away their arms, forasmuch as al their neighbors were
enemies unto them, and envied at their valor; neither were they able to defend
themselves, if they should deliver up their armor: so that they had rather
suffer any inconvenience by the people of Rome, then to be butcherly murdered
by them, whom in former time they had held subject to their command.

To this Caesar answered, that he would save the city rather of his own
custom, the^ for any desert of theirs; so that they yielded before the Ram
touched the wall: but no condition of remedy should be accepted, without present
delivery of their arms; for he would do by the^ as he had done by the Neruij,
and give commandment to their neighbors, that they should offer no wrong to
such, as had commended their safety to the people of Rome. This answer being
returned to the city, they seemed contented to do whatsoever he commanded
them, and thereupon casting a great part of their armor over the wall into the
ditch, insomuch as they filled it almost to the top of the rampire: and yet (as
afterward was known) concealing the third part, they set open the gates, and
for that day carried themselves peaceably. Toward night Caesar commanded the
gates to be shut, and the soldiers to be drawn out of the town. But the
Aduatici having consulted together before, forasmuch as they believed that upon
their submission, the Romans would either set no watch at all, or at the
least, keep it very carelessly; partly with such armor as they had
retained, and partly with Targets, made of bark or wrought of wicker, which
upon the sudden they had covered over with leather, about the third watch
where the ascent to our fortifications was easiest; they issued suddenly out of
the town with all their power: but signification thereof being given by fires,
as Caesar had commanded, the Romans hasted speedily to that place. The enemy
fought very desperately, as men in the last hope of their welfare,
incountering the Romans in a place of disadvantage, at length with the
slaughter of 4000. the rest were driven back into the town. The next day
when Caesar came to break open the gates, and found no man at defense, he sent
in the soldiors, and sold all the people and spoil of the town: the number of
persons in the town amounted to 53000. bondslaues.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
IN the surprise, Circu^uallatio
attempted by the Belgae upon Bibract, I set down the manner, which both the
Galls and the Romans used in their sudden surprising of a town: whereof if
they failed (the place importing any advantage in the course of the war) they
then prepared for the siege, in that manner, as Caesar has described in this
place. They environed the town about with a ditch and a rampire, and fortified
the said rampire, with many castles and fortresses, erected in a convenient
distance one from another; and so they kept the town from any foreign succor
or relief: and withal secured themselves from sallies or other stratagerns,
which the townsmen might practice against them. And this manner of siege was
called circumuallatio; the particular description whereof, In the seventh
commentary.
I refer unto the history of Alesia, where I will handle it, according to the
particulars there set down by Caesar.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe Ram, Aries or the Ram.
which Caesar here mentions, was of greatest note amongst all the Roman
Engines, and held that place which the Canon has in our wars. Vitruuius
does attribute the invention thereof, to the Carthagimans, who at the taking of
Cadiz, wanting a fit instrument to raze and overthrow a castle, Cales.
they took a long beam or timber tree, and bearing it upon their arms and
shoulders, with the one end thereof they first brake down the uppermost rank
of stones: and so descending by degrees, Aries simplex
they ouerthrewe the whole tower. The Romans had two sorts of Rams, the one
was rude and plain; the other artificial and compound: the first, is that
which the Carthaginians used at Cadiz, and is purtraited in the column of
Traian at Rome.

The compound Ram is thus described by Josephus; Aries composita.
a Ram (says he) is a mighty great beam, like unto the mast of a ship, and
is strengthened at one end with a head of iron, fashioned like unto a Ram; and
thereof it took the name. This Ram is hanged by the midst with roapes unto
an other beam, which lies cross a couple of pillars, and hanging thus
equally balanced, it is by force of men thrust forward, and recoiled
backward; and so beats upon the wall with his iron head: neither is there
any tower so strong, or wall so broad, that is able to stand before it. The
length of this Ram was of a large scantling, for Plutarch affirms, that
Anthony in the Parthian war had a Ram eighty foot long: and Vitruuius
says, that the length of a Ram was usually 106. and sometimes 120; and this
length gave great strength and force to the engine. It was managed at one time
with a whole Centurie or order of soldiers: and their forces being spent, they
were seconded with another Centurie; and so the ram played continually upon
the wall, without intermission. Josephus says, that Titus, at the siege of
Jerusalem, had a ram for every legion: it was oftentimes covered with a
vine, that the men that managed it might be in more safety. It appears by
this place, that if a town had continued out until the ram had touched the
wall, they could not presume of any acceptance of rendrie; for as much as by
their obstinacy, they had brought in peril the lives of their enemies, and
were subdued by force of Arms, which affoordeth such mercy as the victor
pleases.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe Aduatici, as it seems, were not ignorant of the small security, which
one state can give unto another, that commends their safety to be protected
by it: for as Architas the Pythagorean says, a body, a family, and an Army
are then well governed, when they contain within themselves the causes of
their safety; so we must not look for any security in a state, when their
safety depends upon a foreign protection. For the old saying is, that
Neque murus, neque amicus quisquam teget, quem propria arma non texere.
Although in this case the matter was well qualified, by the majesty of the
Roman Empire, and the late victories in the continent of Gallia, whereof the
Hedui with their associates were very gainful witnesses: but amongst kingdoms,
that are better suited with equality of strength and authority, there is small
hope of safety to be looked for, unless the happy government of both do
mutually depend upon the safety of either nation. For that which Polybius
observed in Antigonus king of Macedonia, takes place for the most part amongst
all Princes; That kings by nature esteem no man, either as a friend or an
enemy, but as the calculation of profit shall find them answerable to their
proiectes. And contrariwise, it cutteth off many occasions of practices and
attempts, when it is known that a state is of it self able and ready to
resist the dessignes of foreign enemies, according to that of Manlius:
Ostendite modo bellum, pacem habebitis: videant vos paratos ad vim, ius ipsi
remittent.

THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
THe manner of signifying any motion or attempt by fire, To give notice of an
Alarm by fire.
was of great use in the might leason, where the fortification was of so large
an extension: for fire in the night does appear far greater then indeed it is,
for as much as that part of the air, which is next unto the fire, as it is
illuminated with the light thereof, in a reasonable distance cannot be
discerned from the fire it self, and so it seems much greater then it is in
substance: and contrariwise, in the day time it shows less then it is; for
the clear brightness of the air does much obscure that light, which
proceeds from a more gross and material body: and therefore their custom
was to use fire in the night, and smoke in the day, suting the transparent
middle with a contrary quality, that so it might more manifestly appear to
the beholder.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
ANd albeit after the victory, the Romans inflicted diverse degrees of
punishment, Lib. 25.
according to the malice which they found in an enemy; yet as Flauius Lucanus
says in Liuie, there was no nation more exorable, The punishments which the
Romans laid upon a conquerednation.
nor readier to show mercy, then the Romans were. The punishments which we
find them to have used toward a conquered nation, were these; either they
punished them by death, or sold them for bondslaues, sub corona, or dismissed
them sub iugum; or merced them, in taking away their territories; or made them
tributarie states.

Of the first we find a manifest example in the third of these Commentaries,
where Caesar having overthrown the Veneti by sea, in as much as they had
retained his ambassadors by force, contrary to the law of nations, he put all
the Senate to the sword, and sold the rest sub corona.

Festus says, that an enemy was said to be sold sub corona, in as much as the
captives stood crowned in the market place, where they were set out to sale; as
Cato says in his book de re militari, vt populus sua opera potius ob rem been
gestam coronatus, supplicatum eat? quam re male gesta coronatus vaeneat. And
Gellius affirms the same thing, but adds also another reason, for as much
as the soldiers that kept them while they were in selling, incircled them round
about, to keep them together; and this round-about-standing was called Corona.
Festus says, that oftentimes they used a spear; and therefore they were said
to be sold sub hasta: for as much as amongst the Greeks, by the spear or
pike, was signified the power of Arms, and majesty of Empires.

When they dismissed them sub iugum, their order was to erect three trees like
a pair of gallows, under which they caused all the captives to pass, as a
sign of bondage: for they had so conquered them by force of Arms, that they
laid upon their neck the yoke of thraldom. Liuie says, that Quintius the
dictator dismissed the Aequos sub iugum; and this iugum was made of 3 spears,
whereof two were stuck upright in the ground, and the third was tied
overthwart them. The soldiers that passed sub iugum, were ungirt, and their
weapons taken from them, as Festus says.

Sometimes again they took away their lands and territories, and either
sold it for money, and brought it into the treasury, or divided the land
amongst the Roman people, or let it out to farm rent: of all which Liuie has
many pregnant examples.

CHAP. XIII.
Crassus takes in all the maritimate cities that lie to the Ocean: the legions
are carried into their wintering camps.

THE same time Pub. Caesar.
Crassus, whom he had sent with one legion to the maritimate cities that lay
to the Ocean, advertised him that al those states had yielded themselves to the
people of Rome: The wars being thus ended, and all Gallia being settled in
peace, there went such a fame of this war among other barbarous people, that
from nations beyond the Rhene there came ambassadors to Caesar, offering both
hostages and obedience to whatsoever he commanded them. But Caesar willed them
to repair unto him again in the beginning of the next summer, for as much as
he then hasted into Lumbardie, after he had placed his legions in their
wintering camps. Of this supplication I will speak in the latter end of the 4
book.
For these things, upon the sight of Caesar's letters, a general supplication
was proclaimed in Rome for 15 days together, which honor before that time had
happened to no man. And thus ends the second Commentary.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE THIRD BOOK OF CAESAR HIS COMMENTARIES.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Commentary begins with an Accident, which happened in the latter end
of the former summer; wherein the Belgae had so lean a harvest: and then it
proceeds to the war between Caesar and the Veneti; Crassus and the
Aquitani; Titurius Sabinus and the Curiosolitae: And Titus Labienus, with the
Treuiri.

CHAP. I.
Sergius Galba, being sent to clear the passage of the Alps, was besieged by
the Seduni and Veragri.

CAESAR taking his journey into Italy, Caesar.
sent Sergius Galba with the twelfth legion, and part of the horsemen unto the
Nantuates, Veragri and Seduni: whose territories are extended from the river
Rhone, and the lake Lemanus, unto the tops of the highest Alps. The end of
this voyage was chiefly to clear the Alps of thieves and robbers, that lived
by the spoil of passengers that traveled between Italy and Gallia: Galba
having order, if he found it expedient to winter in those parts, after some
fortunate incounters and the taking of some castles and holds, he concluded a
peace, and resolved to place two cohortes of his legion, amongst the Nantuates;
and himself to winter with the other cohortes, in a town of the Veragri,
named Octodurus. This town being sited in a narrow valley, and incircled about
with mighty high hills, was divided by a river into two parts, whereof he gave
one part to the Galls, and the other he chose for his wintering camp, and
fortified it about with a ditch and a rampire. After he had spent many days of
wintering, and given order, that corn should be brought thither for provision;
he had intelligence upon a sudden, that the Galls, in the night time, had all
left that part of the town that was allotted unto them; and that the hills
which hung over the valley, wherein the town stood, were possessed with great
multitudes of the Seduni, and Veragri. The reasons of this sudden commotion
were chiefly the paucitie of the Roman forces, not making a complete legion;
for as much as two cohorts wintered amongst the Nantuates: besides many
particulars, that were wanting upon necessary occasions. And to make them more
contemptible in regard of themselves, the place affoorded such advantage, that
they were persuaded by reason of the steep decliuitie of the hill, that the
Romans would not endure the brunt of the first assault: besides this, it
grieved them exceedingly to have their children taken from them, under the
title of hostages; and the Alps, which nature had exempted from habitation,
and placed as bounds between two large kingdoms, to be seized upon by the
Roman legions, and united to their Province.

Upon these aduertisements, Galba not having as yet finished the fortification
of his camp, nor made provision of corn and forage for the winter season, in
that he little feared any motion of war, being secured of their amity, and
obedience, both by hostages and rendrie: he presently called a council of
war, to determine what course was best to be taken. In which council the
minds of many were so amazed, with the terror of so unexpected a danger, when
they beheld the hills pestered with armed soldiers, the passages taken and
intercepted by the enemy, and no hope left of any succor or relief, that
they could think of no other way for their safety, then leaving behind them
their baggage and impediments, to sallie out of their camp, and so to save
themselves by the same way they came thither: notwithstanding the greater part
concluded, to refer that resolution to the last push; and in the mean time,
to attend the fortune of the event, and defend the camp.

THE OBSERVATION.
WHich advise although at this time sorted to small effect; yet it better suited
the valor of the Romans, and sauoured more of tempered magnanimity, then that
former hazard, which argued the weakness of their minds, by their over
hasty and too forward resolution. For as it imported greater danger, and
discovered a more desperate spirit, to break through the thickest troops of
their enemies, and so by strong hand to save themselves by the help of some
other fortune; so it manifested a greater apprehension of terror, and a
stronger impression of fear, which can afford nothing but desperate remedies:
for desperate and inconsiderate rashness rises sooner of fear, then of any
other passion of the mind. But such as beheld the danger with a less troubled
eye and qualified the terror of death with the life of their spirit,
reserving extremity of help to extremity of peril, and in the mean time
attended what chances of advantage might happen unto them, upon any enterprise
the enemy should attempt; I say, they so gave greater scope to fortune and
enlarged the bounds of changing accidents.

CHAP. II.
The enemy sets upon the wintering camp: Galba overthrows them.

THE council being dismissed, Caesar.
they had scarce time to put in execution such things, as were agreed upon for
their defense: but the enemy at a watchword given assaulted the camp, on all
sides with stones and darts, and other casting weapons: the Romans at first
when their strength was fresh, valiantly resisted the brunt of the charge;
neither did they spend in vain any weapon which they cast from the rampire;
but what part soever of their camp seemed to be in greatest danger, and want
of help, thither they came with succor and relief; but herein they were
ouermatched. For the enemy being spent and wearied with fight, whenever any
of them gave place and forsook the battle, there were always fresh
combatants to supply it: but the Romans by reason of their small number, had
no such help. For their extremity in that point was such, that no man was
permitted neither for weariness nor wounds, to forsake his station, or
abandon his charge. And having thus fought continually the space of six
hours, when both strength and weapons wanted, the enemy persisting with
greater fury to fill the ditch and break down the rampire, and their hopes
relying upon the last expectation: P. Sex. Baculus the Primipile of that
legion, whom we said to be so sore wounded in the Neruian battle, and Caius
Volusenus Tribune of the soldiers, a man of singular courage and wisdom,
ran speedily to Galba and told him, that the only way of safety was to
break out upon the enemy, and to try the last refuge in that extremity.
Whereupon they called the Centurions, and by them admonished the soldiers to
surcease a while from fighting, and only to receive such weapons as were cast
into the camp; and so to rest themselves a little and recover their strength:
and then at a watchword to sallie out of their camp, and lay their safety
upon their virtue; which the soldiers executed with such alacrity and courage
of spirit, that breaking out at all the gates of the camp, they gave no
leisure to the enemy to consider what was done, nor to satisfy his judgment
touching so unexpected a novelty. And thus fortune being suddenly changed,
they slew more then the third part of 30000, and put the rest to flight, not
suffering them to stay upon the hills near about them.

OBSERVATIONS.
WHich strange alteration lively describes the force of novelty, The force of
nouelty turning the for tune of a battle.
and the effectual power of unexpected adue^tures: for in the first course of
their proceeding, wherein the Romans defended the camp, and the Galls charged
it by assault, the victory held constant with the Galls, and threatened death
and mortality to the Romans. Neither had they any means to recover hope of
better success, but by trying another way; which so much the more amazed the
Galls, in that they had vehemently apprehended an opinion of victory, by a
set fight continuing the space of six hours, without any likelihood of
contrariety, or alteration. Which practice, of frustrating a dessigne intended
by an indirect and contrary answer, served the Romans oftentimes to great
advantage; as besides this present example, in this Commentary we shall
afterward read, how Titurius Sabinus defeated the Vnellos, with the same
stratagem; and overthrew them by eruption and sallying out, when they expected
nothing but a defensive resistance from the rampire. From whence a commander
may learn, to avoid two contrary inconveniences, according as the quality
of the war shall offer occasion: first (if other things be answerable, which
a judicious eye will easily discover) that a sallie made out at diverse ports
of a hold, will much mitigate the heat of a charge, and control the fury of
an enemy. And on the other side, he that besieges any place what advantage
soever he has of the defendant, may much better assure himself of good
fortune, if he appoint certain troops in readiness to receive the charge of
any eruption, that the rest that are busily employed in the assault may provide
to answer it, without disorder or confusion. Which order, if the Galls had
taken, they had not in likelihood so often been deceived.

CHAP. III.
Galba returns into the Province: the Vnelli give occasion of a new war.

THE enemy being thus defeated, Caesar.
Galba was unwilling to try fortune any further; and the rather for that he
wanted both corn and forage: and therefore having burned the town, the next
day he returned toward the Province, and without let or resistance, brought
the legion safe into the Nantuates; and from thence to the Sauoiens.
Allobrogae, and there he wintered.

After these things were dispatched: Caesar supposing for many reasons, that
all Gallia was now in peace, and that there was no further fear of any new
war, the Belgae being overthrown, the Germans thrust out, and the Seduni
amongst the Alps subdued and vanquished; in the beginning of the winter, as he
went into Illyricum, having a great desire to see those nations: there grew a
sudden tumult and dissension in Gallia upon this occasion. Pub. Crassus
wintering with the seventh legion in Aniou near unto the Ocean, and finding
scarcity of corn in those parts; he sent out the Prefects of the horsemen,
and Tribunes into the next cities to demand corn, and other provisions for
his legion, of whom Titus Terrasidius was sent unto the Le Perch.
Venelli, Marcus Trebius to the Cornoaille in Bretaine
Curiosolitae, Q. Velanius, and Titus Silius to the Vannes.
Veneti. These Veneti were of greatest authority amongst all the maritimate
nations in that coast, by reason of their great store of shipping, with which
they did traffic into Britanie, and exceeded all their neighbor states in
skill and experience of seafaring matters; having the most part of such as
used those seas, tributaries to their state: These Veneti first adventured to
retain Silius and Velanius, hoping thereby to recover their hostages which
they had given to Crassus. The finitimate cities induced by their authority
and example, for the same reason, laid hold upon Trebius and Terrasidius; and
sending speedy ambassages one unto another, coniured by their Princes and
chiefest magistrates, to approve their fact by common consent, and to attend
all the same event of fortune; soliciting also other cities and states, rather
to maintain that liberty, which they had received of their Ancestors, then to
endure the servile bondage of a stranger.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THe circumstance in this history, which notes the sudden breaking out of
wars, when the course of things made promise of peace: shows first, The
weakness of our judgment in regard of the knowledge of future times.
what small assurance our reason has of her discourse, in calculating the
nativity of After-chances; which so seldom answer the judgment we give upon
their beginnings, that when we speak of happiness, we find nothing but
misery: and contrariwise, it goes often well with that part, which our Art
has condemned to ill fortune. And therefore I do not marvel, if when almost
all nations are at odds, and in our best conceits, threaten destruction one
to another, there happen a sudden motion of peace; or if peace be in speech,
soothing the world with pleasing tranquillity, and through the uncertainty of
our weak probabilities, promise much rest after many troubles: there follow
greater wars in the end, then the former time can truly speak of. Which
being well understood, may humble the spirits of our hautie politicians, that
think to comprehend the conclusions of future times, under the premises of
their weak proiectes, and predestinate succeeding ages, accorto the course of
the present motion: when an accident so little thought of, shall break the
maine stream of our judgment, and falsify the Oracles which our understanding
has uttered. And it may learn them withal, how much it imports a wise
commander, to prevent an evil that may cross his dessigne, (how unlikely
soever it be to happen) by handling it in such manner, as though it were
necessarily to confront the same. For then a thing is well done, when it has
in it self both the causes of his being; and the direct means to resist the
repugnancie of a contrary nature: and so hap what will, it has great
possibility to continue the same.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THis practice of the Veneti may instruct a circumspect Prince in cases of this
nature, to have a more watchful eye over that Province or city, which shall be
found most potent and mighty amongst the rest, then of any other inferior
state of the same nature and condition: for as example of it self is of great
Authority, The Authority of example.
making improbabilities seem full of reason, especially when the intention
shall sympathize with our will; so when it shall happen to be strengthened with
powerful means, and graced with the Act of superior personages: it must
needs be very effectual to stir up men's minds, to approve that with a
strong affection, which their own single judgment did no way allow of. And
therefore equality brings this advantage to a Prince, which differencie can
not afford, that albeit example do set on foot any rebellious motion, yet no
supereminencie shall authorize the same.

CHAP. IIII.
Caesar having advertisement of these new troubles; hastes into Gallia and
prepares for the war.

ALL the maritimate states being by this means drawn into the same
conspiracy, Caesar.
they sent a common embassage unto Crassus; that if he would have his men
again, he must deliver up the hostages, which he had taken from them. Whereof
Caesar being certified by Crassus, in as much as he was then a great way
distant from his Army, he commanded Galleys and ships of war to be built
upon the river Ligeris.
Loier, which runs into the Ocean; and that Gallie men, Mariners, and
Shipmasters should be mustered in the Province: which being speedely
dispatched, as soon as the time of the year would permit him, he came into
Gallia. The Veneti and the rest of the confederacy, understanding of Caesar's
arrival, and considering how heinous a fact they had committed, in detaining
the ambassadors and casting them into yrons, whose name is held sacred and
inviolable amongst all nations: prepared accordingly to answer so eminent a
danger, and especially such necessaries, as pertained to shipping and
sea fights.

THE OBSERVATION.
FRom hence I may take occasion, The grounds of that reverent opinion which is
held of ambassadors.
briefly to touch the reverent opinion, which all nations, how barbarous
soever, have generally conceived of the quality and condition of ambassadors:
and what the grounds are of this universal received custom, which in all
ages, and times has held Authentical. And first we are to understand, that
all man kind (as endued with the same nature and properties) are so linked
together in the strict alliance of humane society; that, albeit their turbulent
and disagreeing passions (which in themselves are unnatural, as proceeding
from corruption and defect) drive them into extreme discord and disunion of
spirit, and break the bonds of civil conversation, which otherwise we do
naturally affect: yet without a necessary intercourse and traffic of
society, we are not able to keep on foot the very discord it self, in
terms of reason and orderly proceeding, but all parts will be blended with
disordered confusion, and go to wrack, for want of these mutual offices
performed by messengers: so straight are the bonds of nature, and so powerful
are the laws which she enacteth. And therefore if it were for no other end,
which might sort to the benefit of either party, (as there are many good uses
thereof) yet to hold up the quarrel and keep it from falling, making war,
according to the grounds of reason, the intercourse of messengers is not to be
interrupted, nor their persons to be touched with hateful violence: but that
which the common reason of nations has made a law, ought as religiously to be
observed, as an Oracle of our own belief. Secondly, for as much as the end
of war is, or at the least should be, peace: which by treaty of mutual
messengers is principally to be confirmed, to the end that no people may seem
so barbarous, as to maintain a war; which only intends blood, and
proposes as the chiefest object, the death and mortality of mankind, no way
respecting peace and civil government: such as refuse the intercourse of
messengers, as the means of amity and concord, are justly condemned in the
judgment of all nations, as unworthy of humane society. Last of all, it is an
injury of great dishonor, and deserves the reward of extreme infamy, to
revenge the master his quarrel upon a servant, and punish ambassadors for the
faults of their state: considering that their chiefest duty consists in the
faithful relation of such mandates, as they have received, which may as well
tend to the advancement and honor of that city, to which they are sent; as
to the dishonor and ruin of the same, whereof the messengers take no notice.
And therefore whether we desire war or peace; the free liberty, and holy
order of ambassadors, is reverently to be respected, and defended from brutish
and unnatural violence.

CHAP. V.
The proceedings of either party, in the entrance of this war.

THE Veneti conceived great hope of their enterprise, Caesar.
by reason of the strength of their situation: for as much as all the passages
by land were broken and cut off, with arms and creekes of the sea; and on the
other side, navigations and entrance by sea was so troublesome and dangerous, in
that the Romans were altogether unacquainted with the channels, and shelues of
the coast. Neither did they think that the Roman Army could long continue
there without corn, which was not to be had in those quarters. And if it
happened, that the course of things were carried contrary to this probable
expectation; yet they themselves were strong in shipping: whereas the Romans
had none at all: Neither had they knowledge of the flats and shallowes, Ports
and Islands of that coast, where they were to fight. And to conclude, they
should find the use of Navigations in that narrow sea, to be far different
from that, which they were accustomed unto, Lendriguer. Lysieux. Nantes.
Aurenche. Leondoul. Cities in little Britain.
in the vast and open Ocean. In this resolution, they fortified their towns,
stored them with provision, and brought all their shipping to Vannes; against
whom, Caesar (as it was reported) would begin to make war, taking the
Osisimi, Lexouij, Nannetes, Ambiuariti, Morini, Menapij, Diablintres, as
consorts and partakers in this quarrel. Notwithstanding these difficulties,
many motives stirred up Caesar to undertake this war: as namely, the violent
detaining of the Roman knights: their rebellion, after they had yielded
themselves by rendrie, and given hostages of their loialtie: the conspiracy of
so many cities, which being now neglected, might afterward incite other
nations and states to the like insolency. And therefore understanding, that
almost all the Galls were inclining to novelty and alteration, and of their
own nature, were quick and ready to undertake a war; and further,
considering that all men by nature desired liberty, and hated the servile
condition of bondage: he prevented all further insurrections of the other
states, with the presence of the Roman forces: and sent Titus Labienus with the
Caualrie, unto the Triers.
Treuiri, that bordered upon the Rhene: to him he gave in charge, to visit the
men of Rhemes and the rest of the Belgae, to keep them in obedience; and to
hinder such forces, as might peradventure be transported over the river by the
Germains, to further this rebellious humor of the Galls. He commanded
likewise Pub. Crassus, with 12 legionarie cohortes, and a great part of the
horse to go into Aquitaine, least there might come any aid from those nations.
He sent also Q. Titurius Sabinus with three legions, unto the Lexouij,
Curiosolitae, Vnelli, to disappoint any practice which rebellious minds might
intend. And making D. Brutus chief Admiral of the navy, he gave him in
charge, to make toward Vannes, with what speed he could: and he himself
marched thitherward with the rest of the foot forces.

THE OBSERVATION.
IN the first book, I observed the authority which the Roman leaders had to
undertake a war, without further acquainting the senate with the consequence
thereof: in this place, let us observe the care and circumspection, which the
Generals had, not to undertake a troublesome and dangerous war upon a humor,
or any other slender motion: but diligently waighing the circumstances thereof,
and measuring the peril and hazard of the war, with the good and consequence
of the effect; informed their judgments of the importance of that action; and
so tried whether the benefit would answer their labor. And thus we find the
reasons particularly delivered, that moved Caesar first to undertake the
Heluetian war: and then the causes which drew him on to the quarrel with
Ariouistus: then follows the necessity of that war with the Belgae; and
now the motives which induced him to this with the maritimate cities of
Bretaine: and so consequently of his passage into Germany, or what other
enterprise he attempted: which he lays down as the grounds and occasions of
those wars, and could not be avoided but with the loss and dishonor of the
Roman Empire.

Further, let us observe the means he used to prevent the inclination of the
Galls, and to keep them in subjection and peaceable obedience, by sending his
men into diverse quarters of that continent; and so settling the wavering
disposition of the further skirtes, with the weight of his Army, and the
presence of his legionarie soldiers, which he sent ready to stifle all
motions of rebellion in the beginning, that they might not break out to the
prejudice and diminution of the Roman Empire, and the good success of his
proceedings: besides the advantage, which he gained in the opinion of the
enemy; whom he so little feared concerning the vpshot of that quarrel, that
he had dispersed the greatest part of his Army upon other services, the rest
being sufficient to end that war.

CHAP. VI.
The manner of their shipping, and their sea fight.

THE site, Caesar.
of almost all these cities was such, that being built in points and
promontories, they could not at full sea, which happened always twice in 12
hours, be approached by foot forces, nor yet with shipping neither; for again*
in an ebb, the vessalles were laid on the ground, and so left as a pray to
the enemy. And if the Romans went about to shut out the sea, with mounts which
they raised equal to the walls of the town, and were at the point of entering
and taking it: yet the townsmen having such store of shipping, would easily
convey, both themselves and their cariages, into the next towns, and there
help themselves with the like advantage of place. And thus they deluded Caesar
the greatest part of the summer: for the Roman fleet by reason of continual
winds and foul weather, durst not adventure to put out of the river Loier
into so vast a sea, wherein the havens and roades were few, and far distant
one from another, and the tides great. The shipping of the Galls was thus
built and rigged: the keele was somewhat flatter then the Roman shipping, the
better to bear the ebbes, and shalowes of that coast: the foredecke was
altogether erect and perpendicular: the poupe was made to bear the hugeness
of the billows, and the force of the tempest. And in a word, they were
altogether built for strength: for the ribs and seats were made of beams of
a foot square, fastened with iron pins of an inch thick: in steed of cables,
they used chains of iron; and raw hides and skins for sails, either for want
of linen or ignorant of the use thereof, or because sails of linen would
hardly serve to carry ships of that burden.

The meeting and conflict of the Roman navy, with this kind of ships was
such, that they only excelled them in celeritie and speedy nimblenes, with
force of oars; but in all other things, either concerning the nature of the
place, or the dangers of the foul weather, were far inferior unto them: for
the strength of them was such, that they could neither hurt them with their
beake-heads, nor cast a weapon to any purpose into them, by reason of their
altitude, and high built bulkes. And if any gust chanced in the mean time to
rise, that forced them to commit themselves to the mercy of the weather, their
shipping would better bear the rage of the sea; and with greater safety
shelter it self amongst flats and shallowes, without fear of rocks or any
such hazard: of all which chances the Roman navy stood continually in danger.

OBSERVATIONS.
ANd here, The causes of the ebbing and flowing of the sea.
let it not seem impertinent to the argument which we handle, considering the
general use which we Insulairs have of navigations, briefly to set down the
most eminent causes of the flowing and ebbing of the sea, as far forth as
shall seem necessary to the knowledge of a soldier: which, albeit may fall
short of the true reasons of this great secret; yet for as much as they stand
for true principles of regularitie, and well approved rules in our Art of
navigations, let us take them for no less then they effect, and give them that
credit in our imagination, which tract of time has gained to those forged
circles in the heavens: that albeit their chiefest essence consists in
conceit and supposal; yet for as much as they serve to direct our knowledge to
a certainty, in that variety and seeming inconstancy of motion, we esteem of
them as they effect, and not as they are.

Considering then the globe of the world, as it makes a right sphere (for in
that position, the Naturalistes chiefly understand celestial influence to have
operation in this liquid element of the water) it is divided by the Horizon and
Meridian into four quarters: the first quarter is that, between the east
horizon and the noone meridian, which they call a flowing quarter: the second,
from the noone meridian, to the west horizon; which they make an ebbing
quarter: the third, from the west horizon to the midnight meridian; which they
likewise call a flowing quarter: and again, from the midnight meridian to the
east horizon, the second ebbing quarter: And so they make two flowing quarters,
and two ebbing quarters of the whole circuit of heaven. The instruments of
these sensible qualities, and contrary effects, are the sun and the moon,
as they are carried through these distinct parts of the heaven. And although
experience has noted the moon to be of greatest power in warrie motions; yet
we may not omit to acknowledge the force, which the sun yields in this
miracle of nature.

First therefore we are to understand, that when the moon or the sun begin to
appear above the right horizon, and enter into that part of the heaven which I
termed the first flowing quarter, that then the sea begins to swell: and as
they mount up to their meridian altitude; so it increases until it come to a
high flood. And again, as those lights passing the meridian, decline to the
west, and run the circuit of the ebbing quarter: so the water decreaseth and
returns again from whence it came. Again, as they set under the west
horizon and enter into the second flowing quarter; so the sea begins again
to flow, and still increases until they come to the point of the night
meridian: and then again, it refloweth, according as the sun and moon are
carried in the other ebbing quarter from the night meridian, to the east
horizon.

And hence it happens that in conjunction or new of the moon, Spring tides.
when the sun and the moon are carried both together in the same flowing, and
ebbing quarters; that then the tides and ebbes are very great: and likewise in
opposition or full of the moon, when these lights are carried in opposite
quarters, which we have described to be of the same nature, either ebbing or
flowing; that then in like manner the tides are great: forasmuch as both these
Planets, through the symbolising quarters wherein they are carried, do join
their forces, to make perfect this work of nature in the ebbing and flowing of
the sea. And contrariwise, in a quadrate aspect (as the Astronomers call it) or
quarter age of the moon, when as the moon is carried in a flowing quarter; and
at the same instant, the sun does happen to be in an ebbing or decreasing
quarter, as the course of nature does necessarily require: then are the tides
lessoned, as daily experience does witness.

And for as much as both the right horizon and the meridian also, divide every
diurnall circle, which either the sun or the moon makes in their reuolutions,
into equal parts; it follows that every tide is continually measured with
the quantity of 6 hours: and therefore that which Caesar here says, must
needs be true, that in the space of 12 hours, there are always 2 high tides.
And least any man should imagine, that every inland city, standing upon an
ebbing and flowing river, may take the computation of the tide according to
this rule: let him understand that this which I have delivered, is to be
conceived principally of the sea it self; and secondarily of such ports and
havens, as stand either near or upon the sea: but where a river shall run many
miles from the sea, and make many winding meanders, before it come to the place
of calculation; it must needs lose much of this time before mentioned. And thus
much I thought convenient to insert in these discourses touching the ebbing and
flowing of the sea, as not impertinent to martial knowledge.

Concerning the shipping of the Romans, The manner of their shipping.
whereof posterity has only received the bare names, and some few
circumstances touching the manner of their Equipage, the Critickes of these
times have labored to set forth a fleet, answerable to that, which the
terms and title mentioned in history seem to report: but yet the gain of
their voyage does not answer their charge. For many men rest unsatisfied,
first touching the names themselves, whereof we find these kinds,

Names Longas. Onerarias. Actuarias. Triremes. Quadriremes. Quinqueremes.


The first we may understand to be Galleys or ships of service: the second
ships of burden: the third, ships that were driven forward with force of
oars, and the rest sounding according to their Names; for I dare not entitle
them with a more particular description. Now whether these Names Longas and
Actuarias, were a several sort of shipping by themselves; or the general
Names of the Quadriremes, Triremes, and Quinqueremes, for as much as every
kind of these might be called both Longas and Actuarias, as it yet remains
in controversy: so it is not much material to that which we seek after. But
that which most troubles our sea-Critickes, is in what sense they may
understand these vocabularies, Triremes, Quadriremes, and Quinqueremes, whether
they were so termed in regard of the number of rowers, or watermen that haled
continually at an oar, as the custom of the Galleys is at this day; or
otherwise, because a Trireme had three orders of oars on either side, a
Quadrireme four, and a Quinquereme five: whereof they took their distinction
of Names.

Such as hold, Lib. 27.
that a Trireme had on each side three ranks of oars, and so consequently, of
a Quadrireme and Quinquereme; allege this place of Liuie, to make good their
opinion. In the wars between Rome and Carthage, Laelius meeting with
Adherball in the straightes of Gibraltar, each of them had a Quinquereme, and
seven or eight Triremes a piece, the current in that place was so great that
it gave no place to Art, but carried the vessailes according to the fall of
the Billow: in which uncertainty the Triremes of the Carthaginean, closed with
the Quinquereme of Laelius: which either because she was pondere tenacior, as
Liuie says, or otherwise, for that pluribus remorum ordinibus scindentibus
vertices facilius regeretur; in regard of the plurality of banks of oars,
which resisted the billowe and steamed the current, she sunk two of the
Triremes, and so got the victory. From hence they prove, that a Quinquereme
had plures remorum ordines, then a Trireme had; and therefore it took the name
from the plurality of banks of oars, and not from the number of men that
rowed at an oar.

But the contrary opinion does interpret Ordo Remorum, to be a couple of oars
one answering another, on each side of the vessaile, which we call a pair of
oars: So that a Quinquereme being far greater and longer then a Trireme, had
more paires of oars then a Trireme had, and those oars were handled with five
men at one oar, according to the use of our Galleys at this day.

But to leave this, Their manner of sea fights.
and come to their manner of sea fights, we must understand that the Romans,
wanting the use of Artillery and managing their ships of war with force of
oars, failed not to make use of their Art, in their conflictes and incounters
by sea: for all their ships of service, which we term men of war, carried
a strong beake-head of iron, which they called rostrum, with which they ran
one against another, with as great violence and fury, as their oars could
carry them. And herein Art gave great advantage; for he that could best skill
to turn his ship, with greatest celeritie, and so frustrate an offer; or with
speedy and strong agitation follow an advantage: commonly got the victory.

In the battle, Lib. 2. de bello civilly.
which D. Brutus had with the Massilians, we read that two Triremes charging
the Admiral, wherein Brutus was one at the one side, and the other at the
other; Brutus and his Mariners so cunningly handled the matter, that when they
should come to the hurt, they speedily in a trice of time, wound themselves
from between them, and the two Triremes met with such a carriere one against
another, that one brake her beakehead, and the other split with the blow.

For this skill and fortune withal, Euphranor the Rodian was of great fame in
Caesar's time; although his end found too true the saying of the Historian,
that Whom fortune honors with many good haps, she oftentimes reserueth to a
harder destiny; as other seamen besides Euphranor, can truly witness.

This first brunt being ended: when they came to grapple and boording one of
another, then the art and practices of their land services came in use: for
they erected turrets upon their deckes, and from them they fought with engines
and casting weapons, as slinges, arrows, and piles; and when they entered,
they fought with sword and target. Neither did the legionarie soldier find
any difference, when he came to the point, between their fight at sea and that
at land: saving that they could not be martialed in troops and bands, in
regard whereof the sea service was counted more base, and dishonorable; and the
rather, in as much as it decided the controversy, by slinges and casting
weapons: which kind of fight was of less honor, then buckling at
handy-blowes.

CHAP. VII.
The battle continues: and Caesar overcomes.

THE manner of their fightes being this, Caesar.
as I have described, neither Brutus, nor any Tribune or Centurion in his
navy, knew what to do or what course of fight to take: for the shipping of
the Galls was so strong, that the beake-head of their Quinqueremes could
perform no service upon them: and although they should raise turrets according
to their use, yet these would not equal in height the poupe of the enemies
shipping, so that therein also the Galls had advantage: neither had they any
means, whereby they might foil so great a navy, which amounted to the number
of 230 ships of war. One thing there was amongst their provisions which
stood them in great steed: for the Romans had provided great sharp hooks or
sickles, which they put upon great and long poles, these they fastened to the
tackling which held the maine yard to the mast; and then haling away their
ship, with force of Oars, they cut the said tackling, and the maine yard
fell down: Whereby the Galls, whose only hope consisted in sailing and yare
turning of their ships, lost at one instant* both their sails and the use of
their shipping: And then the controversy fell within the compass of valor,
wherein the Romans exceeded the Gals; and the rather, inasmuch as they fought
in the sight of Caesar and the whole Army, no valiant act could be smothered
in secret; for all the hills and clifts, which affoorded near prospect into
the sea, were covered with the Roman Army.

Their maine yardes being cut down, and the Romans indeuouring with great
fury to board them, failed not to take many of their ships: which the Galls
perceiving, and finding no remedy nor hope of resistance, began all to fly,
and turning their ships to a forewind, were upon a sudden so becalmed, that
they were able to make no way at all. Which fell out so fitly for the Romans,
that of so great a navy, very few through the help of the evening escaped to
land, after they had fought the space of 8 hours: with which battle, ended
the war with the Veneti, and the rest of the maritimate nations. For all sort
of people both young and old, in whom there was either courage, counsel, or
dignity, were present at this battle, and all their shipping was taken and
lost; so that such as remained, knew not whither to go, nor how to defend their
towns any longer: and therefore yielded themselves to Caesar, in whom he used
the greater severity, that he might thereby teach all other barbarous people,
not to violate the law of nations: for he slew all the Senate with the sword,
and sold the people for bondslaues.

THE OBSERVATION.
IN this battle I chiefly observe the good fortune, The force of industry.
which usually attends upon industry: for amongst other provisions, which
the diligence of the Romans had furnished out to the use of this war, they had
made ready these hooks, not for this intent wherein they were employed, but at
all occasions and chances, that might happen, as service able complements
rather then principal instruments: and yet it so fell out, that they proved
the only means, to overthrow the Galls. Which proves true the saying of
Caesar, that industry commands fortune and buyeth good success, with
extraordinary labor: for industry in action is as importunity in speech,
which forces an assent beyond the strength of reason; and strives through
continual pursuit, to make good the motives, by often inculcations; and at
length finds that disposition, which will easily admit whatsoever is
required: In like manner diligence and laboursome industry, by circumspect and
heedefull carriage, seldom fail either by hap or cunning, to make good that
part wherein the maine point of the matter depends. For euetie action is
entangled with many infinite adherents, which are so interessed in the matter,
that it succeeds according as it is carried answerable to their natures. Of
these adherentes, some of them are by wisdom, foreseen; and directed to that
course which may fortunate the action: the rest being unknown, continue
without either direction or prevention, and are all under the regiment of
fortune; for as much as they are beyond the compass of our wisest reach, and
stand in the way either to assist or disadvantage: Of these, industry has
greatest authority; in as much as she armeth her self for all chances,
whereby she is said to command fortune.

CHAP. VIII.
Sabinus overthrows the La Perch.
Vnelli, with the manner thereof.

WHILE these things happened in the state of Vannes, Caesar.
L. Titurius Sabinus enters with his forces, into the confines of the Vnelli,
over whom Viridouix was made chief commander, having drawn the Rhone.
Aulerci and the Eureux.
Eburonices, with a great number of vagabondes and thieves into the same
conspiracy: Sabinus incamping himself in a convenient place, kept his
soldiers within the rampire. But Viridouix, being lodged within less then two
miles of Sabinus his camp, brought out his forces daily, and putting them in
battle gave him opportunity to fight if he would: which Sabinus refused in
such sort, that he began not only to be suspected by the enemy of cowardice,
but to be taunted with the reproachful speeches of his own soldiers; which
opinion of fear being once settled in the minds of the enemy, he used all
means to increase it, and carried it so well, that the enemy durst approach the
very rampire of the camp. The color that he pretended was, that he thought
it not the part of a Legate, in the absence of the General, to fight with an
enemy of that strength, but upon some good opportunity, or in a place of
advantage. In this general persuasion of fear, Sabinus chose out a subtle
witted Gall, whom he persuaded with great rewards, and further promises, to
fly to the enemy, and there to carry himself, according to the
instructions, which he should give him. This Gall, coming as a reuolter to the
enemy, laid open unto them the fear of the Romans: the extremity that Caesar
was driven into by the Veneti; and that the night before, Sabinus was about to
withdraw his forces secretly out of his camp, and to make all the haste he
could to relieve Caesar. Upon which advertisement, they all cried out with one
consent, that this opportunity was not to be omitted; but setting apart all
other devises, to go and assault the Roman camp. Many circumstances persuaded
the Galls to this resolution; as first the lingering and doubt which Sabinus
had made, when he was offered battle: secondly the intelligence which this
fugitive had brought: thirdly the want of victuals, wherein they had bin
negligent and unadvisedly careless: fourthly the hope they conceived of the
war of Vannes; and lastly, for that men willingly believe that which they
would have come to pass. The force of these motives was so strong, that they
would not suffer Viridouix, nor the rest of the captains, to dismiss the
council until they had permitted them to take Arms, and go to the Roman
camp. Which being granted, they gathered rubbish and fagots to fill up the
ditch, and with cheerful hearts, as though the victory were already gotten,
they marched to the place where Sabinus was encamped, which was the top of a
hill rising gently from a level, the quantity of 1000 paces: hither the Gals
hasted with all expedition; and to the intent the Romans might not have so much
time, as to put on their armor, the Galls for haste ran themselves out of
breath.

Sabinus encouraging his soldiers, gave the sign of battle, and sallying out
at two several gates of his camp, it fell out that through the opportunity of
the place, the wearines and vnexperience of the enemy, the valor of the Roman
soldier and their exercise in former battles, that the Galls could not endure
the brunt of the first encounter; but presently took themselves to flight, of
whom very few escaped. And so it happened that at one time, Sabinus had news
of the overthrow at sea; and Caesar of Sabinus victory by land. Upon these
victories, all the cities and states yielded themselves to Titurius: for as the
Galls are prompt to undertake a war; so are they weak in suffering, and
impatient of the consequents and calamities thereof.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis practice of a counterfeit fear was often put in use by the Roman
leaders, The use which the Romans made of a counterfeit fear. Lib. 5.
as well to disappoint the expectation of an enemy, as to draw them into an
inconvenience, and so to defeat them of their greatest helps in time of
battle. Caesar coming to succor the camp of Cicero made such use of this
Art, that he put to route a great Army of the Galls, with a handful of men:
which I will refer unto the place, where it is particularly set down by
Caesar.

The chiefest thing in this place, which brought them to their overthrow, was
disappointment: for it is a thing hardly to be digested in businesses of small
consequence, to be frustrated of a settled expectation, when the mind shall
dispose her self to one only intent, and in the vpshot meet with a
counterbuffe to cross her purposes, and so defeat her of that hope which the
strength of her reason has entertained: how much more then in things of such
importance, when we shall proceed in a course of victory, and humor our
conceits with that we wish and would have to happen; and in the end meet,
either with bondage or death; must our best wits be appauled? having neither
respite nor means, to think how the evil may be best prevented. Which the
wise Romans well understood, and counted it no dishonor to be reproched with
shameful cowardice, by such as knew not the secrets of wisdom; while they in
the mean time foresaw their good fortunes, shrouded under the cloak of a
pretended distrust.

Let these examples instruct a leader, so to take the opportunity of any such
fortune, that in the execution he omit not the chiefest points of order and
discipline, as well for the better effecting of the dessigne, as for his own
safety and the security of his Army. For order is as the sinews and strength
of martial discipline, uniting the particular members into the firm
composition of a well proportioned body: and so it makes it more powerful
then any number of disunited parts, how able or infinite soever. I might here
allege infinite examples to confirm this truth: but let the battle of Drux
serve for all; wherein the protestants ouercharging the catholic Army,
followed the retrait so hard, that they quickly became masters of the field:
and then neglecting martial discipline, fell in confusedly with the broken
multitude, to make the victory more glorious by slaughter and mortality: the
Duke of Guise all this while bouged not a foot: but in unexampled patience kept
his regiment close together, and would not suffer them to rescue their general
that was taken, until the regiment of the Prince of Condie was likewise
dispersed and broken; and then perceiving no difference of order, between the
Victor Protestant, and the vanquished Catholic; he dissolved that terrible
cloud that had hung so long in suspense, and so changing the fortune of the
day, that he took the chiefest of their Princes prisoners, with little or no
loss of his own men: so powerful is order in the deeds of Arms, and of
such consequence in obtaining victory. And thus we have first seen the
inconveniences, which a counterfeit fear well dissembled, may cast upon a
credulous and unadvised enemy, when pretense and appearance has brought them
into an error, which their own credulity does afterward avouch: and
secondly, what strength and safety consists in order; and how powerful it
is to throw down, and to set up.

CHAP. IX.
The Proceedings of Crassus in Aquitanie.

AT the same instant of time it happened also, Caesar.
that Pub. Crassus coming into Aquitania, (which both in regard of the large
extension of the country, as also for the multitude of the inhabitants, was
named the third part of Gallia) and considering that he was to make war in
those parts, where L. Valerius Preconius the Legate was slain, and the Army
over thrown; and where Lucius Manilius was feign to fly with the loss of his
cariages; he thought that his affairs required no mean diligence: and
therefore having made provision of corn, and mustered many Auxiliarie forces,
and sent for many valiant and prudent men from Tolouse and Narbone, he carried
his Army into the confines of the Euocati.
Sontiates, which was no sooner known but they levied great forces both of
horse and foot, and with their horse charged upon the Romans in their march:
which being easily repelled, as they followed the retrait, the infanterie of
the Galls showed it self in a valley as it lay in ambush. These setting upon
the Romans renewed the battle, and there the fight continued hot a long time;
the Sontiates being animated with the former victories, saw all the hope of
Aquitanie rely upon their virtue: and the Romans on the other side, desired to
show what they were able to do of themselves, without their grand Captain,
and under the conduction of a young soldier: At length the enemy ouerwaged
with prowess, and wearied with wounds, betook themselves to flight; of whom
the Romans slew a great number. And then marched directly to the town of the
Sontiates, and laid siege unto if; the siege grew hot on both sides; the Romans
approached the walls, with vines, turrets and mounts: the townsmen defended
themselves some time, by sallying out; sometimes, by undermining the mounts and
fortifications, wherein the Aquitani are very skillful. But when they perceived
the industry of the Romans to exceed all that they were able to do, they
entreated Crassus to accept their rendry: which being granted, and all the army
intending the delivery of their Arms; Adcantuanus their chief magistrate,
fled out in the mean time at an other port of the city, with 600. devoted
companions whom they called Soldurij: but as they attempted to escape, the
soldiers that kept that part of the fortification, as they signified his
cuasion by a clamor and shout, the rest be took themselves to arms; and so
repelled him again into the town, where he desired to be taken in the number
of the submissiue multitude. Crassus having taken hostages of them, went into
the confines of the Vocontij.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THese skillful and experienced men, which Crassus sent for out of all the
Cities in Aquitaine, Euocati.
were those, whom the Romans called Euocati: such as were free from warfare,
and exempted by their laws from giving their names in musters, either by
reason of their years, or the magistracy which they had borne, or for some
other causes, which gave them that privilege: And in that regard were sent for
by letters, entreating their assistance in the carriage of that war, as men well
acquainted with the nature of such businesses. Their places were nothing
inferior to the Centurions, for advise and direction, although they had no
part in command or authority.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN this fight we may further observe, their manner of defense against Mountes,
and Caualieros; which we find chiefly to be mines. Josephus in the Jewish
war says, that the Romans having raised an exceeding high mount, the Jews
undermined the same with such Art, that as they dug underneath; they
supported the mount with huge props and planks, that it might not shrink: and
watching a time of greatest advantage, they set all the timber work, which
underpropped the mount, on fire, which taking fire with the help of brimstone
and pitch, the mount fell upon a sudden, to the great terror and amazement of
the Romans.

At the siege of Auaricum, Lib. 7. de bello Gall.
we find how the Galls by undermining, did take the earth from the mount, as
fast as it was carried unto it by the Romans; and so kept it from rising, and
made it ineffectual. But if it were for the most part made of wood, or other
combustible matter, they sought then by all means to burn it; as it happened
at the siege of Massilia: and oftentimes when both burning and undermining
failed, they confronted it, with an other mount within the walls, to
disappoint the disadvantage by equal contesting of it; and so made it
unprofitable. Concerning mines, this much may I say, without prejudice to that
Art: that the chiefest points to be respected are these: First, the true
distance to a dessigned place, which is best got by instrument and help of
Geometry, where other marks of certainty are wanting: secondly, the
direction of the mine, that we may not err in our course which the compass
affoordeth: thirdly, the strengthening of the mine with timber work, if need
require: lastly, the countermining and crossemeeting: All which parts have very
many circumstances, and require a larger discourse, then may be thought
pertinent for this place.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe strange contract between these Soldurij, and their chiefetaine, may well
deserve a place amongst these observations, especially considering the
obligatorie conditions, which either party stood bound to observe: for the
Captain was to make his Soldurij partakers of all his happiness in this life;
in regard whereof, they were to take part of whatsoever ill chance or disaster
should happen to befall him. If death, which is the last end of all sensual
misery, took hold of their head, these devoted were tied voluntarily to
follow him the self same way: neither in any memory was there over man found,
that refused to die, if he to whom he was devoted, chanced to be slain. Which
bloody league of amity, as it was repugnant to the course of nature,
multiplying particular destiny to a general calamity: so was it dangerous in
a well ordered state, if the ringleader were either ambitious, or sought to
practice any thing contrary to good government: for he himself would
presume much upon the assistance of his Soldurij; and they on the other side,
must needs wish well to his attempts that were so interessed in his life and
death.

CHAP. X.
The Galls raise new forces, against Crassus.

THe barbarous Galls were much troubled, Caesar.
that a town of that strength should so soon be taken; and therefore they
sent ambassadors into all quarters, coniured one with another, confirmed their
covenants with mutual hostages, and levied what power they were able to make:
sending for aid out of Spain, and from other states that bordered upon
Aquitaine; at the coming of these forces they began to make war, with a
great power, and with many soldiers of great fame. For they appointed such
leaders as had seen the experience of Sertorius his wars, and were great in
the opinion of men, for their skill and knowledge in the art military; these
according to the custom of the people of Rome, began to take places of
advantage, to fortify their camp, and to intercept the Romans from free
passage of conu^ies and necessary entercourses. Which when Crassus perceived,
and considering withal that his own forces were so few, that he could not
well dismember them upon any service or advantage; and that the enemy went out
at his pleasure, kept the passages, and left notwithstanding, a sufficient
garrison in his camp; by which means their corn and provision would in time
grow scarce, and the enemy waxed every day stronger: he thought it his best
course not to linger any longer, but presently to give them battle. The matter
being referd to a council of war, when he understood that all men were of
the same opinion, he appointed the next day to give them battle; and in the
dawning putting his men in a double battle, and placing the Auxiliarie forces
in the midst, he attended to see what the enemy would do. The Galls,
although they were persuaded, that they might adventure battle both in regard
of their multitude and ancient prowes of war, as also in respect of the
paucitie of the Romans; yet they though it better to block up the passages,
and so cut off all cariages, and conuoies of corn; and so the victory would
follow without bloodshed: and if the Romans for want of corn should offer to
make a retreit, they would then set upon them as they marched, wearied with
travel, and heavily laden with their burdens. This resolution being approved
by the whole council of the Galls, when the Romans imbattailed their forces,
they kept their men within their camp.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
THis Sertorius had followed the faction of Marius and Cinna, Sertorius.
and when Sylla had overthrown both the elder and younger Marius, he fled into
Spain, and there maintained the quarrel on foot against Pompeie and
Metellus; and overthrew them in many battles: but in the end was trecherously
slain by Perpanna at a banquet. He was a man of great spirit, and of admirable
dispatch; and under him were these captains brought up, which Caesar
commends for their skill in arms.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
IN histories, Two means to atchieue victory and to ouermaster their enemies
propounding to our consideration the deeds and moniments of former ages, we
may observe two especial means, which the great commanders of the world have
entertained to atchieue victory, and ouermaster their enemies: the first by
cunning and wise carriage of a matter, before it come to trial by blows: the
second, by forceable means and waging of battle; the one proceeding from
wisdom and the better faculties of the soul; and the other depending upon the
strength and ability of the body. Concerning the first, it has ever bin held
more honorable, as better suting the worth of the spirit and the divine essence
of our nature, so to direct the course of an action, that the adverse part may
be weakened by wit, and prevented in the proiects of their better fortunes, by
anticipation of means and occasions, and so through advantages taken from
their own proceedings, to be driven to that exigent, which may determine of
the controversy before they come to blows, and conclude the matter by terms
of art, taken from the directions of good providence. For to speak a truth,
Tubalcaine by war and Naamah by the flood.
the action of battle, as it is the last part in that faculty; so it is the
worst in regard of christian duty, and better fitteth the progeny of Lamech
his second wife, which the Divines do note to be borne to the ruin and
destruction of mankind, then the children of grace, whose joy consists in
peace and love.

Caesar in the first of the civil wars respected the same thing, but from
other grounds: for having shut up Afranius, and Petreius in a place of
disadvantage, and might have cut them off without further trouble; yet
forasmuch as he foresaw the victory coming toward him without blow or wound,
he thus answered his Captains that were earnest upon the enemy: Cur etiam
secundo praelio aliquos ex suis amitteret? cur vulnerari pateretur optime de se
meritos milites? cur denique fortunam periclitaretur? And this course did these
Galls take, which under Sertorius had learned the Roman Art, and the
Roman industry; and were now become so expert, that they had almost beaten
the Romans at their own weapon. This first means is principally to be
embraced, as the safest way in these uncertain and casual euentes: for that
which rests upon corporal strength, and makes execution the means to a
conclusion, is very terrible even to the better party, full of hazard and of
little certainty. For it were a miracle of fortune never heard of yet, so to
carry a battle upon what advantage or means whatsoever, that the victor
army should buie so great a fortune without bloodshed or loss of men; and
erect a Trophee to honor at the sole cost of the enemy, without loss or
expense of his own treasure. And for the uncertainty in a battle, who
knows not what infinite chances and changes may happen in every small moment
of time, to turn the fortune of the day to this or that party, and make both
sides unconstant in their affections, by presenting them interchangeably with
hope and fear, joy and sorrow? and therefore Caesar thought it not best to
tempt the waie-wardnes of fortune, when by other means he might obtain his
desires. This I say is chiefly to be embraced, if our means will afford us
that happiness: but howsoever I hold it wisdom so to entertain this course
of victory, that we omit not the chiefest helps of furtherance when it
comes to blows, but to think of this conquest by art and wit, as
necessary, if our means will serve us to compass it; and of the other, as
necessary whether we will or no: for the history makes it plain, that when
Brutus found himself destitute of means to undertake that course of victory,
which proceeds from providence and discreet carriage; he then betook
himself necessarily to the latter, and by the help of battle, sought to
free himself from those disaduantages, into which the Galls had brought him.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
I Observe further out of this place, Not to forgo an advantage
that what course soever be taken, a discreet leader will not easily forgo an
advantage, without great assurance of a better fortune: nor change the
certainty of a benefit, upon probabilities of other hopes, until it have paid
him the interest of his expectation, and wrought that effect which it promised
to perform. For so he might forgo his fortune by presuming too much upon the
favor of future chances, which are oftener seen to cross our purposes, rather
then to further the way which is taken.

THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
FVrther I observe, this double battle to be answerable to the paucity of the
Roman forces: for their usual manner was, to make a triple battle, that the
first might have a second, and a third help: but where their number would not
afford that commodity, they then made two battles, that there might be the
succor of a second supply. But they never fought with one single battle, for
ought that may be gathered by their histories.

THE FIFTH OBSERVATION.
THe last thing which I observe, The place where suspected forces are best
bestowed in battle.
is the place, where Crassus bestowed the Auxiliarie forces, in the disposition
of his troops to battle; which is here said to be, in mediam Aciem: for as
their Armies were divided into three battles; so every battle was divided
into three parts; the two cornets, and the battle, wherein these Auxiliarie
forces were in this service bestowed: of these he afterward says, that in as
much as he durst not put any confidence in them, he commanded them to serve the
Romans in time of battle, with stones and weapons, and to carry earth and
turfe to the mount. The reason why suspected troops are placed in the battle,
rather then in either of the cornets, is, for that the battle has not such
scope to fling out, or take advantage of place to do mischief, as the corners
have: for wheresoever there has been set battles fought, the strength of
their army consisted always in the cornets, as the two principal instruments
of the battle; and as long as these stood sound, the victory went always
certain on that part: for the cornets kept the enemy both from incompassing
about the body of their Army, and had the advantage also of charging upon the
open side of their adversary. At the battle of Cannas Hanniball put the
weakest of his forces in the battle, and advancing them toward the enemy,
left the two cornets behind: so that, when the enemy came to charge upon the
battle, they easily beat them back, and as they followed the retrait fell in
between the two cornets, wherein the strength of the Army consisted, and
being by them encompassed on each side, were defeated and overthrown. And thus
we see the advantage which a General has, when his two cornets stand firm;
although the battle shrink in the encounter. Hanniball in the battle he had
with Scipio in Afric, placed the strangers in the front and in the rereward,
according peradventure as he found their number and the use of their Arms,
which are circumstances to be considered in this case, and depend rather upon
the judgment of a general, then of any prescription that can be given in this
matter.

CHAP. XI.
Crassus takes the camp of the Galls: and with their overthrow ends that
war.

CRASSVS understanding their drift, Caesar.
and finding his men willing to set upon their camp, encouraged his soldiers;
and to the contentment of all men, went directly to the place where they were
lodged: and as some began to fill up the ditch; and others with casting weapons
to beat the Galls from the rampire, he commanded the Auxiliarie forces, of
whom he had no great assurance, to bring stones and weapons to the soldiers
that fought, and to carry earth and turfe to the mount; that so they might
make a show of fighting. And on the other side, as the enemy began valiantly to
make resistance, and to cast their weapon from the higher ground, to the great
hurt of the Roman soldier; the horsemen in the mean time riding about the
camp of the Galls, brought word to Crassus that the rampire at the Decumane
port, was not fortified with such diligence, as they found it in other places,
but would admit an easy entrance. Crassus dealt earnestly with the commanders
of the horse, to encourage their men with great promises and rewards; and
instructed them what he would have done: they, according to their instructions,
took four cohorts that were left in the camp, and carrying them a further
way about, that they might not be discovered by the enemy; while all men's eyes
and minds were intent upon the fight, they speedely came to the place of the
fortifications, which the horsemen had found to be weak, which being easily
broken down, they had entered the camp before the enemy could well tell what
was done. And then a great clamor and shout being heard about that place, the
Roman legions renewing their force, as it falls out always in hope of
victory, began to charge them a fresh with great fury: the Galls being
circumuented on each side, and despairing of their safety, casting themselves
over the rampire, sought by flight to escape the danger. But for as much as the
country was open and champion, the horsemen pursued them with that execution,
that of 50000 there scarce remains the fourth part.

THE OBSERVATION.
FRom this place Brancatio takes occasion to dispute, Lib. 3. Auertimento
secundo.
how an enemy that is strongly encamped, and for some advantage will not
remove, may be dislodged, whether he will or no. A point of great consequence,
in matter of war: and therefore deserves due consideration. Concerning which
he lays this down for a maxim, that all forts and strong holds are taken by
the foot, and that camps and lodgings are taken by the head: By which is
meant, that he who purposes to win a fortress well manned and provided,
must first get the foot and take hold of the ditch; and then sease himself
upon the rampire, and so get the place: for he says, that mounts and eminent
eleuations are of little use against fortresses or sconses, unless they
ouertop them; which may be easily prevented by raising the parapet of the
fortress in front, and the curtain in flank, according as the enemy shall
carry his mounts aloft; and so they shall never come to ouertop the holds. But
all camps and lodgings are taken by the head: That is, by mountes and
eleuations, which by the advantage of their height command the champion. For he
holds it impossible, to raise a mount within the camp in so short a time, to
contest that, which the enemy shall make without. This foundation being laid,
he proceeds to discover a way, how to raise a mount maugre the enemy, which
shall dislodge them by force of Artillery, or murder them all within their
trenches. And this he takes from Caesar at the siege of Gergobia. Lib. de
bello Gallico.
The substance of the matter consists in a double ditch, running like unto
the line which the Geometricians call Helicall; by this double ditch, he makes
his approach to any place of most advantage, where he may in a night, raise a
mount high enough for the ordinance to play upon any quarter of the camp. The
censure of this practice, I refer to our judicious soldiers, which may, if
it please them, take a better view of the particularities of this stratagem in
Brancatio himself. This much I dare affirm in the behalf of these works,
that they were of high esteem amongst the Romans, when daily experience and
exigents of hazard had taught to find out the readiest means, both for
security and victory. And if our soldiers could be brought to taste the
commodity of these works, either by persuasion or impulsion, it were the best
part of their warlike practices: but our men had rather fly upon desperate
adventures, and seek victory in the jaws of death, then to clear all hazard,
with pains and diligence.

CHAP. XII.
Caesar undertakes the war with the Menapij and Morini.

AT the same time also, Caesar.
although the summer was almost at an end, yet for as much as all Gallia was in
peace, and the Terouine
Morini only with the Cleue and Gueldres.
Menapij stood out in arms, and had never either sent ambassador, or
otherwise treated of peace; Caesar thinking that war might quickly be ended,
lead his Army into their country. At his coming, he found them to carry the
wars far otherwise, then the rest of the Galls had done: for understanding
that the greatest nations of Gallia, which had waged battle with the Romans,
were beaten and overthrown; and having whole continents of woods and bogs in
their territories, they conuaied both themselves and their goods into those
quarters: Caesar coming to the beginning of the woods, began to fortify his
camp, not discovering any enemy near about him; but as his men were
dispearsed in their charges, they suddenly sallied out of the woods and
assaulted the Romans; but being speedely driven in again with the loss of
many of them, as the Romans followed them far into the woods, had some few
of their men slain. The time that remained, Caesar resolved to spend in
cutting down the woods; and least the soldiers might be taken unawares,
while they were busied in that work, he caused them to place all the trees
which they cut down, on either side of the Army; that they might serve for a
defense, against sudden assaults. A great quantity of ground was thus rid
within a few days; so that their goods and cattle was taken by the Romans:
but they themselves were fled into thicker woods. At which time there happened
such a continual rain, as forced them to leave of the work; and the
soldiers could no longer endure, to lie in tents of skins: and therefore
Caesar, after he had wasted and spoiled their country, burned their towns, and
their houses; he carried back his Army, and placed them in such cities to
winter in, as were subdued by the late wars.

OBSERVATIONS.
THe Irish rebels, having the like commodity of woods and bogs, do entertain
the like course of war, as the Morini did with Caesar: the means which he
used to disappoint them of that practice, was to cut down the woods, which
if it be thought monstrous in this age, or ridiculous to our men of war; let
them consider that the Roman discipline wrought greater effects of valor,
then can be made credible by the use of these times. For besides their
exquisite discipline, which of it self was able to frame patterns of
unexampled magnanimity; their industry was admirable in the execution
thereof, and carried it with such incessant travel, that the soldiers thought
it great happiness when they came to wage battle with the enemy; and could
have means to quit their continual travel, with the hazard of their lives.
Neither let it seem strange, that the Romans undertook to cut down the woods;
but rather let us admire their facility in so difficult a task: for as the
history witnesses: magno spacio paucis diebus confecto, incredibili
celeritate: a great quantity of ground was rid in a few days with incredible
speed. And after the woods were cut down, they took more pains in placing
it on each side of the legions, to hinder any sudden assault, then they did in
cutting it down: which deserves as great admiration, as the former part.
There is another place in the sixth book of these Commentaries, which
expresses more particularly the nature of such wars, and may serve to
acquaint us with that which Caesar did in these difficulties.

The Eburones or the men of Liege, had the like commodity of woods and bogges,
and made use of them in the war they had with Caesar: The matter (says he)
required great diligence, not so much in regard of the peril of the whole
Army, (for there could no danger come from an enemy that was frighted and
dispersed) as the safety of every particular soldier, which in part did
pertain to the welfare of the whole Army. For the desire of booty carried
many of the soldiers far from the body of the Army: and the woods being
full of unknown and secret passages, would not suffer them to go either thick
together or close imbattailed. If he desired to have the war ended, and the
race of those wicked men to be rooted out, he must of force make many small
companies, and divide his men into many bodies: but if he would have the
maniples to keep at their ensigns, as the discipline and custom of the Roman
Army required; then the place was a shelter and defense to the enemy: neither
did they want courage to lay ambushments, and to circumuent such as they found
alone, straggling from their companies. In these difficulties, there was as much
done as diligence could do; providing rather to be wanting in the offensive
part (although all men's minds were set on fire with revenge) then to hurt the
enemy with the loss of the Roman soldier. Caesar sent messengers to the
bordering states, to come out and sack the Eburones, and they should have all
the pray for their labor: that the life of the Galls rather then his
legionarie soldiers might be hazarded in those woods; as also that, with so
great a multitude, both the race and name of that people might be quite
extinguished.

There are many particularities in this relation, which concern the true
motion of the Irish wars, which may be better observed by such as know those
wars by experience, then by my self that understand them only by relation:
and therefore to prevent such exceptions, as my rule shall make of the
parallel in these two cases: I will leave it to be done by themselves. And
thus ends the third Commentary.

THE FOVRTH COMMENTARY.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Vsipetes, and Tenchtheri are driven to seek new seats in Gallia; they
drive the Menapij out of their territories: but in the end are overthrown by
Caesar. That war being ended, he made a bridge upon the Rhene, and carried
his Army over into Germany. He takes revenge upon the Sicambri; and gives
liberty to the Vbij: returns into Gallia, and carries his Army over into
Britanie, with the occurrences of that war.

CHAP. I.
The Those of Zutpnen.
Vsipetes, and Of Hassia.
Tenchtheri bring great multitudes of peoples, over the Rhene into Gallia: the
nature of the Sueui.

THE winter following, Caesar.
Pompeie and Crassus being Consuls, the Vsipetes and Tenchtheri, two German
nations, passed over the Rhene, with great multitudes of people; not far from
the place, where it falls into the sea. The reason of their flitting, was the
ill entreaty, which for many years together they had received of the Sueui,
the greatest and warlikest nation amongst the Germains. For these Sueui had one
hundred Cantons or shires, which yearly furnished their wars, with 1000 men
a piece; and kept as many at home to maintain both themselves, and their
Armies abroad: and these the year following were in Arms; and the other
stayed at home, and performed the like duty; and so by this means, they all
continued their experience both of tillage, and matter of war. They lived
chiefly upon cattle and milk, and used much hunting, which was the cause
(what through the quality of their diet, their continual exercise, and
liberty of life, being never tied to any discipline, nor urged to any thing
against their disposition) that they were strong and of a large stature, using
skins and hides for their clothing, which covered but part of their body, the
rest being naked. Their horsemen oftentimes, in time of battle, forsook their
horse, and fought on foot; being taught to stand still in one place, that when
they would they might return unto them. Neither was there any thing more base,
or dishonest in the course of their life, then to use furniture for horses: and
would adventure to charge upon great troops of horse, that used Equipage, with
a few of their own quality. They admitted no wine to be brought in unto them,
least it might effeminate their warlike inclination, or make them unapt for
labor. The greatest honor in their opinion, was to have their bordering
Territories lie wast and desolate: for so it would be thought, that many
states together, would not resist, their conquering valor: and it was
reported, that the country lay wast from them one way 600 miles together.

THE OBSERVATION.
BY this practice of the Sueui, it appears, how little a naked resolution of
valor avails, when it wants the ornaments of moral carriage and civil
discretion, to make use of that greatness which prowess has obtained: for
notwithstanding that they were a nation both warlike, and of good ability,
they were so vainly carried on with a conceit of manhood, that it sorted to no
other end, then to maintain barbarism at home, and desolation abroad; where
as true valor is always subordinate to the preservation of commonweals, and
is as the defensive arms of civil society. Which I have the rather noted, in
as much as it resembles an humor that abounds in this age, especially in
the particular hauiour of our young galants, whose naked valor reuelling it
self only in the lie and in the stabbe, for want of other assistant virtues
to temper the heat of so brittle a metal, leads them into such
inconveniences and disordered actions, that it changes the nature thereof,
into giddie headed rashness; and in lieue of virtues guerdon, is repaide with
irrision.

CHAP. II.
The motives, inducing the Vsipetes to come over the Rhene into Gallia.

NEXT unto these Sueui, Caesar.
inhabited the Vbij, a very ample and potent state: and through their
intercourse and traffic with merchants, somewhat more civil, then the rest
of the Germans. With these, the Sueui had often waged battle: and albeit they
could not expel them out of their country, forasmuch as their state was very
great and populous; yet by continual incursions they brought them under, and
much weakened their estate. In the same case were the Vsipetes and Tenchtheri:
for having made head against the Sueui for many years together, they were
constrained in the end to forsake their possessions; and wandering the space of
three years through the continent of Germany, at last they arrived where the
Geldres and Cleeue.
Menapij inhabited the banks, on both sides the river Rhene: but being
terrified with the arrival of such a multitude, they forsook all their
dwellings beyond the river, and planted themselves on this side of the water,
to hinder the Germans from further passage.

The Vsipetes with their associates, having tried all means, and not finding
themselves able to pass over by force, for want of boats; nor by stealth, by
reason of the diligent watch of the Menapij, fained a retrait to their old
habitation: and after three days journey, their horsemen in one night speedely
returned again, and slew the Menapij, both unguarded and unprovided. For they
upon the departure of the Germans, feared not to return over the river into
their towns and houses: these being slain, and their shipping taken, they got
over the river, before the rest of the Menapij had any notice of their
coming: by which means they easily dispossessed them of their dwelling
places, and lived that winter upon the provision they found there.

Caesar understanding of these things, and fearing the weakness of the
Galls, in as much as they are sudden and quick in their resolutions, and
withal desirous of novelty: he durst no way trust their inconstancy; for it
was their practice and custom to stay trauellours and passengers, and inquire
of them what they either heard or knew, concerning any thing that had
happened; and the common people would flock about merchants in faires and
markets, and learn of them whence they came, and what news they brought from
thence: and by these rumors and hearesaies they directed the maine course of
their actions; whereof they could not but repent themselves, being grounded
upon such weak intelligence, as was usually coined to please the multitude.
Which custom being known, Caesar to prevent a greater war, hasted to his
Army sooner then he was wont to do.

OBSERVATIONS.
SVch as have spent their time in the contemplation of nature, and have made
diligent search of the temperature and quality of climates and nations, have
all with one consent made choler the regent of the French complexion;
distinguishing the people, with such attributes, as the said humor usually
breeds. Neither have these conditions, which Caesar so long ago observed in
the ancient Galls, any disresemblance from that, which the learned of this
age have delivered, concerning the nature of the said inhabitants: but that
irresolute constitution, which breeds such novelties and contrarieties of
actions, continues the same unto these times, in the inhabitants of that
country, notwithstanding the alteration of customs, and people, or what else so
long a time has changed; which argues the irresistable power of celestial
influence, establishing an uniformity of nature, according as the site of the
place lies capable of their powerful aspect.

The cause of the diversity in the temperature of nations, which are
differenced by North and south, is not without apparent cause, attributed to
their propinquitie, or distance from the course of the sun, which
distinguishes by heat and cold the Northren and Southern climates of the
earth; and separateth the inhabitants thereof, by the dominion of their active
qualities. But the reason why two nations which are both in the same climate,
and under the same parallel, receiving the virtue of the celestial bodies, by
the same downefal and rebound of their beams, being differenced only by East
and West; are so much disunited in nature, and so unlike in disposition, is not
so apparent: whether it be as some have imagined, for as much as the all
enclosing sphere, which remains quiet and immovable above the circuit of
the first motor, has his parts diversely distinguished with variety of
properties; which by continual reference and mutual aspect, are imprinted in
the correspondent quarters of the earth; and so keep a perpetual residency of
one and the same quality, in one and the same place; and make also the variety
of fashions in such parts, as otherwise are equal favorites of the heavens
majesty, by receiving an equal measure of light, heat and virtue; or whether
the said quarters of the earth are in themselves diversely noted, with several
qualities, which appropriate the self same influence to their particular
nature, and so alter it into many fashions; or whether there be some other
unknown cause: I will leave every man to satisfy himself with that which
seems most probable unto him, and proceed to the discovery of this
choleric passion. Wherein I will endeavor to show how impatiencie, sudden
resolution, and desire of novelty, are natural adjuncts of this humor: And if
Caesar made use of this philosophy in the managing of that war, let it not
be thought impertinent to the knowledge of a General, to enter into the
consideration of this learning. Wherein first, I must lay for a maxim that
which long experience has made authentical, that the motions of the mind are
either quick or slow, according as the complexion is tempered, either with
heat or cold: for as the flegmaticall humor, is of a moist, cold and heavy
nature, begetting weak and gross spirits, and benumming the instruments with
a liueles disability; so is the motion of the internal faculties, proceeding
likewise after a slow manner, according to the quality of the instruments,
whereby it moves: and therefore men of this watrish constitution, are no way
apt to receive an impression, nor to entertain any sensible apprehension,
unless it be beaten into them, with often and strong repetitions; and then also
they proceed as slowly in discoursing of the consequence, and linger in the
choice of their resolutions. On the contrary part, this flaua bilis, being of a
hot piercing nature, and resembling the active virtue of the fire, does so
purify the instruments of sense, and quicken the spirits with the viuacity of
motion, that they take the first impression as perfectly, as if it had been
oftentimes presented unto them, with many strong circumstances. And thence it
happens, that inasmuch as the Species is so readily received, and possesses
the apprehending faculty, with such facility of entrance, that it moves the
other powers of the soul, with as great efficacy at the first conception, as
if it had been brought in with troops of probabilities, and strengthened with
manifest arguments of undoubted truth: It follows therefore (by reason of the
subtle and fit disposition of the instruments, which proceeds from heat
the chiefest quality in choler) that the object is at the first moment so
strongly setteled, in the first receiving faculty, that the other powers of
the mind, with as great speed manifest their offices, concerning the
apprehension; and deliver a sentence answerable to the strength of the first
conception: which makes them so impatient of delaie, and so suddenly to alter
their former resolutions, not suffering the discoursiue power to examine the
substance thereof, by conference of circumstances; nor to give judgment
according to the course of our intellectual court. It behooves therefore every
man, in that unsteady disposition, especially in matter of moment, to be
suspicious of his own credulity, and not to give place to resolution, before
his judgment be informed, by discourse of the strength or weakness of the
conceived opinion.

But to leave these speculatiue meditations, to Philosophers of learned
conceit: for as much as the right use of passions is either true wisdom, or
comes nearest to the same; I will only touch in a word what degree of
choler best befitteth a soldier; or how it avails, or disaduantageth in
matter of war. And first it cannot be denied, that there is almost no
passion, that does more eclips the light of reason, or sooner corrupts the
sincerity of a good judgment, then this of anger, which we now speak of:
Neither is there any motion that more pleases it self in his own actions, or
follows them with greater heat in the execution. And if the truth chance to
show it self, and convince a false pretended cause, as the author of that
passion, it oftentimes redoubleth the rage even against truth and innocence.
Piso condemned a soldier for returning from forraging, without his companion,
being persuaded that he had slain him: but at the instant of the execution,
the other that was missing, returned, and with great joy of the whole army,
they were carried to the general, thinking to have much gratified him, with the
manifestation of the truth: but he through shame and despite, being yet in
the torture of his wrath, redoubled his anger, and by a subtilty which his
passion furnished him withal, he made three culpable for that he found one
innocent; the first, because the sentence of death was past against him, and
was not to be recalled without the breach of law: the second, for that he was
the cause of the death of his companion: and thirdly, the executioner, for not
obeying his commandment.

Concerning matter of war, as it consists of differenced parts; so has
choler diverse effects. In case of discourse and consultation, when as the
powers of the mind ought to be clear of all violent affections, it greatly
darkeneth the understanding, and troubles the sincerity of a good judgment,
as Caesar noted in his speech to the senate concerning Cateline: Salust.
and therefore a commander must, by all means endeavor to avoid, even the least
motions of so hurtful a passion; and season his affections, with that gravity
and constancy of spirit, that no turbulent disposition may, either hinder his
understanding, or withold his will from following that course, which reason
appoints, as the best means to a fortunate success: always remembering, that
al his actions are presented upon a stage, and pass the censure of many
curious beholders, which applaud grave and patient motions, as the greatest
proof of true wisdom; and disallow of passionate, and headstrong affection, as
derogating from the sincere carriage of an action, how just soever otherwise it
seems.

Concerning execution and fury of battle, I take anger to be a necessary
instrument to set valor on foot, and to ouerwage the difficulties of terror,
with a furious resolution: for considering that the noblest actions of the
mind, stand in need of the impulsions of passions, I take anger to be the
fittest means, to advance the valiant carriage of a battle: for as fear is
treacherous and unsafe; so anger is confident and of an unquenchable heat; and
therefore a Commander ought by all means, to suggest matter of anger against
an enemy, that his men may behold them with a wrathful regard, and thirst
after the day of battle, to satisfy their fury with the blood of their
adversaries. If any urge that it has been heretofore observed of the Galls,
that in the beginning of a battle they were more then men, and in the latter
end they were less then women; and therefore a choleric disposition is not so
fit for service, as we seem to make it. I answer, that there is a difference
between a disposition to choler, such as was observed in the Galls, and the
passion of anger, well kindled in the mind: for the first is subject to
alteration and contrariety of actions; but the other is furious, invincible,
never satisfied but with revenge. And so that of Aristotle is proved true, that
anger serves oftentimes as a weapon to virtue; whereunto some answer very
pleasantly, saying, it is a weapon of a strange nature: for we do manage
other weapons, and this does manage us; our hand guides not it, but it
guides our hand; it possesses us, and not we it, as it happened in the
reign of Tyberius, amongst the mutinous legions at Vetera: Tacit. 1. Anal.
and therefore a Commander ought to take great heed, whom he makes the
object of that anger, which kindles in his army: for as it is a passion of
terrible execution, and therefore needs to be wisely directed; so is it
dangerous in regard of obedience, which was the only thing which Caesar
required in his soldiors.

But to leave this hasty matter, and fall nearer that which we seek after. I
may not omit the prognostication, which Caesar made of the consequence of this
accident, by the natural disposition of the people; the event whereof proved
the truth of his predictions; which shows what advantage a learned general
that has bin somewhat instructed in the school of nature, has gained of him,
whom only experience has taught the active rudiments of the war, and thinks
of no further lesson in that art, then that which the office of a seriant or
lanceprizado contains.

CHAP. III.
Caesar comes to his army, marches toward the Germans, and by the way
treats of conditions of peace.

CAESAR being come to his army, Caesar.
found that to have happened which he before suspected: for some of the states
of Gallia had sent messengers unto the Germans, to leave the banks of Rhene,
and to come further into the continent, where they should find ready,
whatsoever they desired. Whereupon the Germans began to make further
incursions, and to waste the land as far as the confines of the Liege.
Eburones. The Princes of the Galls being called together, Caesar thought it
best to dissemble what he had discovered, concerning their revolt; and
confirming their minds with an approbation of their loialtie, he commanded
certain troops of horse to be levied, and resolved to make war upon the
Germains; and having made provision of corn, he directed his march toward
them. From whom as he was on the way, within a few days journey of their
camp, he received this message: The Germains as they were not willing to make
war upon the Romans, so they would not refuse to make trial of their
manhood, if they were justly provoked; for their ancient custom was to answer
an enemy by force, and not by treaty; yet this much they would confess, that
they came thither very unwillingly, being driven by violence out of their
possessions. If the Roman people would accept of their friendship, and either
give them territories to inhabit, or suffer them to keep that which they had
got by the law of arms, they might prove profitable friends unto them. They
only yielded to the Sueui, to whom the Gods in feats of arms were inferior;
any other nation they would easily conquer.

To this Caesar answered what he thought fit; but the purport of his speech
was, that he could not make any league with them, if they continued in Gallia:
neither was it probable, that they that could not keep their own, would get
possessions out of other men's hands. Gallia had no vacant place to entertain
so great a multitude: but if they would they might find a welcome, amongst the
Colonia Agripina.
Vbij, whose agents were at that instant in his camp, complaining of the
injury of the Sueui, and desiring aid against them; this much he himself
would entreat of the Vbij. The messengers went back with these Mandates,
promising within three days to return again to Caesar: in the mean time,
they desired him, not to bring his army any nearer their quarters; which
request Caesar denied: for understanding that a few days before, a great part
of their Caualrie were passed over the Mosa, he suspected that this delay
imported nothing more then the return of their horsemen.

When Caesar was come within twelve miles of their camp, their Ambassadors
returned; and meeting him on the way, entreated him earnestly to march no
further toward them: but being denied of their suite, they besought him to
send to those troops of horse, which marched before the army, that they
should not fight nor make any hostile encounter; and that he would give them
leave to send messengers to the Vbij, of whose entertainment they would
willingly accept, if the Princes and senate would swear faith and safe
continuance unto their people: Neither would they require more then 3. days,
to negotiat this business. Caesar conceived this treaty to import nothing else,
then the return of their horsemen that were absent in pillage, whom they
expected within 3. days; notwithstanding he promised them to march but four
miles further that day, to a convenient watring place: in the mean time he
sent to the commanders of the horse that were before, not to provoke the enemy
to fight; and if they were set upon to sustain the charge, until he came
nearer with the army.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
FIrst we may observe his disse^bling of the practice of the Galls, with the
Germans; and the encouragement which he gave them in a faithful and loial
affection to the people of Rome, when he himself knew they had started from
that duty, which both their honor and a good respect of their friends
required: for he well understood that his presence did take away al scruple of
any further motion in that kind; and therefore to have objected unto the^ their
errors, had not been to heal, but to discover their wound: only he took the
way, to cut off their hopes of any practices, which they might attempt against
the Roman people; and held them in the mean time in the appearance of faithful
friends, that they might not be discouraged, by the detection of their revolt.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SEcondly, upon this resolution that there was no league to be made with the
Germans, if they continued on this side the Rhene; we may observe how he
entertained a treaty of peace, with such consents and denials, as might
manifest his readiness to further what he made show of, and not weaken the
means of his best advantage. For as he was content they should take a quiet
farewell of Gallia, and plant themselves in the possessions of the Vbij; so was
he loath to yield to any condition, which might disadvantage his forcible
co^straint or weaken his command, if persuasion failed: for he well knew that
powerful means to effect that which he required, would further the course of a
peaceable conclusion, and carry more authority in a parlee, then any other
motive, how reasonable soever.

Moreover we may observe, Vincitur haud gratis iugulo qui prouocat hostem.
how careful he was not to impose upon the Germans a necessity of
fighting; but opened a passage (by propounding unto them the association of the
Vbij) by which they might avoid the hazard of battle. Which thing was
always observed by Commanders of ancient times, who diligently searching into
the nature of things, found that neither of those noble instruments, whereby
man works such wonders (I mean the hand and the tongue) had ever brought so
many excellent works to that type of perfection, unless they had bin forced
thereunto by necessity: and therefore we are wisely to handle the course of
our actions, least while we stand too strict upon a violent guarde, we give
occasion to the enemy, by the way of Antiperistasis, to redouble his strength;
and so furnish him with that powerful engine, which Vetius Mescius calls
vltimum and maximum telum, the last and greatest weapon; the force whereof
shall better appear by these examples.

Some few of the Samnites, Liu. lib. 9.
contrary to the articles of peace between them and the Romans, having made
incursions into the territories of the Ramaine confederates; the senate of that
state sent to Rome, to excuse the fact, and to make offer of satisfaction: But
being rejected, Claudius Pontius general of their forces, in an excellent
oration which he made, showed how the Romans would not harken to peace, but
chose rather to be revenged by war: and therefore necessity constrained them to
put on arms: iustum est bellum (says he) quibus necessarium, and pia arma
quibus, nisi in Armis, spes est.

Caius Manlius, Liu. lib. 7.
conducting the Roman legions against the Veij, part of the Veian army had
entered the Roman camp; which Manlius perceiving, he hasted with a band of
men to keep the breach, and to shut in the Veij: which they no sooner
perceived, but they fought with that rage and fury, that they slew Manlius; and
had ouerthrown the whole camp, had not a Tribune opened the^ a passage, by
which they fled away.

In like manner Camillus, the wisest of the Roman Captains, being entered
into the city of the Veij, that he might take it with greater facility, and
disarme the enemy of that terrible weapon of necessity, he caused it to be
proclaimed, that no Veian should be hurt, that was found unarmed. Whereupon
every man cast away his weapon, and so the town was taken without bloodshed.

Let a soldiour therefore take such hold of occasions, and oportunities that
are offered unto him, that in time of battle he may seem to cast necessity
upon his own cause, and retain it in his pay: considering how the power
thereof alters the works of nature, and changes their effects into contrary
operations, being never subject to any ordinance or law; and yet making that
lawful which proceeds from it.

CHAP. IIII.
The Germans, contrary to their own request made to Caesar, set upon the
Roman horsemen, and overthrew them.

NOtwithstanding the Germans request, Caesar.
concerning the truce, as soon as they saw the Roman horsemen, which were in
number 5000, (whereas the Germans had not above 800. hearse) they charged upon
the Romans, not expecting any hostile encounter, inasmuch as their
ambassadors were newly departed from Caesar, and had obtained that day of
truce; but being set upon, they made what resistance they could. The Germans,
according to their usual custom, forsook their horse, and fighting on foot,
did easily put the Romans to flight; who never looked back, until they came
into the sight of the legions: in that battle were slain 74. Roman
horsemen. After this battle, Caesar thought it not safe, either to harken to
any conditions, or to receive any message from them, that by fraud and deceit
had songht for peace, and meant nothing but war: And to attend any longer until
their horsemen returned, was but to give them that advantage against him,
especially considering the weakness of the Galls, amongst whom the Germans
by this battle had gained great reputation; and therefore he durst not give them
space to think upon it.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis cunning of the Germans offers occasion to speak somewhat, concerning
that maine controversy of policy, which is, whether the actions of Princes
and great commanders, are always to be attended with integrity, and faithful
accomplishment thereof. Wherein I will only set down such arguments, and grounds
of reason, which virtue and moral honesty on the one part, (for we will make it
no question to a Christian mind) and the daily practice of states men on the
other side, allege, to make good their contrary assertions.

The great Politicians of the world, that commend virtue in a show, and not in
esse and being, and study to maintain their states only with humane reason,
not regarding the authority of divine ordinance, set this down as a maxim in
their Art; That he, that is to negotiate a matter, and means to bring it to
an end sorting to his contentment, must in all respects be like qualified,
both in judgment and disposition, as the party is, with whom he deals:
otherwise he cannot be sufficiently prepared, to hold himself strong in the
matter, which he undertakes. For a wrastler that comes with mere strength
to encounter an other that has both strength and cunning, may beshrew his
strength that brought him thither, to be cast by skill, and be laughed at, as an
unworthy cha^pion for serious sports: in like manner in this universal
confusion of infidelity, wherein subtilty flies at so high a pitch, he that
thinks with simplicity of spirit to wind through the labyrinths of
falsehood, and avoid the snares of deceit, shall find himself too weak for
so difficult a task, and beshrew his honesty, if he regard his commodity: for
it is the course that every man takes, which must bring us to the place, to
which every man goes: and he that opposes himself against the current of the
world, may stand alone in his own conceit, and never attain that which the
world seeks after. Forasmuch therefore, as craft and deceit are so general, it
behooves a man of public negotiations, to carry a mind apt and disposed to
these qualities. This was signified by that, which ancient writers report of
Achilles, who was sent to Chiron the Centaure, half a man and half a beast, to
be instructed in the rudime^ts of princely carriage; that of the brutish part,
he might learn to strengthen himself, with force and courage; and of the humane
shape, so to manage reason, that it might be a fit instrument to answer or
prevent, what soever man's wit might forge to overthrow it. Neither ought a
private man to wonder at the strangeness of these positions; considering that
the government of kingdoms, and Empires is carried with another bias, then that
which concerns particular affairs in a well ordered state: wherein
truth-breakers and faithlesse-dissemblers are worthily condemned, inasmuch as
they necessarily enforce the ruin thereof. But these that sit at the helm of
government, and are to shape the course of a state, according to the variation
of times and fortunes, derive their conclusions from other principles, whereof
inferior subjects are no more capable, then men are able to understand the
works of the Gods: and therefore they are called arcana imperij, to be
reverenced rather, then looked into.

To conclude, the affairs of particular persons are of so short extension, and
incircled in so small a compass, that a mean capacity may easily apprehend
the advantages or inconveniences, which may ensue upon the contract: and
therefore it is requisite they should stand to the adventure, and their
judgment is worthily taxed with the loss: but the businesses of a common
weal are, both subject to so many casualties of fortune, and rely upon such
unexpected accidents, that it is impossible for any spirit, how provident
soever, to foresee the issue, in that variety of chances. Besides that, every
particular subject is much interessed in the fortune of the event, and may
justly, challenge an alteration of the intended course, rather then suffer
shipwreck through the error of their Pilot: And so the safety of the state
does balance out the loss of credit in the Governor.

On the other side, such as zealously affect true honor, affirm virtue to be
the same both in prince and people; neither does condition of state, or
calling, or the quality of public or private businesses, alter the nature and
essence of goodness: for to deprive the tongue of truth and fidelity were to
break the bond of civil society, which is the basis and ground plot of all
states and commonweales. They do not deny but that a wise Prince may so
carry a treaty, that he may seem to affect that most which he least
intends; or answer doubtfully concerning the propositions; and that he may
use with great honor the practices and stratagems of war, when the fortune
of both parties consists upon their own industry: but to break any
covenants agreed upon, may well get a kingdom, but never honorable reputation.

And thus they contend concerning the means, whereby a state is continued in
happy government: whereof this much I dare say by the warrant of this
history, that he who falsifieth his words upon advantage, howsoever he
regards his honor, had need to pay them home in regard of his own
safety: for if they once recover the loss, and get any advantage against
those truth-breakers, they will find as little favor, as the Germans did with
Caesar.

CHAP. V.
Caesar marched directly to the camp of the Germans, and cut them all in
pieces, and so ended that war.

UPON these considerations, Caesar.
Caesar manifesting his resolution to the Legates, and Questor; there happened
a very fortunate accident. For the next day, very early in the morning, most
of the Princes and chiefest of the Germans came unto Caesar into his camp, to
excuse their fraudulent practice; and withal to continue their petition of
truce. Whereof Caesar was exceeding glad, and caused them to be kept in hold;
and at the same instant, brought his Army out of the camp, commanding his
horsemen to follow the legions, because they had been daunted with so late an
overthrow: And making a triple battle, marched speedely eight miles, and so
came upon the Germans, before they had notice what had happened; and being
terrified with our sudden arrival, and the departure of their own leaders,
knew not whether it were their best course, to bring forth their forces, or to
defend their camp, or otherwise to seek their safety by flight. Which tumult
and fear was no sooner perceived by the Roman soldier, but calling to mind
their perfidious treachery, they brake into the camp, and were at first a
little resisted; in the mean time, the women and children fled every one
away: which Caesar perceiving, sent his horsemen to pursue them. The Germans
hearing the clamor and schrichings behind their backs, and seeing their
friends pursued and slain, did cast away their weapons, and fled out of the
camp, and coming to the confluence of the Mase and the Rhene, such as had
escaped cast themselves into the river; where, what through fear, and
weariness, and the force of the water, were all drowned. In this conflict the
Romans lost not a man: the number of the enemy was 430000 with women and
children. To them, whom he had retained in his camp, he gave leave to depart;
but they fearing the cruelty of the Galls, desired that they might continue
with the Romans: which Caesar agreed unto.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis relation affoordeth little matter of war, but only a severe revenge of
hateful treachery: notwithstanding I will hence take occasion, to discover the
offices of the Questor and the Legates; and show what place they had in the
Army. And first concerning the Questor, we are to understand, that he was
elected by the common voice of the people, in the same court, which was called
to creat the General. His office was, to take charge of the public treasure,
whether it came out of their Aerarium, for the pay of the Army; or otherwise
was taken from the enemy. Of him the soldiers received their stipend both in
corn and money; and what other booty was taken from the enemy, he either
kept them, or sold them, for the use of the commonweal.

The Legates were not chosen, by the people, but appointed by the Senate, as
assistants and Coadiutors to the Emperor, for the public service, and were
altogether directed by the General, in whose absence they had the absolute
command: and their number was for the most part uncertain; but proportioned
according to the number of legions in the Army.

CHAP. VI.
Caesar makes a bridge upon the Rhene, and carries his Army over into
Germany.

THE German war being thus ended: Caesar.
Caesar thought it necessary, to transport his Army over the Rhene into the
continent of Germany, for many causes: whereof this was not the least, that
seeing the Germans were so easily persuaded, to bring their colonies and their
vagrant multitudes into Gallia: he thought it good to make known unto them,
that the Roman people could, at their pleasure, carry their forces over the
Rhene into Germany. Moreover, those troops of horse, which were absent at the
late overthrow of the Germans, were fled into the confines of the Sicambri; to
whom, when Caesar sent messengers to demand them to be sent unto him, they
answered, that the Roman Empire was limited by the Rhene: and if the Germans
were interdicted Gallia, why should Caesar challenge any authority in their
quarters? Lastly, the Vbij, who amongst all the rest of the Germans had only
accepted of Caesar's friendship, and given pledges of their fidelity, had made
earnest suit unto him, to send them aid against the Sueui; or at the least to
transport his Army over the Rhene: for the name and opinion of the Roman Army
was so great, and of such fame, what with Ariouistus overthrow, and this last
service, that it sounded honorable amongst the furthest nations of Germany.
For these reasons, Caesar resolved to pass the Rhene: but to carry his Army
over by boat, was neither safe, nor for the majesty of the people of Rome.
And albeit it seemed a matter of great difficulty, by reason of the breadth,
swiftnes, and depth of the river, to make a bridge; yet he resolved to try
what he could do, otherwise he determined not to pass over at all: and so he
built a bridge after this manner.

At two foot distance, he placed two trees of a foot and half square,
sharpened at the lower end, and cut answerable to the depth of the river: these
he let down into the water with engines, and drove them in with commanders,
not perpendicularly, after the fashion of a pile, but gable wise and bending
with the course of the water: opposite unto these he placed two other trees,
joined together after the same fashion, being 40 foot distant from the former,
by the dimension between their lower parts in the bottom of the water, and
reclining against the course of the river: these two pair of couples thus
placed, he joined together with a beam of two foot square, equal to the
distance between the said couples, and fastened them at each end on either
side of the couples, with braces and pins: whereby the strength of the work,
and nature of the frame was such, that the greater the violence of the stream
was, and the faster it fell upon the timber work, the stronger the bridge was
united in the couplings and iointes. In like manner, he proceeded with couples,
and beams, until the work was brought unto the other side of the river: and
then he laid straight planks from beam to beam, and covered them with
hurdles; and so he made a floor to the bridge. Moreover, on the lower side of
the bridge, he drove down supporters, which being fastened to the timber
work, did strengthen the bridge against the force of the water; and on the
upper side of the bridge, at a reasonable distance, he placed piles to hinder
the force of trees or boats, or what else the enemy might cast down to
trouble the work: within ten days, that the timber began to be cut down and
carried, the work was ended, and the Army transported. Caesar, leaving a
strong garrison at either end of the bridge, went into the confines of the
Sicambri.

OBSERVATIONS.
IT shall not be amiss, to enter a little into the consideration of this
bridge; as well in regard of the ingenious Architecture thereof, as also that we
may somewhat imitate Caesar, whom we may observe to insist with as great plenty
of wit and eloquence, in presenting unto us the subtilty of his invention in
such manner of handy works, as upon any other part of his actions; as this
particular description of the bridge, may sufficiently witness: besides the
fortifications at Alesia, and the intrenchments in Britanie, for the safety of
his shipping, with many other works, which he might well record, as the
greatest dessignes of an heroic spirit, and the wonderful effects of
magnanimous industry; that succeeding ages might not boast either of Art or
prowes, which his virtue had not expressed; or otherwise might wonder at that
worth, which they themselves could not attain unto: And to that purpose he
entertained Virtuuius, the father of architecture, and as worthily to be
imitated in that faculty, as his master Caesar is in feats of arms. By
whose example a great commander may learn how much it imports the eternity
of his fame, to beautify his greatest dessignes with art; and to esteem of
such as are able to entreat the Mathematical muses, to show themselves under
the shape of a sensible form; which albeit through the rudeness of the
matter, fall far short of the truth of their intellectual nature, yet their
beauty expresses such a majesty of Art, that no time will suffer the
memory thereof to perish.

The workmanship of this bridge consisted chiefly in the oblique situation of
the double posts, whereof the first order bending with the stream, and the
lower rank against the stream, when they came to be coupled together with
overthwart beams, which were fastened in the couplings with braces, which he
names Fibulas; the more violent the stream fell upon the work, the faster
the iointes of the building were united, as may better appear by a model of
that making, then can be expressed by any circumstance of words.

I might hence take occasion to speak of the diversity of bridges, and of the
practices which antiquity has devised to transport Armies over rivers: but
inasmuch as it is a common subject for all that undertake this military task,
and has been handled by Lipsius, Lib. de Machi.
upon the occasion of this bridge; I will refer the reader to that place; and
only note the singular disposition of this action, in as much as Caesar made
the means correspondent to that end which he intended. For considering that
the chiefest end of his passage was, to let the Germans understand, that the
power of the Roman Empire was not bou^ded with the Rhene; and that a river
could not so separate their Territories, but that they were able to join both
the continents together, and make a common road way, where it seemed most
impassable: he thought it best to pass over his Army by a bridge, that so the
Germans might know the power of his forces, and also conceit their Territories,
as united unto Gallia; or to be united at the pleasure of the Romans, with a
firm Isthmus and plain passage by foot, which in times past had always been
separated by a mighty river. Neither would a transportation by boat have
wrought that effect, for as much as the daily use thereof was so familiar to
the Germans, that it nothing altered their imagination, of an inaccessible
passage: but when they saw so strange a thing attempted, and so suddenly
performed, they would easily understand, that they were not so far off, but
that they might be overtaken; and so direct their demeanor accordingly.

Let this suffice therefore to prove, that a passage over a river by a bridge,
is more honorable, safe, and of greater terror to the enemy, then any other
way that can be devised; especially if the river carry any depth, such as the
Rhene is otherwise, if it have either shallowes or foordes, whereby men may
wade over, without any great incombrance, it were but lost labor to stand
about a bridge; but rather to think of it, as of a place incombred with such
hindrances, as men often meet with in a march.

CHAP. VII.
Caesar takes revenge upon the Sicambri: gives liberty to the Vbij; and
returns again into Gallia.

THE Sicambri, Caesar.
understanding that Caesar was making a bridge over the Rhene, prepared
themselves to fly; and at the persuasion of the Vsipetes, forsook their
country, and conuaied selves and their possessions into woods, and solitary
desartes. Caesar continuing a few days in their quarters, having set on fire
their villages and houses, and burned up their corn and provision; he came to
the Vbij, promising them aid against the Sueui: by whom he understood, that
as soon as the Sueui had intelligence, that he went about to make a bridge,
calling a council according to their manner, they sent unto all quarters of
their state, that they should forsake their towns, and carry their wives and
children, and all that they had, into the woods: and that all that were able to
bear Arms, should make head in one place, which they appointed to be the
midst of their country, and there they attended the coming of the Romans,
and were resolved in that place to give them battle. Which when Caesar
understood, having ended all those things, in regard whereof he came into
Germany, which was chiefly to terrify the Germans, to be revenged upon the
Sicambri, to set the Vbij at liberty; having spent in all 18 days beyond the
Rhene, as well in regard of his own honor, and the good of the commonweal:
he returned into Gallia, and brake up the bridge.

CHAP. VIII.
Caesar thinks of a voyage into Britanie: he enquireth of merchants,
concerning the nature of that people.

ALTHOUGH the summer was almost spent, Caesar.
and that in those parts the winter hasteneth on a pace, inasmuch as all
Gallia inclines to the North; notwithstanding he resolved to go over into
Britanie; forasmuch as he understood, that in all the former wars of Gallia,
the enemy had received most of their supply from thence. And although the time
of the year would not suffer him to finish that war; yet he thought it would
be to good purpose, if he went only to view the Island, to understand the
quality of the inhabitants, and to know their coast, their ports, and their
landing places; whereof the Galls were altogether ignorant: for seldom any
man, but merchants, did travel unto them. Neither was there any thing
discovered but the seacoast, and those regions which were opposite unto
Gallia: And therefore calling merchants together from all quarters, he neither
could understand of what quantity the Island was, what nations, or of what
power they were that inhabited it; what use or experience of war they had;
what laws or customs they used; nor what havens they had to receive a navy
of great shipping.

OBSERVATIONS.
AS the Germans had oftentimes stirred up motions of rebellion amongst the
Galls, by sending their superfluous multitudes into their kingdom; so the
Britains had vpheld most of their wars, by furnishing them with such
supplies, as from time to time they stood in need of. So that if Caesar, or
the Roman people, would rest secure of their quiet and peaceable government in
Gallia, as they had chastised the insolency of the Germans, and sent them
back again, with greater loss then gain; so was it necessary to make the
Britains know, that their assistance in the war of Gallia would draw more
businesses upon them, then they were well able to manage. For as I have noted
in my former discourses, the causes of an unpeaceable government are as well
external and foreign, as internal and bred in the body; which need the
help of a Physician, to continue the body in a perfect state of health, and
require as great a diligence to qualify their malicious operations, as any
internal sickness whatsoever.

In the second Commentary, I briefly touched the commodity of good
discovery; but because it is a matter of great consequence, in the fortunate
carriage of a war, I will once again by this example of Caesar, remember a
General not to be negligent in this duty. Suetonius in the life of our Caesar
reports, that he never undertook any expedition, but he first received true
intelligence of the particular site, and nature of the country, as also of the
manners and quality of the people; and that he would not undertake the voyage
into Britanie, until he had made perfect discovery by himself, of the
magnitude and situation of the Island. Which Suetonius might understand by this
first voyage, which Caesar would needs undertake in the latter end of a
summer, although it were as he himself says, but to discover.

It is recorded by ancient writers, that those demigods that governed the
world in their time, gave great honor to the exercise of hunting, as the
perfect image of war in the resemblance of all parts, and namely in the
discovery and knowledge of a country; without which all enterprises, either of
sport in hunting, or earnest in wars were frivolous and of no effect. And
therefore Zenophon in the life of Cyrus, shows that his expedition against
the king of Armenia, was nothing but a repetition of such sportes, as he had
used in hunting. Howsoever, if the infinite examples registered in history, how
by the dexterity of some leaders it has gained great victories, and through
the negligence of others, irrecouerable overthrows; are not sufficient motives
to persuade the^ to this duty: let their own experience in matters of small
moment, manifest the weakness of their proceedings, when they are ignorant of
the chiefest circumstances of the matter they have in hand. But let this
suffice in the second place, to prove the necessity of good discovery; and
let us learn of Caesar, what is principally to be inquired after in the
discovery of an unknown country; as first the quantity of the land:
secondly, what nations inhabit it: thirdly, their use of war: fourthly,
their civil government: and lastly, what havens they had to receive a navy of
great shipping. All which circumstances are such principal Arteries in the
body of a state, that the discovery of any one of these demaundes would have
given great light, concerning the motion of the whole body.

CHAP. IX.
Caesar sends C. Volusenus, to discover the coast of Britanie; and prepares
himself for that voyage.

CAESAR sent out Caius Volusenus, Caesar. Teroanne, or Monstrell.
with a gallie to discover what he could concerning these things; and to
return again unto him very speedely: he himself marched in the mean time,
with all his forces, unto the Morini; forasmuch as from thence lay the
shortest cut into Britanie. Thither he commanded that ships should be brought
from all the maritimate cities of that quarter, and namely that fleet, which
he had built the year before for the war at Vannes. In the mean time his
resolution being known, and carried into Britanie by merchants and others,
many private states of that Island sent ambassadors unto him, promising him
hostages of their loialtie, and signifying their readiness to submit
themselves to the Roman Empire. To these he made liberal promises, exhorting
them to continue in that obedience; and so sent them back again: And with
them he sent Comius, whom he had made king of Arras, whose wisdom and virtue
he held in good account, and knew it to be of great authority in those
Regions: to him he gave in charge to go to as many of the states as he could,
and persuade them to accept of the friendship of the Roman Empire, and that
Caesar himself would presently follow after.

Volusenus, having taken what view of the country he could; for he durst not go
on shore to commit himself to the barbarism of the enemy; after five days
returned to Caesar: and while he stayed in those places for the furnishing of
his fleet, the Morini sent messengers unto him, excusing their former faults,
and manifesting their readiness to obey his mandates. Caesar not willing to
leave any enemy behind him, or to neglect his voyage into Britanie, for such
small matters; he willingly accepted of their submission, having first
received many hostages of them, and having made ready eighty ships of
burden, which he thought sufficient to transport two legions, he divided the
Galleies to the Questor, the Legates and the commanders of the horse. There
were also eighteen ships of burden more, which lay windbound at a port
eight miles off, and them he appointed for the horsemen: the rest of the Army
he committed to Q. Titurius Sabinus, and L. Arunculeius Cotta, commanding them
to go to the confines of the Menapij: and appointed P. Sulp. Rufus, a Legate,
to keep the port, with a sufficient garrizon.

CHAP. X.
Caesar saileth into Britanie, and landeth his men.

THESE things being thus dispatched: having a good wind in the third watch,
Caesar.
he put out to sea, commanding his horsemen to imbarke themselves at the further
port, which was but slowly performed: he himself arrived upon the coast
about the fourth hour of the day, where he found all the cliftes possessed
with the forces of the enemy. The nature of the place was such, that the hills
lay so steep over the sea, that a weapon might easily be cast, from the
higher, ground upon the lower shore: and therefore he thought it no fit landing
place; notwithstanding he cast anchor until the rest of the navy were come up
unto him. In the mean time* calling a council of the Legates and Tribunes, he
declared unto them what aduertisements he had received by Volusenus, and told
them what he would have done; and withal admonished them that the course of
military affairs, and especially sea matters, that had so sudden and an
unconstant motion, required all things to be done at a beck, and in due time.
The Council being dismissed, having both wind and tide with him, he waighed
anchor, and sailed eight miles from that place, unto a plain and open shore.
The Britains perceiving the Romans determination, sent their horse and
chariots before, and the rest of their forces followed after, to the place
where the Romans intended to land. Caesar found it exceeding difficult to land
his men, for these respects: the ships were so great, that they could not be
brought near unto the shore: the soldiers in strange and unknown places,
having their hands laden with great and heavy weapons, were at one instant to
go out of the ship, to withstand the force of the billow, and to fight with
the enemy; whereas the Britains either standing upon the shore, or making
short sallies into the water, did boldly cast their weapons in known and
frequented places, and managed their horses as accustomed to such services.

The Romans being terrified with these things, and altogether unskillful of
this kind of fight, did use the same courage, as they were wont to do in
land services: which when Caesar perceived, he caused the Galleies, that were
both strange to the Britains, and readier for use, to be removed from the
ships of burden, and to be rowed up and down, and laid against the open
side of the enemy; that from thence with slinges, engines and arrows, the
enemy might be beaten up from the water side; which stood the Romans in good
steed: for the Britains, being troubled with the strangeness of the
Galleies, the motion of their Oars; and the unusual kind of engines; were
somewhat dismayed, and began to retire back, and give way to the Romans: but
the soldiers still lingering, and especially for fear of the depth of the sea,
the Eagle-bearer of the tenth legion desiring the Gods, that it might fall out
happily to the legion: If you will (says he) forsake your Eagle, O ye
soldiers, and betraie it to the enemy, for mine own part I will do my duty
both to the common weal, and to my Imperator, and having spoken this, with a
loud voice, he cast himself into the sea, and carried the Eagle toward the
enemy; the Romans exhorting one another, not to suffer such a dishonor to be
committed, they all leaped out of the ship: which when others that were near
at hand perceived, they followed them with as great alacrity, and pressed
toward the enemy to encounter with them. The fight on both parts was very
eager, the Romans not being able to keep any order of battle, nor to get
any firm footing, nor to follow their ensigns, forasmuch as every man kept
with those ensigns, which he first met withal, were wonderfully troubled: But
the enemy acquainted with the flats and shallowes, as they beheld them from the
shore to come single out of their ships, putting spurs to their horse, would
set upon them incombred and unprepared, and many of them would ouerlay a few;
others would get the advantage of the open side, and cast their weapons amongst
the thickest troops of them: which when Caesar perceived, he caused the
shipboates and smaller vessels to be manned with soldiers, and where he saw
need of help, he sent them to rescue such as were ouercharged. As soon as
the Romans got footing on the firm land, they made head together and charged
the enemy, and so put them to flight; but they were not able to follow them,
nor take the Island at that time, for want of horsemen, which thing was only
wanting to Caesar's fortune.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
Upon this circumstance of landing, I may justly take occasion to handle that
controversy, which has been often debated by our English Captains, which
is, whether it be better in question of an invasion, and in the absence of our
shipping, to oppose an enemy at his landing upon our coast; or quietly to
suffer him to set his men on shore, and retire our forces into some inland
place, and there attend to give him battle? It seems that such as first set
this question on foot, and were of an opinion, that we ought not by any means
to encounter an enemy at his landing; for so we might much endanger our selves
and our country; did ground themselves upon the authority of Monsieur de
Langey, not observing the difference between an Island and a continent. For
where he sets down that position, he plainly aims at such Princes, as
border one upon an other in the same continent: but where their territories are
disioyned by so great a bar as the Ocean, and have not such means to
supprise one an other, it were mere folly to hold good that rule, as shall
better appear by the sequel of this discourse. Wherein I will first lay
down the reasons, that may be urged to prove it unsafe to oppose an enemy at
his landing, not as being urged by that party; for I never heard any probable
motive from them which might induce any such opinion, but set down by such as
have looked into the controversies, both with experience and good judgment.

And first, it may be objected, that it is a hard matter to resist an enemy at
his landing, as well in regard of the uncertainty of place, as of time: for
being ignorant in what place he will attempt a landing, we must either
defend all places of access, or our intentions will prove mere frivolous; and
to perform that, it is requisite that our defensive forces be sufficient,
according to the particular quality of every place subject to danger: which
considering the large extension of our maritimate parts, and the many landing
places on our coast, will require a greater number of men, then this Island
can afford. And although it could furnish such a competent number, as might
seem in some sort sufficient; yet the uncertainty of the time of the enemies
arrival, would require that they should be lodged, either upon or near the
places of danger, many days at least, if not many weeks, before the instant
of their attempt, which would exhaust a greater mass of treasure, then could
be well affoorded by the state.

Secondly, it may be objected, that all our landing places are of such
disadvantage, for the defendantes; that it were no safety at all to make head
against him at the landing: for in as much as such places are open and plain,
they yield no commodity to shelter the defendantes from the fury of the
artillery, wherewith the enemy will plentifully furnish their long boats and
landing vessailes; which beating upon the beach (for most of our landing places
are of that quality) will so scatter them, that no man shall be able to endure
the inconvenience thereof.

The third objection may arise from the disparitie both of numbers, and
condition of the forces of either party: for the first it must needs be
granted, that the defendantes being to guard so many places at once, cannot
furnish such numbers to every particular place for defense, as the assailants
may for offense. Concerning the quality of the forces, it is without question,
that a great and potent Prince, (for such a one it must be, that undertakes
to invade the territories of so absolute and well obeyed a Princess as her
Majesty is) would draw out the flower of his solderie wheresoever; besides
the gallant troops of voluntaries, which do commonly attend such services. Now
these being thus qualified, and drawn into one head, and being to make as it
were but one body: how can it be reasonably imagined (the time and place of
their attempt being uncertain) that the defendants should equal them with
forces of like virtue and experience?

These are the reasons, which may be drawn from the disadvantage, which they
have that go about to oppose an enemy at his landing: the rest that have been
urged, by such as maintain this opinion, are either impertinent to the
question, or taken altogether from false grounds. But before I proceed to the
answer of these reasons, I will lay this down for a principle. That it is
impossible for any foreign Prince how puissant soever, to make such a
preparation as shall be fitting to invade a state so populous, and respective of
their soueragine, (notwithstanding the pretenses devised to dissemble the same)
but it must of necessity be discovered, before it can be made able to put any
thing in execution: which I might enlarge by particularizing the infinite
equipage, which is required for so great a fleet. But I will rest my self in
the example of the year 88. which proves the discovery of the pretended
invasion, before it could come to execution.

Concerning therefore the first objection: it cannot indeed be denied, but the
place of the enemies landing will be doubtful, Answer to the first objection.
and therefore our care must generally extend it self to all places of
access: but that our defensive forces are not sufficient in a competent manner
to guard all such places, according as the necessity of them shall require,
that is the point in question. To prove that our forces are sufficient: we
must necessarily enter into particularities, wherein I will take Kent for a
president, as not altogether unacquainted with the state thereof; which, if I
deceive not my self, is a shore of as large extension upon the maritimate
parts, as any other within this kingdom, for the breadth thereof enlarging it
self from the point of Nesse by Lyd, which is the uttermost skirt upon the
coast of Sussex, unto Margate upon the coast of Essex; is by computation about
twenty four miles: but notwithstanding this large circuit, who knows not
that the sixth part thereof is not subject to the landing of such an enemy, as
we speak of, partly in regard of the hugeness of the cliffes, which do
enclose a great part of that skirt; and partly in regard that much of that
quantity, which may be landed upon, has such eminent and difficult places
near adjoining, as an army that should put it self there on shore, should
find it self being opposed but by a small force, so straitened, as they would
not easily find a way out, without apparent ruin of their whole forces.
Further it cannot be denied, but that generally along the coast of Kent, there
are so many rocks, shelues, flats, and other impediments, that a navy of great
ships can have no commodity to anchor near the shore: and for the most part
the coast lies so open to the weather, that the least gale of wind will put
them from their Anchor: all which particularities duly considered, it will
appear that this large skirt of Kent will afford a far lesser part fit for
the landing of an army, then was thought of at the first. And were it that so
public a treatise as this is, would admit with good discretion such an exact
relation, as falls within my knowledge concerning this point, I would
undertake to make it so evident, by the particular description both of the
number, quantity and quality of the places themselves; as no man of an
indifferent judgment would imagine our forces to be insufficient, to afford
every of them such a safe and sure guard, as shall be thought requisite for
the same. But forasmuch as it is unfitting to give such particular satisfaction
in this public discourse, give me leave, submitting my self always to better
judgments, to give a general taste of that means as would secure all
places, with a competent number of men.

Having showed you before the circuit of the maritimat parts of Kent, I would
observe this order: first, to make a triple division of all such forces, as
shall be appointed for this service; as for example, I will suppose the number
to be 12000 of which I would lodge 3000. about the point of Nesse, and 3000.
about Margate, and 6000. about Foulkston, which I take to be as it were the
center: for my greatest care should be so to dispose of them, as they might not
only succor one an other in the same shire, but as every shire bordereth one
upon an other; so they should mutually give help one unto an other, as
occasion should be offered: as if the enemy should attempt a landing about
Nesse, not only the 6000. lodged as before, should march to their succors,
but such also of the Sussex forces as were near unto that part; and so
likewise of the rest: by which you may see how great a force would in few
hours be assembled, for the renforcing of any of these out skirts; and the
rather, forasmuch as the one half of the whole forces are thus lodged in the
center of the shire, which is nearer to all parts then any other place
whatsoever. There would also in the quartering of them, an especial care be
had to the places of danger, as might be answerable to the importance
thereof: for my meaning is not to lodge them close together, but to stretch
them out along the coast by regiments and companies, as the country might
afford best opportunity, to entertain them.

Now concerning the latter part of this objection, which urges the uncertainty
of time, when the enemy shall make his approches: I hold it most requisite
that our defensive forces should be drawn into a head, before the enemy
should be discovered near our coast ready to put himself on shore: for it
were a gross absurdity to imagine, that companies could upon such a sudden
be assembled, without confusion; and make so long a march, with such
expedition, as the necessity of the occasion would require. Now for that
husbanding respect of her Majesty's coffers, which is urged to such extremity,
as it would be unsupportable for this state to bear: as I doubt not but good
intelligence would much qualify that supposed immoderate expense; so I assure
my self, that men of sound judgment, will deem it much out of season to
dispute about unnecessary thrift, when the whole kingdom is brought in
question of being made subject to a stranger: Vt iugulent homines surgunt de
nocte latrones,
Non expergesceris, vt te ipsum serves?
the enemy (peradventure) has kept 30000. men in pay 2. months before, to
make havoc of our country, and to bring us into perpetual thraldom; shall
we think it much to maintain sufficient forces upon our coast, to assure our
selves, that no such enemy shall enter into our country? the extremity of this
charge would be qualified by our good espiall, which would proportion our
attendance, with the necessity which is imposed upon us to be careful in
businesses of this nature. Let this suffice therefore to prove, that our forces
are sufficient to keep the sea cost; and that the uncertainty of time, when
the enemy will make his attempts, ought not to hinder us from performing that
duty, which the care and respect of our Prince and country imposes upon
every good subject, which is the substance of the first reason, which I set
down in the beginning of this discourse.

Now concerning the second reason, which urges the disadvantage of the place,
The answer to the second reason.
in regard of the fury of the enemies artillery. True it is, that such places
as yield the enemy commodity of landing, are for the most part plain and
open, and afford naturally no covert at all. What then? shall a soldiour take
every place as he finds it, and use no art to qualify the disaduantages
thereof? or shall a man forgo the benefit of a place of advantage rather, then
he will relieve with industry the discommoditie of some particular
circumstance? I make no question but an ingenious commander, being in
seasonable time lodged with convenient forces upon any of those places, yea
upon the beach it self, which is unapt to make defensible, as any place
whatsoever; would use such industry as might give sufficient security to his
forces, and ouerwaie the enemy with advantage of place; especially considering
that this age has affoorded such plentiful examples of admirable inventions
in that behalf: but this cannot be done, if our forces do not make head
before the instant of the enemies attempt, that our commanders may have some
time to make ready store of Gabions, handbaskets, with such moveable matter as
shall be thought fit for that service.

Neither let this trouble any man, for I dare avouch it, that if our forces
are not drawn into a head before the enemy be discovered upon the coast,
although we never mean to oppose their landing, but attend them in some
inlande place, to give them battle; our Commanders will be far to seek of
many important circumstances, which are requisite in a matter of that
consequence. And therefore let us have but a reasonable time to bethink our
selves of these necessaries, and we will easily overcome all these
difficulties, and use the benefit of the firm land to repel an enemy,
weakened with the sea, tossed with the billow, troubled with his weapons, with
many other hindrances and discouragementes, which are presented unto him both
from the land and the sea. He that saw the landing of our forces in the Island
of Fiall, in the year 97. can somewhat judge of the difficulty of that matter:
for what with the working of the sea, the steepness of the cliffes, the
troublesomnes of their arms, the soldiors were so incombred, that had not the
enemy been more then a coward, he might well with 200. men have kept us from
entering any part of that Island.

Concerning the third objection, The answer to the third reason.
this briefly shall be sufficient, that we are not so much to regard that
our forces do equal them in number, as to see that they be sufficient for
the nature of the place, to make it good against the enemies landing: for we
know that in places of advantage and difficult access, a small number is able
to oppose a great; and we doubt not but all circumstances duly considered,
we shall proportionablie equal the enemy, both in number and quality of
their forces: always presupposed, that our state shall never be destitute of
sufficient forces trained, and exercised in a competent manner, to defend their
Country from foreign enemies. For the neglect thereof, were to draw on such
as of themselves are but too forward, to make a pray of us; and to make us
unapt, not only to oppose an enemies landing, but to defend our selves from
being ouerrunne, as other nations living in security, without due regard
thereof, have been.

And this much concerning the answer to those three reasons, which seem to
prove that an enemy is not to be resisted at his landing. Now if we do but
look a little into the discommodities, which follow upon the landing of an
enemy, we shall easily discover the dangerousnesse of this opinion: as first,
we give him leave to live upon the spoil of our country, which cannot be
prevented by any wasting, spoiling, or retiring of our provisions, in so
plentiful a country as this is, especially considering that we have no strong
towns at all to repose our selves upon. Whereof we need no further
testimony, then is delivered unto us out of the seventh book of these
Commentaries, in that war, which Caesar had with Vercingetorix.

Secondly obedience, which at other times is willingly given to Princes, is
greatly, weakened at such times; whereby all necessary means to maintain a
war is hardly drawn from the subject. Thirdly, opportunity is given to
malcontents and ill disposed persons, either to make head themselves, or to
fly to the enemy. Fourthly, the madness to adventure a kingdom upon one stroke,
having it in our disposition to do otherwise, with many other disaduantages,
which the opportunity of any such occasion would discover.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THe word imperator, Of the name Imperator.
which the Eagle-bearer attributes to Caesar, was the greatest title that
could be given to a Roman leader: and as Zonaras in his second Tome says,
was never given but upon some great exploite, and after a just victory
obtained; and then in the place where the battle was fought, and the enemy
overthrown, the General was saluted by the name of Imperator, with the
triumphant shoute of the whole army; by which acclamation, the soldiers gave
testimony of his worth; and made it equivalent with the most fortunate
Commanders.

This ceremony was of great antiquity in the Roman Empire, as appears by
many histories, 3. Annal.
and namely by Tacitus, where he says, that Tyberius gave that honor to
Blesus, that he should be saluted Imperator by the legions; which he shows
to be an ancient dignity belonging to great Captains, after they had foiled
the enemy, with an eminent overthrow. For every victory was not sufficient,
whereby they might challenge so great an honor, but there was required (as it
seems) a certain number of the enemies to be slain. Apian in his second
book says, that in old time, the name of Imperator was never taken, but
upon great and admirable exploits: but in his time 10000 of the enemy being
slain in one battle, was a sufficient ground of that honor. Cicero says,
that 2000 slain in the place, especially of Thracians, Phil. 14.
Spaniards or Galls, did worthily merit the name of Imperator. Howsoever it
seems by the same author, that there was a certain number of the enemy
required to be slain, Lib. 2. epist. 9.
where he says, Se insta victoria Imperatorem appellatum.

CHAP. XI.
The Britains make peace with Caesar, but break it again, upon the loss of
the Romain shipping.

THE Britains being overthrown in this battle; Caesar.
as soon as they had recovered their safety by flight, they presently
dispatched messengers to Caesar to entreat for peace, promising hostages and
obedience, in whatsoever he commanded. And with these ambassadors returned
Comius of Arras, whom Caesar had sent before into Britanie. Caesar complained,
that, whereas they sent unto him into Gallia to desire peace, notwithstanding
at his coming they made war against him, without any cause or reason at all;
but excusing it by their ignorance, he commanded hostages to be delivered unto
him: which they presently performed in part; and the rest being to be fet
further off, should likewise be rendered within a short time; in the mean
while, they commanded their people to return to their possessions, and their
Rulers and Princes came out of all quarters to commend themselves and their
states to Caesar. The peace being thus concluded; four days after that Caesar
came into Britanie, the eighteen ships which were appointed for the horsemen,
put out to sea with a gentle wind, and approaching so near the coast of
Britanie, that they were within view of the Roman camp: there arose such a
sudden tempest, that none of them were able to hold their course, but some of
them returned to the port from whence they came; othersome were cast upon the
lower part of the Island, which lies to the West ward; and there casting
anchor took in such seas, that they were forced to commit themselves again to
the sea, and direct their course to the coast of Gallia. The same night it
happened, that the moon being in the full, the tides were very high in those
seas; whereof the Romans being altogether ignorant, both the Galleys which
were drawn up upon the shore were filde with the tide, and the ships of
burden that lay at anchor, were shaken with the tempest, neither was there
any help to be given unto them: so that many of them were rent, and split in
pieces; and the rest lost both their anchors, Gables and other tackling: and by
that means became altogether unserviceable. Whereat the whole army was
exceedingly troubled; for there was no other shipping to recarrie them bcke
again: Neither had they any necessaries to new furnish the old: and every
man knew that they must needs winter in Gallia; for as much as there was no
provision of corn in those places where they were. Which thing being known to
the Princes of Britanie, that were assembled to confer of such things as
Caesar had commanded them to perform, when they understood that the Romans
wanted both their horsemen, shipping, and provision of corn, and coniecturing
of the paucitie of their forces, by the small circuit of their camp; and that
which was more important then all the rest, that Caesar had transported his
soldiers without such necessary cariages, as they used to take with them:
they thought it their best course to rebel, and to keep the Romans from
corn and conuoies of provision, and so prolong the matter, until winter came
on. For they thought that if these were once ouerthrown and cut off from
returning into Gallia, never any man would afterward adventure to bring an army
into Britanie: therefore they conspired again the second time, and conuaied
themselves by stealth out of the camp, and got their men privily out of the
fields, to make head in some convenient place against the Romans.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
COncerning the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and the causes thereof; it has
already been handled in the second book, to which I will add this much, as
may serve to show, how the Romans became so ignorant of the spring tides,
which happen in the full and new of the moon. It is observed by experience,
that the motion of this waterie element is altogether directed by the course of
the moon, wherein she exercises her regency, according as she finds the
matter qualified for her influence. And for as much as all mediterrean seas, and
such gulfes as are enclosed in sinues and bosoms of the earth, are both
abridged of the liberty of their course, and through the smallnes of their
quantity, are not so capable of celestial power; as the Ocean it self: it
consequently follows, that the Tuskane seas, wherewith the Romans were
chiefly acquainted, were not so answerable in effect to the operation of the
moon, as the maine sea, whose bounds are ranged in a more spacious circuit; and
through the plenteous abundance of his parts, better answers the virtue of
the moon. The Ocean therefore being thus obedient to the course of the
celestial bodies, taking her course of flowing from the North, falls with
such a current between the Orcades, and the maine of Noruegia; that she fills
our channel between England and France, with great swelling tides; and makes
her motion more eminent in these quarters, then in any other parts of the
world. And hence it happens, that our river of Thames, lying with her mouth
so ready to receive the tide as it comes, and having withal a plain
leuelled belly, and a very small fresh current, takes the tide as far into the
land, as any other known river of Europe. And for this cause the Romans were
ignorant of the spring tides in the full of the moon.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
SVch as either by their own experience, or otherwise by observation of that
which history records, are acquainted with the government of commonweals,
are not ignorant with what difficulty a nation, that either has long lived in
liberty, or bin governed by co^manders of their own chosing, is made subject to
the yoke of bondage, or reduced under the obedience of a stranger. For as we
are apt by a natural inclination to civil society; so by the same nature we
desire a free disposition of our selves and possessions, as the cheifest end of
the said society. And therefore in the government of a subdued state, what
loss or disadvantage happens to the victor, or how indirectlie soever it
concerns the bond of their thraldom, the captive people behold it as a part
of their adversaries overthrow; and conceive thereupon such spirits, as
answer the greatness of their hope, and sort with the strength of their will,
which always makes that seem easy to be effected which it desires. And
this was the reason, that the Britains altered their resolution of peace, upon
the loss which the Romans had received in their shipping.

CHAP. XII.
Caesar new trimmeth his late shaken navy: the Britains set upon the Romans
as they haruested; but were put off by Caesar.

CAESAR although he had not discovered their determination, yet coniecturing of
the event by the loss of his shipping, and by their delay of giving up
hostages; he provided against all chances: for he brought corn daily out of
the fields into his camp; and took the huls of such ships as were most
dismembered, and with the timber and brass thereof he mended the rest that
were beaten with the tempest, causing other necessaries to be brought out of
Gallia. Which being handeled with the great industry and travel of the
soldiers, he lost only twelve ships, and made the other able to abide the
sea.

While these things were in action, the seventh legion being sent out by
course, to fetch in corn, and little suspecting any motion of war; as part
of the soldiers continued in the field, and the rest went and came between
them and the camp; the station that watched before the gate of the camp, gave
advertisement to Caesar, that the same way which the legion went, there
appeared a greater dust then was usually seen. Caesar suspecting that which in
deed was true, that the Britains were entered into some new resolution, he
took those two cohorts which were in station before the port, commanding other
two to take their place, and the rest to arm themselves, and presently to
follow him, and went that way, where the dust was descried. And when he had
marched some distance from the camp, he saw his men ouercharged with the
enemy, and scarce able to sustain the assault, the legion thronged together
on a heap, and weapons cast from all parts amongst them. For when they had
haruested all other quarters, there remained one piece of corn, whither the
enemy suspected the Romans would at last come; and in the night time conuaied
themselves secretly into the woods, where they continued, until the Romans
were come into the field, and as they saw them disarmed, dispersed and occupied
in reaping; they suddenly set upon them, and slaying some few of them, rowted
the rest and encompassed them about with their horsemen, and chariots. Their
manner of fight with chariots, was first to ride up and down and cast their
weapons, as they saw advantage; and with the terror of their horses and
ratteling of their wheels, to disorder the companies; and when they had wound
themselves between any troops of horse, they forsook their chariots and
fought on foot: in the mean time the guiders of their chariots would drive a
little aside, and so place themselves, that if their masters needed any
help, they might have an easy passage unto them. And thus they performed in
all their fightes, both the nimble motion of horsemen, and the firm stabilitie
of footmen; and were so ready with daily practice, that they could stay in
the decliuitie of a steep hill, and turn short or moderate their going, as it
seemed best unto them; and run along the beam of the coach and rest upon the
yoke, or harness of their horses, and return as speedely again at their
pleasure. The Romans being thus troubled, Caesar came to rescue them in very
good time: for at his coming, the enemy stood still; and the soldiers
gathered their spirits unto them, and began to renew their courage that was
almost spent. Caesar, thinking it an unfit time, either to provoke the enemy,
or to give him battle; he continued a while in the same place: And then
returned with the legions into the camp. While these things were a doing, and
the Romans thus busied; the Britains that were in the field, conuaied
themselves all away.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
BY this we plainly find, that there were usually two cohortes (which
according to the rate of 120 in a maniple, amounted to the number of 720 men)
which kept the day watch before the gate of the camp, and were always in
readiness upon any service. The commodity whereof appears by this accident,
for considering that the advertisement required haste and speedy recourse, it
greatly furthered their rescue to have so many men ready to march forward at
the first motion, that they might give what help they could, until the rest
of their fellows came in.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
THeir manner of fight with chariots, is very particularly described by Caesar,
and needs not to be stood upon any longer: only I observe, that neither in
Gallia, nor any other country of Europe, the use of chariots is never
mentioned: but they have ever been attributed, as a peculiar fight, unto the
eastern countries, as suitable to the plain and level situation of the place,
whereof we find often mention in the scripture: which may serve for an
argument to Geffrey of Monmouth, to prove the Britains descent from Troie in
Asia, where we likewise find mention of such chariots.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THirdly we may observe, the discreet or moderate temper of his valor, and
the means he used to make his soldiers confident in his directions: for
notwithstanding the Britains had exceedingly urged him, to make hazard of a
present revenge; yet finding it an unfit time, (inasmuch as his men had been
somewhat troubled, with the fury of the Britains) he thought it best to
expect some other opportunity. And again, to avoid the inconveniences of a
fearful retrait, he continued a while in the same place, to imbolden his men
with the sight of the enemy. And this manner of proceeding wrought a full
persuasion in his soldiers, that his actions were directed with knowledge, and
with a careful respect of their safety; which gave his me^ resolution when
they were carried upon service, being assured that what service soever they were
employed upon, was most diligently to be performed, as a matter much importing
the fortunate issue of that war: whereas if they had perceived that headstrong
fury, which carries men on with a desire of victory, and never looks into
the means whereby it may be obtained, had directed the course of their
proceedinges, they might with reason have drawn back from such imploiments,
and valewed their safety above the issue of such an enterprise. And hence
arises that confident opinion, which the soldiers have of a good General;
which is a matter of great importance in the course of a war.

CHAP. XIII.
The Britains make head, with their forces; and are beaten by Caesar: his
return into Gallia.

AFTER this; Caesar.
for many days together, there followed such tempests and foul weather, that
both the Romans were constrained to keep their camp, and the Britains were
kept from attempting any thing against them: But in the mean time, they sent
messengers into all quarters, publishing the small number of the Roman forces,
and amplifying the greatness of the booty, and the easy means offered unto
them of perpetual liberty, if they could take the Roman camp. Shortly upon
this, having gathered a great company, both of horse and foot; they came to
the place where the Romans were encamped. Caesar (although he foresaw the event
by that which before had happened, that if the enemy were beaten back, he
would avoid the danger by flight) yet having some 30 horse, which Comius of
Arras had carried with him, at his coming into Britanie; he imbattailed his
legions before his camp; and so gave them battle. The enemy not being able
to bear the assault of the Roman soldiers, turned their backs and fled: the
Romans followed them, as far as they could by running on foot; and after a
great slaughter, with the burning of their towns far and near, they
returned to their camp. The same day the Britains sent messengers to Caesar,
to entreat for peace; whom he commanded to double their number of hostages,
which he commanded to be carried into Gallia. And forasmuch as the Aequinoctium
was at hand; he thought it not safe to put himself to the winter sea, with
such weak shipping: and therefore having got a convenient time, he hoised
sail a little after midnight, and brought all his ships safe unto the
continent. Two of these ships of burden, not being able to reach the same
haven, put in somewhat lower into the land: the soldiers that were in them
being about 300, being set on shore, and marching toward their camp: the
Morini, with whom Caesar at his going into Britany had made peace, in hope of a
booty, first with a few of their men stood about them, commanding them upon
pain of death to lay down their weapons; and as the Romans, by casting
themselves into an Orb, began to make defense, at the noise and clamor
amongst them, there were suddenly gathered together about 6000 of the enemy.
Which thing being known, Caesar sent out all the horsemen to relieve them: in
the mean time the Romans sustained the force of the enemy, and fought
valiantly the space of four hours; and receiving themselves some few wounds,
they slew many of the enemy. After the Roman horsemen came in sight, the
enemy cast away their weapons and fled, and a great number of them fell by
the horsemen.

OBSERVATIONS.
OF all the figures which the Tactici have chosen to make use of in military
affairs; the circle has ever been taken for the fittest, to be applied in
the defensive part, as enclosing with an equal circuit on all parts
whatsoever is contained within the circumference of that Area: and therefore
Geometry terms a circumference a simple line, for as much as if you alter
the site of the parts, and transport one arch into the place of another; the
figure notwithstanding will remain the same, because of the equal bending of
the line, throughout the whole circumference. Which property, as it proves an
uniformity of strength in the whole circuit, so that it cannot be said that
this is the beginning, or this is the end; this is front, or this is flank. So
does that, which Euclide does demonstrate in the 3 of his Elements, concerning
the small affinity between a right line, and a circle (which being drawn to
touch the circumference, does touch it but in a point only) show the greatness
of this strength in regard of any other line, by which it may be broken. Which,
howsoever they seem, as speculatiue qualities, conceived rather by
intellectual discourse, then manifested to sensible apprehension; yet
forasmuch as experience has proved the strength of this figure, in a defensive
part, above any other manner of imbattailing; let us not neglect the knowledge
of these natural properties, which discover the causes of this effect: neither
let us neglect this part of military knowledge, being so strong a means to
maintain valor, and the sinew of all our ability: for order correspondent to
circumstances, is the whole strength and power of an Army. Neither ought there
any action in a well ordered discipline, to be irregular, or void of order:
and therefore the Romans did neither eat nor sleep, without the direction of
the Consul, or chief commander; otherwise their valor might rather have
been termed fury then virtue: but when their courage was ranged with order,
and disposed according to the occurrences of the time; it never failed as long
as the said order continued perfect.

It appears therefore, how important it is for a commander to look into the
diversity of orders for imbattailing, and to weigh the nature thereof; that
he may with knowledge apply them to the quality of any occasion. The Romans
termed this figure Orbis, which signifies a round body both with a concaue,
and a conuex surface: in resemblance whereof, I understand this Orb of men
imbattailed to be so named; which might peradventure consist of five or more or
fewer ranks, enclosing one another after the nature of so many circles,
described about one Center: so that either the midst thereof remained void,
or otherwise contained such cariages, and impediments, as they had with them in
their march. This form of imbattailing was never used, but in great
extremity: for as it was the safest of all other; so it gave suspicion to the
soldiers of exceeding danger, which abated much of their heat in battle, as
will herafter appear by the testimony of Caesar himself, in the fifth
Commentary, upon the occasion which happened unto Sabinus and Cotta.

CHAP. XIIII.
THE next day, Caesar.
Caesar sent Titus Labienus a Legate, with those legions which he had brought
out of Britanie, against the revolted Morini; who having no place of refuge
because their bogs and fens were dried up, where they had sheltered themselves
the year before, they all fell under the power of his mercy. Q. Titurius, and
A. Cotta the Legates, who had led the legions against the Menapij, after they
had wasted their fields, cut up their corn, burned their houses, for the
Menapij were all hid in thick woods; they returned to Caesar: these things
being thus ended, Caesar placed the wintering camps of all his legions amongst
the Belgae; to which place two only of all the cities in Britanie, sent
hostages unto him: the rest neglecting it. These wars being thus ended: upon
the relation of Caesar's letters, the senate decreed a supplication for the
space of 20 days.

OBSERVATIONS.
IN the end of the second Commentary, we read of a supplication granted by
the senate, for 15 days; which was never granted to any man before that time;
since the first building of the city; but forasmuch as in this fourth year of
the wars in Gallia, it was augmented from 15 unto 20 days, I thought it fit
to refer the handling thereof, unto this place. We are therefore to
understand, that whenever a Roman General had carried himself well in the
wars, by gaining a victory, or enlarging the bounds of their Empire; that
then the senate did decree a supplication to the Gods, in the name of that
captain. And this dignity was much sought after, not only because it was a
matter of great honor, that in their names the Temples of their Gods should be
opened, and their victories acknowledged, with the concourse and gratulation of
the Roman people: but also because a supplication was commonly the forerunner
of a triumph, which was the greatest honor in the Roman government: Li. 15.
fami. Cicero.
And therefore Cato names it the prerogative of a triumph. And Liuie in his 26
book says, that it was long disputed on in the senate, how they could deny
one that was there present to triumph, whose absence they had honored, with
supplication, and thanksgiving to the Gods, for things happily effected? The
manner of the Ceremony was; that after the Magistrate had publicly proclaimed
it with this form or style, quod been and faeciliter rempublicam
administrasset; the Roman people clothed in white garments and crowned with
garlands, went to all the temples of the Gods, and there offered sacrifices, to
gratulate the victory in the name of the General. In which time they were
forbidden all other businesses, but that which pertained to this solemnity. It
seems that this time of supplication, was at first included within one or two
days at the most, as appears by Liuie in his third book, where he says,
that the victory gained by two several battles, was spitefully shut up by the
senate in one days supplication: the people of their own accord keeping the
next day holy and celebrating it with greater devotion then the former.

Upon the victory which Camillus had against the Veij, there were granted
four days of supplication; to which there was afterward a day added, which
was the usual time of supplication unto the time that Pompei ended the war,
which they called Mithridaticum; when the usual time of five days was
doubled, and made 10, and in the second of these Commentaries, made 15, and now
brought to 20 days. Which sets forth the incitements and rewards of well
doing, which the Romans propounded both at home and abroad, to such as
endeavored to enlarge their Empire, or manage a charge, to the benefit of their
commonwealths. And thus ends the fourth Commentary.

THE FIFTH COMMENTARY OF THE WAR, WHICH CAESAR MADE IN GALLIA.
THE ARGUMENT.
CAesar caused a great navy to be built in Gallia: he carried 5 legions into
Britany, where he made war with the Britains, on both sides the river Thames:
at his return into Gallia, most of the Galls revolted; and first the Eburones
under the conduction of Ambiorix, set upon the camp of Q. Titurius the Legate,
whom they circumuented by subtilty; and then besieged the camp of Cicero: but
were put by, and their Army overthrown by Caesar.

CHAP. I.
Caesar returns into Gallia: finds there great store of shipping made by
the soldiers, and commands them to be brought to the haven Iccius.

LUCIUS Domitius, Caesar.
and Appius Claudius, being Consuls; Caesar at his going into Italy, gave
order to the Legates to build as many ships that winter, as possibly they
could; commanding them to be built of a lower pitch then those which are used
in the mediterranean sea, for the speedier lading and vnlading of the^, and
because the tides in these seas were very great: and forasmuch as he was to
transport great store of horse, he commanded them to be made flatter in the
bottom them such as were usual in other places, and all of them to be made
for the use of Oars, to which purpose their low building served very
conveniently. Other necessaries and furniture for rigging, he gave order to
have it brought out of Spain. Caesar after the assembly of the states in
Lombardie, and that he set free Illiricum from the incursions of the Pirustae,
he returned into Gallia; where he found 600 ships built, by the extraordinary
industry of the soldiers, notwithstanding the penury and want of all
necessary matter, with 28 Galleys ready furnished, which in a few days might
be lanched: having commended the soldiers and overseers of the work, he
commanded them to be brought to the port called Iccius, from whence he knew the
passage into Britanie, was not above thirty mile over.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis Iccius Portus Floide thinks to be Caleis; others take it to be Saint
Omer, partly in regard of the situation of the place, which being in it self
very low, has notwithstanding very high banks, which incompasse the town
about; and in times past was a very large haven. To this may be added the
distance from this town, to the next continent of the Island of Britany; which
Strabo makes to contain 320 stadia, which agrees to the French computation
of 13 leages. Caesar makes it thirty mile: this is the haven, which Pliny
calls Britannicum portum Morinorum.

CHAP. II.
Caesar saileth into Britanie: landeth his forces, and seeks the enemy.

CAESAR having prepared all things in readiness, Caesar.
he left Labienus in the continent with three legions, and 2000 horse, both to
keep the haven and make provision of corn; and also to observe the motion of
the Galls: and with five legions and the like number of horse, as he left in
the continent, about sunsetting he put out to sea, with a soft south wind,
which continued until midnight; and then ceasing, he was carried with the tide
until the morning, when he perceived that the Island lay on his left hand: and
again, as the tide changed, he labored by rowing to reach that part of the
Island, where he had found good landing the year before: wherein the soldiers
deserved great commendation; for by strength and force of Oars, they made
their great ships of burden to keep way with the Galleies. About high noone,
they arrived in Britanie, with all their ships: neither was there any enemy
seen in that place; but as afterward Caesar understood by the captives, the
Britains were there with a great power; but being terrified with the infinite
number of shipping, which they discovered from the shore (for there were in all
above 800) they forsook the shore, and hid themselves in the vpland country.
Caesar having landed his men, and chosen a convenient place to incampe, as soon
as he understood by the captives where the enemy lay, in the third watch of
the night, he marched toward them; leaving ten cohortes and 300 horse, for a
garizon to his shipping: which he the less feared, because it lay at anchor in
a soft and open shore: he marched that night about 12 mile before he found the
enemy: The Britains sending out their horse, and chariots to a river that ran
between them and the Romans, and having the advantage of the upper ground;
began to hinder the Romans, and to give them battle, but being beaten back
with our horsemen, they conuaied themselves into a wood. The place was strongly
fortified both by art and nature, and made for a defense (as it seems) in
their civil wars: for all the entrances were shut up with great trees, laid
overthwart the passages. And the Britains showed themselves out of the wood
but here and there, not suffering the Romans to enter the fortification: but
the soldiors of the seventh legion, with a Testudo which they made, and a
mount which they raised, took the place and drove them all out of the woods,
without any loss at all; saving some few wounds which they received. But
Caesar forbad his men to follow after them, with any long pursuit, because he
was both ignorant of the place, and a great part of that day being spent, he
would employ the rest thereof in the fortification of his camp.

OBSERVATIONS.
CAesar, having taken what assurance of peace he could with the Galls, both by
carrying the chiefest of their Princes with him, and by leaving three legions
in the continent, to keep the vulgar people in obedience: he embarked al his
men at one place, that they might be all partakers of the same casualties, and
take the benefit of the same adventures, which being neglected the year
before, drew him into many inconveniences for want of horse, which being
embarked at an other haven met with other cha^ces, and saw other fortunes; and
never came to him into Britanie: The place of landing in this second voyage,
was the same where he landed the year before; and by the circumstances of this
history, may agree with that which tradition has delivered of Deal in Kent,
where it is said that Caesar landed. In the first year we find, that he never
removed his camp from the sea shore, where he first seated himself; although
his men went out to bring in corn, as far as they might well return again at
night: but now he entered further into the Island, and within twelve miles
march came unto a river, which must needs be that of Canturbury, which falls
into the sea at Sandwich.

In that he says that the garizon of his shipping consisted of ten cohortes,
which I have said to be a legion: we must understand, that Caesar left not an
entire legion in that garizon; but he took ten cohorts out of his whole
forces, peradventure two out of every legion, and appointed them to take the
charge of his shipping.

CHAP. III.
Caesar returns to his nauies to take order for such losses as had happened
by tempest the night before.

THE next day early in the morning, he divided his forces into 3. companies,
and sent them out to pursue the enemy: Caesar.
but before they had marched any far distance, and came to have the rereward
of the enemy in vewe; there came news from Q. Atrius, with whom he left the
ten cohorts, and the charge of the shipping, that the night before there was
such a tempest at sea, that the whole navy was either sore beaten or cast on
shore; and that neither anchor nor Gable could hold them, nor yet the Sailers
endure the force of the weather; and that there was great loss in the
shipping, by running against one another, in the violence of the tempest. Upon
these news; Caesar caused the legions to be called back again, and to cease
for that time, from following the enemy any further, he himself returned to
the navy, where he found 40. ships lost, and the rest not to be repaired but
with great industry and pains: first therefore he chose shipwrites and
Carpenters out of the legions, and caused others to be sent for out of Gallia;
and writ to Labienus to make ready what shipping he could. And although it
seemed a matter of great difficulty and much labor; yet he thought it best, to
hale up all the ships on shore, and to enclose them within the fortification of
his camp: in this business he spent ten days, without intermission either of
night or day, until he had drawn up the ships, and strongly fortified the
camp; leaving the same garrison which was there before to defend it.

THE OBSERVATION.
WHerein we may behold the true image of undaunted valor, and the horrible
industry (as Tully terms it) which he used to prevent fortune of her stroke
in his business, and comprehend casualties and future contingents, within the
compass of order and the bounds of his own power, being able in ten days
space, to set almost eight hundred ships from the hazard of wind and weather;
and to make his camp the Road for his navy, that so he might rest secure of
a means to return at his pleasure.

CHAP. IIII.
The Britains make Cassiuellaunus general in this war: the Island, and the
manners of the people described.

CAESAR returning to the place from whence he came, Caesar.
found far greater forces of the Britans there assembled, then he left when he
went to the navy. And that by public consent of the Britains, the whole
government of that war was given to Cassiuellaunus, whose kingdom lay divided
from the maritimate states, with the river Thames, beginning at the sea, and
extending it self 80. mile into the Island. This Cassiuellaunus, made
continual war with his neighbor states: but upon the coming of the Romans,
they all forgot their homebred quarrels, and cast the whole government upon
his sholders, as the fittest to direct that war.

The inner part of Britanie is inhabited, by such as memory records to be
borne in the Island; and the maritimate coast by such as came out of Belgia,
either to make incursions or invasions; and after the war was ended, they
continued in the possessions they had gained, and were called by the name of
the cities from whence they came: the country is very populous, and well
inhabited with houses, much like unto them in Gallia. They have great store of
cattle, and use brass for money, or iron ringes waighed at a certain rate.
In the mediterranean parts there is found great quantity of Tyn, and in the
maritimate parts iron: their brass was brought in by other nations. They have
all sorts of trees that they have in Gallia, excepting the fig and the Beech.
Their religion will not suffer them to eat, either Hair, Hen, or Goose;
notwithstanding they have of all sorts, as well for nouelty as variety. The
country is more temperate, and not so cold as Gallia. The Island lies
triangle wise, whereof one side confronteth Gallia, of which side that angle,
wherein Kent is pointed to the East, and the other angle to the South: this
side contains about 500. mile. Another side lies toward Spain and the West,
that way where Ireland lies, being an Island half as big as England; and as
far distant from it as Gallia: in the midway between England and Ireland,
lies an Island called Mona, besides many other smaller Islands, of which some
write that in winter time for 30. days together, they have continual night,
whereof we learned nothing by inquiry, only we found by certain measures of
water, that the nights in England were shorter then in the Continent. The
length of this side, according to the opinion of the inhabitants, contains
700. mile. The third side lies to the North and the open sea, saving that
this angle does somewhat point toward Germany; this side is thought to contain
800. miles: And so the whole Island contains in circuit 2000. miles. Of all the
inhabitants, they of Kent are most courteous and civil; al their country
bordering upon the sea, and little differing from the fashion of Gallia, Most
of the inlande people sow no corn, but live with milk and flesh, clothed with
skins, and having their faces painted with a blew color, to the end they may
seem more terrible in sight: they have the hair of their head long, having al
other parts of their body shaven, saving their upper lip. Their wives are
common to ten or twelve; especially brethren with brethren, and parents with
children; but the children that are borne, are put unto them, unto whom the
mother was first given in marriage.

OBSERVATIONS.
IN the descriptions of the ancient Britains, we may first observe their
pedigree, according to the Haraldry of that time: wherein we must understand
that in those ages, the Ntiaons of the world thought it no small honor, to
derive their descent from a certain beginning, and to make either some of
their Gods, or some man of a famous memory, the father of that progeny, and
founder of their state; that so they might promise a fortunate continuance to
their government, being first laid and established by so powerful a means.
But if this failed, they then bragged of antiquity, and cast all their glory
upon the fertility of their soil, being so strong and fruitful, that it
yielded of it self such a people, as they were: and so we read how the
Athenians, for as much as they were ignorant from whence they came, ware an
Oaken leaf, in token that they were bred of the earth where they dwelled. And
hereupon also grew the controversy, between the Egyptians and the Scythians,
concerning antiquity: wherein the Egyptians seemed to have great advantage,
because of the fertility and heat of their country; whereas the Scythians
inhabited a cold climate, unfruitful and an enemy to generation. Of this sort
were the Britains, that inhabited the mediterranean part of the Island: who not
knowing from whence they came; nor who first brought them thither, satisfied
themselves with that common received opinion, that they were borne and bred of
the earth. The sea coast was possessed by such as came out of the continent and
retained the names of the cities from whence they came, as a memorial of their
progenitors.

The form of the Island is very well described, and measured out, according to
the scale of our modern Geographers. For concerning the difference of
longitude between the Eastern angel of Kent, and the furthest point of
Cornewal, they make it eight degrees; which in a manner iumpeth with Caesar's
dimensuration: the other sides are somewhat longer; and therefore. Tacitus in
the life of Agricola, compares it to a Carpenters Axe, making that side which
bordereth upon France to resemble the Edge; and the other two sides to incline
by little and little, one toward an other; and so make the Island narrower at
the top, according to the form of that instrument. He sets down the whole
compass of the Island, according to the manner of the ancient Geographers, who
by the quantity of the circuit, did usually judge of the content, not
considering that the Area of every figure depends as well of the quantity of
the angle, as the length of the side. Concerning the temperature of Britanie,
in regard of the cold winters in France, we must understand that Britanie has
ever been found of a more temperate constitution, in regard of sharp and
cold winters, then any other country lying under the same parallel: whether
the cause thereof may be imputed to the continual motion of the sea about the
Island, which begets heat, as some have imagined; or to the site thereof, in
regard of other Continents from whence the wind always rises, and carries
with it the nature of the country by which it passes; and so the Island
having no other continent lying North to it, from whence the wind may rise,
but all for the most part upon the South, has no such cold winds to
distemper it, as other parts of Germany, which are under the same parallel; but
the Southern wind, which is so frequent in Britany, te^pereth the air, with a
mild disposition, and so keeps it warm; or whether it be some other unknown
cause, our Philosophers rest unsatisfied. But as touching Gallia, it may be
said, that forasmuch as it bears more to the South, then this Island does,
the air thereof by reason of the continual heat, is of a far purer
disposition; and so pierces more then this grosser air of Britany, and
carries the cold further into the pores; and so seems sharper and of a far
colder disposition.

This Island, which Caesar names Mona, is known at this time by the name of
Man, and lies between Cumberland and Ireland. Ptolemie calls it Monaeda,
Tacitus calls Anglesey by the name of Mona, peradventure from the nomination
of the Britains, who calls it Tyr mon, the land of Mon.

Concerning those places, where the night continues in the midst of winter for
30. days together, they must be sited 6. degrees beyond the circle Articke,
and have a day in summer of like continuance, according to the rules of
Astronomy. In that he found the nights in Britanie shorter then in the
continent, we must understand it to be only in summer: for the more oblique the
horizon is, the more uneven are the portions of the diurnall circles which it
cutteth; and the nearer it comes to a right horizon, the nearer it comes to
an equality of day and night: and hence it happens, that in summer time, the
nights in France are longer then here in England; and in winter shorter. The
like we must understand of all Sotherne and Northern countries.

To conclude, I may not omit the ciuility of the Kentish men, and their
courteous disposition, above the rest of the Britains, which must be imputed to
that ordinary course which brought ciuility unto all other nations: of whom
such as were first seated in their possessions, and entertained society, were
the first that brought in civil conversation, and by little and little were
purified, and so attained to the perfection of civil government. So we find
that first Assirians and Babilonians (as nearest to the mountains of Armenia
where the Arc rested, and people first inhabited) reduced their states into
commonweals, of monarchies of exquisite government, flourishing with all manner
of learning and knowledge; when as yet other countries lay either waste, or
overwhelmed with Barbarism. From thence it flowed into Egypt; out of Egypt
into Greece; out of Greece into Italy; out of Italy into Gallia; and from
thence into England: where our Kentishmen first entertained it, as bordering
upon France; and frequented with merchants of those countries.

CHAP. V.
Diverse skirmishes between the Romans and the Britains.

THE Caualrie of the enemy and their chariots, Caesar.
gaile a sharp conflict to the Roman horsemen, in their march: but so, that
the Romans got the better every way, driving them with great slaughter to the
woods and hills, and loosing also some of their own men, being too venturous
in the pursuit. The Britains after some intermission of time, when the Romans
little thought of them, and were busied in fortifying their ca^pe, came suddenly
out of the woods and charged upon those that kept station before the camp.
Caesar sent out two the thickest cohorts of two legions, to second their
fellows: these two cohortes standing with a small alley between them, the
other that were first charged, being terrified with that strange kind of
fight, boldly brake through the chiefest of the enemy, and so retired in
safety to their fellows. That day Quintus Laberius Durus a Tribune of the
soldiers, was slain; the Britains were repelled with more cohortes, which
Caesar sent to second the former. And for as much as the fight happened in the
vewe of all the camp, it was plainly perceived, that the legionarie soldiors,
being neither able for the weight of their armor, to follow the enemy as he
retired, nor yet daring to go far from his ensign; was not a fit adversary to
contest this kind of enemy: and that the horsemen likewise fought with no less
danger, inasmuch as the enemy would retire back of purpose, and when they had
drawn them a little from the legions, they would then light from their
chariots and encounter the^, with that advantage, which is between a footeman
and a horseman. Furthermore, they never fought thick and close together, but
thin and in great distances, having stations of men to succor one another, to
receive the weary, and to send out fresh supplies.

OBSERVATIONS.
Upon this occasion of their heavy armor, I will describe a legionarie
soldior in his complete furniture, that we may better judge of their manner of
warfare, and understand wherein their greatest strength consisted. And first we
are to learn, that their legionarie soldiors were called Milites grauis
armaturae, soldiors wearing heavy armor, to distinguish them from the
Velites, the Archers, slingers, and other light armed men. Their offensive
arms were, a couple of Piles, or as some will, but one Pile, and a Spanish
sword, short and strong, to strike rather with the point then with the edge.
Their defensive arms were, a helmet, a corslet, and boots of brass, with a
large Target; which in some sort was offensive, in regard of that vmbonem
which stuck out in the midst thereof. The Pile is described at large in the
first book, and the Target in the second: the sword (as Polybius witnesses)
was short, two edged, yerie sharp, and of a strong point: and therefore Liuie
in his 22. Book says, that the Galls used very long swords without
points; but the Romans had short swords, readier for use; these they called
Spanish swords, because they borrowed that fashion from the Spaniarde. The
old Romans were so girt with their swords, as appears by Polybius, and
their monuments in Marble, that from their left shoulder it hung upon their
right thigh, contrary to the use of these times, which as I have noted before,
was in regard of their target, which they carried on their left arm: this
sword was hung with a belt of leather, beset with studs as Varro notes, and
these were their offensive weapons. Lib. 4.


Their Helmet was of brass, Pli. lib. 10.
adorned with three Ostrich feathers of a cubite in length, by which the
soldiour appeared of a large stature, and more terrible to the enemy, as
Polybius says in his 6. book. Their breast plate was either of brass, or
Iron, ioynted together after the manner of scales, or platted with little ringes
of iron: their boots were made of bars of brass, from the foot up to the
knee. And thus were the legionarie soldiers armed, to stand firm rather then
to use any nimble motion, and to combine themselves into a body of that
strength which might not easily recoile, at the opposition of any
confrontment; for agilitie stands indifferent to help either a retreit or a
pursuit, and nimble footed soldiors are as ready to fly back, as to march
forward; but a weighty body keeps a more regular motion, and is not hindered
with a common counterbuffe: so that whenever they came to firm buckeling,
and felt the enemy stand stiff before them, such was their practice, and
exercise in continual works, that they never fainted under any such task; but
the victory went always clear on their side. But if the enemy gave way to
their violence, and came not in but for advantage, and then as speedily
retired, before the counterbuffe were well discharged; then did their
nimblenesse much help their weakness, and frustrate the greatest part of
the Roman discipline. This is also proved in the overthrow of Sabinus and
Cotta, where Ambiorix finding the inconvenience of buckeling at handy blows,
commanded his men to fight a far off; and if they were assaulted, to give
back; and to come on again as they saw occasion: which so wearied out the
Romans, that they all fell under the execution of the Galls. Let this
suffice therefore to show, how unapt the Romans were to fly upon any occasion,
when their armor was such, that it kept them from al starting motions, and
made the^ suitable to the stayed and well assured rules of their discipline,
which were as certain principles in the execution of a standing battle; and
therefore not so fit either for a pursuit, or a flight.

Concerning the unequal combat between a horseman and a footeman, it may be
thought strange, that a footeman should have such an advantage against a
horseman, being ouermatched, at least with a Sextuple proportion both of
strength and agilitie: but we must understand, that as the horse is much
swifter in a long cariere; so in speedy and nimble turning at hand, wherein
the substance of the combat consists, the footeman far exceeds the
horseman in advantage, having a larger mark to hit by the Horse, then the
other has. Besides, the horseman ingageth both his valor, and his fortune in
the good speed of his horse, his wounds and his death do consequently pull
the rider after, his fear or fury makes his master either desperate or
slow of performance, and what defect soever rises from the horse, must be
answered out of the honor of the rider. And surely it seems reasonable, that
what thing soever draws us into the society of so great a hazard, should as
much as is possible, be contained in the compass of our own power. The sword
which we manage with our own hand, affoordeth greater assurance then the
harquebuse, wherein there are many parts belonging to the action, as the
powder, the stone, the spring, and such like; whereof if the least fail of his
part, we likewise fail of our fortune: but how probable soever this seems,
this is certain, that in the course of the Roman wars, the horse were ever
defeated by the foot, as is manifestly proved in the first of these books.

CHAP. VII.
Caesar gives the Britains two several overthrows.

THE next day, the enemy made a stand upon the hills a far off from the camp,
Caesar.
and showed themselves not so often; neither were they so busy with our
horsemen, as they were the day before: but about noone, when Caesar sent out
three legions, and al his Caualry to get forage, under the conduction of the
Caius Trebonius a legate, they made a sudden assault upon the forragers, and
fell in close with the Ensigns, and the legions. The Romans charged very
fiercely upon them, and beat them back; neither did they make an end of
following them, until the horsemen trusting to the succor of the legions
which were behind them, put them all to flight, with the slaughter of a great
number of them; neither did they give them respite either to make head, to make
a stand, or to forsake their chariots. After this overthrow, all their
Auxiliarie forces departed from them; neither did they afterward contend with
the Romans with any great power. Caesar understanding their determination,
carried his army to the river Thames, and so to the confines of Cassiuellaunus,
which river was passable by foot but in one place only, and that very hardly;
at his coming he found a great power of the enemy to be imbattailed on the
other side, and the banck fortified with many sharp stakes, and many other
also were planted covertly under the water. These things being discovered to
the Romans by the Captives and fugitives; Caesar putting his horse before,
caused the legions to follow suddenly after, who notwithstanding they had but
their heads clear above the water, went with that violence, that the enemy
was not able to endure the charge, but left the bancke and betook themselves
to flight.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis attempt of Caesar seems so strange to Brancatio, that he runs into
as strange conclusions, concerning this matter, as first that he that imitateth
Caesar, may doubt of his good fortunes: for his proceeding in this point, was
not directed by any order of war; and that a great commander has nothing
common with other leaders: but especially, he cries out at the baseness of
the Britains, that would suffer themselves so cowardly to be beaten. But if
we look into the circumstances of the action, we shall find both Art and good
direction therein; for being assured by the fugitives, that the river was
passable in that place, and in that place only, he knew that he must either
adventure over there, or leave Cassiuellaunus for an other su^mer, which was a
very strong inducement to urge him to that enterprise. The difficulty whereof
was much relieved by good direction, which consisted of two points, first, by
sending over the horsemen in the front of the legions, who might better endure
the charge of the enemy, then the footmen could, that were up to the neck
in water; and withal, to shelter the footmen from the fury of the enemy.
Secondly, he sent them over with that speed, that they were on the other side
of the water, before the enemy could tell what they attempted: for if he had
lingered in the service, and given the enemy leave to find the advantage which
he had by experience, his men had never bin able to have endured the hazard of
so dangerous a service. It is hard to conjecture at the place, where this
service was performed; for since the building of London bridge, many foordes
have been scoured with the current, and fall of the water, which before that
time carried not such a depth as now they do.

CHAP. VII.
The conclusion of the British war: Caesar returns into Gallia.

CAssiuellaunus having no courage to contend any longer, dismissed his
greatest forces, and retaining only four thousand chariots, observed their
iourneies, keeping the wood countries, and driving men and cattle out of the
fields into the woods, for fear of the Romans; and as their horsemen straied
out either for forage or booty, he sent his chariots out of the woods by
unknown ways, and put their horsemen to great peril: in regard whereof, the
horsemen durst never adventure further then the legions, neither was there any
more spoil done in the country, then that which the legionarie soldiers did
of themselves. In the mean time, the Trinobantes, being almost the greatest
state of all those countries (from whom Mandubratius had fled to Caesar into
Gallia, for that his father Imanuentius holding the kingdom, was slain by
Cassiuellaunus) sent Ambassadors to Caesar, to offer their submission, and to
entreat that Mandubratius might be defended from the oppression of
Cassiuellaunus, and sent unto them to take the kingdom. Caesar having received
from them forty pledges, and corn for his Army, sent Mandubratius unto them.
The Trinobantes, being thus kept from the violence of the soldiers, the
Cenimagni, Seguntiaci, Anacalites, Bibrocassi, yielded themselves to Caesar. By
these he understood, that Cassiuellaunus his town was not far off, fortified
with woods and bogges, and well stored with men and cattle. The Britains call
a town a thick wood, enclosed about with a ditch and a rampire, made for a
place of retrait when they stood in fear of incursions from the borderers.
Thither marched Caesar with his Army, and found it well fortified both by art
and nature: And as he assaulted it in two several places, the enemy unable to
keep it, cast himself out of the town by a back way, and so he took it.
Where he found great store of cattle, and slew many of the Britains.

While these things were a doing, Cassiuellaunus sent messengers into Kent,
wherein there were four seurall kings, Cingetorix, Caruilius, Taximagulus, and
Segonax, them he commanded with all the power they could make, to set upon the
camp where the navy was kept. These kings coming to the place, were
overthrown by a sallie which the Romans made out upon them, many of them
being slain, and Cingetorix taken prisoner. This battle concurring with the
former losses, and especially moved thereunto with the revolt of the forenamed
cities, Cassiuellaunus entreated peace of Caesar by Comius of Arras. Caesar
being determined to winter in the continent, for fear of sudden commotions in
Gallia, and that the summer was now far spent, and might easily be lingered
out, he commanded pledges to be brought unto him, and set down what yearly
tribute the Britains should pay to the Romans: the hostages being taken, he
carried back his Army to the sea, embarked his men and arrived safe with all
his ships upon the coast of Gallia.

THE OBSERVATION.
ANd thus ended the war in Britanie, which affoordeth little matter of
discourse, being indeed but a scambling war, as well in regard of the
Britains themselves, who after they had felt the strength of the Roman
legions, would never adventure to buckle with them in any standing battle, as
also in regard that there were no such towns in Britany as are recorded to
have been in Gallia, which might have given great honor to the war, if there
had been any such to have been besieged, and taken in by Caesar. And although
Tacitus says, that Britanie was rather viewed then subdued by Caesar, being
desirous to draw that honor to his father in law Agricola; yet we find here,
that the Trinobantes, which were more then either the skirt, or the heart of
Britanie, (for our Historians do understand them to have inhabited that part,
which lies as far as Yorkshire and Lancashire) were brought under the Roman
Empire by Caesar: who was the first that ever laid tribute upon Britanie, in
the behalf of the people of Rome; or cast upon them the heavy name of a
subdued people.

TO THE WORTHY KNIGHT SIR ROBERT DRVRIE.
SIR, my purpose was to have concluded these discourses, with the end of the
British war: reserving the latter part of this fifth book, for an entrance
unto such observations, as may be gathered from the sixth and seventh
Commentaries, which I intend to make a second part of this work: but your
desire to see the errors of Sabinus and Cotta discovered, and the famous fight
of Q. Cicero in his wintering camp, has brought them forth somewhat before
their time, annexing that to the first part which was meant for the latter. If
my labor shall be found too weak to deserve well of military dessignes; yet
I think it very well imploide in that it pleases you to give it the reading,
and so rest

Ready to do you service, C. EDMVNDS.

CHAP. VIII.
Caesar disposes his legions into their wintetering camps.

AFTER he had put his ships in harbor, Caesar.
and held a council of the Galls at Either Cambraz, Amiens or S. Quintin
Samarobrina; forasmuch as that year by reason of the drought there was some
scarcity of corn in Gallia; he was constrained to garizon his Army, and to
disperse them into more cities then he had done the years before. And 1 he gave
one legion to Caius Fabius, to be led among the Morini; another to Q. Cicero,
to be carried to the Neruij; another to L. Roscius, to be conducted to the
Essui; a fourth he commanded to winter amongst the men of Rheimes, in the
marches of the Treuiri under T. Labienus; three he placed in Belgia, with whom
he sent Marcus Crassus his Questor, L. Munatius Planus, and C. Trebonius
Legates; he sent one legion, that which he had last enrolled, beyond the river
Po in Italy, with five cohortes, unto the Eburones, the greatest part of whose
country lies between the Maze and the Rhene; with them he sent Q. Titurius
Sabinus, and Lucius Arunculeius Cotta. By distributing his legions in this
manner, he thought to remedy the scarcity of corn; and yet the garrizons of
all these legions, excepting that which Roscius carried into a quiet and
peaceable part, were contained within the space of 100 mile: and until his
legions were settled, and their wintering camps fortified, he determined to
abide in Gallia.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Have heard it oftentimes contradicted by some, that understand not the
weight of a multitude, when it was said, that an Army keeping head continually
in one part of a kingdom, was more burdensome to the commonwealth in regard
of the expense of victuals, then when it was dispersed into particular cities
and families, before the time of the muster and inrolement: for (say they) in
the general account of the public weal, it differs nothing, whether a
multitude of 30000 men be maintained with necessary provisions in one entire
body together, or dispersed particularly throughout every part of the
country: forasmuch as every man has but a competent quantity allotted unto
him, which he cannot want in what sort or condition of life soever he be
ranged; neither does the charge of a multitude grow in regard they are united
together, but in regard they amount to such a multitude wheresoever. But such
as look into the difference with judgment, shall find a marvelous
inequality, both in regard of the portion of victuals which is spent, and the
means whereby it is provided: for first we must understand, that an army
lying continually in one place, falls so heavy upon that part, that it
quickly consumes both the fat and the flesh (as they say) and leaves
nothing unspent, which that part can afford them; and without further supply
of provisions, would in a small time come to utter destruction. This want then
must be relieved by taking from the plenty of other bordering quarters, to
furnish the wants of so great a multitude: wherein there cannot be observed that
proportion of moderate taking, to vittaile the Army with a sufficient
competencie, but the partial respect which the purueiers, and vittailers will
have to their private commodity, will quickly make an inconvenience either in the
country, from whence it is taken; or in the Army, for which it is provided;
according as the error may best advantage their particular, what discipline
soever be established in that behalf. Whereas on the contrary part, when
every particular man of that multitude shall be billeted in a several family,
throughout all parts of the kingdom, the charge will be so insensible, in
regard of the expense of the said families, that the country will never feel
any inconvenience. And if every householder that had received into his house
one of the said army, should give a true account of that which rises above his
ordinary expense; by the addition of one man, it would fall far short of that
treasure, which is necessarily required, to maintain the said number of men
united together into one body. Neither does the difference consist in the
quantity of vittailes, which every man has for his portion, whether they be
dispersed or united; but in the manner of provision, and the means which is
used to maintain them: wherein every master or steward of a family,
endeavors to make his provisions at the best hand, and so to husband it, that
it may serve for competencie, and not for superfluity; and by that means, the
general plenty of the country is maintained, and the commonwealth florisheth
by well directed moderation. But in the victualing of an army, there is no such
respect had, which may any way advantage the public good; for there the gain
of the purueier rises by experience and superfluous wasting, rather then by
thrift and saving frugalitie: and so the commonwealth is weakened by the il
husbanding of that great portion of vittaile, which is allowed for so great a
multitude. And if they should have such variety of viands in an Army, as they
have when they are in several families, it were impossible it should continue
any time together. And therefore the Romans, notwithstanding the exactness of
their discipline, could afford their armies no other provision but corn, and
larde, as well in regard of the commodity which that kind of diet affoorded
them in the course of their wars, as also for the good of that country,
wherein they were resident. And if it so fell out, that the extremity of the
season, or any other cause, had brought a dearth into the land, there was no
readier way to help that inconvenience, then by dispersing their Armies into
diverse quarters; which Caesar disposed with that care, that they might be as
near together as they could.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
COncerning the choice of their soldiers and their manner of inrolement, I had
rather refer the reader to Polybius, then enter into the particular discourse
of that action; which was carried with such gravity and religious ceremonies,
as might best serve to possess their minds of the weight and consequence of
that business: but for as much as the largeness of their Empire, and the
necessity of their occasions would not admit, that the enrolment should still
be made at Rome amongst the citizens, as it appears by this legion which was
enrolled beyond the river Po; it consequently follows, that such Ceremonies,
which were annexed to the place, were altogether omitted: and therefore I
cannot speak of that which the old Romans did in that part of their
discipline, as a thing continued unto Caesar's time. But he that desires to see
the manner of their choice, with such complements as might add both a reverent
respect, and a Majesty to the work; let him read Polybius of that argument.

CHAP. IX.
Ambiorix attempteth to surprise the camp of Sabinus and Cotta; and failing,
practices to take them by guile.

FIFTEEN days after the legions were settled in their wintering camps,
Caesar.
there began a sudden tumult and rebellion by the means of Ambiorix, and
Catiunculus, who, having received Sabinus and Cotta into their confines, and
brought them in corn to the place, where they lay; at the inducement of
Induciomarus of Triers, they stirred up their people to rebellion: and suddenly
surprising those that were gone abroad to get wood, came with a great power to
assault the camp. But when our men had took Arms, and were got up upon the
rampire, and had ouermatched them in a skirmish of horse, which made a sallie
out of the camp upon the Galls: Ambiorix despairing of good success,
withdrew his men from the assault; and then after their manner, they cried unto
us, that some of our company should come and speak with them: for they had
somewhat to discover touching the public state, whereby they hoped all
controversies might be ended. Whereupon Caius Carpineius a Roman horseman, and
one of Titurius his familiar friends, and one Iunius a Spaniard, who diverse
times before had been sent by Caesar to Ambiorix; were sent out to treat with
them. Ambiorix first acknowledged himself much indebted to Caesar; for many
courtesies, in that by his means he was freed from a pension which he paid
to the Aduatici; and for that both his own son, and his brothers son, whom
the Aduatici had held in prison under the name of hostages, were by Caesar
released and sent home again. And touching the assault of the camp, he had
done nothing of himself, but by the impulsion of the state, among whom such
was his condition, that the people had as great authority over him, as he
himself had in regard of the people: who were likewise enforced to this war,
because they could not withstand the sudden insurrection of the Galls, whereof
his small means might be a sufficient argument. For his experience was not so
little, to think himself able with so small a power to overthrow the people
of Rome; but it was a general appointment throughout all Gallia, upon this
day to assault all Caesar's garrizons, to the end that one legion might not
give relief unto another: Galls could not easily deny the request of Galls,
especially when it concerned their public liberty. Now having satisfied that
duty which he owed to his country, he had respect to Caesar and his
benefits, in regard whereof, he admonished them, and prayed Titurius for the
hospitality that had been between them, that he would look to the safety
of himself, and his soldiers. There were a great number of Germans that had
already passed the Rhene, and would be here within two days: and therefore
let them advise themselves, whether they thought it good before the next
borderers perceived it, to depart with their soldiers out of their wintering
places, either to Cicero or Labienus, of who^ the one was not past fifty mile
off; and the other a little further: for his own part, he promised them this
much, and confirmed it by oath, that they should have safe passage through his
territories; for so he should both do a pleasure to his country, in
disburdening it of garrizons, and show himself thankful to Caesar for his
benefits. This speech being ended, Ambiorix departed, and Carpineius and Iunius
made report thereof to the Legates.

OBSERVATIONS.
LEander his counsel, to use the foxes skin where the lions fails, does
show, that the discourse of our reason is sooner corrupted with error, then
the powers of our body are overcome with force. For oftentimes the mind is so
disquieted, with the extremity of perturbation, that neither the apprehension
can take sound instructions, nor the judgment determine of that which is most
for our good: but according as any passion shall happen to reign in our
disposition; so are we carried headlong to the ruin of our fortune, without
sense of error, or mistrust of welsucceeding: where as the body continues
firm in his own strength, and is subject only to a greater weight of power,
by which it may be subdued and overthrown. It behooves us therefore to take
good heed, that our surest hold be not vnfastened by the subtlety of the
fox, when it has continued firm against the force of the Lion: and that the
treachery of the spirit do not disadvantage those means, which either our
own power or opportunity, has gained in our actions. Wherein a commander
cannot have a better rule for his direction, then to beware, that violence of
passion do not hinder the course of sound deliberation: and withal, to be
jealous of whatsoever an enemy shall, either by speech or action, seem to
thrust upon him, how colorable soever the reasons may be, which are alleged
to induce him thereunto. For first, if the mind be not confirmed by the virtue
of her better faculties, to resist the motion of fruitless apprehensions, it
may easily be seduced either by fear or vain imagination, diffident
conceptions or over easy credulity, with many other such disturbing powers,
from that way, which a good discretion and an understanding, free from
passion, would have taken. First therefore I hold it necessary, to have the
consistory of our judgment well settled, with a firm resolution, and with the
presence of the mind, before we enter into deliberation of such things, as
are made happy unto us by good direction. And then this, amongst other
circumstances, will give some help to a good conclusion; when we consider how
improbable it is, that an enemy, whose chiefest care is to weaken his
adversary, and bring him to ruin, should advise him of any thing that may
concern his good; unless the profit, which he himself shall thereby gather,
do far exceed that which the contrary part may expect. I grant that in
civil wars, where there are many friends on either party, and have the
adverse cause as dear unto them as their own; there are oftentimes many
aduertisements given, which proceed from a true and sincere affection, and
may advantage the party whom it concerns, as well in preventing any danger,
as in the furtherance of their cause; and therefore are not altogether to be
neglected, but to be waied by circumstances, and accordingly to be respected;
whereof we have many pregnant examples in the civil wars of France, and
particularly in Monsieur La Nou his discourses: But where there are two Armies,
different in nation, language and humor, contending for that which peculiarly
belongs unto one of them; where care to keep that which is dearest unto
them, possesses the one, and hope of gain stirs up the other; there is
commonly such an universal hatred between them, that they are to look for
small advantage, by aduertisements from the enemy: which if the Romans had
well considered, this subtle Gall had not dispossessed them of their strength,
nor brought them to ruin.

CHAP. X.
The Romans call a council upon this advertisement, and resolve to depart, and
join themselves to some other of the legions.

THE Romans being troubled at the sodainnesse of the matter, Caesar.
albeit those things were spoken by an enemy, yet they thought them no way to
be neglected; but especially it moved them, for that it was incredible that the
Eburones, being base and of no reputation, durst of themselves make war
against the people of Rome: and therefore they propounded the matter in a
council, wherein there grew a great controversy among them: L. Arunculeius
and most of the Tribunes, and Centurions of the first orders, thought it not
good to conclude of any thing rashly, nor to depart out of their wintering
camps, without express commandment from Caesar; forasmuch as they were able
to resist never so great a power, yea even of their Germans, having the
garizons well fortified: an argument whereof was, that they had valiantly
withstood the first assault of the enemy, and given them many wounds. Neither
wanted they any victuals, and before that provision which they had was spent,
there would come succor from other garizons and from Caesar. And to conclude,
what was more dishonorable, or sauored of greater inconstancy, then to consult
of their waightiest affairs, by the advertisement of an enemy? Titurius urged
vehemently to the contrary, that it then would be too late for them to seek
a remedy, when a greater power of the enemy, accompanied with the Germans,
were assembled against them; or when any blow were given to any of the next
wintering camps he: took Caesar to be gone into Italy, for otherwise the
Eburones, would not have come so proudly to the camp. Let them not respect the
author, but the thing it self; the Rhene was not far off, and he knew well
that the overthrow of Ariouistus, and their former victories, were grievous to
the Germans. The Galls were vexed with the contumelies they had received,
being brought in subjection to the Roman Empire, and having lost their former
reputation in deeds of arms. And to conclude, who would imagine that Ambiorix
should enterprise such a matter, without any ground, or certainty thereof? but
howsoever things stood, his counsel was sure, and could bring no harm: for
if there were no worse thing intended, they should but go safely to the next
garizons; or otherwise, if the Galls conspired with the Germans, their only
safety consisted in celeritie. As for the counsel of Cotta, and such as were
of the contrary opinion, what expectation could be had thereof? wherein if
there were not present danger; yet assuredly famine was to be feared by long
siege. The disputation being thus continued on either part, and Cotta with the
Centurions of the first orders, earnestly repugning it; do as please you,
since you will needs have it so, says Sabinus; and that he spoke with a loud
voice, that a great part of the soldiers might well hear him. For I am not he
that most fears death among you, let these be wise: and if any mischance
happen unto them, they shall ask account thereof at thy hands, inasmuch as if
thou would let them, they might join themselves within 2. days to the next
garizons, and with them sustain what chance soever their common destiny
should allot them; and not perish with famine and sword, like a people cast off
and abandoned from their fellows. After these words, they began to rise out
of the council; but hold was laid upon them both; entreatie was made that
they would not obstinately bring all unto a desperate hazard; the matter was
all one whether they went or stayed, so that they all agreed upon one thing;
whereas in disagreeing, there was no likelihood of well doing: the disputation
was prolonged until midnight; at length Cotta yielded, and the sentence of
Sabinus took place. And thereupon it was proclaimed, that they should set
forth by the break of day: the rest of the night was spent in watching, every
soldior sought out what he had to carry with him, and what he should be
constrained to leave behind him of such necessaries, as he had prepared for
winter: all things were disposed in such sort, to make the soldiers believe,
that they could not stay without danger.

OBSERVATIONS.
BY the resolution in this disputation, it appears how little a grave and
wise deliberation avails, when it is impugned with the violence of passion,
according to the truth of my former observation; for the matter was well
reasoned by Cotta, and his positions were grounded upon things certain, and
well known to the whole council: and yet the fear of Sabinus was such, that
it carried the conclusion by such supposed assertions, as the quality of his
passion had ratified for true principles; being grounded altogether upon that
which the enemy had suggested, and not upon any certain knowledge of the
truth: neither is it often seen, when a Council disputes upon matters of
such consequence, that their deliberations are altogether clear from such
troublesome motions, but that it will somewhat incline to the partiality of a
strong affection; so powerful is passion in the government of the soul, and
so interessed in the other faculties. And this is one cause of the uncertainty
of man's judgment, from whence all contrary and different opinions do arise.
Neither is this so strange a matter, that a council of war should so much
vary in case of deliberation, when as many especial points of military
discipline remain yet undecided; having the authority of the great
Commanders of all ages, to ratify the truth on either part; whereof I
could allege many examples. But concerning the issue and event of our
deliberations, what can be more truly said then that of the Poet?

Et male consultis pretium est, prudentia fallax,
Nec fortuna probat causas, sequiturque merentes;
Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine fertur:
Scilicet est aliua quod nos cogatque regatque
Maius, and in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
Notwithstanding, forasmuch as our wisdom is not so subject to fortune, but
that it may comprehend within it self, the good direction of most of the
occurrences, which fall within the course of our business; or if we must
needs miscarrie, yet it somewhat helps our ill fortune to think, that we
went upon best probabilities; it shall not be amiss to set down some rules for
the better directing of a mature consultation. Wherein we are to understand,
that as all our knowledge arises from some of our senses, and our senses
comprehend only particularities, which being carried unto the apprehension,
are disposed into forms and degrees, according as they either concur or
disagree in their several properties: from whence there arise intellectual
notions, and rules of Art; wherein the science of the said particulars
consists: so he that intends to debate a matter, with sound deliberation,
must descend from confused conceptions and a knowledge in general, to the
exact distinction of particular parts, which are the occurrences to be
directed, and the material substance of every action: he therefore that can
give best direction, either by experience, or judicious discourse, concerning
such particularities as are incident to the matter propounded, can best advise
which is the safest way to avoid the opposition of contradicting natures. But
to make this somewhat plainer, I will allege 2. examples: the one modern in
case of consultation; the other ancient, and may seem not so pertinent to this
matter, in regard it is a mere Apology, yet forasmuch as it freely censureth
the quality of particular circumstances, it may give great light to that which
we seek after.

The modern example is taken out of Guicherdin, Lib. 9.
from the wars which Lewis the French King had with the Pope and the
Venetians, concerning the state of Ferrara and the Duchy of Milan: wherein
there arose a controversy among the French captains, whether it were better
to go directly to seek the enemy, who albeit were lodged in a strong and
secure place, yet there was hope, that with the virtue of arms and
importunity of artillery, they might be dislodged and driven to a retreit:
or otherwise, to take the way either of Modina or Bolognia, that so the enemy
for fear of loosing either of those towns, might quit their hold, and by
that means Ferrara should be freed from the war. Monsieur Chaumont the
General of the French, inclined to the former advise: But Triuulce, a man of
great authority and experience, having been an executioner in 18. battles,
reasoned thus in particulars to the contrary. We debate (says he) to go seek
the enemy to fight with him; and I have always heard great captains hold
this as a firm principle: Not to attempt the fortune of a battle, unless
there be either an offer of an especial advantage, or otherwise, compulsion by
necessity. The rules of war give it to the enemy that is the inuader, and
has undertaken the conquest of Ferrar, to seek to assail and charge us; but
to us, to whom it is sufficient to defend our selves, it cannot be but
impertinent to undertake an action, contrary to all direction and discipline of
war. I am of opinion, which is confirmed by evident reason, that there is no
possibility to execute that devise, but to our harms and disadvantage: for we
cannot go to their camp but by the side of a hill, a straight and narrow way,
where all our forces cannot be employed; and yet they with small numbers will
make resistance, having the opportunity of the place favorable to their
virtues: we must march by the rising of a hill, one horse after another;
neither have we any other way to draw our Artillery, our baggage, our carts
and bridges, but by the straight of the hill: and who doubts not but in a
way so narrow and combrous, every artillery, every carte, or every wheel
that shall break, will not stay the Army a whole hour at the least? By which
impediments every contrary accident may put us to disorder. The enemy is
lodged in covert, provided of victuals and forage; and we must incampe all
bare and naked, not carrying with us that which should serve for our necessary
nouriture, but expect the things to come after; which in reason ought to go
with us. To attempt new enterprises, whereof the victory is less certain
then the peril, is contrary to the gravity and reputation of a leader; and
in actions of the war, those enterprises are put to adventure, that are done
by will and not by reason. Many difficulties may compel us to make our aboade
there, two or three days; yea the snowes and raines joined with the extremity
of the season, may suffice to detain us: how shall we then do for victuals
and forrages? What shall we be able to do in the wars, wanting the things
that should give us strength and sustenance? What is he that considers not,
how dangerous it is to go seek the enemy in a strong camp, and to be driven
at one time to fight against them, and against the discommoditie of the place?
If we compel them not to abandon their camp, we cannot but be enforced to
retire; a matter of great difficulty in a country so wholly against us, and
where every little disfavor will turn to our great disadvantage, etc.

And thus proceeded that grave discourse, in the discovery of the particular
occurrences, incident to that enterprise; which being laid open to their
confused judgments, did manifestly point at the great disaduantages, which were
to be undergone, by that attempt.

The other example is of more antiquity, Anal. 6.
taken out of Tacitus, and concerns the araignment of certain senators, for
the friendship that had past between Scianus and them. Amongst whom M.
Terentius thus answered for himself; according as it has of late been
published by translation.

It would be peradventure less behoouefull for my estate to acknowledge, then
to deny the crime I am charged with: but hap what hap may, I will
confess that I have been Seianus friend, and that I desired so to be, and
that after I had obtained his friendship, I was glad of it. I had seen him
joint officer with my father, in the government of the pretorian cohort; and
not long after in managing the city affairs, and matters of war: his
kinsemen and allies were advanced to honor, as every man was inward with
Seianus, so he was graced by Caesar: and contrariwise, such as were not in his
favor, lived in fear, and distressed with poverty. Neither do I allege
any man for an example of this; all of us who were not privy to his last
attempts, with the danger of my only estate I will defend: not Seianus the
Vulsiniensis, but a part of the Claudian and Julian family, which by alliance
he had entered into; thy son in law Caesar, thy companion in the Consulship,
and him, who took upon him thy charge of administering the commonwealth, we
did reverence and honor. It is not our part to judge of him, whom thou do
exalt above the rest, nor for what considerations: to thee the highest
judgment of things the gods have given; and to us the glory of obedience is
left. We look into those things which we see before our eyes, whom thou do
enrich, whom thou do advance to honors, who have greatest power of hurting
or helping, which Seianus to have had, no man will deny. The Princes hidden
thoughts, or if he go about any secret drift, it is not lawful to sound, and
dangerous; neither shall thou in the end reach unto them. Think not only
Lords of the senate, of Seianus last day; but of sixteen years, in which
we did likewise fawn upon and court Satrius, and Pomponius; and to be known
unto his freed men and partners, was reckoned for a high favor. What then?
shall this defense be general, and not distinguished, but a confusion made of
times past, and his latter actions? no, but let it by just bounds and terms
be divided: let the treasons against the common wealth, the intentions of
murdering the Emperor be punished; but as for the friendships, duties,
pleasures and good turns, the same end shall discharge and quit thee, O
Caesar, and us! The constancy of this Oration preualled so much, that his
Accusers were punished with exile. And thus we see how particularities decide
the controversy, and make the way plain to good direction.

CHAP. XI.
The Romans take their journey toward the next legion; and are set upon by
the Galls.

AS soon as the day light appeared, they set forth of their Camp, Caesar.
like men persuaded that the counsel had been given them not by an enemy,
but by Ambiorix an especial friend, with a long tailed march, and as much
baggage as they were able to carry. The Galls understanding of their journey,
by their noise and watching in the night; secretly in the woods some two
miles off laid an Ambuscado, in two several places of advantage, and there
attended the coming of the Romans; and when the greatest part of the troops
were entered into a valley, suddenly they showed themselves on both sides the
vale, pressing hard upon the rerewarde, and hindering the foremost from going
up the hill; and so began to charge upon the Romans in a place of as
great disadvantage for them as could be. Then at length Titurius, as one that
had provided for nothing before hand, began to tremble, ran up and down, and
disposed his cohorts, but so fearfully and after such a fashion, as if all
things had gone against him, as it happens for the most part to such, as are
forced to consult in the instance of execution.

THE OBSERVATION.
IT now plainly appears, by this negligent and ill ordered march, and the
unlooked for encounter which the Galls gave the^, that fear had ratified in
the judgment of Sabinus the smooth suggestion of Ambiorix, with an approbation
of a certain truth; and laid that for a principle, which a discourse free
from passion would have discerned to be but weak, and of no probability:
which so much the more amazed Titurius, by how much his apprehension had erred
from the truth, and betrayed good counsel to a course full of danger; which as
Caesar notes, must needs fall upon such, as are then to seek for direction
when the business requires execution. I have handled already the
inconveniences of disappointment; and therefore at this time will but bring it
only into remembrance, that we may take the greater care to prevent an
accident of that nature: wherein, as the best remedy for an evil is to
foresee it, according to the saying, praeuisa pereunt mala; so the greatest
mischief in an evil, is when it comes unthought of, and besides our
expectation; for then it falls upon us with a supernatural weight, and
affrighteth the mind with a superstitious astonishment, as though the divine
powers had prevented our dessignements, with an irremediable calamity, and cut
off our appointment with a contrary decree: although peradventure the thing it
self carry no such importance, but might be remedied, if we were but prepared
with an opinion, that such a thing might happen. It were no ill counsel
therefore, what resolution soever be taken, to make as full account of that
which may fall out to cross our intentions, as that which is likely to happen
from the direction of our chiefest proiects; and so we shall be sure to have a
present mind in the midst of our occasions, and feel no further danger, then
that which the nature of the thing inforceth.

CHAP. XII.
The Romans cast themselves into an Orb; and are much discouraged.

BUT Cotta, who had before thought that these things might happen by the way,
and for that cause would not be the author of the journey, was not wanting in
any thing that concerned their common safety: for both in calling upon the
soldiers and encouraging them, he executed the place of a Commander; and in
fighting, the duty of a soldiour. And when they found, that by reason of the
length of their troop, they were not able in their own persons to see all
things done, and to give direction in every place; they caused it to be
proclaimed, that they should all forsake their baggage, and cast themselves
into an Orb: which direction, although in such a case be not to be reproved;
yet it fell out ill fauoredlie: for it both abated the courage of the Romans,
and gave the enemy greater encouragement, inasmuch as it seemed that that
course was not taken, but upon a great fear and in extremity of peril.
Moreover, it happened, as it could not otherwise chose, that the soldiers
went from their Ensigns, to take from the cariages such things as were most
dear unto them: and there was nothing heard amongst them but clamours and
weepings. But the Barbarous Galls were not to learn how to carry
themselves: for their Commanders caused it to be proclaimed, that no man
should stir out of his place; for the pray was theirs, and all that the
Romans had laid aparte, was reserved for them: and therefore let them
suppose that al things consisted in the victory. The Romans were equal to the
Galls, both in number of men and valor* and albeit they were destitute of
good Captains, and of good fortune, yet they reposed in their manhood all the
hope of their safety: and as often as any cohort issued out, they failed not to
make a great slaughter of the enemy on that part.

THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
I Have already handeled the nature of an Orb, with such properties as are
incident to a circle; wherein I showed the conueniencie of this figure, in
regard of safe and strong imbattailing: I will now add this much concerning
the use thereof, that as it is the best manner of imbattailing for a defensive
strength, and therefore never used but in extremity; so we must be very
careful, that the sudden betaking of our selves to such a refuge, do not
more dismaie the soldiers, then the advantage of that imbattailing can
benefit them. For unless a leader be careful to keep his men in courage,
that their hearts may be free from despair and amazement, what profit can
there arise from any disposition or body soever, when the particular members
shall be senseless of that duty, which belongs unto them? for order is
nothing but an assistance to courage, giving means to manage our valor with
advantage. In the war of Afric we read, that Caesar's legions being
incircled about with great multitudes of enemies, were forced to make an Orb;
but he quickly turned it to a better use, by advancing the two Cornets two
contrary ways, and so divided the enemy into two parts; and then beat them
back to their great disadvantage.

THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
I Need not stand upon this order which the Galls here took, concerning
pillage, that no soldior should forsake his station, or disranke himself in
hope of spoil; which is a thing that from the very infancy of wars has
often changed the fortune of the day, and sold the honor of a public
victory, for private lucre and petty pilfering. Amongst other examples, Lib. 20
let that which Guichardine reports of the battle of Taro, suffice to warn
a well directed army, as well by the good which Charles the eighth of that
name, King of France, received at that time, as by the loss which the Italians
felt by that disorder, not to seek after pillage until the victory be obtained.

THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
THe insufficiency of these Commanders, whereof Caesar now complains as the
only want, which these Romans had to clear themselves of this danger;
brings to our consideration that which former times have made a question,
which is, whether it were the virtue of the Roman leaders, or the valor of
their soldiers, that enlarged their Empire to that greatness, and made their
people and senate Lords of the world? Polybius waighing the causes of a
victory, which the Carthagineans gained of the Romans, by the counsel and
good direction of one Zantippus a Grecian, having before that time received
diverse overthrows, during the time of those wars in Afric; concluded, that
it was more in the worthiness of the Commanders, then in any extraordinary
virtue of the soldiers, that the Romans achieved so many conquests. And
besides the present example of Zantippus, he confirmed his opinion with the
proceedings of Hanniball; who from the beginning of the second punicke war,
still gained of the Roman Empire, enlarging the territories of Carthage, and
streightening the jurisdiction of mighty Rome, until it had got a leader
matchable to that subtle Carthaginean, and found a Scipio to confront their
Hannibal. To this may be added that SABINVS AND COTTA

famous battle between the old Romans, and the last Latins; wherein both
parties were equally ballaunced, both in number and quality of their soldiers,
having both the same Arms, the same use of their weapons, and the same
discipline, as if it had been in a Civil war: neither could fortune tell by
the presence of their Armies, where to bestow her favor, or where to show
her disdain; but that the worthiness of the Roman leaders brought the odds
in the trial, and made Rome great with the ruin of the Latins. Whereby it
appears, how much it imports the whole fortune of an Army, to have a
leader worthy of the place which he holds: forasmuch as nothing does make a
greater difference of inequality between two equal Armies, then the wisdom
and experience of a grave commander, or the disabilitie of an unskillful
leader; which are so powerful in their several effects, that there is
greater hope of a heard of Hearts led by a Lion, then of so many Lions
conducted by a Heart.

CHAP. XIII.
Ambiorix directs the Galls how they might best fight with advantage, and
frustrate the weapons of Roman soldiers.

THE which thing when Ambiorix perceived; Caesar.
he commanded his men to throw their casting weapons a far off, and keep
themselves from coming near at hand, and where the Romans charged upon them
to give way; and again, as they saw them retire to their ensigns, then to
pursue them. Which commandment was so diligently observed by the Galls, that
as often as any cohort sallied out of the Orb to give an assault, the enemy
gave back as fast as they could; and in the mean time there was no help, but
that part must be left naked and open to the inconvenience of casting weapons;
and again, as they retired to their place, they were circumuented as well by
them that had given place unto them, as by such as stood next about them: And
if they went about to keep their ground, they could neither help themselves
by their manhood; nor standing thick together, avoid the darts that such a
multitude cast upon them: and yet notwithstanding these inconveniences besides
the wounds which they had received, they stood still at their defense, and
having so spent the greatest part of the day (for they had fought eight hours
together) they counted nothing dishonorable or unworthy of themselves.

THE OBSERVATION.
I Have spoken already of the manner of the Roman fight, consisting altogether
in good disposition of imbattailing, and in firm standing, and buckling at
handy-blowes: as may appear by this circumstance, where Ambiorix forbids
his men to buckle with them, but to give back and follow on again, as the
lightness of their Arms gave them opportunity. In like manner in the first
book of the Civil wars, in the battle between Caesar and Affranius, it
appears, that Caesar his soldiers were bound to keep their araie, not to
leave their ensigns, nor without a weighty occasion to forsake their stations
appointed them: whereas the Affranians fought thin, and scattered here and
there; and if they were hard laid unto, they thought it no dishonor to retire
and give back, as they had learned of the Portugals, and other Barbarous
nations.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Romans are overthrown.

THEN T. Baluentius, who the year before had been Primipile of that legion, a
valiant man and of great authority, had both his thighs darted through with a
Iauelin: and Q. Lucanius, of the same order, valiantly fighting to succor his
son, was slain: and L. Cotta the Legate, as he busily encouraged all the
Cohortes and Centuries, was wounded in the mouth with a sling. Titurius moved
with these things, as he beheld Ambiorix a far off encouraging his men, sent
C. Pompeius unto him, to entreat him that he would spare him and his soldiers.
Ambiorix answered, that if he were desirous to treat, he might: for he hoped to
obtain so much of the people, to save the soldiers: but for himself he
should have no harm at all; for the assurance whereof, he gave him his faith.
Titurius imparted the matter to Cotta, who absolutely denied to go to an armed
enemy, and continued resolute in that opinion. Titurius commanded such
Tribunes and Centurions that were present, to follow him; and when he came
near to Ambiorix, being commanded to cast away his arms, he obeyed, and
willed those that were with him, do the same. In the mean time while they
treated of the couditions, and Ambiorix began a solemn protestation of
purpose, Titurius was by little and little encompassed about and slain. Then
according to their custom, they cried victory, and taking up a houling,
charged the Romans with a fresh assault, and routed their troops. There L.
Cotta fighting valiantly was slain, with the most part of the soldiers with
him. The remnant retired into their camp, amongst whom L. Petrosidius the
eagle-bearer, when he saw himself ouercharged with enemies, threw the Eagle
within the rampire, and fighting with a great courage, before the camp was
slain. The rest with much ado endured the assault until night, and in the
night being in despair of all succor slew themselves every man: a few, that
escaped from the battle, came by unknown ways through the woods to Labienus,
and certified him how all things had fallen out.

OBSERVATIONS.
ANd thus have we heard of the greatest loss, that ever fell at any one time
upon Caesar his Army, from the time that he was first Proconsull in Gallia,
unto the end of his dictatorship. For in the two overthrows at Dirrachium, he
lost not above 1000 men, and in that at Gergouia not so many: but here
fifteen cohortes were cut in pieces, which amounted to the number of 7000 men,
or thereabout. Which makes cowardice, and ill direction the more hateful, in
regard that the great victory, which his valor obtained in Pharsalia, cost
him but the lives of two hundredth men. The resolution of such as returned to
the camp, witnesses the exceeding valor of the Roman soldier, if a valiant
leader had had the managing thereof; or if Cotta alone had been absolute
commander, there had been great hope of better fortune in the success: but
here it happened as it commonly does, that where there are many that are equal
sharers in the chief authority, the direction for the most part follows him
that is more violent in opinion then the rest: which being a property rather
of passion then of judicious discourse, forces a consent against the temperat
opposition of a true discerning understanding; and so consequently it falls
out, that one coward, having place and authority in the council, does either
infect or annihilate the sound deliberations of the rest of the leaders: for
his timerousnesse flies always to extremities, making him rash in
consultation, peremptory in opinion, and base in case of peril; all which are
enemies to good direction, and the only instruments of mischieuing fortune.

CHAP. XV.
Ambiorix hastes to besiege Cicero; and stirs up the Aduatici, the Neruij;
and so raises a great power.

AMBIORIX took such spirits unto him upon this victory, that with his
horsemen he went immediately unto the Aduatici, being the next borderers upon
his kingdom, without intermission of night, commanding his footmen to follow
him: The aduatici being stirred up to Commotion, the next day after he came to
the Neruij, exhorting them not to let slip this occasion of taking to
themselves perpetual liberty, and revenging them of the Romans for the wrong
they had received. He told them that two Legates were already slain, and a
great part of the Army overthrown: it was now no great matter, suddenly to
surprise the legion that wintered with Cicero; to the performance whereof, he
offered himself to be their assistant. These remonstrances easily persuaded
the Neruij, and therefore they dispatched speedy messengers to the Centrones,
Grudij and other people under their dominion, and raised verte great forces,
and with them they hasted to the camp where Cicero wintered, before any
inkling of the death of Titurius was brought unto him.

THE OBSERVATION.
THe ambitious and working spirit of Ambiorix, that could attempt to raise the
baseness of a small and ignoble state, to so high a point of resolution, that
they durst adventure upon the Roman legions, being settled in the strength of
their Empire, by the memory of so many victories in Gallia: wanted now no
means to make an ouerture to a universal commotion, propounding liberty and
revenge to the Galls, two the sweetest conditions that can happen to a subdued
people, if they would but stretch out their hands to take it, and follow that
course which his example had proved sure and easy. Which may serve to show,
that he that will attempt upon doubtful and unsafe Principles, will take great
advantage from a probable entrance, and make a small beginning a sufficient
means for his greatest dessignes.

CHAP. XVI.
Cicero defends his camp from the surprise of the Neruij, and prepares
himself against a siege.

IT happened to Cicero also (as it could not otherwise choose) that many of
the soldiers, that were gone into the woods for timber and munition, were cut
off by the sudden approach of the enemies horsemen. These being circumuented,
the Eburones, Neruij, and Aduatici, with all their confederates and clientes,
began to assault the camp. The Romans betook them speedily to their weapons;
and got upon the rampire, with much ado they held out that day: for the
Galls trusted much upon celeritie, hoping if they sped well in that action, to
be victors ever after. Cicero dispatched letters with all speed to Caesar,
promising great rewards to him that should carry them: but all the ways were
so forelaid, that the messengers were taken. In one night there was built in
the camp 120 towers, of such timber as was brought in for fortification, and
whatsoever wanted of the rest of the work, was perfected. The enemy the next
day with a far greater power assaulted the camp, and filled up the ditch:
the Romans made the like defense, as they had done the day before; the like
was continued diverse days after. The Romans made no intermission of their
work at any part of the night, nor gave any rest either to the sick or the
wounded. Whatsoever was needful for the next days assault, was provided in a
readiness the night before; a great number of stakes hardened in the fire were
prepared, and many murall piles were made; the towers were floored in their
stories, Pinacles and Parapets were set up of hurdles: and Cicero himself
being sickly, and of a weak constitution, took not so much leisure as to rest
himself in the night time; so that the soldiers of their own accord compeld
him, by entreaty, to spare himself.

THE OBSERVATION.
THis Q. Cicero is said to be the brother of Marcus Cicero the famous Orator,
and to him were the letters sent which are found in his Epistles, directed
Quincto fratri. In this action his carriage deserved as great reputation, in the
true censure of honor, as ever his brother did for his eloquence, pro Rostris.
And if it had been the others fortune to have performed the like service, he
would have made it the greatest exploit that ever Roman had achieved by arms:
wherein particularly may be commended the diligence and industry, which was
used in raising so many towers, in so small a time; for providing the night
before, such things as were necessary for the next days defense; for making
so many stakes hardened at the end with fire, for the defense of the rampire;
and for the store of these murall piles, which resembled the form of the
ordinary pile, but were far greater and waightier in regard they were to be
cast from the rampire; which gave them such advantage, by reason of the height,
that being cast by a strong and well practiced arm, they were very effectual
and of great terror.

CHAP. XVII.
The Neruij propound the same things to Cicero which Ambiorix had done to
Sabinus; but are rejected.

THEN the Princes and chief commanders of the Neruij, which had any entrance
of speech and cause of acquaintance with Cicero, signified their desire to
speak with him: which being granted, they propounded the same things they had
used to deceive Sabinus; all Gallia was in Arms; the Germans were come over
the Rhene; Caesar and the rest were besieged in their wintering camps; Sabinus
and his men were cut in pieces; notwithstanding they carried this mind to
Cicero, that they refused nothing but their wintering among them, they might
depart in safety whither they would, without disturbance or fear of danger.
Cicero only made this answer: that it was not the custom of the people of
Rome, to take any article or condition from an armed enemy; but if they would
lay their arms aside, let them use his furtherance in the matter, and send
some to negotiat it with Caesar; there was great hope in regard of his justice
and equity, that they should not return unsatisfied.

THE OBSERVATION.
THe first attempt, which Ambiorix made upon the camp of Sabinus and Cotta,
was but short; but here what with the pride of the former victory, and the
great multitude of the assailants, they continued it longer, in hope to carry
it by assault: for the first assault of a place, especially when it comes by
way of surprise, is of greater hope to the assailant, and of greater danger to
the defendant, then such as afterward are made in the sequel of the war: for
after the first brunt, the heat of the enemy is much abated, as well through
the nature of a hot desire, which is most violent in the beginning, and
afterward grows cold and remiss, as also with the harms and peril which
they meet with in the encounter; and on the contrary side, the defendants
having withstood the first fury, wherein there is most terror and distrust,
grow more confident and better assured of their manhood, and in experience of
their strength stand firm against any charge whatsoever.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Neruij besiege Cicero, with a ditch and a rampire, and work means to set
fire on their tents.

THE Neruij disappointed of his hope, carried a ditch and a rampire round about
the camp; the rampire was 11 foot high, and the ditch 15 foot deep; which
they had learned of the Romans, partly by being conversant among them
certain years before, and partly by the prisoners and captives which they had
taken; but they had no iron tools fit for that purpose, but were driven to cut
up turfe with their swords, and gather earth with their hands, and carry it
away with their mantles and gaberdines. Whereby may be gathered, what a
multitude of men there were at the siege; for in less then three hours, they
finished the fortification of fifteen miles in circuit. The days following,
the enemy built towers to the height of the rampire, prepared great hooks and
strong penthouses, or sauegardes of boords and timber, according as the
captives had given them instruction. The seventh day of the siege being a
very windy day, they cast hot bullets of claie out of slinges, and burning
darts upon the cabines of the Romans, which after the manner of the Galls,
were thatched with straw: these cabines were quickly set on fire, which by the
violence of the wind was carried over all the camp; the enemy pressing
forward with a great clamor, as though the victory were already gotten,
began to bring their Turrets and Testudines to the rampire, and to scale it
with ladders. But such was the valor of the Roman soldiers, that albeit they
were scorched on all sides with fire, and ouer-charged with multitude of
weapons, and saw all their wealth burned before their face; yet no man forsook
the rampire, or scarce looked back at that which had happened, but they all
fought valiantly, and with an exceeding courage.

OBSERVATIONS.
THis one example may serve to show the excellency of the Roman discipline,
and the wisdom of the first founders of that Art: for they perceiving that
the fortune of wars consisted chiefelie in the mastering of particular
occurrences, trained their soldiers in that form of discipline, as might
struggle with inconveniences, and strong oppositions of contradicting
accidents; and so ouerwage all difficulties and hindrances, with a constant
perseueration and a courage invincible. For the great attempting spirit of an
ambitious comma^der, that seeks to ouertop the trophes of honor, with the
memory of his exploites, will quickly perish by his own direction, if the
instruments of execution be weaker, then the means which lead him to his
dessignments. For where the weight is greater then the strength, the engine
will sooner break, then lift it up. Let a discreet leader therefore so level
his thoughts, that his resolution may not exceed the ability of his
particular means; but first let him be well assured what his soldiers can do,
before he resolve what he will do: or otherwise, let him so enable them by
discipline and instructions, according to the example of the old Romans, that
their worth may answer the height of his desires and follow his aspiring
mind, with a resolution grounded upon knowledge and valor; and so making
their ability the ground of his dessignes, he shall never fail of means to
perform what he intends. The want of this consideration has, within these
late years, repaide our commanders in many parts of Christendom with loss
and dishonor; when as they measured the humor of their poor needy and
undisciplined soldier, by the garb of their ambitious thoughts, and so laid
such proiects of difficulty, as were very unsuitable in the particularitie of
occurrences to that, which their soldiers were fit to execute.

CHAP. XIX.
The aemulation between two Centurions, Pulfio, and Varenus, with their
fortunes in the encounter.

THERE were in that legion two valiant men, Titus Pulfio, and L. Varenus
Centurions, coming on a pace to the dignity of the first orders: these two
were at continual debate which of them should be preferred one before another,
and every year contended for place of preferment, with much strife and
emulation. Pulfio at a time, that the fortification was very sharply assaulted,
called to Varenus, and asked him why he now stood doubtful? or what other
place he did look for to make trial of his manhood? this is the day (says
he) that shall decide our controversies; and when he had spoken these words,
he went out of the fortification, and where he saw the enemy thickest, he
fiercely set upon the^: then could not Varenus hold himself within the
rampire, but followed after in a reasonable distance. Pulfio cast his pile at
the enemy, and struck one of the multitude through that came running out
against him; he being slain, all cast their weapons at him, giving no respite
or time of retrait: Pulfio had his target struck through, and the dart stuck
fast in his girdle: this chance turned aside his scabberd and hindered his
right hand from pulling out his sword, in which disadvantage the enemy pressed
hard upon him; Varenus came and rescued him: immediately the whole multitude,
thinking Pulfio to be slain with the darte, turned to Varenus, who speedely
betook him to his sword, and came to handy-strokes, and having slain one he
put the rest somewhat back. But as he followed ouerhastely upon them, he fell
down: him did Pulfio rescue, CICERO BESIEGED

being circumuented and in danger; and so both of them having slain many of
the enemy, retired to their camp in safety, to their great honor. Thus
fortune carried as well the contention, as the encounter of them both, that
being enemies, they nevertheless gave help to save each others life, in such
sort, that it was not to be judged which of them deserved greatest honor.

OBSERVATIONS.
CAEsar inserteth this accident of the two Centurions, as worthy to be related
amongst the deeds of arms contained in these comme^taries: wherein we are
first to observe the grounds of this quarrel, which was their continual strife
for place of preferment, which they sought after by showing their valor in
time of danger, and approouing their worth by the greatness of their desert; a
contention worthy the Roman discipline, and may serve for a pattern of true
honor full of courage, accomplished with virtue. For these Simultates, which
desire of honor had cast between them, brought forth emulation which is the
spur of virtue, far from enmity or hateful contention: for the difference
between these two qualities is, that enmity hunteth after destruction, and
only reioiceth in that which brings to our adversary utter ruin, dishonor
or ill atchieuement: but emulation contendeth only by well deserving, to gain
the advantage of an other man's fame, that uses the same means to attain to
the like end; and is always mixed with love, in regard of the affinity of
their affections, and the sympathy of their desires, not seeking the overthrow
of their Competitor, but succouring him in time of danger, and defending him
from foul and unfortunate calamity, that he may still continue to show the
greatness of his worth by the opposition of inferior actions, which are as a
lesser scantling of desert to measure the estimation of the others honor.

A virtue rare and unknown in these days, and would hardly find subjects to
be resident in, if she should offer her help in the course of our affairs, or
sue to be entertained by the crooked dispositio^s of our times: for we can no
sooner conceive the thoughts that breed emulation, but it turns presently to
hatred, which is followed to the uttermost of our malice, and rests better
satisfied with the miserable end of our opposed partner, then with thousand of
Trophes deservedly erected to our honor. Which makes me wonder, when I look
into the difference of these and those ages, whether it were the discipline of
that time, which brought forth such honest effects of virtue, to their glory
and our ignominy, having learned better rules then were known unto them; or
whether the world weakened with age, want strength in these times to bring
forth her creatures in that perfection, as it did in those days; or what
other cause has made our worst affections so violent, and our better faculties
so remiss and negligent, that virtue has no part in us but words of praise,
our whole practice being consecrated to actions of reproach. The injuries,
murders, scandalous cariages of one toward an other, which in these days are
so readily offered, and so impatiently digested, will admit no satisfaction
but private combat, which in the first monarchies was granted only against
strangers, and foreign enemies, as the only objects of arms and wrath, and
capable of that justice, which the private sword should execute: for they
well perceived that these single battles were, as sparkles of civil discord,
and intestine wars; although not so apparent in the general view of their
state, yet as odious in particular, and as dishonorable to good government.
And if there were a true record of such, as have been either slain or
wounded within these forty years, either in this kingdom, or in France, or
in Germany, by this licentious and brutish custom; I make no question, but
they would amount to a number capable of that fearful style, which is
attributed to civil wars.

Neither is there any law how rigorous or hard soever, that can give relief
to this disorder, but the restraint will draw on as great enormities, and as
intolerable in a good government. Rotaris king of the Lumbardes forbade his
subjects this manner of combat; but shortly after, he was constrained to
recall the edict, for the avoiding of greater evils; although he protested the
thing to be both inhumane, and barbarous. The like edict was published in
France by Philip the Fair, but was within two years revoked again, at the
instante request of his subjects, in regard of the murders and assasinats
committed in that kingdom. The only remedy, that I find to take effect in
this case, was that of late time, which the Prince of Melphe in Piemont,
invented to prevent this evil: for perceiving how ordinary quarrels and
bloodshed were in his camp, he assigned a place between two bridges for the
performance of the Duellum, with this charge; that he that had the worst
should always be slain, and cast from the bridge into the water; the
danger joined with dishonor (which by this decree attended such as undertook
private combat) made the soldiers wiser in their carriage, and put an end to
their sedition and civil discordes. But that which is yet worst of all, is
that custom has now made it so familiar, that every trifle seems sufficient
to call the matter to a private combat; a cross look calls an others man's
honor in question; but the word lie is of as great consequence, as any stabbe
or villainy whatsoever. Whereat we may well wonder how it happens, that we
feel our selves so much exasperated at the reproach of that vice, which we so
ordinarily commit; for in the custom of these times to cast upon us the lie,
is the greatest injury that words can do unto us; and yet there is nothing
more frequent in our mouth. It may be a property in our nature, to stand
chiefly in the defense of that corruption unto which we are most subject: I
speak not this to qualify the foulness of this vice; for I hold a lier to
be a monster in nature, one that contemns God and fears man, as an ancient
father says; but to show the crookedness of our disposition in disdaining to
acknowledge that fault, which we so commonly commit. But I would feign learn
when honor first came to be measured with words, for from the beginning it was
not so. Caesar was often called to his face thief, and dronkard, without any
further matter; and the liberty of inuectiues, which great personages used one
against an other, as it began, so it ended with words. And so I think our lie
might too, for I take him that returns the lie, and so lets it rest until
further proof, to have as great advantage in the reputation of honor, as the
former that first gave the disgrace.

CHAP. XX.
Cicero sends to Caesar, at whose coming the siege was raised, and the
Galls overthrown.

AT length Cicero found means, by a Gall to advertise Caesar of the danger
wherein he was: who speedily hasted with two legions to give him succor; the
Neruij understanding of Caesar's approach, forsook the siege and went to meet
him. Caesar finding the enemy to be 60000. strong, and himself not to have
above 7000. men, encamped himself in a place of advantage; and sought by
counterfeiting fear, to draw the enemy to come and assault his camp, which he
handled with that dexterity, that the Galls came up unto him, with a full
assurance of victory: but Caesar sending out two sallies at two several gates
of the camp, overthrew the greatest part of them, and dispossessed the rest of
their arms; and so ended that war.

FINIS.

