THE PARADYSE of dainty Devises.

Containing sundry pithie precepts, learned Counsels, and excellent
Inventions: right pleasant and profitable for all estates.

Devised and written for the most part, by M. Edwards, sometimes of her
Majesty's Chapel: the rest by sundry learned Gentlemen, both of Honor, and
Worship, whose names hereafter follow.

printer's device portraying angel with heart EGO SVM VIA ET VERITAS


Imprinted at London, by Henrye Dizle, dwelling in Pater noster row, and are
to be sold at his Shop, in Cannons lane, near the great North Door of S.
Paul's Church. 1580.

blazon or coat of arms IE NE CHERCHE Q'VNE


The names of those who wrote these Devises.
Saint Barnard. E. O. Lord Vaux, the elder. W. Hunis. Jasper Heywood. F.
Kindlemarsh. D. Sand. M. Yloop.
To the Right Honorable Sir Henry Compton Knight, Lord Compton of Compton.
RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MY very good Lord, (presuming upon your courtesy) I am
bold to present unto your Honor, this small volume, Entitled, The Paradise
of dainty Devises, being penned by diverse learned Gentlemen, and collected
together through the travail of one, both of worship and credit, for his
private use: who not long since departed this life, which when I had perused
over, not without the advice of sundry my friends, I determined by their good
motion to set them in print, who thereunto greatly persuaded me, with these
and like words. The writers of them, were both of honor and worship, besides
that, our own countrymen, and such as for their learning and gravity, might
be accounted of, among the wisest. Furthermore, the ditties both pithie and
pleasant, as well for the invention as meeter, and will yield a far greater
delight, being as they are, so aptly made to be set to any song in 5. parts,
or song to instrument. Which well considering, I purposed not to forsake so
good an occasion, beseching your honor to accept in good part, cheefelye for
the Authors sake: who though some of them are departed this life, yet their
worthy doings shall continue for ever, for like as the shadow follows the
body, so praise follows virtue, and as the shadow goes sometimes before,
and sometimes behind, so does praise also to virtue: but the later it
comes, the greater it is, and to be the better esteemed. Thus fearing to
offend your Honor with these my rude speeches, I end, wishing your L. many
years of joy.

Your good Lordships wholly to command. H. D.

The translation of the blessed S. Barnards Verses, containing the unstable
felicity of this wayfaring world.
CVR mundus militat, sub vana gloria, cuius prosperitas est transitoria?
Tam cito labitur, eius potentia quam vasa figuli, que sunt fragilia.
WHY does each state apply it self to worldly praise?
And undertake such toil, to heap up honors gain,
Whose seat though seeming sure on fickle Fortune stays,
Whose gifts were never proved, perpetual to remain,
But even as earthen pot, with every fillip fayles,
So fortunes favor flits, and Fame with Honor quayles.
Plus creed litteris, scriptis in glacie, quam mundi fragilis, vanae fallasiae,
Fallax in premijs, virtutis specie, que nunquam habuit, tempus siducie.
Think rather firm to find, a figure graven in yse,
Whose substance subject is, to heat of shyning sun,
Then hope for steadfast stay in wanton worlds devise,
Whose feigned fond delights, from falsheads forge do come,
And under Virtues veyle are largely dealt about,
Deceiving those, who think their date will never out.
Magis credendum est viris fallacibus, quam mundi miseris prosperitatibus
Falsis insanijs and voluptatibus falsis quoquae studiis and vanitatibus.
The trifeling truthlesse tongue of rumors lying lips,
Deserves more trust then does the highest happy hap,
That world to worldlinges gives, for see how honor slippes,
To foolish fond conceits, to pleasures poisoned sap,
To studies false in proof, to arts applied to gain,
To fickle fancies toys, which wisdom deemeth vain.
Dic vbi Solomon, olim tam nobilis, vel vbi Sampson est, dux inuincibilis,
Vel dulcis Jonathas, multum amabilis, vel purcher Absolon, vultu mirabilis.
Where is the sacred King, that Solomon the wise?
Who wisdom former time of duty did commend,
Where is that Sampson strong, that monstrous man in size?
Whose forced arm did cause the mighty pillars bend,
Where is the Pearelesse Prince, the friendly Ionathas;
Or Absolon whose shape and favor did surpass,
Quo Caesar abijt? celsus imperio, vel dives splendidus, totus in prandio,
Dic vbi Tullius, clarus elloquio, vel Aristoteles, summus ingenio.
Where is that Casar now, whose high renowned fame,
Of sundry conquestes won, throughout the world did sound:
Or Dives rich in store, and rich in richely name,
Whose chest with Gold, and dishe with daynties did abound,
Where is the passing grace of Tullies pleading skill?
Or Aristottles vain, whose pen had wit and will.
O esca vermium, o massa pulueris, o ros, o vanitas, cur sic extolleris?
Jgnoras penitus vtru^ cras vixeris, fac bonum omnibus, quam diu poteris.
O food of filthy worm, oh lump of lochsome clay,
O life full like the dew, which morning soon does waste,
O shadow vain whose shape with son does shrink away,
Why gloryest thou so much, in honor to be plaste?
Since that no certain hour of life thou do enjoy,
Most fit it were thy time to goodness to employ.
Quam breue festu^ est, haec mundi gloria, vt vmbra hominu^, sic eius gaudia
Quae semper subtrahit aeterna praemia, and ducunt hominum, at dura deuia.
How short a banquet seems the pomp of high renown?
How like the senseless shape of shiuering shadow thine?
Are wanton worldly toys, whose pleasure plucketh down,
Our hearts from hope, and hands from works, which heaven should win,
And takes us from the trod, which guides to endless gain,
And sets us in the way that leads to lasting pain.
Haec mundi gloria, quae magni penditur, sacris in litteris, slos faeni
dicitur,
Vt leave folium, quod vento rapitur, sic vita hominum, hac vita tollitur.
The pomp of worldly praise, which worldlinges hold so dear,
In holy sacret book, is likened to a flower,
Whose date does not contain, a week, a month, or year,
But springing now does fade again within an hour.
And as the lightest leaf, with wind about is thrown,
So light is life of man, and lightly hence is blown.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
1. Our pleasures are vantiies.
Behold the blast which blows the blossoms from the tree,
The end whereof, consumes and comes to naught we see,
Ere thou therefore be blown from life that may not last,
Begin for grace to call, for time misspent and past.
Have mind on brittle life, whose pleasures are but vain,
On death likewise bethink, how thou shall not remain.
And fear thy Lord to grieve, which sought thy soul to save,
To sin no more be bent, but mercy ask and have.
For death who does not spare, the kings on earth to kill,
Shall reap also from thee, thy pleasure, life and will:
That life which yet remaynes, and in thy breast appears,
Has sown in thee such seeds, you ought to weed with tears.
And life that shall succeed, when death is worn and past,
Shall spring for ever then, in joy or pain to last:
Where death on life, has power ye see, that life also,
Has mowen the fruits of death, which never more shall grow.
FJNJS.
W. Hunis.

2. Who waighteth on this wavering world, and veweth each estate.
By trial taught shall learn it best, to live in simple rate.

AMid the vale the slender shrubbe is hid from all mishap,
When taller tree that stands aloft, is rent with thunder clappe,
The Turrets tops which touch the clouds, are beat with every blast,
Soon shiuered are their stones with storm, and quickly over cast.
Best bodyed tree in all the world, for timber beam is found,
And to the axe the sturdiest Ox, does yield and fall to ground.
The highest hill does soonest feel, the flash of lightninges flame,
And soon decays the pomp and pride, of high renowned name,
Of all the heard the huntman seeks, by proof as does appear,
With double forked arrow head, to wound the greatest Dear.
The haughtiest head of all the drove, enioyest the shortest life,
And stains the slaughter house with blood, at prick of butchers knife.
Thus what thing highest place attaines, is soonest overthrown,
What ever fortune sets aloft, she threats to throw it down.
And though no force resist thy power, and seek thee to confound,
Yet does the praise of weighty things declyne it self to ground.
For restless tipe of rowlling wheel, example has it tried,
To heavy burden yield it must full soon, and slip aside.
What vailes the rich his bed of down, yt sighs for sleepeles thought
What time in couch of flock the poor, sleeps sound and fears naught
At homely board his quiet food, his drinks in treene be taken,
When often the proud in cups of gold, with wine receive their bane.
The bed, the board, the dread in doubt, with train to be oppressed,
When fortune frowns, their power must yield as wyre unto ye wrest
Who so thou be that sits allow, and tread the valleys path,
Thou needs not fear the Thunder bolts of mighty Jove his wrath
If Icarus had not presumed to high to take his flight,
He had not yet been drowned in Seas, that now Jtarion hight,
If Phaeton had not enterprised to guide his fathers seat,
His fires had not inflamed the world, nor been destroyed with heat,
But who so climes above the mean, there is no hope of stay,
The higher up, the sooner down, and nearer his decay.
Then you that here in pomp are plaste, to guide the golden mace,
Let crown and Scepter both obey the mean of virtues race.
For neither shall renowned virtue see the pit of hell,
Nor yet in tomb of Marble stone, she shall abide to dwell,
And in that Tomb full bravely dect When that she shall depart,
God send her rest and all things well, according to desert.
But from Sepulcher flies she hence, beyond the skies above,
And glistering in the blisfull stars, she reigns with mighty Jove.
FINJS.
Jasper Heywood.

3. The perfect trial of a faithful friend.
NOt stayed state, but feeble stay, not costly robes, but bare array:
not passed wealth, but present want, not heped store but sle^der ska^t.
Not plenties purse, but poor estate, not happy hap, but froward fate,
Not wish at will, but want of joy, not hearts good health but hearts anoy.
No fredomes use, but prisoners thrall, not costly seat, but lowest fall
Not weal I mean but wretched woe, does truly try ye friend from foe,
And naught but froward Fortune proves, who fawning faynes, or simply loves.
FINIS.
M. Yloop.

4. Being asked the occasion of his white head, He answers thus.
WHere seething sighs and sorrow sobbes,
Has slain the slippes that Nature set,
And scalding showers with stony throbbes,
The kindly sapp from them has fet,
What wonder their though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
Where thought has thrilde and thrown his spears,
To hurt the heart that harmeth him not,
And groaning grefe has ground forth tears,
Mine eyne to stayne, my face to spot,
What wonder then, though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
Where pinching pain himself has plaste,
There peace with pleasures were possessed,
And where the walls of wealth lie waste,
And poverty in them is pressed,
What wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
Where wreatched woe will weaue her web,
Where care the clew can catch and cast,
And floods of joy are fallen to ebb,
So lo, that life may not long last,
What wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
These hears of age are messengers,
Which bid me fast, repent and pray:
They be of death the Harbingers,
That does prepare and dress the way,
Wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such hears to be.
They be the lives that lead the length,
How far my race is for to run:
They say my youth is fled with strength,
And how old age is weak begun,
The which I feel, and you may see,
Upon my head such lines to be.
They be the stringes of sober sound,
Whose music is harmonicall:
Their tunes declare a time from ground
I came, and how thereto I shall.
Wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such stringes to be.
God grant to those that white hears have,
No worse them take then I have meant:
That after they be laid in grave,
Their souls may joy their lives well spent.
God grant likewise that you may see,
Upon your head such hears to be.
FINIS.
W. Hunis.

5. Beware of had J wist.
BEware of had I wist, whose fine bringes care and smart,
Esteem of all as they deserve, and deem as deemde thou art:
So shall thy pefect friend, enjoy his hoped hyre,
And faithless fawning foe, shall miss theffect of his desire.
Good wilt shall have his gain, and hate shall heap despite,
A faythlesse friend shall find distrust, and love shall reap delight.
Thy self shall rest in peace, thy friend shall joy thy fate,
Thy foe shall fret at thy good hap, and I shall joy thy state.
But this my fond advise, may seem perchance but vain,
As rather teaching how to lose, then how a friend to gain.
But this not my intent, to teach to find a friend,
But safely how to love and leave, is all that I intend.
And if you prove in part, and find my council true,
Then wish me well for my good will, it is all I crave, adue.
FJNJS.
My luck is loss.
6. M. Edwardes MAY.
WHen MAY is in his prime, then MAY each heart rejoice,
When MAY bedecks each branch with green, each bird streins forth his voice
The lively sap creepes, up into the bloming thorn,
The flowers, which cold in prison kept, now laughes ye frost to skorne.
All natures Impes triumphs, whiles joyful May does last,
When MAY is gone, of all the year the pleasant time is past.
MAY makes the cheerful hue, MAY breeds and brings new blood.
MAY marches throughout every lim, MAY makes ye merry mood.
MAY pricketh tender hearts, their warbling notes to tune,
Full strange it is, yet some we see, do make their MAY in June.
Thus things are strangly wrought, whiles joyful MAY does last,
Take MAY in time, when MAY is gone, ye pleasant time is past.
All ye that live on earth, and have your MAY at will,
Rejoice in MAY, as I do now, and use your MAY with skill.
Use MAY, while that you may, for MAY has but his time,
When all the fruit is gone, it is to late the tree to clime.
Your liking and your lust, is fresh whiles MAY does last,
When MAY is gone, of all the year, the pleasant time is past.
FJNJS.
M. Edwardes.

7. Fair words make fools feign.
JN youthful years when first my young desires began,
To prick me forth to serve in Court a sclender tal young man:
My fathers blessing then I ask upon my knee,
Who blessing me with trembling hand, these words began say to me:
My son, God guide thy way, and shield thee from mischaunce,
And make thy just desartes in Court, thy poor estate to advance:
Yet when thou art become one of the Courtly train,
Think on this proverb old (quoth he) that fair words make foles fain.
This counsel gravely given, most strange appears to me,
Till tract of time with open eyes, had made me plainly see:
What subtle sleightes are wrought by painted tales devise,
When hollow hearts with freendly shows the simple do entise.
To think all gold that shynes, to feed their fond desire.
Whose sheuering cold is warmd with smoke, in steed of flaming fire,
Since talk of tickle trust, does breed a hope most vain,
This proverb true by proof I find, that fair words make fools fain.
Fair speech always does well, where deeds ensue fair words.
Fair speech again always does evil, that bushes give for birds,
Who hopes to have fair words, to try his luckie lot,
If I may council, let him strike it while the iron is hot.
But them that feed on cloddes, in steed of pleasant grapes,
And after warning often given, for better luck still gapes,
Full loath I am, yet must I tell them in words plain,
This proverb old proves true in them, that fair words make fools feign.
Woe worth the time that words so slowly turn to deeds,
Woe worth the time yt fair sweet flowers are grown to rotten weeds,
But thrice woe worth the time that truth away is fled,
Wherein I see how simple hearts, with words are vaynely fed,
Trust not fair words therefore, where no deeds do ensue,
Trust words as skillful Falkeners do trust Hawks that never flewe,
Trust deeds, let words be words which never wrought me gain,
Let my experience make you wise, and let words make fools feign.
FJNJS
M. Edwardes.

8 Jn his extreme sickness.
WHat greeues my bones, and makes my body fainte
What pricks my flesh and tears my head in twain?
Why do I wake when rest should me attaint?
When others laugh, why do I live in pain?
I toss, I turn, I change from side to side,
And stretch me often in sorrows linkes betyde.
I toss, as one betost in waves of care,
I turn, to fly the woes of loathsome life:
I change, to spy if death this corpse might spare,
I stretch to heaven to rid me of this strife:
Thus do I stretch, and change, and toss, and turn,
While I in hope of heaven my life do burn.
Then hold thee still, let be thy heaviness,
Abolish care, forget thy pining woe:
For by this means soon shall thou find redress,
When often betost, hence thou to heaven must go.
Then toss, and turn, and tumble frank and free,
O happy thryse, when thou in heaven shall be.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

9. For Christmas day.
Rejoice rejoice with heart and voice,
Jn Christ's birth this day rejoice.
FRom Virgins womb this day did spring,
The precious seed that only saved man:
This day let man rejoice and sweetly sing,
Since on this day salvation first began.
This day did Christ man's soul from death remdite.
With glorious saints to dwell in heaven above.
This day to man, came pledge of perfect peace,
This day to man, came love and unity:
This day man's grief began for to surcease,
This day did man receive a remedy.
For each offense and every deadly sin,
With guilty heart that erst he wandered in.
In Christ's flock, let love be surely plaste,
From Christ's flock, let concord hate expel:
Of Christ's flock let love be so embraste,
As we in Christ, and Christ in us may dwell.
Christ is the author of all unity,
From whence proceeds all felicity.
O sing unto this glittering glorious king,
O praise his name let every living thing:
Let heart and voice like Belles of silver ring,
The comfort that this day did bring.
Let Lute, let Shalme, with sound of sweet delight,
The joy of Christ's birth this day resight.
FINIS.
F. Kindlemarsh.

10 For Easter day.
ALl mortal men this day rejoice, in Christ that you redeemed has,
By death with death sing we with voice, to him yt has appesd gods wrath
Due unto man for sinful path, wherein before he went astray,
Give thanks to him with perfect faith that for man kind has made this
glorious day.
This day he rose from tomb again, wherein his precious corse was laid
Whom cruelly ye Jews had slain, with bloody wounds full il araid:
O man be now no more dismayed, if thou henceforth from sin do stay,
Of death thou need not be afraid, Christ conquered death for this his
glorious day.
His death prevailed had no whit, as Paul ye Apostle well does write,
Except he had vprisen yet, from death to life by Godlike might,
With most triumphant glittering light,
This day his glory shined I say, and made us bright as sun this glorious day.
O man arise with Christ therefore, since he from sin has made the fre,
Beware thou fall in sin no more, but rise as Christ did rise for thee,
So may thou him in glory see, when he at day of doom shall say,
Come thou my child and dwell with me, God grant us all to see that glorious
day.
FINIS.
quoth Jasper Haywood.

11. For Whitsunday.
COme holy ghost eternal God, and ease the woeful grief,
That through the heaps of heavy sin, can no where find relief.
Do thou O God redress
The great distress
Of sinful heaviness.
Come comfort the afflicted thoughts of my consumed heart,
O ryd the pearcing pricking pains of my tormenting smart:
O holy ghost grant me
That I by thee
From sin may purged be.
Thou art my God, to thee alone I will commend my cause,
Nor glittering gold nor precious stone, shall make me leave thy laws:
O teach me then the way
Whereby I may
Make thee my only stay.
My lips, my tongue, my heart and al, shall spread thy mighty name,
My voice shall never cease to sound the praises of the same:
Yea every living thing
Shall sweetly sing
To thee (O heavenly king.)
FINIS.
F. K.

12. No pleasure without some pain.
Sweet were the joys that both might like and last,
Strange were the state exempt from all distress,
Happy the life that no mishap should taste,
Blessed the chance might never change success,
Were such a life to lead, or state to prove,
Who would not wish that such a life were love.
But O the sowrie sauce of sweet unsure,
When pleasures fly and flit with wast of wind:
The trustlesse trains that hoping hearts allure,
When sweet delights do but allure the mind.
When care consumes and wastes the wretched wight,
While fancy feeds and draws of her delight.
What life were love, if love were free from pain?
But O that pain with pleasure match should meet:
Why did the course of nature so ordain,
That surged sour must sauce the bitter sweet?
Which sour from sweet might any means remove,
What hap, what heaven, what life were like to love:
FJNJS.
W. R.

13. Who minds to bring his Ship to happy shore
Must care to know the laws of wisdoms lore.

MY friend, if thou will credit me in ought,
To whom the truth by trial well appears:
Naught worth is wit til it be dearly bought,
There is no wisdom but in hoary hears.
Yet if I may of wisdom often de^^ne,
As well as others have of happiness:
Then to my words my friend thy ear incline,
The things that make thee wise are these I guess.
Fear God, and know thy self in each degree,
Be friend to all, familiar but to few:
To light of credit see thou never be,
For trial ought in trust does treason show.
To others faults cast not too much thy eye,
Accuse no man of guilt, amend thy own:
Of meddling much does mischief ought arise,
And often debate by tickle tongue is sown.
What thing thou will have hyd, to none declare,
In word or deed beware of had I wist:
So spend thy good that some thou ever spare,
For friends like Hawks do soar from empty fist.
Cut out thy coat according to thy cloth,
Suspected persons see thou always flee,
Believe not him that once has broke his troth,
Nor yet of gift without desert be free.
Time quickly slips beware how thou it spend,
Of wanton youth repents a paynfull age:
Begin nothing without an eye to thend,
Nor bow thine ear from counsel of the sage.
If thou too far let out thy fancy slip,
And witless will from reasons rule outstart:
Thy folly shall at length be made thy whip,
And sore the stripes of shame shall cause the smart;
To do to much for old men is but lost,
Of friendship had to women comes like gain,
Bestow not thou on Children to much cost,
For what thou do for these, is all in vain,
The old man or he can requite, he dies,
Unconstant is the woman's wavering mind,
Full soon the boy thy friendship will despise,
And him for love, thou shall ungrateful find.
The aged man is like the barraine ground,
The woman like the reed that wagges with wind:
There may no trust in tender years he found,
And of the three, the boy is most unkind.
If thou have found a faithful friend in deed,
Beware thou lose not love of such a one:
He shall sometime stand thee in better steed,
Then treasure great of gold or precious stone.
FJNJS.
Jasper Haywood.

14. Of the unconstant stay of Fortunes gifts.
JF Fortune be thy stay, thy state is very tickle,
She bears a double face, disguised, false and fickle:
This day she seems to smile, to morrow will she frown,
What now she sets aloft, anon she throws down:
Fly Fortunes slye deceytes, let Virtue be thy guide,
If that you do intend in happy state to abide.
Upon the settled rock thy building surest stands,
Away it quickly wears, that rests on the sands:
Dame Virtue is the rock, that yeeldes assured stay,
Dame Fortune is the sand, that skoureth soon away:
Choose that is certain, let thing uncertain pass,
Prefer the precious gold, before the brittle glass.
Sly Fortune has her slightes, she plays upon the pack,
Look who^ she favors most, at length she turns to wrack:
But Virtue simply deals, she shuns deceitful train,
Who is by Virtue raised up, shall never fall again:
Stick fast to Virtue then, that gives assured trust,
And fly from Fortunes frekes, that ever prove unjust.
FJNJS.
F. K.

15. Promise is debt.
JN my account the promise that is vowed,
Among the good is holden such a debt:
As he is thought no whit to be allowed,
That sets light his promise to forget.
And for my part I will not link in love,
With fickle folk whose fancies ought remove.
My happy gain I do esteem for such,
As few have found in these our doubtful days:
To find a friend I think it be as much,
As to win a fort full fraught of noble praise.
Of all the goods that there may be possessed,
A faithful friend I judge to be the best.
O freendly league although to late begun,
Yet time shall try our troth as well employed:
And that we both shall see that we have won,
Such fastened faith as can not be destroyed.
By envious rage or slanders bitter blow,
That always seeks the good to overthrow.
FJNJS.
R. Hill.

16. No words but deeds.
THE wrong is great, the pain above my power,
That yeeldes such care in doubtful dens to drown:
Such hap is hard where Fortune does so lower,
As freendly look is turned to froward frown.
Is this the trust that faithful friends can find?
With those that yet have promise broke?
By deeds in doubt, as though no words can bind,
A vowed friend to hold him to his yoke.
O faithless friend, what can assure your mind,
That doubts so soon before you have cause why?
To what hard hap does Fortune here me bind,
When words nor deeds can no where satisfye.
What can I write? that has not often bine said,
What have I said? that has not bine affyrmed:
What not approved? that ought to be assayed,
Or what is vowed? that shall not be performed.
Cast of mistrust, in have no credit give,
To this or that, that breeds friends unrest:
No doubt at all, but trust me if I live,
My deeds shall prove, that all is for the best.
And this believe, the Sea shall cease to flow,
The Sun to shine within the fetled sky:
All things on earth shall leave to spring and grow,
Yea every Foul shall want his wings to fly.
Ear I in thought shall seem once to retire,
If you my friend remain as I desire:
Now lose no time, but use that while you may,
Forget not this, a dog shall have a day.
FINIS.
R. D.

17. He desires exchange of life.
THE day delayed, of that I most do wish,
Wherewith I feed and starve in one degree:
With wish and want still served in one dishe,
Alive as dead, by proof as you may see.
To whom of old this proverb well it serves,
While grass does grow, the selly horse he sterues.
Tweene these extremes thus do I rome the race,
Of my poor life, this certainly I know:
Tweene would and want unawarely that do pass,
More swift then shot out of Archers bow.
As Spider draws her line all day,
I watch the net, and others have the pray.
And as by proof the greedy dog does gnawe,
The bared bone all only for the taste:
So to and fro this loathsome life I draw,
With fancies forced and fed with vain repast.
Narsissus brought unto the water brinke,
So aye thirst I, the more that I do drink.
Lo thus I dye, and yet I seem not sick,
With smart unseen my self, my self I wear:
With prone desire and power that is not quick,
With hope aloft now drenched in despair.
Trained in trust for no reward assignd,
The more I have, the more I come behind.
With hurt to heal, in frozen yse to fry,
With loss to laugh, this is a wondrous case:
Fast fetred here, is forced away to fly,
As hunted Hare, that Hound has in the chase.
With wings and spurs, for all the have I make,
As like to lose, as for to draw the stake.
The days be long that hang upon desert,
The life is irke of joys that be delayed:
The time is short for to requite the smart,
That does proceed of promise long unpaid.
That to the last of this my fainting breath,
I wish exchange of life for happy death.
FJNJS.
L. Vaux.

18. Of the instabilitie of youth.
WHEN I look back and in my self behold,
The wandering ways that youth could not descry:
And marked the fearful course that youth did hold,
And met in mind, each step youth strayed a wry.
My knees I bow, and from my heart I call,
O Lord, forget these faults and folies all.
For now I see, how void youth is of skill,
I see also his prime time and his end:
I do confess my faults and all my ill,
And sorrow sore, for that I did offend,
And with a mind repentant of all crimes,
Pardon I ask for youth, ten thousand times.
The humble heart, has daunted the proud mind,
Eke wisdom has given ignorance a fall:
And wit has taught, that folly could not find,
And age has youth, her subject and her thrall.
Therefore I pray, O Lord of life and truth,
Pardon the faults committed in my youth.
Thou that did grant the wise king his request,
Thou that in the Whale, thy prophet did preserve:
Thou that forgauest the wounding of thy breast,
Thou that did save the thief in state to sterue.
Thou only God, the giver of all grace,
Wipe out of mind, the path of youths vain race.
Thou that by power, to life did raise the dead.
Thou that restorest the blind to sight:
Thou that for love, thy life and love out bled,
Thou that of favor, made the lame go right.
Thou that can heal, and help in all assayes,
Forgive the gilth, that grew in youths vain ways.
And now since I, with faith and doubtless mind,
Do fly to thee by prayer to appease thy ire:
And since that thee I only seek to find,
And hope by faith to attain my just desire.
Lord mind no more youths error and vnskill,
And able age, to do thy holy will.
FJNJS.
L. Vaux.

19. Most happy is that state alone,
Where words and deeds agree in one.

BY painted words, the silly simple man,
To trustlesse trap, is trained now and than:
And by conceyt, of sweet alluring tale,
He bites the baits, that breeds his bitter bale.
To beawties blaze, cast not thy rouing eye:
In pleasant grieve, do stinging serpents lie.
The golden Pill, has but a bitter taste,
In glittering glass, a poison ranckest plaste.
So pleasant words, without performing deeds:
May well be deemed to spring of Darnel seeds,
The freendly deed is it, that quickly tryes:
Where trusty faith, and freendly meaning lies.
That state therefore most happy seems to be:
Where words and deeds, most faithfully agree.
My friend if thou will keep thy honest name:
Fly from the blot, of barking slanders blame.
Let not in word thy promise be more large:
Then thou in deed, art willing to discharge.
Abhorred is that false dissembling brood:
That seems to bear two faces in one hoode.
To say a thing, and not to mean the same:
Will turn at length to loss of thy good name.
Wherefore my friend, let double dealing go:
In stead whereof, let perfect playnenesse flow.
Do thou no more, in idle words exceed:
Then thou intendes to do, in very deed.
So good report, shall spread thy worthy praise:
For being just in word and deed always.
You worldly wightes that worldly dooers are:
Before you let your word slip out to far,
Consider well, what inconvenience springes:
By breach of promise made, in lawful things.
First, God mislikes where such deceit does swarm:
Next, it redoundeth unto thy neighbors harm.
And last of all, which is not least of all:
For such offense, thy conscience suffer shall.
As barren grounds, bringes forth but rotten weeds.
From barren words, so fruitless chafe proceeds.
As sauery flowers, do spring in fertile ground:
So trusty friends, by trial soon are found.
To shun therefore the woorst, that may ensue:
Let deeds always, approve thy sayings true.
FJNJS.
F. K.

20. Who will aspire to dignity.
By learning must advanced be.

THe poor yt live in needy rate, by learning do great riches gain:
The rich yt live in welthy state, by learning do their wealth maintain.
Thus rich and poor, are furthered still,
By sacred rules of learned skill.
All fond conceits of frantic youth, ye golden gift of learning stays:
Of doubtful things to search the truth, learning sets forth the reddy ways.
O happy him do I repute,
Whose breast it fraught with learning fruit.
There grows no corn wtin the field, ye Ox and Plough did never till,
Right so ye mind no fruit can yield, that is not lead by learnings skill.
Of ignorance comes rotten weeds,
Of learning springes right noble deeds.
Like as the Captain has respect, to train his soldiers in array:
So learning does ma^s mind direct, by Virtues staff his life to stay.
Though Friends and Fortune waxes skant,
Yet learned men shall never want.
You Impes therefore in youth be sure, to fraught your minds with learned things,
For learning is the fountain pure, out from ye which al glory springes.
Who so therefore will glory win,
With learning first must needs begin.
FINIS.
F. K.

21. Man's flittyng life finds surest stay,
Where sacred Virtue bearteh sway.

THE sturdy Rock for all his strength, by raging Seas is rent in twain:
The Marble stone is pearst at length, with little drops of drisling rain.
The Ox does yield unto the yoke,
The Steel obeys the hammer stroke.
The stately Stagge yt seems so stout, by yalping hou^ds at bay is set:
The swiftest bird yt flees above, is caught at length in Fowlers net.
The greatest Fish in deepest Brook,
Is soon deceived with subtle hook.
Yea man him self, unto whose will, all things are bounden to obey:
For all his wit and worthy skill, does fade at length and fall away,
There is nothing, but time does wast,
The Heavens, the Earth, consume at last.
But Virtue sittes triumphing still, upon ye Trone of glorious Fame:
Though spiteful death man's body kill, yet hurts he not his virtuous name
By life or death, what so betides,
The state of Virtue, never slides.
FINIS.
M. T.

22. Nothing is comparable unto a faithful friend.
Since this our time of Freendship is so skant,
Since Freendship now in every place does want.
Since every man of Freendship is so hollow,
As no man rightly knows which way to follow.
Sease not my Muse, sease not in these our days,
To ring loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
If men be now, their own peculier friends,
And to their neighbors freendship none pertendes.
If men of Freendship show them selves so bare,
And of their brethren take no Freendly care.
Forbear not then my muse, nor fear not then,
To ring dispraise of these vnfreendly men.
Did man of Freendship know the mighty power?
How great effects it works every hour.
What store of hidden freendship it retaynes,
How still it powers forth abundant gains.
Man would with thee my muse in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred Freendships praise.
Freendship releeueth man's necessity,
Freendship, comfort man's adversity.
Freendship augmenteth man's prosperity,
Freendship preferres man to felicity.
Then ring my muse, ring out in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred freendships praise.
Of Freendship, grows love and charity,
By Freendship, men are linked in amity:
From Freendship springs all commodity,
The fruit of Freendship, is fidelity.
Oh ring my muse, ring out in these our days,
Peale upon peale, of sacred Freendships praise.
That man with man, true freendship may embrace,
That man to man, may show a freendly face:
That every man, may sow such freendly seeds,
As freendship may be found in freendly deeds.
And join with thee my Muse in these our days,
To ring loud peales of sacred Freendships praise.
FJNJS.
F. K.

23. Remember thy end.
TO be as wise as Cato was, or rich as Cresus in his life:
To have ye strength of Hercules, which did subdue by force or strife.
What helps it when Death does call,
The happy end exceeds all.
The rich may well ye poor relieve, ye Rulers may redress each wrong:
The learned may good counsel give, but mark ye end of this my song.
Who does these things, happy they call,
Their happy end exceeds all.
The happiest end, in these our days, yt al do seek, both small and great:
Is either for Fame, or else for praise, or who may sit in highest seat.
But of these things, hap what hap shall.
The happy end exceeds all.
A good beginning ought we see, but seeldome standing at one stay:
For few do like ye mean degree, their praise at parting some men say.
The things whereto each wight is thrall,
The happy end exceeds all.
The mean estate, that happy life, which lives under governance:
Who seeks no hate, nor breeds no strife, but takes in worth his happy chance.
If contentation him befall,
His happy end exceeds all.
The longer life that we desire, the more offense does daily grow:
The greater pain it does require, except ye Judge some mercy show.
Wherefore I think and ever shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
FJNJS.
D. S.

24. He persuades his friend,
from the fond Affectes of love.

WHy art thou bound and may go fre, shall reason yield to raging will?
Is thraldom like to liberty? will thou exchange thy good for ill?
Then shall thou learn a childish play, and of each part to tash and prove:
The lookers on shall judge and say, lo this is he that lives by love.
Thy wits with thoughts, shall stand at stay, thy head shall have but heavy rest.
Thy eyes shall watch for wa^to^ prays, thy tongue shall show thy hearts request.
Thy ears shall here a M. noise, thy hand shall put thy pe^ to pain:
And in ye end, thou shall dispraise, thy life so spent, for such small gain.
If love and list might ever cope, or youth might run in reasons race:
Or if strong suit might win sure hope, I would less blame a lovers case
For love is hot, with great desire, and sweet delight makes youth so fond,
That little sparks will prove great fire, and bring free hearts to endless
bond.
First count ye care and then the cost, and mark what fraud in faith is found:
The^ after come and make thy bost, and show some cause why thou art bound
For when ye wine does run full low, you shall be feign to drink the lies:
And eat ye flesh full well I know, yt has been blown with many flies.
We see where great devotion is, the people kneel and kiss the cross:
And though we find small fault of this, yet so^e will gilld a bridles bosse.
A fool his babble will not change, not for the septer of a king,
A lovers life is nothing strange, for youth delights none other thing.
FINIS.
Tho. Churchyard.

25. Wanting his desire he complayneth.
THe sailing ships with joy at length, do touch their long desired port,
The hewing axe ye Oak does wast, ye battring Cano^ breaks ye fort.
Hard hagard hawks stope to ye lure, wild colts in time ye bridle tames:
There is nothing so out of ure, but to his kind long time it frames.
Yet this I find in time, no time can win my suit,
Though often the tree I climb, I can not catch the fruit.
And yet the pleasant branches often in yielding wise to me do bow,
When I would touch they spring aloft, soon are they gone I wot not how
Thus I present ye sleeting floode, like Tantalus in hell below,
Would God my case she understood, which can full soon relieve my woe
Which if to her were known, the fruit were surely mine,
She would not let me groan, and brouse upon the rine.
But if my ship with tackle torn, with rented sails must needs retire.
And stream and wind has plainly sworn, by force to hinder my desire,
Like one yt strikes upon ye rocks, my weary wrack I should bewail
And learn to know false fortunes mookes, who smiles on me to small avail.
Yet since she only can, my rented ship restore,
To help her wracked man, but once I seek no more.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

26. Try before you trust.
JN friends are found a heap of doubts, that double dealing use,
A swarm of such I could find out, whose craft I can accuse:
A face for love, a heart for hate, these feigned friends can bear,
A tongue for troth, a head for wyles, to hurt each simple ear.
In humble port, is poison pact, that plainness can not spy.
Which credites all, and can not see, where stinging serpents lie.
Through hasty trust, the harmless heart, is easily hampred in,
And made believe it is good gold, when it is lead and tin.
The first deceit that bleares mine eyes, is feigned faith professed,
The second trappe is grating talk, that gripes each strangers breast.
The third deceit is greeting words, with colors painted out,
Which bids suspect to fear no smart, nor dread no dangerous doubt.
The fourth, and last is long repair, which creepes in freendships lap,
And daily hauntes, that under trust, deuiseth many a trap.
Lo how false friends can frame a fetch, to win the will with wills,
To sauce their slightes with sugared sops, and shadow harm with smiles.
To serve their lusts, are sundry sorts, by practice diverse kinds,
Some carries honnie in their mouths, and venime in their minds.
Me thinks the stones within the streets, should cry out in this case,
And every one that does them meet, should shun their double face.
FJNJS.
D. S.

27. A Lady forsaken complayneth.
JF pleasures be in painfulnes? in pleasures does my body rest,
If joys accord with carefulnes? a joyful heart is in my breast:
If prison strong is liberty? in liberty long have I been,
If joys accord with misery? who can compare a life to mine.
Who can unbind yt is sore bound? who can make free yt is sore thrall,
Or how can any means be found to comfort such a wretch withal.
None can, but he yt has my heart, convert my pains to comfort then.
Yet since his servant I became, most like a bondsman have I been:
Since first in bondage I became, my words and deeds were ever such,
That never once he could me blame, except from loving him too much.
Which I can judge no just offense, nor cause that I deserve disdain,
Except he mean through false pretense, through forged love to make a train.
nay, nay, alas, my fained thoughts, my fre^ded and my fained ruth
My pleasures past my present plaints, show well I mean but to much truth.
But since I can not him attain, against my will I let him go.
And least he glory at my pain, I will attempt to cloak my woe.
Youth, learn by me, but do not prove, for I have proved to my pain,
What grievous griefs do grow by love, and what it is to love in vain.
FJNJS.
M. D.

28. Finding worldly joys but vanities, he wishes death.
Forlorn in filthy froward fate, wherein a thousand cares I find,
By whom I do lament my state, annoyd with fond afflicted mind:
A wretch in woe, and dare not cry,
I live, and yet I wish to die.
The day in dole, that seems long, I pas with sighs and heavy cheer.
And with these eyes I vewe the wrong, that I sustain by living here:
Where my mishaps as rife do dwell,
As plagues within the pit of hell.
A wailing wight I walk alone, in desert dens there to complain,
Among the savage sort to moan, I flee my friends where they remain:
And pleasure take to shun the sight,
Where erst I felt my great delight,
A captive clapped in chains of care, lapt in the laws of lethal love,
My flesh and bones consumed bare, with crauling greefes full strange to prove:
Though hap does bid me hope at least,
Whiles grass does grow, yet statues the beast.
A seeged fort with foreign force, for want of aid, must yield at last,
So must my weried pined corse, submit it self to bitter taste:
Of crauling care, that carkes my breast,
Till hope or death, shall breed my rest.
FJNJS.
F. M.

29. A reply to M. Edwards MAY.
J Read a maying rhyme of late delighted much my ear,
It may delight as many more, as it shall read or hear.
To see how there is showed, how May is much of price,
And eke to May when that you may, even so is his advice.
It seems he meant to may himself, and so to use his skill,
For that the time did serve so well, in May to have his will.
His only May was ease of mind, so far as I can guess,
And that his may his mind did please, a man can judge no less.
And as himself did reap the fruits, of that his pleasant May,
He wills his freende the same to use, in time when as he may.
He is not for him self it seems, but wishes well to all,
For that he would they should, take May in time when it does fall.
So use your May, you may, it can not hurtful be,
And May well used in time and place, may make you merry gle:
Modest maying meetest is, of this you may be sure,
A modest maying quietness, to Mayers does procure.
Who may and will not take, may wish he had so done,
Who may and it does take, may think he took too sone.
So join your May with wisdoms lore, and then you may be sure,
Who makes his May in other sort, his unrest may procure.
Some May before May come, some May when May is past,
Some make their May to late, and some do May posthast.
Let wisdom rule I say your May, and thus I make an end,
And May, that when you list to May, a good May God you send.
FJNJS.
M. S.

30. Having married a worthy Lady, and taken away by death, he complayneth his
mishap.
JN youth when I at large did lead, my life in lusty liberty,
When heavy thoughts no one did spread, to let my pleasant fantasy:
No fortune seemd, so hard could fall,
This freedom then, that might make thrall.
And twenty years I scarce had spent, when to make full my happy fate
Both treasures great were on me cast, with lands and titles of estate:
So as more blessed their I, stood than,
Eke as me thought was never man.
For of Dame Fortune who is he, could more desire by just request,
Then health, with wealth, and liberty, al which at once I this possessed:
But masking in this ioly joy,
A soden sight, prooud al a toy.
For passing on these merry days, with new device of pleasures great,
And now and their to view ye rays of beauties works with cunning feat:
In heavenly hewes, all which as one,
I often beheld, but bound to none.
And one day rolling thus my eyes, upon these blessed wights at ease,
Amongst ye rest one did I se, who straight my wa^dring lokes did sease:
And stayed them firm, but such a sight,
Of beauty yet saw never wight.
What shall I seek to praise it more, where to^gs cannot well praise ye same
But to be short to lovers lore, I straight my senses all did frame:
And were it wit, or were it chance,
I won the Garland in this dance.
And thus where I before had thought, no hap my fortune might increase,
A double blis this chance forth brought, so did my ladies love me please
Her faith so firm, and constant such,
As never heart, can praise too much.
But now with torments strange I taste, ye fickle stay of fortunes wheel
And where she raised from high to cast, with greater force of grief to feel:
For from this hap of soden frown,
Of Princes face she threw me down.
And thus exchange now has it made, by liberty a thing most dear,
In hateful prison for to fade, where sundred from my loving fear,
My wealth and health, stands at like stay,
Obscurely to consume away.
And last when humane force was none, could part our love wherein we lived,
My ladies life alas is gone, most cruel death has it bereued:
Whose virtues, her, to God, has won,
And left me here, a man undone.
FINIS.
F. G.

31. A worthy ditie, song before the Queens Majesty at Bristowe.
MIstrust not troth, that truly means, for every ielous freke,
Instead of wrong, condemn not right, no hidden wrath to wreke:
Look on the light of fault less life, how bright her virtues shine,
And measure out her steps each one, by leuel and by line.
Deem each desert by upright guess, whereby your praise shall live,
If malice would be match with might, let hate no judgment give.
Enforce no fear with wresting wits, in quiet conscience breast.
Lend not your ears to busy tongues, which breeds much unrest.
In doubtful drifts wade not to far, it weries but the mind,
Seek not to search the secret hearts, whose thoughts are hard to find:
Avoid from you those hateful heads, that helps to heap mishap,
Be slow to hear the flatterers voice, that creeps in your lap.
Embrace their love that wills you good, and sport not at their praise,
Trust not too much unto your self, for feeble are your stays:
How can your seat be settled fast, or stand on steadfast ground,
So propped up with hollow hearts, whose surety is unsound.
Give faith to those that fear for love, and not that love for fear,
Regard not them that force compels, to please you every where:
All this well waid and borne away, shall stablish long your state,
Continually with perfect peace, in spite of puffing hate.
FINIS.
D. S.

32. An Epitaph upon the death of Sir Edward Saunders. Knight, Lord chief
Baron of the Exchequer.
YOu Muses wear your mourning weeds, strike on ye fatal Drome,
Sound Triton out the trumpe of fame, in spite of Parcas dome.
Distill Parnassus pleasant drops, possess Pierides place,
Apollo help with doleful tune, to wail this woeful case.
Wring hard your hands, wail on your loss, lament the fate that fell,
With sobs and sighs to Saunders say, oh Saunders now farewell,
Whom Phoebus fed with Pallas pappe, as one of Sibils seed,
Lo here where death did rest his corpse, the vermin foul to feed.
Whom Impes of Joue with Necter sweet, long in Libethres noursht,
Behold how dreadful death him brought, to yt whence he came first.
Lycurgus he for learned laws, Rhadamanthus race that ran,
An other Nestor for advise, Zalucus fame that wanne.
A Damon dear unto his friend, in faith like Phocion found,
A Cato that could counsel give, to prince a subject found.
Not Athens for their Solon sage, not Rome for Numa wail,
As we for Saunders death have cause, in fods of tears to sail.
Nor Sparta card for Chilos death, ne proud Prienua pressed,
To weep for Bias as we wayle, for Saunders late possessed.
His learned paths his talentes rare, so now by death appears,
As he that Solomon sought to serve, in prime and youthful years,
His counsel sad, his rules, his laws, in country soil so wrought,
As though in Cuma he had been, of sage Sibilla taught.
His virtuous life was such I say, as Virtue did embrace,
By Virtue taught in Virtues school, to grow in virtues race.
Might tender babes, might orpha^ts weak, might widows rere yt cry,
The sound thereof should pearce the clouds, to skale ye empire sky.
To bid the gods to battle bend, and to dissend in sight,
Though far unfit, and mates unmeet, with mortal men to fight.
Too late (alas) we wish his life, to soon deceived us Death.
Too little wit we have to seek, the dead again to breath.
What helpless is, must careless be, as Natures course does show,
For death shall reap what life has sown, by nature this we know.
Where is that fierce Achilles sled, where is king Turnus shroude,
What is become of Priamus state, where is Periander proud:
Hector, Hanno, Hanibal, dead, Pompei, Pirrhus spild,
Scipio, Cirus, Caesar, slain, and Alexander killed.
So long there Fortune fast did floe, and charged Fame to sound,
Till frowning Fortune foyld by face, which fawning fortune found:
Shun Fortunes feats, shake fortune of to none is fortune sound,
Since none may say of Fortune so, I Fortune faithful found.
Behold where Fortune flowed so fast, and favored Saunders lure,
Tiliffckle Fortune false again did Saunders death procure.
Lo clothed could in cloddes of clay, in drossy dust remain,
By fate returned from whence he came, to his mothers womb again.
Who welnigh thirty years was Judge, before a Judge did fall,
And judged by that mighty Judge, which Judge shall judge us all.
The heavens may of right rejoice, and earth may it bewail,
Since heaven wan, and earth has lost, the guide and arc of veil.
There gain is much, our loss is great, their mirth our moan is such,
That they may laugh as cause do yield, and we may weep as much:
O happy he, unhappy we, his hap does aye increase,
Happy he, and hapless we, his hap shall never cease.
We live to die, he dyed to live, we want, and he possessed,
We bide in bands, he bathes in bliss, the Gods above him blessed.
Being borne to live, he lived to dye, and dyed to God so plain,
That birth, that life, that death, do show, that he shall live again:
His youth to age, his age to death, his death to fame applied,
His fame to time, his time to God, thus Saunders lived and dyed.
O happy life, O happier death, O ten times happy he,
Whose hap it was, such hap to have, a Judge this age to be.
Oh joyful time, oh blessed soil, where Pallas rules with wit,
O noble state, O sacred seat, where Saba sage does sit.
Like Susan sound, like Sara sad, with Hesters mace in hand,
With Judiths sword Bellona like, to rule this noble land.
I had my will, you have your wish, I laugh, rejoice you may,
I wan now much, you gain no less, to see this happy day.
Wherein I dyed, wherein you live, Oh treble happy cost,
Wherein I ioyed in glory great, wherein you triumph most.
Knele on your knes, knock hard your breasts, sound forth ye joyful drome
Clap loud your hands, sound Echo say, the golden world is come.
Rejoice you Judges may of right, your mirth may now be such,
As never erst you Judges had, in England mirth so much.
Here Cuma is, here Sibill reigns, on Delphos seat to sit,
Here she like Phoebus rules, that can Gordius knot vnknitte.
I lived to nature long enough, I lived to honor much,
I lived at wish, I died at will, to see my country such.
As neither needs it Numas laws, nor yet Apollos sweard,
For Mauger Mars, yet Mars shall be of this our Queen afeard.
O peerlesse pearl, O Diamo^d deer, O Queen of Queens farewell,
Your royal majesty God preserve in England long to dwell.
Farewell the Phaenix of the world, farwell my sovereign Queen,
Farwell most noble virtuous prince, Mineruas mate I ween.
No Iuel, Gemme, no Gold to give, no pearls from Pactolos lo,
No Persian Gaze, no Indian stones, no Tagus sands to show.
But faith and will to native soil a live and dead I find,
My heart my mind, my love I leave unto my prince behind.
Farwell you nobles of this land, farwell you Judges grave,
Farwell my fellows, friends and mates, your Queen I say God save.
What rise in time, in time does fall, what flows in time does ebb,
What lives in time, in time shall dye, and yield to Parcus web.
The sun to darkness shall be turned, the stars from skies shall fall,
The Moon to blood, the world with fire shall be consumed all.
As smoke or vapor vanish straight, as bubbles rise and fall,
As clouds do pass or shadow shifts we live, we dye so all.
Our pomp our pride, our triumph most, our glory great herein,
Like shattering shadow pass away, as though none such had bin.
Earth, water, air, and fire, as they were erst before,
A lump confused, and Chaos called, so shall they once be more.
And all to earth, that came from earth, and to the grave descend,
For earth on earth, to earth shall go, and earth shall be the end.
As Christ ascended up in clouds, so Christ in clouds shall come,
To judge both good and bad on earth, at dreadful day of dome.
From whence our flesh shall rise again, even from the drossy dust,
And so shall pass I hope, unto the mansion of the just.
FINIS.
Lodowick LLoyd.

33. His good name being blemished, he bewayleth.
FRamd in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery.
I stayles stand tabide the shocke of shame and infamy.
My life through lingering long is lodgde, in lare of loathsome ways,
My death delayed to keep from life, the harm of hapless days:
My sprites, my heart, my wit and force, in deep destresse are dround,
The only loss of my good name, is of these greefes the ground.
And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice, and tongue are weak:
To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare, and speak:
Such pearsing plaints, as answer might, or would my woeful case,
Help crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face:
Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air be found,
To wail with me this loss of mine, as of these greefes the ground.
Help gods, help saints, help sprits and powers, yt in ye heaven do dwell,
Help ye that are aye wont to wail, ye howling hounds of hell:
Help man, help beasts, help birds, and worms, yt on ye earth does toil
Help fish, help foul, that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil.
Help Echo that in air does flee, shril voices to resound,
To wail this loss of my good name, as of these greefes the ground.
FJNJS.
E. O.

34. Of Fortunes power.
POlicrates whose passing hap, causd him to lose his fate,
A golden ring cast in the seas to change his constant state,
And in a fish yet at his bourd, the same he after found,
Thus Fortune lo, to whom she takes, for bounty does abound.
The myzers unto might she mounts, a common case we see,
And mighty to great misery, she sets in low degree:
Whom she to day does rear on hie, upon her whirling wheel,
Tomorrow next she dingeth down, and casts at her heel.
No measure has she in her gifts, she does reward each sort,
The wise that counsel have, no more, then fools that makes sport.
She uses never partial hands, for to offend or please,
Give me good Fortune al men says, and throw me in the seas.
It is no fault or worthiness, that makes men fall or rise,
I rather be borne Fortunate, then to be very wise.
The blindest man right soon, that by good Fortune guided is,
To whom that pleasant Fortune pipes, can never dance amiss,
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

36 Though triumph after bloody wars, the greatest brags do bear.
Yet triumph of a conquered mind, the crown of fame shall wear.

Who so does mark the careless life, of these unhappy days,
And sees what small and slender hold, the state of virtue stays:
He finds, that this accursed trade, proceeds of this ill,
That men be given too much to yield, to their untamed will.
In lack of taming witless will, the poor we often see,
Enuies the rich, because that he, his equal cannot be:
The rich advanced to might by wealth, from wrong does not refrain,
But will oppresses weaker sort, to heap excessive gain.
If Fortune were so blind to give to one man what he will,
A world would not suffice the same, if he might have his fill:
We wish, we search, we strive for all, and have no more therein,
Then has ye slave, when death does come, though Cresus wealth he win.
In getting much, we get but care, such brittle wealth to keep,
The rich within his walls of stone, does never soundly sleep:
When poor in weak and slender house, do fear no loss of wealth,
And have no further care but this, to keep themselves in health.
Affection may not hide the sword of sway in judgment seat,
Least partial favor execute, the law in causes great:
But if the mind in constant state, affection quite do leave,
The higher state shall have their rights, the poor no wrong receive.
It is accounted greater praise to Caesar's lofty state,
Against his vanquist foes, in wars to bridle wrekefull hate:
Then when to Rome he had subdued the people long unknown,
Whereby as far as land was found, the same abroad was blown.
If honor can self will refuse, and justice be upright.
And private state desires but that, which good appears in sight:
Then virtue shall with sovereign show, to every eye reveal,
An heavenly life, a wealefull state, a happy common weal.
Let virtue then the triumph win, and govern all your deeds,
Your yielding to her sober heastes, immortal glory breeds:
She shall vpreare your worthy name, shining into the skies,
Her beams shall blaze in grave obscure, where shrined carcass lies.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

37. Of perfect wisdom.
Who so will be accounted wise, and truly claim the same,
By joining virtue to his deeds, he must atchieue the same:
But few there be, that seek thereby true wisdom to attain,
O God so rule our hearts therefore, such fondness to refrain.
The wisdom which we most esteem, in this thing does consist,
With glorious talk to show in words, our wisdom when we list.
Yet not in talk, but seemly deeds, our wisdom we should place,
To speak so fair, and do but ill, does wisdom quite disgrace.
To bargain well, and shun the loss, a wisdom counted is,
And thereby through the greedy coin, no hope of grace to mis:
To seek by honor to advance his name to brittle praise,
Is wisdom, which we daily see, increases in our days.
But heavenly wisdom sower seems to hard for them to win,
And weary of the suit they seem, when they do once begin:
It teaches us to frame our life, while vital breath we have,
When it dissalueth earthly mass, the soul from death to save.
By fear of God to rule our steps, from sliding into vice,
A wisdom is, which we neglect, although of greater price:
A point of wisdom also this, we commonly esteem,
That every man should be in deed, that he desires to seem.
To bridle that desire of gain, which forces us to ill,
Our hauty stomachs Lord repress, to tame presuming will:
This is the wisdom that we should, above each thing desire,
O heavenly God from sacred throne, that grace in us inspire.
And print in our repugnant hearts, the rules of wisdom true,
That all our deeds in worldly life, may like thereof ensue:
Thou only art the living spring, from whom this wisdom flows,
O wash therewith our sinful hearts, from vice that therein grows.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

38. A freendly admonition.
YE stately wightes, that live in quiet rest,
Through worldly wealth, which God has given you.
Lament with tears and sighs from doleful breast:
The shame and power that vice obtains now.
Behold how God does daily profer grace,
Yet we disdain repentance to embrace.
The suddes of sin do soke into the mind,
And cancred vice does virtue quite expel:
No change to good alas can resting find,
Our wicked hearts so stoutly do rebel.
Not one there is that hastes to amend,
Though God from heaven his daily threats down send.
We are so slow to change our blamefull life,
We are so pressed to snatch aluring vice:
Such greedy hearts on every side be rife,
So few that guide their will by counsel wise,
To let our tears lament the wretched case,
And call to God for undeserved grace.
You worldly wightes, that have your fancies fixed,
On slipper joy of terraine pleasure here:
Let some remorse in all your deeds be mixed,
Whiles you have time let some redress appear.
Of sudden death the hour you shall not know,
And look for Death although it seems slow.
Oh be no judge in other men's offense,
But purge thy self and seek to make thee free,
Let every one apply his diligence,
A change to good within him self to see.
O God direct our feet in such a stay,
From cancred vice to shun the hateful way.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

39. Sundry men sundry affectes.
JN every wight some sundry sort of pleasure I do find,
Which after he does seek to ease his toyling mind.
Diana with her trayning chase, of hunting had delight,
Against the fearful Dear, she could direct her shot aright.
The lofty years in every age, does still embrace the same,
The sport is good, if virtue do assist the cheerful game.
Minerua in her chattering arms her courage does advance,
In trial of the bloody wars, she gives luckie chance.
For sauegard men embrace the same, which do so needful seem.
That noble hearts their chief delights in use thereof esteem,
In warlike games to try or ride the force of arms they use,
And base the man we do account that does the same refuse.
The silver sound of musickes cords, does please Apollos wit,
A sentence which the heavens advance, where it deserves to sit,
A pleasure apt for every wight, relief to careful mind,
For woe redress, for care a salve, for sadness help we find.
The sovereign praise of Music still, does cause the Poets feign.
That whirling Spheres, and eake the heavens do hermonie retain.
I hard, that these three powers, at variance lately fell,
Whiles each did praise his own delight, the other to excel.
Then Fame, as an indifferent judge, to end the case they call,
The praise pronounced by her to them, indifferently does fall.
Diana health and strength maintain, Minerua force does tame,
And Music gives a sweet delight, to further others game.
These three delights to hawtre minds the worthiest are esteemed,
If virtue be annexed to them, they rightly be so deemed.
With joy they do revive the wit with sorrow often oppressed,
And never suffer solemn grief to long in mind to rest.
Be wise in mirth, and seek delight, the same do not abuse,
In honest mirth a happy joy we ought not to refuse.
FJNJS.
R. Hill.

40. Of a Friend and a Flatterer.
A Trusty friend is rare to find, a fawning foe may sone be got:
A faithful friend bear still in mind, but fawning foe regard thou not
A faithful friend no cloak does crave, to color knavery withal:
But Sicophant a Gun must have, to bear a port what ere befall.
A nose to smell out every feast, a brazen face to set it out:
A shamles child or homely gest, whose life does like to range about.
A fauning foe while wealth does last, a thief to rob and spoil his friend:
As strong as oak while wealth does last, but rotten stick does prove in the
end.
Look first, then leap, beware the mire:
Burnt Child is warnd to dread the fire.
Take heed my friend, remember this,
Short horse (they say) soon curried is.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

41. Of sufferaunce comes case.
TO seem for to revenge each wrong in hasty wise,
By proof of guiltless men, it has not been the guise.
In slanders loathsome brute, where they condemned be,
with ragelesse mood they suffer wrong, where truth shall try the^ free.
These are the patient pangues, that pass within the breast,
Of those, yt feel their cause by mine, where wrong has right oppressed.
I know how by suspect, I have been iudgd awry,
And granted gilty in the thing, that clearly I deny.
My faith may me defend, if I might loved be,
God judge me so, as from the guilt I know me to be free.
I wrote but for my self, the grief was all mine own.
As, who would prove extremity, by proof it might be known.
Yet are there such, that say they can my meaning deem,
Without respect of this old troth, things prove not as they seem.
Whereby it may befall, in judgment to be quick,
To make themselves suspect therewith, that needed not to kick.
Yet in resisting wrong, I would not have it thought,
I do amiss, as though I knew by whom it might be wrought.
If any such there be, that herewithall be vexed,
It were their virtue to beware, and deem me better next.
L. Vaux.

43. All things are Vain:
ALthough the purple morning, brags in brightness of the sun,
As though he had of chased night, a glorious conquest won:
The time by day, gives place again to force of drowsy night,
And every creature is constrained to change his lusty plight.
Of pleasures all, that here we taste:
We feel the contrary at last.
In spring, though pleasant Zephirus, has fruitful earth inspired,
And never has each bush, each branch, with blossoms brave attired:
Yet fruits and flowers, as buds and blomes full quickly withered be,
When stormy winter comes to kill, the summers iolitie.
By time are got, by time are lost,
All things wherein we pleasure most.
Although the Seas so calmely glide, as dangers none appear,
And doubt of storms, in sky is none, king Phoebus shines so clear:
Yet when the boisterous winds break out, and raging waves do swel,
The seely bark now heaues to heaven, now sinckes again to hell.
Thus change in every thing we see,
And nothing constant seems to be.
Who flows most in worldly wealth of wealth is most unsure,
And he that cheefely tastes of joy, does sometime woe endure?
Who vaunteth most of numbered friends, forgo them al he must,
The fairest flesh and liuelest blood, is turned at length to dust.
Experience gives a certain ground,
That certain here, is nothing found.
Then trust to that which aye remains, the bliss of heavens above,
Which Time, nor Fate, nor Wind, nor Storm, is able to remove.
Trust to that sure celestial rock, that restes in glorious throne,
That has been, is, and must be still, our anchor hold alone.
The world is but a vanity,
In heaven seek we our surety.
FINIS.
F. K.

44. A Virtuous Gentlewoman in the praise of her love.
J Am a Virgin fair and free, and freely do rejoice,
I sweetly warble sugared notes, from silver voice:
For which delightful joys, yet thank I courtesy love,
By whose almighty power, such sweet delights I prove.
I walk the pleasant fields, adornd with lively green,
And view the fragrant flowers, most lovely to be seen:
The purple Columbine, the Couslippe and the Lilly,
The Violet sweet, the Daizie and Daffadillie,
The Woodbines on the hedge, the red Rose and the white,
And each fine flowers else, that renders sweet delight:
Among the which I choose, all those of seemeliest grace,
In thought, resembling them to my dear lovers face.
His lovely face I mean, whose golden flouring gifts,
His ever living Fame, to lofty sky vpliftes:
Whom loving me I love, only for virtues sake,
When virtuously to love, all only care I take.
Of al which fresh fair flowers, ye flower yt does appear,
In my conceit most like to him I hold so dear:
I gather it, I kiss it, and eke devise with it,
Such kind of lovely speech, as is for lovers fit.
And then of all my flowers, I make a garland fine,
With which my golden wire hears, together I do twine:
And set it on my head, so taking that delight,
That I would take, had I my lover still in sight.
For as in goodly flowers, mine eyes great pleasure find,
So are my lovers gifts most pleasant to my mind:
Upon which virtuous gifts, I make more sweet repast,
Then they that for love sportes, the sweetest joys do taste.
FJNJS.
F. K.

45. Oppressed with sorrow he wishes death.
JF Fortune may enforce, the careful heart to cry,
And griping grief constrain, the wounded wight lament:
Who then alas to mourn, has greater cause then I,
Against whose hard mishap, both Heaven and earth is bent.
For whom no help remains, for whom no hope is left,
From whom all happy hap is fled, and pleasure quite bereft,
Whose life naught can prolong, whose health, naught can procure.
Whose passed proof of pleasant joy,
Mischaunce has changed to griefs anoy:
And lo, whose hope of better day,
Is over whelmd with long delay.
Oh hard mishap.
Each thing I plainly see, whose virtues may avail,
To ease the pinching pain, which gripes the groaning wight:
By Phisicks sacred skill, whose rule does seldom fail,
Through labors long inspect, is plainly brought to light.
I know, there is no fruit, no leaf, no root, no rind,
No herb, no plant, no juice, no gum, no metal deeply mind:
No Pearl, no precious stone, ne Iemme of rare effect,
Whose virtues, learned Gallens books, at large do not detect.
Yet all their force can not appease,
The furious fittes of my disease:
For any drugge of phisickes art,
Can ease the grief that gripes my heart.
Oh strange disease.
I hear the wise affirm, that Nature has in store,
A thousand secret salues, which Wisdom has out found:
To cool the scorching heat of every smarting sore,
And heals deepest scarce, though grievous be the wound.
The ancient proverb says, that none so festred grief,
Does grow, for which ye gods themselves, have not ordained relief.
But I by proof do know, such proverbs to be vain,
And think that nature never knew the plague that I sustain.
And so not knowing my distress,
Has left my grief remediless,
For why, the heavens for me prepare,
To live in thought, and dye in care.
Oh lasting pain.
By change of air I see, by hant of healthful soil,
By diet duly kept, gross humors are expeld:
I know that greefes of mind, and inward hearts turmoyle,
By faithful friends advise, in time may be repeld.
Yet all this naught auailes, to kill that me anoyes,
I mean to stop these floods of care that ouerflow my joys.
No none exchange of place, can change my lucklesse lot,
Like one I live, and so must die, whom Fortune has forgot.
No counsel can prevail with me,
Nor sage advise with grief agree:
For he that feels the panges of hell,
Can never hope in heaven to dwell.
Oh deep despair.
What lives on earth but I, whose travail reapes no gain,
The wearied Horse and Ox, install and stable rest:
The Ante with summers toil bears out the winters pain,
The foul that flies all day, at night returns to rest.
The Ploughmans weary work, amid the winters mire,
Rewarded is with summers gain, which yeeldes him double hire:
The silly laboring soul, which drudges from day to day,
At night his wages truly paid, contented goth his way.
And coming home, his drowsy head,
He cowcheth close in homely bed:
Wherein no sooner down he lies,
But sleep has straight possessed his eyes.
Oh happy man.
The Soldier biding long the brunt of mortal wars,
Where life is never free, from dint of deadly foil:
At last comes joyful home, though mangled all with scarres,
Where frankly, void of fear, he spends the gotten spoil.
The Pirate lying long, amid the foming floods,
With every flaw in hazard is to loose both life and goods:
At length finds view of land, where wished Port he spies,
Which once obtained, among his mates, he parts the gotten prise,
Thus every man, from travail past,
Does reap a just reward at last:
But I alone, whose troubled mind,
In seeking rest, unrest does find.
Oh lucklesse lotte.
Oh cursed caitife wretch, whose heavy hard mishappe,
Does wish ten thousand times, that thou had not ben borne:
Since fate has thee condemned, to live in sorrows lap,
Where waylings waste thy life, of all redress forlorn.
What shall thy grief appease: who shall thy torment stay?
Will thou thy self, with murdering hands, enforce thy own decay?
No, far be thou from me, my self to stop my breath,
The gods forbid, whom I beseech, to work my joys by death.
For lingering length of loathsome life,
Does stir in me such mortal strife:
That whiles for life and death I cry,
In death I live, and living dye.
Oh froward fate.
Lo here my hard mishap, lo here my strange disease,
Lo here my deep despair, lo here my lasting pain,
Lo here my froward fate, which nothing can appease.
Lo here how others toil, rewarded is with gain.
While lucklesse, lo I live, in loss of labors due,
Compeld by proof of torment strong, my endless grief to rue:
In which, since needs I must, consume both youth and age,
If old I live, and that my care no comfort can assuage.
Henceforth I banishe from my breast,
All frustrate hope of future rest:
And truthlesse trust to times reward,
With all respects of joys regard.
Here I forswear.
47. Where reason makes request, there wisdom ought supply,
With freendly answer pressed, to grant or else deny.

J Sigh, why so? for sorrow of her smart,
I morn, wherefore? for grief that she complains:
I pity, what? her oppressed heart,
I dread what harm? the danger she sustaines.
I grieve, whereat? at her oppressing pains.
I feel, what force the fittes of her disease,
Whose harm does me and her, alike displease.
I hope, what hap? her happy healthes retire,
I wish, what wealth? no wealth, nor worldly store:
But crave, what craft? by cunning to aspire,
Some skill, whereto? to salve her sickly sore.
What then? why then would I her health restore,
Whose harm me hurtes, how so? so works my will,
To wish my self and her, like good and ill.
What moves thy mind, whereto? to such desire,
Ne force, ne favor, what then? free fancies choice:
Art thou to chose? my charter to require,
Each Ladies love is feed by customs voice,
Yet are there grauntes, the evidence of their choice.
What then, our freedom is at large in choosing,
As women's wills are froward in refusing,
Wotes she thy will? she knows what I protest,
Daynde she thy suit? she daungerd not my talk:
Gave she consent? she granted my request,
What did thou crave? the root, the fruit, the stalk,
I asked them all, what gave she, Cheese, or chalk?
That taste must try, what taste? I mean the proof,
Of friends, whose wills withhold there bow aloof.
Meanst thou good faith? what else, hopest thou to speed?
Why not, O fool untaught in carpell trade,
Know not what proofs from such delays proceed,
Will thou like headless Cock be caught in glade?
Art thou like ass, too apt for burden made?
Fie, fie, will thou for faint adore the shrine?
And woo her friend, ear she be wholly thine;
Who drew this drift? moved she, or thou this match?
It Was I: oh fool unware of women's wyles,
Long may thou wait, like hungry hounde at hatch,
She crafty Fox, the silly Goose beguiles.
Thy suit is shaped so fit for long delay,
That she at will may chek, from yea to nay.
But in good soothe, tell me her friends intent:
Best learn it first, their purpose I not know,
Why then thy will to worse and worse is bent,
Do thou delight, the vnkindled cole to blow?
Or childlike love, in anckred bote to row,
What mean these terms? who since thy suit is such,
Know of or on, or thou affect too much.
No haste but good, why no, the mean is best,
Admit she love, mislike in lingering grows:
Suppose she is caught, then Woodcocke on thy crest,
Till end approues, what scornful seeds she sowes.
In loytring love, such dangers ebbes and flows,
What help herein? why wake in dangerous watch,
That too, nor fro, may make thee mar the match.
Is that the way to end my weary work?
By quick dispatch, to lesson long turmoyle,
Well well, though loss in lingering wontes to lurk,
And I a fool, most fit to take the foil:
Yet proof from promise, never shall recoyle.
My words with deeds, and deeds with words shall wend,
Till she or hers, gainsay that I intend.
Art thou so fond? not fond, but firmly fast,
Why fool her friends wot how thy will is bent:
Yet thou like doult, whose wit and sense is past,
See not what frumpes, do follow thy intent.
Ne know, how love in lewe of scorn is lent,
Adewe, for sightes such folly should prevent.
Well well, their scoffs with scorns might be repayd,
If my requests were fully yead or nayd,
Well, well, let these with wisdoms praise be wayd,
And in your chest of cheifest secrets laid.
FJNJS.
My luck is loss.
48. What joy to a contented mind.
THe faith that fayles, must needs be thought untrue,
The friend that faines, who holds not unjust,
Who likes that love, that changes still for new:
Who hopes for truth, where troth is void of trust,
No faith, no friend, no love, no troth so sure,
But rather fails then steadfastly endure.
What head so stayed? that alters not intent,
What thought so sure? that steadfast does remain,
What wit so wise? that never needs repent:
What tongue so true? but sometime wonts to feign,
What foot so firm? that never treades awrie.
What sooner dimde? then sight of clearest eye.
What heart so fixed? but soon enclines to change,
What mood so mild? that never moved debate:
What faith so strong, but lightly likes to range,
What love so true? that never learnd to hate.
What life so pure? that lasts, without offense,
What worldly mind? but moves with ill pretense.
What knot so fast? that may not be untied,
What seal so sure? but fraud or force shall break:
What prop of stay? but one time shrinkes aside,
What ship so stauche? that never had a leake.
What grant so large? that no exception makes,
What hoped help, but friend at need forsakes.
What seat so high? but low to ground may fall,
What hap so good? that never found mislike:
What state so sure? but subject is to thrall.
What force preuailes? where Fortune list to strike.
What wealth so much? but time may turn to want,
What store so great? but wasting makes skant.
What profits hope in depth of dangers thrall.
What ruste in time, but waxes worse and worse:
What helps good heart, if Fortune frown withal,
What blessing thriues, against heavenly helpless curse.
What winnes desire to get and can not gain,
What boots to wish and never to obtain.
FJNJS.
My luck is loss.
49. Donec eris Faelix multos numerabis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.

EVen as the Raven, the Crow, and greedy Rite,
Do swarming flock, where carren corpse does fall:
And tiring tear with beak and talentes might;
Both skin and flesh to gorge their guts withal.
And never cease, but gather more to more,
Do all to pull the carkas to and froe,
Till bared bones at last they leave behind,
And seek elsewhere some fatter food to find.
Even so I see, where wealth does wax at will.
And Gold does grow to heaps of great increase:
There friends resort, and profering freendship still,
Full thick they throng, with never ceasing prease.
And slilie make a show of true intent,
When naught but guile, and inward hate is meant,
For when mischance shall change such wealth to want,
They pack them thence to place of richer haunt.
FJNJS.
My luck is loss.
50. Amantium irae amoris redinte gratio est.
JN going to my naked bed as one that would have slept,
I hard a wife sing to her child, that long before had wept:
She sighed sore and sang full sweet, to bring the babe to rest,
That would not cease but cried still, in sucking at her breast.
She was full weary of her watch, and grieved with her child,
She rocked it and rated it, till that on her it smilde:
Then did she say now have I found, this proverb true to prove,
The falling out of faithful friends, reliuing is of love.
Then took I paper, pen and ynke, this proverb for to write,
In regester for to remain, of such a worthy wight:
As she proceeded thus in song unto her little bratt,
Much matter uttered she of weight, in place whereas she satt.
And proved plain, there was no beast, nor creature bearing life,
Could well be known to live in love, without discord and strife:
Then kissed she her little babe, and swear by God above,
The falling out of faithful friends, renewing is of love.
She said that neither king ne prince, ne lord could live aright,
Until their puissance they did prove their manhood and their might.
When manhood shall be matched so, that fear can take no place,
Then weary works make warriors, each other to embrace,
And leaued their force that failed them, which did consume the rout,
That might before have lived their time, and nature out:
Then did she sing as one that thought, no man could her reprove,
The falling out of faithful friends, renewing is of love.
She said she saw no fish ne foul, nor beast within her haunt,
That met a stranger in their kind, but could give it a taunt:
Since flesh might not endure, but rest must wrath succeed,
And force the fight to fall to play, in pasture where they feed,
So noble nature can well end, the work she has begone,
And bridle well that will not cease, her tragedy in some:
Thus in song she often reherst, as did her well behoue,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renewing of love.
I marvel much pardy quoth she, for to behold the route,
To see man, woman, boy and beast, to toss the world about:
Some kneel, so^e crouch, so^e beck, some chek, and some ca^ smothly smile,
And some embrace others in arm, and there think many a wile.
Some stand aloufe at cap and knee, some humble and some stout,
Yet are they never friends in deed, until they once fall out:
Thus ended she her song, and said before she did remove,
The falling out of faithful friends, is the renewing of love.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

51. Think to dye.
THe life is long, which lothsomely does last,
The doleful days draw slowly to their date:
The present pangues, and painful plagues forepast,
Yeeldes grief aye green, to stablish this estate.
So that I feel in this great storm and strife,
That death is sweet, that shortneth such a life.
And by the stroke of this strange overthrow,
All which conflict in thraldom I was thrust:
The Lord be praised, I am well taught to know,
From whence man came, and eke whereto he must.
And by the way, upon how feeble force,
His term does stand, till death does end his course.
The pleasant years that seems so sweetly run,
The merry days to end, so fast that fleet:
The joyful wightes, of which days draws so sone,
The happy hours which more do miss then meet.
Do all consume as snow against the Sun,
And death makes end of all that life begun.
Since death shall dure till all the world be wast,
What means man to dread death then so sore?
As man might make, that life should always last,
Without regard the Lord has led before.
The dance of death, which all must run on row,
The hour wherein only himself does know.
If man would mind, what burdens life does bring,
What grievous crimes to God he does commit:
What plagues, what peril thereby spring,
With no sure hour in all his days to sit.
He would sure think, as with great cause I do,
The day of death is happier of the two.
Death is the door whereby we draw to joy,
Life is the lake that drowneth all in pain:
Death is so dole it seaseth all away,
Life is so leude, that all it yeeldes is vain.
And as by life, in bondage man is brought,
Even so by death is freedom likewise wrought.
Wherefore with Paul let all men wish and pray,
To be dissolved of this foul fleshly mass:
Or at the least be armd against the day,
That they be found good soldiers pressed to pass.
From life to death, from death to life again,
And such a life as ever shall remain.
FINIS.
D. S.

51. If thou desire to live in quiet rest,
give ear and see but say the best.

If thou: delight, in quietness of life,
Desire: to shun, from brales, debate and strife,
To live: in love with god, with friend and foe,
In rest: shall sleep: when others cannot so.
Give ear: to all, yet do not all believe,
And see: the end, and then do sentence geeue:
But say: for truth of happy lives assinde,
The best: has he that quiet is in mind.
FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

52. Being forsaken of his friend he complains.
Why should I linger long to live,
In this disease of fantasy,
Since fortune does not cease to give,
Things to my mind most contrary.
And at my joys does lowre and frown,
Till she has turned them vpsidowne,
A friend I had to me most dear,
And of long time faithful and just:
There was no one, my heart so near,
Nor one in whom I had more trust.
Whom now of late without cause why,
Fortune has made my enemy.
The grass me thinks should grow in sky,
The stars, unto the earth cleave fast:
The water stream should pass awrie,
The winds should leave their strength of blast.
The Sun and Moon by one assent,
Should both forsake the firmament.
The fish in air should slye with finne,
The fowls in flood, should bring forth fry:
All things methinkes should erst begin,
To take their course unnaturally,
Before my friend should alter so,
Without a cause to be my foe.
But such is Fortunes hate I say,
Such is his will on me to wreake:
Such spite he has at me always,
And ceasseth not my heart to break.
With such despite of cruelty,
Wherefore then longer live should I.
FINIS.
E. S.

54. Prudens. The history of Damacles, and Dionise.
Who so is set in princely throne, and craves rule to bear,
Is still beset on every side, with peril and with fear.
High trees by stormy winds are shakt, and rent up from the ground,
And flashly flackes of lightning flames on turrets do rebound.
When little shrubs in safety lurk, in covert all allow,
And freshly flourish in their kind, what ever wind do blow.
The cruel king of Scisili: who fearing Barbars hands.
Was wont to sludge his beard himself, with cole and fire brands,
Has taught us this, the proof whereof, full plainly we may see,
Was never thing more lively touched, to show it so to be.
This king did seem to Damacles, to be the happiest wight,
Because he thought none like to him, in power or in might.
Who did alone so far excel the rest in his degree,
As does the Sun in brightness clear, the darkest star we see.
Will thou (then said this cruel king) prove this my present state,
Possess thou shall this seat of mine, and so be fortunate.
Full gladly then this Damacles, this proferd honor took,
And shooting at a princely life, his quiet rest forsook.
In honors seat then was he plast, according to his will,
Forthwith a banquet was prepared, that he might feast his fill,
Nothing did want wherein it was thought, that he could take delight,
To feed his eye, to fill his mouth, or please the appetite.
Such store of plate, I think in Greece, there scarsly was so much,
His seruitours did angels seem, their passing shape was such.
No dayntie dish but their it was, and thereof was such store,
That through out Greece so princely cheer, was never seen before.
Thus while in pomp and pleasures seat, this Damacles was plast,
And did begin with gladsome heart, each dainty dish to taste.
At length by chance cast up his eyes, and began the house to vewe,
And saw a sight that him enforst, his princely state to rewe.
A sword forsooth with downward point, that had no stronger thread,
Then one horse here that peised it, direct upon his head.
Wherewith he was so sore amasde, and shoke in every part,
As though the sword that hong above, had stroke him to the heart.
Then all their pleasures took their leave, and sorrow came in place,
His heavy heart the tears declard, that trickled down his face.
And then forthwith with sobbing voice, besought the king of grace,
That he would license him with speed, to depart out of that place.
And said that he full long enough, had tried now with fear,
What it is to be a happy man, and princely rule to bear.
This deed of thine oh Dionise, deserves immortal fame,
This deed shall always live with praise, though thou did live with shame
Whereby both kings be put in mind, their dangers to be great,
And subjects be forbid to climb, high steps of honors seat.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

48. Fortitude. A young man of Egypt, and Valerian.
Each one deserves great praise to have, but yet not like I think,
Both he that can sustain the yoke of pains, and does not shrink.
And he whom Cupids covert craft can nothing move at all,
Into the hard and tangled knottes of Venus snares to fall.
Besturre you then who so delights in virtues race to run,
The flying boy with bow ibent, by strength to over come.
As one did once when he was young, and in his tender days,
Whose stout and noble deed of his, has got immortal praise.
The wicked Romans did pursue the silly Christians than,
What time Valerian Emperor was a wicked cruel man.
Who spared not with bloody draughtes, to quench his own desire,
Dispatching all that stuck to Christ with hot consuming fire.
At length a man of tender years was brought before his sight,
Such one as Nature seemed to make a witness of her might.
For every part so well was set, that nothing was depraved,
So that the cruel king himself, would gladly him have saved.
So loath he was to see a work, so rare of Natures power,
So finely built so suddenly destroyed within an hour.
Then means he sought to overcome, or win him at the lest,
To slip from Christ whom he before had earnestly professed.
A bed preparde, so finely dect, such diverse pleasant smells,
That well it might appear a place, where pleasure only dwells,
By him he laid a naked wench, a Venus darling sure,
With sugared speech and lovely toys, that might his mind assure.
Such wanton lewres as these he thought, might easly him entise,
Which things he knew with lusty youth, had always ben in prise.
Such ways I think ye Gods themselves, could have invented none,
For flattering Venus ouercomes the senses every chone,
And he himself was even at point, to Venus to consent,
Had not his stout and manly mind resisted his intent.
When he perceived his flesh to yield to pleasures wanton toys.
And was by flight almost provoked, to taste of Venus joys.
More cruel to himself then those, that glad would him undo,
With bloody tooth, his tender tongue, byt quite and clean in two.
Thus was the pain so passing great of this his bloody bitt,
That all the fire and carnal lust was quenched every whitt.
Do ill and all thy pleasures then full soon will pass away,
But yet the shame of those thy deeds, will neuermore decay.
Do well and though thy pains be great, yet soon each one will cease,
But yet, the praise of those thy deeds will evermore increase.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

56. Justice. Zaleuch and his Son.
LEt rulers make most perfect laws, to rule both great and small
If they themselves obey them not, it booteth not at all.
As laws be naught but rulers dome, containing equal might,
So rulers should be speaking Laws, to rule by line of right.
Zaleuch the Prince of Locrine once, appointed by decree,
Each Lecherer should be punished, with loss of either eye.
His son by chance offended first, which when his father saw,
Lord God how earnest then was he, to execute the Law.
Then ran the people all by flocks, to him with weeping eyes,
Not one among the route there was, but pardon, pardon cries.
By whose outcries and earnest suit, his son in hope did stand,
That he thereby should then obtain, some pardon at his hand,
But all in vain, for he is found to be the man he was,
And makes have so much the more, to have the Law to pass.
The people yet renewed their suit, in hope of some relief,
Whose faces all besprent with tears, did testify their grief.
And cried all for pities sake, yield now to our request,
If all you will not clean remit, yet ease the pain at least.
Then somewhat was the father moved, with all the peoples voice,
And every man did give a shoute, to show they did rejoice.
Well then quoth he, it shall be thus, the Law shall be fulfilde,
And yet my son shall favor have, according as you wild.
One eye of his shall be pulde out, thus has his lewdness got,
And likewise so shall one of mine, though I deserve it not.
This word no sooner was pronounced, but strait the deed was done,
Two eyes, no mo were left, between the father and the son.
Say now who can, and on my faith Apollo he shall be,
Was he more gentle father lo? or suffer Judge trow ye.
This man would not his Laws belike, the webbs the Spiders weue
Wherein they lurk when they intend the simple to deceive.
Wherewith small flies full soon be caught, and tangled ere they wist,
When great ones fly and escape away, and break them as they list.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

57. Temperaunce. Spurina and the Roman Ladies.
IF nature bear thee so great Love, yt she in thee have beauty plast,
Full hard it is as we do prove, to keep the body clean and chaste:
Twixt comeliness and chastity.
A deadly strife is thought to be.
For beauty which some men suppose, to be as tware a golden ill,
Provoke strife and many foes, that seek on her to work her will:
Assaults to Towns if many make,
No Town so strong but may be take.
And this Spurina witness can, who did for beauty bear the bell,
So clean a wight so comely made, no dame in Rome but loved well:
Not one could cool her hot desire,
So burning was the flame of fire.
Like as when bait cast in the flood, forthwt does cause the fishes come
That pleasantly before did play, now presently to death to run:
For when they see the bait to fall,
Straight way they swallow hook and all.
So when Spurina they did see, to him they flocked out of hand,
So happest dame was thought to be, yt in his favor most did stand:
Not knowing under sweet deceits,
How Venus hides her poisoned baits.
But when he saw them thus to range, who^ love had linked in his chain
This means he sought for to assuage, these Ladies of their grievous pain:
His shape intending to disgrace,
With many wounds be scorcht his face.
By which his deed it came to pass, that he yt seemed an angel bright
Even now so clean disfigured was, yt he became a loathsome wight.
And rather had he be foul and chaste,
Then fair, and filthy joys to taste.
What pen can write, or tongue express, ye worthy praises of this deed,
Me think yt God ca^ do no less, then grant him heaven for his meede:
Who for to save himself upright,
Him self has first destroyed quite.
Finis.
M. E.

58. A bunche of herbs and flowers.
IF that each flower, the Gods have framed, or shapt by sacred skill,
Where as I would (no wrong to wish) and mine to wear at will.
Or else each tree, with lusty top, would lend me leave to Love,
With sprigs displaied to spread my suit, a wailing heart to prove.
Upon my helm soon should you see, my head advanced hie,
Some slipp for solace there to set, and wear the same would I.
Yet would I not for great delight, the Daises strange desire,
The Lilly would not like my lust, nor Rose would I require.
The Marigolde might grow for me, Rosemarie well might rest,
The fenell to, that is more fit, for some unfriendly geste.
Nor Cowslopps would I crave at all, sometimes they seem to coy,
Some ioly youth the Gelliflower, esteems for his joy.
The Lauender sometimes aloft, alures the lookers eyes,
The Paunsie shall not have the praise, where I may give the prise.
And thus no flower my fancy feeds, or likes so my lust,
As that I may subject my self, to toys of tickle trust.
For flowers though they be fair and fresh, of sent excelling sweet.
Yet grow they on the ground below, we tread them with our feet.
And shall I then go stoop to such? or else go seek to those,
Shall flowers enforce me once to faune, for fear of friends or foes.
Yet rather yield I to the right, as reason has assignde,
Mine aucthour said there was no salve, in flowers for me to find.
And yet perhaps some Tree there is, to shroude me from the shower,
That with her arms may salve the soul, that yields to her power.
Where I may find some pleasant shade, to salve me from the Sun,
Each thing we see that reason has, unto the Trees do run.
Both men and beasts such fowls as flies, the treasures are the trees,
And for my part when branches fall, I wish no other fees.
But when that storms beset me round, such succor God me send,
That I may find a friendly Tree, that will me well defend.
No Tree there is which yelds no good, to some that does it seek:
And as they are of diverse kinds, their uses are unlike.
The Eve tree serve ye Bowyers turn, the Ash the Coupers art,
The puissaunt Oak does make the post, the Pine some other part.
The Elmo does help to hide the birds, in weary Winters night,
The Briers I guess are nothing worth, they serve but for despite.
The willow wished I far from hence, good will deserve no wrong,
The Sallowe well may serve their states, that sing so sad a song.
The Box and Beeche each for himself, above the rest does bost,
The Eglantine for pleasure often, is pricked upon the post,
The Hauthorne so is had in prise, the Baies do bear the bell,
And that these Baies did bring no bliss, I like it not so well.
As erst I do that seemly tree, by which those Baies I found,
And wherewithal unwittingly, I took so great a wound.
As if the tree by which I lent, does lend me no relief,
There is no help but down I fall, so great is grown my grief.
And therefore at the last I crave, this favor for to find,
When every tree that here is told, begins to grow unkind.
The B. for beauty whom I boast, and shall above the rest,
That B. may take me to her trust, for B. does please me best.
It likes me well to walk the way, where B. does keep her bower,
And when it Raines to B. I run to save me from the shower.
This branch of B. which here I mean, to keep and chiefly crave,
At beck unto this B. I bow, to serve that beauty brave.
What shall I say the time does pass, the tale too tedious is,
though loathe to leave, yet leave I must, and say no more but this.
I wish this B. I might embrace, when as the same I see,
A league for life then I require, between this B. and me.
And though unworthy, yet good will, does work the way herein,
And B. has brought ye same above, which beauty did begin.
Finis.
59. Jn commendation of Music.
WHere griping grief ye heart would wou^d, and dolfull dumpes ye mind
there Music with her silver sound, is wont with speed to give redress:
Of troubled minds for every sore, sweet Music has a salve in store.
In joy makes our mirth abound, in grief it cheres our heavy sprits,
the careful head relief has found, by Musicks pleasant sweet delits:
Our senses, what should I say more, are subject unto Musicks lore,
The Gods by Music has their pray, the foul therein does joy,
For as the Roman Poets say, in seas whom Pirates would destroy,
A Dolphin saude from death most sharp, Arion playing on his harp:
Oh heavenly gift, yt turns the mind, like as the stern does rule ye ship,
Of music who^ the gods assignde to comfort man, who^ cares would nip,
since thou both man and beast do move, what wisema^ the^ will thee reprove
Finis.
60. A dialogue between the auctour and his eye.
Auctour. MY eye why did thou light on that, which was not thine?
Why have thou with thy sight, thus slain an heart of mine?
O thou unhappy eye, would God thou had been blind,
When first thou did her spy, for whom this grief I find.

Eye. Why sir it is not I, that do deserve such blame,
Your fancy not your eye, is causer of the same:
For I am ready pressed, as page that serves your ease,
To search what thing is best, that might your fancy please.

Auctour. I sent thee forth to see, but not so long to bide,
Though fancy went with thee, thou were my fancies guide:
Thy message being done, thou might return again,
So Cupid Venus son, no whit my heart should pain.

Eye. Where fancy bears swaye, there Cupid will be bold,
And reason flies away, from Cupids shafte of gold:
If you find cause thereby, some deal of painful smarte,
Alas blame not your eye, but blame consent of heart.

Auctour. My heart must I excuse, and lay the fault on thee,
Because thy sight did choose, when heart from thought was free:
Thy sight thus brought consent, consent has bred my grief,
And grief bids be content, with sorrow for relief.

FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

61. Finding no joy, he desires death.
THe Connie in his cave, the Feret does annoy,
And fleing thence his life to save, himself he does destroy,
His Berrie round about beset, with Hunters snares,
So that when he to escape starts out, is caught therein unawares,
Like choice poor man have I, to bide and rest in Love,
Or else from thence to fly, as badde a death to prove.
I see, in Love to rest, unkindness does pursure,
To rent the heart out of his breast, which is a Lover true:
And if from Love I start, as one that Love forsakes,
Then pensive thoughts my heart does pearce, and so my life it takes.
Then thus to fly or bide, hard is the choice to choose,
Since death has campd, and trenched each side, and says life now refuse.
Content I am therefore, my life therein to spend,
And death I take a salve for sore, my weary days to end.
And thus I you require, that faithful Love profess,
When carcas cased is in cheste, and body laid on hearse.
Your brinishe tears to save, such as my corse shall move,
And therewith write upon my grave, behold the force of Love.
FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

Hope well and have well.
JN hope the Shipman hoiseth sail, in hope of passage good,
In hope of health the sick man, does suffer loss of blood:
In hope the prisoner linckt in chains, hopes liberty to find,
Thus hope breds health, and health breds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope desire gets victory, in hope great comfort springs,
In hope the Lover lives in joys, he fears no dreadful stings,
In hope we live and may abide, such storms as are assignde,
Thus hope breds health, and health breds case, to every troubled mind.
In hope we easily suffer harm, in hope of future time,
In hope of fruit, the pain seems sweet, that to the tree does clime:
In hope of Love such glory grows, as now by proof I find,
That hope breds health, and heath breds ease to every troubled mind.
FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

He requesteth some freendly comfort, affirming his constancy.
THe mountains hie whose lofty topps, does meet the hautie sky,
The craggie rock that to the sea, free passage does deny:
The aged Oak that does resist, the force of blustering blast,
The pleasant herb that every where, a fragrant smell does cast.
The Lions force whose courage stout, declares a princelike might,
The Eagle that for worthiness, is borne of kings in fight:
The Serpent eke whose poisoned jaws, does belche out venime vile,
The loathsome Tode that shunneth light, and lives in exile.
These these I say and thousands more by trackt of time decay,
And like to time do quite consume, and vade from time to clay:
But my true heart and service vowed, shall last time out of mind,
And still remains as thine by dome, as Cupid has assignde.
My faith lo here I vow to thee, my troth thou know right well,
My goods my friends, my life is thine, what need I more to tell?
I am not mine, but thine I vow, thy hestes I will obey,
And serve thee as a servant ought, in pleasing if I may:
And sith I have no flying wings, to see thee as I wish,
Ne sins to cut the silver streams, as does the gliding fish.
Wherefore leave now forgetfulness, and send again to me,
And strain thy azured veins to write, then I may greeting see:
And thus farewell more dear to me, then chiefest friend I have,
Whose Love in heart I mind to shrine, till death his fee do crave.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

He complains his mishap.
SHall rigor reign where ruth has run, shall fancy now forsake?
Shall fortune lose that favor won, shall not your anger slake?
Shall hateful heart be had in you, that friendly did pretend,
Shall slipper thought and faith untrue, that heart of yours defend?
Shall nature show your beauty fair, that gentle seems to be?
Shall frowardness your fancies heir, be of more force then she?
Shall now disdain the dragg of death, direct and lead the way?
Shall all the imps upon the earth, rejoice at my decay?
Shall this the service of my youth, have such reward at last?
Shall I receive rigor of ruthe, and be from favor taste?
Shall I therefore berent my hears, with wights that wish to dye?
Or shall I bathe my self with tears, to feed your fickle eye.
No, no, I shall in pain lie still, with turtle Dove most true,
And vow my self to wit and will, their counsels to ensue:
Good Ladies all that Lovers be, and that to be pretend,
Give place to wit, let reason seem, your enemy to defend.
Least yt you think as I have thought, your self to strive in vain,
And so to be in thraldom brought, with me to suffer pain.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

No foe to a flatterer.
J Would it were not as I think, I would it were not so,
I am not blind although I wink, I feel what winds do blow:
I know where craft, with smiling cheer, creps into boldned breast,
I hear how fained speech speaks fair, where hatred is possessed.
I see the Serpent lie and lurcke, under the green allow,
I see him watch a time to work, his poison to bestow.
In freendly looks such fraud is found, as faith for fear is fled,
And freendship has receiude such wound, as he is almost ded.
And hateful heart with malice great, so boiles in cankred mind,
That flattery flearing in the face, had almost made me blind.
But now I see all is not gold, that glittereth in the eye,
Nor yet such friends as they profess, as now by proof I try.
Though secret spite by craft, has made a coat of Panter skin,
And thinks to find me in the shade, by sleight to wrap me in,
Yet God be praised my eye is clear, and can behold the Sun:
When falsehood dare not once appear, to end that he begun,
Thus time shall try the thing amiss, which God save shortly send,
And turn the heart that fained is, to be a faithful friend.
FINIS.
M. Hunnis.

His comparison of Love.
THe Spider with great skill, does travel day by day,
His lymmes no time lie still, to set his house in stay:
And when he has it wrought, thinking therein to reign,
A blaste of wind unthought, does drive it down again,
The proof whereof is true, to make his work endure,
He pains himself a new, in hope to dwell more sure:
And in some secret place, a corner of a wall,
He frames himself a pace, to build and rest withal.
His pleasure sweet to stay, when he to rest is bent,
And ugly shamble Flee, approaches to his tent:
And there intendes by force, his labors great to win,
Or else to yield his corse, by fatal death therein,
Thus is the Spiders nest, from time to time thrown down,
And he to labor pressed, with endless pain unknown:
So such as Lovers be, like travel do attain,
Those endless works ye see, are always full of pain.
FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

A Lovers joy.
J Have no joy, but dream of joy, and joy to think on joy,
A joy I withstoode, for to enjoy, to finishe mine annoy.
I hate not without cause alas, yet Love I know not why,
I thought to hate, I can not hate, although that I should dye.
A foe most sweet, a friend most sower, I joy for to embrace.
I hate the wrong, and not the wight, that workt my woeful case:
What thing it is I know not I, but yet a thing there is,
That in my fancy still perswads, there is no other bliss.
The joys of life, the pangues of death, it make me feel each day,
But life nor death, this humor can, devise to wear away.
Feign would I die, but yet in death no hope I see remains,
And shall I live? since life I see, a course of sorry pains:
What is it then that I do seek, what joy would I aspire,
A thing that is divine belike, to high for man's desire.
FJNJS.
F. K.

Evil to him that evil thinks.
THe subtle slily slights, that worldly men do work,
The friendly shows, under whose shade, most craft does often lurk:
Enforces me alas, with yernfull voice to say,
Woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decay.
The bird that dreads no guile, is soonest caught in snare,
Each gentle heart deuoide of craft, is soonest brought to care:
Good nature soonest trapt, which gives me cause to say,
Woe worth the wily heads, that seeks the simple man's decay.
I see the Serpent vile, that lurkes under the green,
How subtly he shroudes himself, that he may not be seen:
And yet his fosters bane, his learing looks bewray,
Woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decay.
Woe worth the feining looks, on favor that we do wait,
Woe worth the feined friendly heart, that harbors deep deceit:
Woe worth the Vipers brood, oh thrice woe worth I say,
All worldly wily heads, that seeks the simple man's decay.
FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

He assures his constancy.
WIth painted speech I list not prove, my cunning for to try,
Nor yet will use to fill my pen, with gilefull flattery:
With pen in hand, and heart in breast, shall faithful promise make,
To love you best, and serve you most, by your great virtues sake.
And sure dame Nature has you decked, with gifts above the rest,
Let not Disdain a harbor find, within your noble breast:
For Love has lead his law a like, to men of each degree,
So that the Beggar with the Prince, shall Love as well as he.
I am no Prince I must confess, nor yet of Princes line,
Nor yet a brutish Beggar borne, that feeds among the Swine:
The fruit shall try the tree at last, the blossoms good or no,
Then do not judge of me the worse, till you have tried me so.
As I deserve, so then reward, I make you judge of all,
If I be false in word or deed, let Lightning Thunder fall:
And Furies fell with frantic fitts, bereue and stay my breathe,
For an example to the rest, if I shall break my faith.
FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

Complaining his mishapp to his friend, he complains wittely.
A. THe fire shall freze, the frost shall fry the frozen mountains hie,

B. What strange things has dame natures force, to turn her course awrie:

A. My Love has me left, and taken a new man:

B. This is not strange, it happes often times, the truth to scan,

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain.

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is this not strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. By skillful means I here reclaim, to stoop unto my lure,

B. Such haggard Hawks will soar away, of them who can be sure,

A. With silver bells and hoode, my joy was her to deck,

B. She was full gorgde, she would the sooner give the check,

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain:

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. Her chirping lips should chirpe to me, sweet words of her desire

B. Such chirping birds who ever saw, to preach still on one brire,

A. She said she loved me best, and would not till she die,

B. She said in words, she thought it not, as time does try.

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain:

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit,

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. Can no man win a woman so, to make her Love endure,

B. To make the Fox his wiles to leave, what man will put in ure;

A. Why then there is no choice, but all women will change,

B. As men do use, so some women do Love to raunge.

A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain,

A. Who thought she would flitt,

B. each one that has wit:

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. Since slipper gain falls to my lot, farewell that gliding pray,

B. Since that the dice does run awrie, betimes leave of thy play.

A. I will no more lament, the thing I may not have,

B. Then by exchange the loss to come, all shall thou save.

A. Love will I refrain,

B. thereby thou shall gain,

A. With loss I will leave,

B. she will thee deceive:

A. That is not strange,

B. then let her raunge.

FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

No pains comparable to his attempt.
LIke as the doleful Dove, delights alone to be,
And does refuse the bloumed branche, choosing the leaflesse tree.
Whereon wailing his chance, with bitter tears besprent,
Does with his bill, his tender breast often pearse and all to rent.
Whose grievous gronyngs tho: whose gripes of pyning pain,
Whose ghastly looks, whose bloody streams out flowing from each vain
Whose falling from the tree, whose panting on the ground,
Examples be of mine estate, tho there appear no wound.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

He repents his folly.
A Lack when I look back, upon my youth thatz paste,
And deeply ponder youths offense, and youths reward at last.
With sighs and tears I say, O God I not deny,
My youth with folly has deserved, with folly for to die.
But yet if ever sinful man, might mercy move to ruthe,
Good Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth.
In youth I rangde the feeldes, where vices all did grow,
In youth alas I wanted grace, such vice to overthrow.
In youth what I thought sweet, most bitter now do find,
Thus has the follies of my youth, with folly kept me blind.
Yet as the Egle castes her bill, whereby her age renueth,
So Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth.
FJNJS.
M. Hunnis.

No pleasure without some pain.
HOw can the tree but wast, and wither away,
That has not sometime comfort of the Sun:
How can that flower but fade, and soon decay,
That always is with dark clouds run.
Is this a life, nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
What foodlesse beast can live long in good plight;
Or is it life, where senses there be none:
Or what avails eyes without their light?
Or else a tongue, to him that is alone.
Is this a life? nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
Whereto serve ears, if that there be no sound,
Or such a head, where no devise does grow:
But all of plaintes, since sorrow is the ground,
Whereby the heart does pine in deadly woe.
Is this a life, nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

The fruit of feined friends.
JN choice of friends what hap had I, to choose one of cire^s kind
whose harp, whose pipe, whose melody could feed my ears and make me blind
Whose pleasant voice made me forget, yt in sure trust is great deceit.
In trust I see is treason found, and man to man deceitful is,
And whereas treasure does abound, of flatterers there do not miss:
Whose painted speech, and outward show, do seem as friends and be not so,
Would I have thought in thee to be, the nature of the Crocadill:
Which if a man a sleep may see, with bloody thirst desires to kill:
And then with tears a while began weep, ye death of him thus slain a sleep,
O fauel false, thou traitor born, what mischief more might thou devise
Then thy dear friend to have in scorn, and him to wou^d in sundry wise,
Which still a friend pretends to be, and are not so by proof I see.
Fie, fie, upon such treachery. W. H.
If such false Ships do haunt the shore,
Strike down the sail and trust no more. M. Edwards.
A dialogue between a Gentleman and his Love.
A. SHall I no way win you, to grant my desire?

B. What woman will grant you, the thing you require:

A. You only to Love me, is all that I crave,

B. You only to leave me, is all I would have.

A. My dear alas, now say not so,

B. To Love you best I must say no:

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

B. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not.

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. The swifter I follow, then you fly away,

B. Swift hawks in their flying, often times miss their pray.

A. Yet some kills deadly, that fly to the mark:

B. You shall touch no feather, thereof take no carke.

A. Yet hope shall further my desire,

B. You blow the coals, and raise no fire,

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt,

B. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. To love is no danger, where true Love is meant,

B. I will Love no ranger, least that I repent:

A. My Love is no raunger, I make God auow,

B. To trust your smothe sayings, I sure know not how.

A. Most truth I mean, as time shall well try,

B. No truth in men, I often epsy.

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt.

B. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. Some women may say nay, and mean Love most true,

B. Some women can make fools, of as wise men as you:

A. In time I shall catch you, I know when and where:

B. I will soon dispatche you, you shall not come there.

A. Some speedes at length, that often have miste,

B. I am well armde, come when you list.

A. Yet will I not flitt,

B. then play on the bitt,

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrewe me than.

A. Yet work your kind kindly, grant me Love for Love,

B. I will use you friendly, as I shall you prove:

A. Most true you shall find me, I this do protest,

B. Then sure you shall bind me, to grant your request.

A. O happy threede, now have I spunne,

B. You sing before the conquest won.

A. Why then, will you swerve,

B. even as you deserve:

A. Love still,

B. I will,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. come to me than.

FJNJS.
M. Edwards.

Exclaiming upon his unkind Love, his friend replieth wittely.
M. What death may be, compared to Love;

H. What grief therein, now do thou prove?

M. My pains alas, who can express,

H. I see no cause of heaviness.

M. My Ladies looks, my woe has wrought:

H. Then blame thine eyes, that first has sought,

M. I burn alas, and blow the fire,

H. A fool consumes by his desire,

M. What shall I do than?

H. come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy?

M. My sugared sweet, is mixed with gall,

H. Thy Lady can not do with all:

M. The more I seek, the less I find,

H. Then strive not with the stream and wind,

M. Her most I love, although I smarte,

H. With her own sword, thou slaiest thy heart:

M. Such pleasant baits, who can refrain,

H. Such baits will sure breed thee great pain,

M. What shall I do than?

H. Come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

M. Her golden beams, mine eyes do daze,

H. Upon the Sun thou may not gaze:

M. She might reward my cruel smarte,

H. She thinks thou hardst a fained heart,

M. She laughes to hear my woeful cries,

H. Forsake her then, in time be wise:

M. No, no, alas, that may not be,

H. No wise man then, will pity thee,

M. What shall I do than?

H. come out and thou can.

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

M. A living death, lo thus I prove,

H. Such are the fruits of froward Love:

M. O that I might her Love once gain,

H. Thy gain would not, half quite the pain.

M. Her will I Love, though she be coye,

H. A fool him self, will still annoye:

M. Who will not die, for such a one?

H. Be wise at length, let her alone:

M. I can not do so,

H. then be thy own fo,

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.

FJNJS.
E. S.

The complaint of a Lover, wearing Black and Taunie.
A Crown of Bays shall that man wear,
That triumphs over me:
For Black and Taunie will I wear,
Which mournyng colors be.
The more I follow on, the more she fled away,
As Daphne did full long ago, Apollos wishfull pray:
The more my plaintes resounde, the less she pities me,
The more I sought, the less I found, that mine she meant to be.
Melpomene, alas with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes Baies shall that man wear, yt triumphs over me,
For black and Taunie will I wear, which mourning colors be.
Drown me you trickling tears, you wailefull wights of woe,
Come help these hands to rent my hears, my rufull hap to show:
On whom the scorching flames of Love, does feed you see,
Ah a lalalantida my dear Dame, has thus tormented me.
Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes Baies shall that man wear, yt triumphs over me,
For Black and Taunie will I wear, which mourning colors be.
An Ancres life to lead, with nails to scratche my grave,
Where yearthly worms on me shall feed, is all ye joys I crave:
And hide my self from shame, since that mine eyes do see,
Ah a lalalantida my dear dame, has thus tormented me.
And all that present be, with doleful tunes help than:
And sing Bis woe worth on me, forsaken man.
FJNJS.
E. O.

Finding no relief, he complains thus.
JN quest of my relief, I find distress,
In recompense of Love, most deep disdain:
My laugour such, as words may not express,
A shower of tears, my watrishe eye does rain.
I dream of this, and do define of woe,
I wander in the thoughts of my sweet foe.
I would no peace, the cause of war I fly,
I hope. I fear, I burn, I chill in Froste:
I lie a low, yet mountes my mind on hie,
Thus doubtful storms, my troubled thoughts have toste,
And for my pain, this pleasure do I prove,
I hate my self, and pine in others Love.
The world I graspe, yet hold I naught at all,
At liberty I seem, in prison pent:
I taste the sweet, more sower then bitter gall,
My ship seems sound, and yet her ribbs be rent.
And out alas, on Fortune false I cry,
Look what I crave, that still she does deny.
Both life and death, be equal unto me,
I do desire to die, yet crave I life.
My wits with sundry thoughts do disagree,
My felfe am with my self at mortal strife.
As warmth of Sun, does melte the silver Snow,
The heat of Love, behold consumes me so.
FJNJS.
R. Hill.

Written upon the death of his especial good friend Master John Barnabie, who
departed this life at Bensted in the county of Southampton 25. January. 1579.
Aetatis. 78.
MIne own good father thou art gone thine ears are stopped with clay
Thy ghost is fled, thy body dead, thou hearste not what I say.
Thy dearest friends may sigh and sobb, thy children cry and call,
Thy wife may wail and not prevail, nor do thee good at all.
Though reason would we should rejoice, and trickling tears restrain,
Yet kindlynes and friendlynes, enforce us to complain.
Thy life was good our loss the more, thy presence cherd our heart,
Thy lack and absence turned therefore, our solace into smart.
I found thee both a kindly friend, and friendly father too,
Barnabie lacks breath, O cruel death and could thou part us two.
But death derides my woeful words, and to my saying says,
Thou foolish wight I did but right, I force nor friend nor faith.
The Lord of life and Lord of death, my threatening hand did let,
Else when yt he in cradell lay, I might have claimd my debt.
His corpse is clad in cloddes of earth, his soul does soore on hie,
Before the throne of God above, whose servant he did die.
And thou his friend and she his spouse, and they his children shall,
Behold the father friend and mate, whose absence greeues you all.
But he nor can, nor will return to thee to her or them,
For heaven is his, he lives in bliss, ye dwell with mortal men.
Ye dwell in dark and dreadful den in prison pent are ye,
He lives in light, and all delight, from thraldom frank and free.
Wish not that he should come to you for then you do him wrong,
But wish that ye may go to him, the blessed saints among.
FJNJS.
H. D.

Coelum non solum.
JF care or skill, could conquer vain desire,
Or reasons reigns my strong affection stay,
Then should my sighs to quiet breast retire,
And shun such signs, as secret thoughts bewray,
Uncomely Love, which now lurkes in my breast,
Should cease my grief, through wisdoms power oppressed
But who can leave to look on Venus face,
Or yields not to Iunos high estate,
What wit so wise, as gives not Palace place,
These virtues rare, each Gods did yield a mate,
Save her alone, who yet on earth does reign.
Whose bewties string, no God can well destraine.
What worldly wight can hope for heavenly hyre,
When only sighs must make his secret moan,
A silent suit does seeld to grace aspyre,
My hapless happ does roll the restless stone,
Yet Phebe fair disdaynde the heavens above,
To joy on earth, her poor Edimions love.
Rare is reward where none can justly crave,
For chance is choice, where reason makes no claim,
Yet luck sometimes, dispayring souls does save,
A happy Star, made Giges joy attain.
A slauishe Smith, of rude and rascal race,
Found means in time to gain a Gods grace.
Then loftye love, thy sacred sails advance,
My sithing seas shall flow with streams of tears,
Amidst disdain drive forth my doleful chance,
A valiant mind, no deadly danger fears,
Who loves aloft, and sets his heart on hye,
Deserves no pain, though he do pine and dye.
FJNIS,
E. O.

A Lover rejected, complains,
THe trickling tears, that falls along my cheeks,
The secret sighs that shows my inward grief,
The present pains perforce, that love aye seeks,
Bids me renew my cares without relief.
In woeful song in dole display,
my pensive heart for to bewray.
Bewray thy grief, thy woeful heart with speed,
Resign thy voice to her that causde thy woe:
With yrkesome cries bewail thy late done deed,
For she thou love, is sure thy mortal foe.
And help for thee there is none sure,
But still in pain thou must endure.
The stricken Dear has help to heal his wound,
The haggerd Hawk, with toil is made full tame:
The strongest tower, the Canon lays on ground,
The wisest wit that ever had the fame,
Was thrall to love, by Cupids sleightes,
Then way my case with equal weights.
She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
She is my pain, she is my ease therefore:
She is my death, she is my life also,
She is my salve, she is my wounded sore.
In fine, she has the hand and knyfe,
That may both save and end my life.
And shall I live on earth to be her thrall,
And shall I sue and serve her all in vain?
And kiss the steps that she lets fall,
And shall I pray the Gods to keep the pain?
From her, that is so cruel still,
No, no, on her work all your will.
And let her feel the power of all your might,
And let her have her most desire with speed:
And let her pine away both day and night,
And let her moan, and none lament her needde.
And let all those that shall her see,
Despise her state, and pity me.
FJNIS.
E. O.

Not attayning to his desire, he complayneth.
J Am not as I seem to be, nor when I smyle, I am not glad:
A thrall although you count me free, I most in mirth, most pensive sad:
I smile to shade my bitter spite, as Haniball that saw in sight:
His country soil with Carthage town: by Roman force defaced down.
And Caesar that presented was, with noble Pompeis princely head,
As twere some judge to rule ye case, a flood of tears he semde to shed:
Although in deed it sprung of joy, yet other thought it was annoy,
Thus contraries be used I find, of wise to cloak the covert mind.
I Haniball that smiles for grief, and let you Cesars tears suffice,
The one that laughs at his mischief, ye other all for joy that cries:
I smile to see me scorned so, you weep for joy to see me woe,
And I a heart by Love slain dead, presents in place of Pompeis head.
O cruel hap, and hard estate, that forces me to love my fo,
Accursed be so foul a fate, my choice for to prefixe it so:
So long to fight with secret sore, and find no secret salve therefore,
Some purge their pain by plaint I find, but I in vain do breath my wind.
FINIS.
E. Ox.

His mind not quietly settled, he writes thus.
EVen as the wax does melt, or dew consume away,
Before the Sun, so I behold through careful thoughts deeay:
For my best luck leads me, to such sinister state,
That I do waste with others Love, that has my self in hate,
And he that beats the bushe, the wished bird not gotts,
But such I see as sits still, and holds the fouling netts.
The Drone more Honnie sucks, that labors not at all,
Then does the Be, to whose most pain, least pleasure does befall:
The Gardner sowes the seeds, whereof the flowers do grow,
And others yet do gather them, that took less pain I know.
So I the pleasant Grape have pulled from the Vine,
And yet I languish in great thirst, whiles others drink the wine.
Thus like a woeful wight, I woue the webb of woe,
The more I would weed out my cares, the more they seem to grow:
The which betokens joy, forsaken is of me,
That with the careful Culuer climes, the worn and withered tree.
To entertain my thoughts, and there my happ to moan,
That never am less idle lo, then when I am alone.
FINIS.
E. Ox.

No joy Comparable to a quiet mind.
JN loathsome race pursued by slippery life,
Whose sugared guile does glistering joy present:
The careful ghost oppressed sore with strife,
Yeeldes ghostly groans from painful passions sent.
The sinful flesh that bears him here in vewe,
In steed of life does dreadful death pursue.
The way he sees by touch of merits grace,
Wherein to run alas he gladly would:
But filthy flesh his wretched dwelling place,
Does so rebel at that which do he should.
That silly soul who feels his heavy need,
Can only will but naught perform in deed.
The will through grace does often desire the good,
But all in vain for that the fleshly foe:
Yeeldes forth such fruits as sins has bred in bud,
And blindly suckes the sapp of deadly woo.
Esteeming shows of fickell fancies known,
And scorning fruit by grace, eternal sown.
Though eye does see that death does swallow all,
Both life and lust and every sound delight:
Yet wretched flesh through sin is made so thrall,
That naught it marks apparent things in sight.
That might him train, to care of better grace,
Both does his bale with greedy lust embrace.
Then sins desert and all things wear away,
That naught remain but fruit of grace or sin:
God build in us such conscience as can say,
This fruit not mine but sin that dwelt me in.
For why to sin I daily do in sight,
That unto Christ I may revive my spright.
FJNJS.
quod Candish.

A Complaint.
IF Cressed in her gadding mood,
Had not gone to the greekish host:
Where she by Diomede was wood,
And won from him that loud her most.
She had not fallen to such mischief,
Nor turned Troylus to such grief,
Nor Diomede had not vpbrayed,
To worthy Troylus, Cressed spoil.
Nor these two worthies had not frayed,
So often each others fame to foil:
If Catterwaling Cressed coy,
Had tarried with her love in Troy.
No Trojans foe, nor cruel Greike,
Had triumphte over her good name:
If she had not gone forth to seek,
The Camp where women win no fame,
She had been calde no common Gill,
If she in Troy had tarryed still.
She had not known the Lazars call,
With Cup and Clap her alms to win:
Nor how infectiue scabbe and scall,
Do cloth the Lepre Ladies skin,
She had no such distress in Troy,
But honor, favor, wealth, and joy.
Howbeit she could not tarry there,
But needs forsooth a gadding go,
To feel the taste of Strangers chere,
Nise novelty lo pricked her so.
She could not hold where she was well,
But strayed and into ruin fell.
I pleasure not to blaze her blame,
Nor chiding cannot mend her mis:
But all good women by her shame,
May learn what Catterwaling is.
For wandering women, most men say,
Cannot be good and go astray.
It is not women's exercise,
To straye or gadde in field or town:
Men count them neither good nor wise,
They blot and blemish their renown.
They hurt their fame, they please their foe,
And greeues their friend to see them so.
FINJS
Troylus.

A Replye.
NO gadding mood, but forced strife,
Compelled me retire from Troy:
If Troylus would have vowde his wife,
We might have dwelt in former joy.
Ne Diomede nor greekish wight,
Had sought my blame or his despite.
If ought the feeble force of mine,
Could have withstood the Kingly heast,
If flowing fluds of stilled rine,
Had pity found in Trojans breast,
I had not been Antenors prise,
Nor thus been thrall to noted vise.
The blome of blame had not bine spread,
The seed of shame had not bine sown:
If Knightly prowes his mind had lead,
By rightful force to keep his own.
I had not thralled bine to ill,
If he in Troy had kept me still.
My heavy heart and doleful case,
Which craves your pity not your spite:
Full well you know has had no place,
If he had guarded well his right.
I see your courtesy small, your store,
That blaze my plague to make it more.
You say in Troy I would not be,
With gadding mind you charge me still:
When well you know that hie decree,
Did send me forth against my will.
Since thus you triumph at my fall,
Ye ought to tell the cause withal.
If naught you joy to blaze my blame,
You would not hunt for terms of spite,
Nor feign me cause of all the same,
Small honor won in such a fight.
For they that noble minded be,
Will rue the case and pity me.
I well allow your final clause,
To gadde and run does blot the name,
But lay the fault unto the cause,
And grant him gilthy of the same.
Who bred the bud that pleased my foe,
That grieved my friends and hurt me so.
FJNJS.
Cressida.

That Love is requited by disdain.
JN searehe of things that secret are, my mated muse began,
What it might be, molested most the head and mind of man.
The bending brow of Princes face, to wrath that does attend,
Or want of Parents, wife or child, or loss of faithful friend.
The roaring of the Canon shot, that makes the piece to shake,
Or terror such as mighty Jove, from heaven above can make.
All these in fine may not compare, experience so does prove,
Unto the torments sharp and strange, of such as be in love.
Love looks alofte, and laughes to scorn, all such as grief anoy,
The more extreme their passions be, the greater is his joy.
Thus love as victor of the field, triumphs above the rest,
And joys to see his Subjects lie with living death in breast.
But dire disdain lets drive a shafte, and gauls this bragging fool,
He pluckes his plumes vnbendes his bow, and sets him new to scoole
Whereby this boy that bragged late, as conqueror over all,
Now yeeldes himself unto disdain, his Vassal, and his thrall.
FJNJS.
W. Hunnis.

Of a contented state.
JN wealth we see some welthy men, abound in wealth most welthily,
In wealth we see those men again, in wealth do live most wretchedly.
And yet of wealth having more store,
Then erst of wealth they had before.
These welthy me^ do seem to want, they seem to want yt most they have,
The more posses, ye more they crave, ye more they crave ye greater store
That most they have, they think but skant.
Yet not content, woe be therefore.
The simple men that less wealth have, with lesser wealth we se content,
Content are they twixt wealth and scath, a life to lead indifferent.
And thus of wealth these men have more,
Then those of which we spoke before.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Being disdayned, he complayneth.
IF friendlesse faith? if guiltless thought may shield?
If simple truth that never meant to swearue:
If dear desire accepted fruit do yielde,
If greedy lust in loyal life does searue.
Then may my playnt bewail my heavy harm,
That seeking calm, have stumbled on the storm.
My wonted cheer eclipsed by the cloud,
Of deep disdain, through error of report:
If weary woe enwrapped in the shrowde,
Lies slain by tongue of the unfriendly sort.
Yet heaven and earth, aid all that Nature wrought,
I call to vow of my unspotted thought.
No shade I seek in part to shield my taynte,
But simple truth I hunt no other suit:
On that I gape, the issue of my plainee,
If that I quail, let Justice me confute.
If that my place amongst the guiltless sort,
Repay by doom my name and good report.
Go heavy verse, pursue desired grace,
Where pity shrinde in cell of secret breast,
Awaits my haste, the rightful lot to place,
And lothes to see the guiltless man oppressed,
Whose virtues great, has cround her more with fame,
Then kingly state, though largely shine the same.
FJNJS.
L. Vaux.

Of the mean estate.
THe higher that the Ceder tree, unto the heavens do grow,
The more in danger is the top, when sturdy winds began blow,
Who Judges then in princely throne, to be deuoyde of hate,
Does not yet know what heaps of ill, lies hid in such estate.
Such dangers great, such gripes of mind, such toil do they sustain
That often times of God they wish, to be vnkingd again.
For as the huge and mighty rocks, withstand the raging seas,
So kingdoms in subjection be, whereas dame Fortune please,
Of brittle joy, of smiling cheer, of hunny mixed with gall,
Allotted is to every prince in freedom to be thrall.
What watches long, what sleeps unsure, what grief and care of mind
What bitter broiles, what endless toiles, to kingdoms be assignd.
The subject then may well compare, with prince for pleasant days,
Whose silent nigh brings quiet rest, whose steps no storm bewrayes
How much be we then bound to God, who such provision makes,
To lay our cares upon the Prince, thus does he for our sakes,
To him therefore ler us lift up our hearts, and pray amayn,
That every Prince that he has plaste, may long in quiet reign.
FJNIS,
W. H.

Of a contentcd mind.
When all is done and said, in the end thus shall you find,
The most of all does bath in bliss, that has a quiet mind.
And clear from worldly cares to deem can be content,
The sweetest time of all this life, in thinking to be spent.
The body subject is, to fickle fortunes power,
And to a million of mishapps, is casual every hour:
And death in time does change it to a clodde of clay,
When as the mind which is divine, runs never to decay.
Companion none is like, unto the mind alone,
For many have been harmd by speech, through thinking few or none,
Few often times restrains words, but makes no thoughts to cease
And ste he speaks best that has the skill, when for to hold his peace.
Our wealth leaves us at death, our kinsmen at the grave,
But virtues of the mind, unto the heavens with us have.
Wherefore for virtues sake I can be well content,
The sweetest time of all my life, to decine in thinking spent.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Try before you trust.
TO counsel my estate, abandonde to the spoil,
Of forged friends whose grosest fraud, it set with finest foil.
To verify true dealing wightes, whose trust no treason dreades,
And all to dear thacquaintaunce be, of such most harmefull heads.
I am advised thus, who so does friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next he feared, for to become a fo.
To have a feigned friend, no perrill like I find,
Often flering face may mantell best, a mischief in the mind:
A pair of Angels ears often times does hide a serpents heart,
Under whose gripes who so does come, to late bewayles the smart.
Wherefore I do advise, who so does friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next he should become a mortal fo.
Refuse respecting friends, that courtly know to feign,
For gold that winnes for gold, shall lose, the self same friend again.
The Quayle needs never fear: in Fowlers nets to fall,
If he would never bend his ear to listen to his call.
Therefore trust not to soon, but when you friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next, ye fearde for to become a fo.
FJNJS.
L. Vaux.

He renounceth all the affectes of Love.
LIke as the Heart that lifts up his ears,
To hear the hounds that has him in the chase,
Does cast the wind, in dangers and in fears,
With flying foot, to pass away apace,
So must I fly of love the vain pursuit,
Whereof the gain is lesser then the fruit.
And I also must loathe those learing looks,
Where love does lurk still with his subtle slight,
With painted mocks, and inward hidden hooks,
To trappe by trust that lies not in wait,
The end whereof, assay it who so shall,
As sugared smart, and inward bitter gall.
And I must fly such Cirian songs,
Wherewith thac Circes, Ulysses did enchaunt:
These wily Wattes I mean, with filed tongues,
That hearts of steel have power to daunt.
Who so as Hawk, that stoopeth to their call,
For most desarte, receives least of all.
But woe to me that first beheld these eyes,
The trappe wherein I say that I was taken,
An outward salve, which inward me destroys,
Whereto I run, as Rat unto her bane,
As to the fish sometime it does befall,
That with the bayte does swallow hook and all.
Within my breast wherewith I daily fed,
The vain repast of amourous hot desire:
With loytering lust so long that has me fed,
Till he has brought me to the flaming fire.
In time as Phoenix ends her care and carkes.
I make the fire and burn my self with sparks.
FJNIS.
L. Vaux.

Bethincking himself of his end; writes thus.
WHen I behold the baier, my last and posting Horse,
That bare shall to the grave, my vile and carren corse.
Then say I seely wretch, why do thou put thy trust,
In things eithe made of clay, that soon will turn to dust.
Do thou not see the young, the hardy and the fair,
That now are past and gone, as though they never were,
Do thou not see thy self, draw howerly to thy last,
As shaftes which that is shot at birds that flies fast.
Do thou not see how death, through smyteth with his lance,
Some by war, some by plague, and some by worldly chance,
What thing is there on earth, for pleasure that was made,
But goes more swift away, then does the Summer shade.
Lo hear the Summer flower, that sprung this other day,
But Winter wears as fast, and blows clean away,
Even so shall thou consume, feom youth to loathsome age,
For death he does not spare, the prince more then the page.
Thy house shall be of clay a clotte under thy head,
Until the latter day the grave shall be thy bed.
Until the blowing tromp does say to all and some,
Rise up out of your grave, for now the Judge is come.
FJNJS.
L. Vaux.

Being in love he complayneth.
ENforst by love and fear, to please and not offend,
Within the words you would me write, a message I must send.
A woeful errand sure, a wretched man must write,
A wretched tale, a woeful head, besemeth to indite.
For what can he but wayle, that has but all he would,
And yet that all is naught at all, but lack of all he should,
But lack of all his mind, what can be greater grefe,
That have and lack that likes him best, must needs be most mischief.
Now fool what makes thee wayle, yet some might say full well,
That haste no harm but of thy self, as thou thy self can tell.
To whom I answer thus, since all my harms do grow,
Upon my self, so of my self, some hap may come I trow.
And since I see hoth hap and harm betides to me,
For present woe, my after bliss, will make me not forget thee,
Who has a field of Gold, and may not come therein,
Must live in hope till he have force his treasure well to win.
Whose joys by hope of dread, to conquer or to lose,
So great a wealth does rise, and for example does disclose,
To win the golden Fleese, stood Jason not in dread,
Till that Medeas hope of health, did give him hope to speed.
Yet sure his mind was much, and yet his fear the more,
That has no hap but by your help, may hap for to restore,
The raging Bulls he dread, yet by his Ladies charm,
He knew it might be brought to pass, they could do little harm.
Unto whose grace yield he, as I do offer me,
Into your hands to have his hap not like him for to be,
But as King Priamus did yield him to the will,
Of Cressed false which him forsook with Diomede to spill.
So I to you comend my faith, and eake my joy,
I hope you will not be so false, as Cressed was to Troy.
For if I be untrue, her Lazares death I wish,
And eake in thee if thou be false, her clapper and her dish.
FINIS.
R. L.

Being in trouble he writes thus.
IN terrors trappe with thralldome thrust,
Their thornie thoughts to taste and try,
In conscience clear, from cause unjust,
With carping tears did call and cry,
And said O God yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Thus trembling there with tears I trod,
To totter tide in truths defense.
With sighs and sobbes, I said O God,
Let right not have this recompense.
Least that my foes might laugh to se,
That thou would not deliver me. Bis.
My soul then to repentance ran,
My ragged clothes all rent and torn,
And did bewail the loss it wanne,
With loathsome life so long forlorn.
And said O God yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Then comfort came with clothes of joy,
Whose seames were faithful steadfastnesse:
And did bedecke the naked boy,
That erst was full of wretchedness,
And said be glad, for God is he,
That shortly will deliver thee. Biss
FJNJS.
W. H.

Being troubled in mind, he writes as follows.
THe bitter sweat, that strains my yielded heart,
The careless count that does the same embrace,
The doubtful hope to reap my due desarte,
The pensive path that guides my restless race,
Are at such war within my wounded breast,
As does bereave my joy and eake my rest.
My greedy will that seeks the golden gain,
My luckelesse lotte, does always take in wroth:
My mated mind, that dreades my suits in vain,
My pittious playnt does help to set it forth.
So that between two waves of raging Seas,
I drive my days in troubles and disease.
My woeful eyes do take their chief delight,
To feed their fill upon the pleasant maze,
My hidden harms that grow in me by sight,
With pining pains do drive me from the gaze,
And to my hope, I reap no other hyre,
But burn my self, and I do blow the fire.
FINJS
I. Haywood.

Look or you leap.
IF thou in surety safe wile sit,
If thou delight at rest to dwell,
Spend no more words then shall seem fit,
Let tongue in silence talk expel,
In all things that thou see men bent,
See all say naught, hold thee content.
In worldly works degrees are three,
Makers, doers, and lookers on,
The lookers on, have liberty,
Both the others to judge upon,
Wherefore in all as men are bent,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
The makers often are in fault found,
The doers doubt of praise or shame,
The lookers on find surest ground,
They have the fruit yet free from blame,
This does persuade in all here meant,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
The Proverb is not South and West,
Which has be said long time ago:
Of little meddling comes rest,
The busy man never wants woe.
The best way is, in all worlds sent,
Se all, say naught, hold thee content.
FJNJS.
J. Haywood.

A description of the world.
WHat is this world, a net to snare the soul,
A mas of sin, a desert of deceit,
A momentes joy, an age of wretched dole,
A lure from grace, for flesh a loathsome bayre.
Unto the mind a canker worm of care,
Unsure, unjust, in rendering man his share.
A place where pride orerunnes the honest mind,
Where rich men ioynes to rob the shiftlesse wretch,
Where bribing mistes do blind the Judges eyes,
Where Parasites the fattest crumbs do catch,
Where good desartes which challenge like reward,
Are over blown with blastes of light regard,
And what is men? dust, slime, a puff of wind,
Conceaude in sin, plaste in the world with grief,
Brought up with care, till care has caught his mind,
And then till death vouchsafe him some relief.
Day, yea nor night, his care does take an end,
To gather goods for other men to spend.
Oh foolish man that art in office plaste,
Think whence thou camste, and whether thou shall go,
The haute hie Oaks, small winds have ouercast,
When slender weeds in roughest weather groe,
Even so pale death often spares the wretched wight,
And wounds you, who wallow in delight.
You lusty youths that nourish hie desire,
Abase your plumes, which makes you look so big,
The Collyers Cut the Courtiers Steed will tire,
Even so the Clarke, the parsons grave does dig,
Whosoever hap is yet here long life to win,
Does heap God wot, but sorrow upon sin.
And to be short, all sorts of men take heed,
The Thunderboltes the lofty towers tare,
The lightning flashe consumes the house of Reed,
Yea more in time all earthly things will wear,
Save only man, who as his earthly time is,
Shall live in woe, or else in endless bliss.
FJNJS.
G. G.

Being in Love, he complains.
MY haute desire, to hye that seeks rest,
My fear to find, where hope my help should give,
My sighs and plaintes sent from unquiet breast,
The hardened heart that will not truth believe,
Bids me despair, and Reason says to me,
Forsake for shame, the suit that shameth thee,
But when mine eyes behold the alluring cayes,
Which only me to Cupids spoil have trainde,
Desire a new does work his wonted ways,
Thus shall I freeze, and yet I frye in pain,
O quenchlesse fire to quayle and quick again.
Such is the flame, where burning love does last,
As hye ne low can bear with reasons bitte,
And such is love, wherein is settled fast,
That naught but death can ease his fervent fit,
Then cannot I, nor love will me forsake,
Sweet is the death, that faithful love does make,
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

The Complaint of a sinner.
O Heavenly God, O Father dear, cast down thy tender eye,
Upon a wretch that prostrate hear before thy face does lie.
O power thy precious Oil of grace into my wounded heart,
O let the drops of mercy swage the rigor of my smart.
My faynting soul suppressed sore, with careful clogge of sin,
In humble sort submits it self, thy mercy for to win,
Grant mercy then O Savior sweet to me most woeful thrall,
Whose mornefull cry to thee O Lord, does still for mercy call.
Thy blessed will I have despised upon a stubborn mind,
And to the sway of worldly things, my self I have inclinde,
Forgetting heaven, and heavenly powers, where god and saints do dwell,
My life had like to tread the path, that leads the way to hell.
But now my Lord, my lodestarre bright, I will no more do so,
To think upon my former life, my heart does melt for woe.
Alas I sigh, Alas I sobbe, alas I do repent,
That ever my licencious will so wickedly was bent.
Since thus therefore with earnefull plaint, I do thy mercy crave,
O Lord for thy great mercies sake, let me thy mercy have.
Restore to life the wretched soul that else is like to die,
So shall my voice unto thy name, sing praise eternally.
Now blessed be the father first, and blessed be the Son,
And blessed be the holy Ghost, by whom all things are done.
Bless me O blessed Trinity, with thy eternal grace,
That after death my soul may have in heaven a dwelling place.
FJNJS.
F. Kindlemarshe.

The fruit that springes from wilful wits, is ruth and ruins rage,
And sure what headless youth commits, repentance rues in age.

J Rage in restless youth, and ruins rule my days,
I rue (to late) my rechlesse youth, by rules of reasons ways,
I ran so long a race in search of surest way,
That leisure learnde me tread the trace that lead to leude decay.
I gave so large a rain to vnrestrayned bitte,
That now with proof of after pain, I wayle my want of wit.
I trifled forth the time, with trust to self conceits,
Whilste plenties use pricked forth my time, to seek for sugared baits,
Wherein once learnde to find, I found so sweet a taste,
That due foresight of after speed, self will esteemed wast.
Which will through wilfulness, has wrought my witless fall,
And heedelesse youths unskillfulness, has lapt my life in thrall.
Whereby by proof I know, that pleasure breeds pain,
And he that evil seed does sow, evil fruit must reap again,
Let such therefore whose youth and purses are in prime,
Foresee and shun the helpelesse ruth, which sues mispence of time,
For want is next to waste, and shame does sin ensue,
Evil speeding proof has heedelesse have, my self have proved it true,
When neighbors next house burns, it is time there of take heed,
For fortunes wheel has choice of turns, which change of chances breed,
My sail has been aloft, though now I bear but low,
Who climbes so high seeld falls soft, deadst ebb has highest flow,
FINJS.
quod. Yloop.

An Epitaph upon the death of sir William Drury, Knight, Lord Justice and
Governor of Yreland, deceased at Waterford the third of October. An. Do. 1579.
JN place where wantes Apollo with his Lute,
There peevish Pan may prease to pipe a dance,
Where men of skill and learned Clerks are mute,
There Fools may prate, and hit the truth perchance,
Why spare I then to speak, when all are mumme,
And virtue left forgot in time to come.
Give pardon then to him that takes in hand,
Though never taught with Poets pen to write,
Will yet presume, to let you understand,
No strange event, although a sieldome sight,
Which late I saw, a doleful tale to tell,
And follows thus, then mark how it befell.
I saw Report in mourning weed arayde,
Whose blubbered eyes bewrayde some secret grief,
Besprent with tears, with sighs and sobbes he said,
You martial wights abandone all relief,
Come wayle with me, whose loss is not alone,
When you your selves have greatest cause to moan.
For Drurie he, the choice of all your train,
Your greatest guide, and lamp of clearest light,
The only man Bellona did retain,
Her Champyon chief, and made sir Mars his knight.
Even he is now bereaved of his breath,
It Is you, it is you, may most lament his death.
Then might I see, a warlik crew appear,
Came marching on with weapons traylde on ground,
Their outward show bewrayde their inward cheer,
Their droms and tromps did yield a doleful sound,
They marched thus in sad and solemn sort,
As men amasde to hear this late Report.
And in the midst of this their heavy muse,
I might perceive in sight a worthy Dame,
Who by her speech and tenure of her news,
I knew her well, and saw it was Lady Fame.
With Tromp in hand, and thus me thought she sed,
You worthy wights, your Drurie is not dead.
He lives he, amongst the blessed route,
Whose noble acts has purchaste endless fame:
Whylste world does last, no time shall wear him out,
Nor death for all his spite abridge his name,
But Drurie still for ever shall remain,
His Fame shall live, in Flaunders, France, and Spain.
The Germans eke, Italyans, and the rest,
Can well discourse of Druries deeds at large,
With whom he serude, a Champyon ready pressed,
At all assaults, the foremost to give charge,
In many a fraye, himself he did advance,
Tweene Charles of Rome, and Henry King of France.
In vain to vaunt, the credit he attaynde,
In native soil, where he was known so well,
And Brute has blown, what glory he has gaynde,
In Scottish Land, where they themselves can tell,
In Edenbrough he wan there Maiden tower,
By first assault, perforce the scotishe power.
But Ireland thou, thou thrice accursed soil,
Thy luck is loss, thy fortune still withstoode,
What mischief more, to work thy greater spoil,
Then loss of him that meant thee greatest good,
Yet can thou say, sir Druries noble name,
In Ireland still shall bide in lasting fame.
Wherefore you worthy wightes, leave of to wayle,
Your Drury lives, his fame for aye shall last,
His virtues bide, though wretched life do fail,
And taking then her Tromp, she blewe a blast,
Which sounded more his praise, then I can write,
Or with my tongue express in order right.
Then might I hear the Souldyers give a shoute,
The sound whereof, redounded in the sky,
Great joy was made amongst the armed route,
With streined throtes then all at once they cry,
He lives, he lives, our Drurie is not deed,
His virtues rare, by Fame shall still be spread.
In order then, themselves they did retire,
Their weapons vaunst, with Ensigns brave displayde,
What would you more? Report is made a liar,
Sir Drurie lives, suffices what is said.
What though his Corpse entombed be in clay,
His virtues shine, that never shall decay.
Viuit post funaera virtus.
By Barnabe Ritche. Gent.
Finis.
1580.

