THE FORERVNNER OF REVENGE.

Upon the Duke of BVCKINGHAM, for the poisoning of the most potent King JAMES
of happy memory King of great Britan, and the Lord Marquis of Hamilton, and
others of the nobility.

Discovered by M. GEORGE EGLISHAM one of King JAMES his Physicians for his
Majesty's person above the space of ten years.

FRANCKFORT. 1626.

TO THE MOST POTENT MONARCH; CHARLES, KING OF GREAT BRITAN, FRANCE AND IRELAND.
The humble complaint of GEORGE EGLISHAM Doctor of Physic, and lately one of
King JAMES his Physicians for his Majesty's person above the space of ten
years.
SIr, no better motive there is for a safe government, the^ the sincere
meditation of death, (equalling Kings to beggars) and of the severe and exact
justice of God, requiring of him, that the good suffering misery in this life,
should receive joy in the other, and the wicked flourishing securely in this,
might be punished in the other. That which pleases lasts but a moment, which
torme^teth is everlasting. Many things we see unrewarded or unpunished in this
inferior world, which in the universal weights of Gods justice must be
counterpoised elsewhere. but wilful and secret murder has seldom been
observed to escape undiscovered or unpunished even in this life, such a
particular and notable revenge perpetually follows it; to the end that they
who ar either Atheists, Lucianistes, or Machiauellists may not trust too much
to there own wits in doing so horrible injustice. Would to God your Majesty
would well consider what I have often said to my Master King James. The greatest
policy is honesty, and howsoever any man seem to him self wise in
compassing his desires by tricks, yet in the end he will prove a fool. for
falsehood ever deceives her own master at length, as the devil author of all
falsehood always does, leaving his adhaerents desolate, when they have greatest
need of his help. No falsehood without injustice, no injustice without falsehood
albeit it were in the person of a king. There is no judge in the world more
tied to do justice then a King, whose coronation tieth him unto it by solemn
oath, which if he violat he is salfe and perjured. It is justice that makes
Kings, justice that maintains Kings, and injustice that brings both
Kingdoms and Kings to destruction to fall in misery, to die like asses in
ditches or more beastly deaths, with eternal infamy after death, as all
histories from time to time do clearly testify. What need has mankind of
Kings, but for justice? men are not borne for them but they for men. What
greater, what more Royal occasion in the would could be offered unto your
Majesty to show your impartial disposition in matter of justice at the first
entree of your reign then this which I offer my just complaint against
Buckingham; by whom your Majesty suffers your self so far to be led, that
your best subjects ar in doubt, whether he is your King or you his. If your
Majesty Know and consider how he has tyrannised over his Lord, and master,
King James, the worldly creator of his fortunes, how insolent, how ingrat an
oppressor, what a murderer and treator he has proved himself toward him,
how treacherous to his upholding friend the Marquis of Hamilton and others,
your Majesty may think the giving way to the laws demanded against him, to
yield a most glorious field for your Majesty to walk in, and display the
banner of your Royal virtues. Your Majesty may perhaps demand, what interest
have I therein? What have I to do therewith, that I should stir, all others
being quiet. Sir the quietness or stirring of others expects only a beginning
from me, whom they know to be so much obliged to stir as that none can be
more, both in respect of knowledge of passages, and in regard of humane
obligation, and of my independencie from the accused or any one that his powar
or credit can reach unto. Many know not what I know therein, others ar little or
nothing beholding to the dead, others albeit they know as well as I, and ar
obliged as deeply as I, yet dare not complain so safely as I, being out of
there reach who ar inseparable from him by his enchanteme^ts, and able to
obscure my self until that the powar of just revenge upon him and his
adherents be obtained from God. What I know sufficient against him, I have set
down in my petition to the parliament, unto which if your Majesty dismiss
him sequestered from your Majesty, chiefly in an accusation of treason, your
Majesty shall do what is most just, and deliver your self, and your
Kingedoomes from the captivity in which he holds them and your Majesty
oppressed. How easily I may eclipse my self from his powar to do me harm
unless he has legions of infernal spirits at his command to pursue me, your
Majesty may well know, I being vltramarin unto these dominions where he
reigns and rages. How far I am obliged to complain more then others I
will only in few words express, that neither your Majesty nor any man may
think otherways, but that I have most just reason not to be silent in wrongs
so intolerable. The interest of blood which I have to any of them of whose
death I complain, either by the house of Balgony Lundy or by the house of
Siluertonhill, albeit it is easy to be made manifest and sufficient to move me,
yet is it not the sole motive of my breach of silence.

For birth, and ancestors, and what we have not done,
Scarce call I ours.
But the interest of received courtesies, and the heap of infallible tokens of
true affection is more then sufficient to stir me thereto, unless I would
prove the most ingrate in the world, and senseless of the greatest injuries
that can be done to my self. For who has killed King James and the Marquis of
Hamilton, in that part of the injury which is done to me, therein he has
done as much as robbed me of my life and of all my fortunes. Friends with such
constant and loving impressions of me, ar neither to be recovered nor duly
valued. For his Majesty from the third year of my age, did practice
honorable tokens of singular favor toward me, daily augmented them, in word,
in writ, in deed accomplished them, with gifts, patents, offices,
recommendations, both in private and in public, at home, and abroad, graced me
so far that I could scarce have asked him any thing which I could not also
obtain. How much honor he has done to me* me there needs no witness unto
your Majesty who is sufficient for many. No less was my Lord Marquis of
Hamilton his friendship established by mutual obligation of most acceptable
offices continued by our ancestors these three generations, engraven in the
tender minds and years of the Marquis and me, in the presence of our soueran
King James. For when the Marquis his father with the right hand upon his head,
and the left upon mine, did offer us young in years so joined to kiss his
Majesty's hand, recommending me unto his Majesty's favor, said, I take God to
witness that this young man his father was the best friend that ever I had or
ever shall have in this world. Whereupon the young Lord resolved to put trust
in me, and I fully to addict myu self unto him, to deserve of him as much
commendation as my father did of his father. This Royal celebratio^ of our
friendship rooted it self so deep in my mind that to my self I proposed
this remembrance, giving it to the young Lord and to my familiar friends, and
set it upon all the books of my study. Semper Hamiltonium, etc.

Alvvayes the King, and Hamilton,
Within thy breast conserve.
What ever be thy action
Let Princes two deserve.
Neither was it in vain. for both our loves increased with our age, the
Marquis promising to engage his life and his whole estate for me if need were,
and to share his fortunes with me, and not only promising but also performing
when ever there was occasion. Yea for my cause, offering to hasard his life
in combat, whose mind in vvishing me well, whose tongue in honoring of me,
and whose hands and means in defending me both absent and present, unto the
last period of his life has ever assisted me* I should be more tedious then
were fit, if I rehearsed every particular favor so manifestly knovve^ to the
whole court and to the freindes of both. Who then can justly blame me for
demanding justice as well for the slaughter of the Marquis of Hamilton as of
my most gracious soueran King James, saying I know whom to accuse. My
profession of Physic, nor my education to lettres, can not serve to hinder me
from undertaking the hardiest enterprise that ever any Roman undertook, so
far as the law of conscience will give way.

Why shall I stay, at thy decay
Of Hamiltons the hope?
VVy shall I see thy foe so free
Unto his joy give scope?
Rather I pray, a doleful day
Set me in cruel fate,
Then thy death strange, without revenge
Or him in safe estate.
This soul to heavens, hand to the dead I vow.
No fraudfull mind, no trembling hand I have:
If pen it shun, the svvord revenge shall follow.
Soul, pen, and svvord, what thing but just do crave?
What affection I boore to the liui^g, the same shall accompany the dead. For
when one whose truth and sincerity was well known to me, told me, that
it were better for the chiefest of my friends the Marquis of Hamilton to be
quiet at home in Scotland, then to be eminent in the court of England, to whom
by the opinion of all the vviser sort, his being at court would cost him no
less the^ his life, since that I stretching forth my arm (apprehending some
plottes laid against him) ansvvered if no man dare revenge his death, I vow
to God this hand shall revenge it, scarcely any other cause ca^ be found, the^
the bond of our most close freindship, why in the scroll of the nobleme^s
names who were to be killed I hold be set down next to the Marquis of
Hamilto^ in these words, ( The Marquis of Hamilton and Doctor Eglisham to
enbavvme him) to wit, to the end that no discoverer or revenger should be
left. This roll of names, I know not by what destiny, found near to
Westminster about the time of the Duke of Richemund his death, and brought to
the L. Marquis by his cousin the daughter of the Lord Oldbarre one of the privy
counsel of Scotland, did cause no terror in me, until that I did see the
Marquis poisoned, and remembered that the rest therein noted were dead, and my
self next pointed but suruiuing. Why stay I any more? the case requires the
pen no more, but the svvord.

I do not writ so boldly, because I am amongst Buckingham his enemies, but I
have retired my self to his enemies, because I was resolved to writ and do
earnestly against him, as may very well appear. For since the Marquis of
Hamilton his death, the most noble Marquis de Fiatta, ambassador for the most
Christian King of France, and also Buckingham his mother sent on every side to
seek me, inuiting me to them: but I did forsake them, knowing certainly the
falsehood of Bukingham, who would rather have suffered the Ambassador to receive
an effront, then to be unsatisfied of his bloodthristie desire of my blood to
silence me with death (for according to the proverb, the dead can not bite) if
he could have found me. for my L. Duke of Lenox who was often crossed by
Buckingham, and with his brother, and the Earl of Southampton, and others now
dead, was one of the roll found of those that were to be murdered, well
assured me, that where Buchingha^ once misliked, no apology, no submission, no
reconciliation could keep him from doing mischief. Neither do I writ this in
this fashion so freely, for any entertainment here present, which I have not,
nor for any future, which I have no ground to look for; seeing Buckingham has
so misled your Majesty that he has caused not only here, but also unto all
nations all Britannes natives to be disgraced and mistrusted. Your Majesty's
Royal word which should be inviolable, your hand and seall, which should be
true, to be most shamefully violated and your self to be held most ingrat for
your most kind usage in Spain which Buckingha^ makes to be requited with
injuries in a most base and false manner, under Protestation of friendship, a
bloody war being kindled on both sides whereby he has buried with King James
the glorious title of a peacemaker King: who had done much more justly, and
more advisedly if he had procured peace unto Christiandome. Whereby small hope I
have of obtaining justice in my most just complaint, unto which my true
affection to my dead friends murdered, and the extreme detestation of
Buckingha^ his violent proceedings has brought me. Your Majesty may find most
just forces of reason to accuse him in my petition to the parliament, which
shall serve for a tutchestone to your Majesty, and a whitstone to me and many
other Scotsmen. And which if it be neglected will make your Majesty to incur
such a censure amongst all vertuose men in the world that your Majesty will be
loath to hear of, and I am astonished to express at this time. a serpent
lurketh in this grass. No other way there is to be found to save your honor,
but to give way to justice against that traitor Buckingham, by whom manifest
damage apphroacheth unto your Majesty no otherways the^ death approached unto
King James. If your Majesty will take any course therein, the examinations upon
oath of all those that were about the King and the Marquis of Hamilto^ in there
sickness, or at there death, or after there death, before indifferent judges no
dependers of Buckingham, will serve for sufficient prooffe of Buckingham his
guiltines. In the mean time until I see what shall be the issue of my
complaint without any more speech I rest.

Your Majesty's daily suppliant. GEORGE EGLISHAM

TO THE MOST HONORABLE THE NOBILITY, KNIGHTS, AND BVRGESSES OF BOTH THE
HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, OF THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND
The humble supplication of M. GEORGE EGLISHAM Doctor of Physic, and one of
the Physicians to King JAMES of happy memory, for his Majesty's person above
the space of ten years.
Whereas the chief humane caire of Kings and courts of parliament, is the
preservation and protection of the subjects lives, liberties, and estates, from
private or public injuries, to the end that all things may be carried in the
equal balance of justice; without the which no Monarchy, no common wealth,
no society, no family, yea no man's life or estate can consist albeit never so
little: it can not be thought iniust to demand of Kings and parliaments the
censure of wrongs. The consideration hereof was so great in our late Monarch of
happy memory King James, that he has often publikly protested, even in the
presence of his apparent heir, that if his own son should commit murder or
any such execrable act of injustice, he would not spare him, but would have him
die for it, and would have him more severely punished the^ any other. For he
well observed, no greater injustice, no injury more intolerable ca^ be done by
man to man then murder. In all other wrongs fortune has recours, the losses
of honor or goods may be repaired, satisffaction may be made, reconciliation
may be procured, so long as the party inuried is alive, but when the person
murdered is bereft of his life, what can restore it? what satisfaction can be
given him, where shall the murderer meet with him to be reconciled to him,
unless he be sent out of this world to follow his spirit, which by his
wickedness he has separated from his body? Therefore of all injuries, of all the
acts of injustice, and of all things most to be looked into, murder is the
greatest, and of all murders the poisoning under trust and profession of
freindship, is the most heinous. Which if you suffer to go unpunished, let no
man think him self so secure to live amongst you, as amongst the wildest and
most furious beasts in the world. for by vigilancie and industry means may
be had to resist, or euite the most violent beast thar ever nature bred, but
from false and treacherous hearts, from poisoning murderers what wit or
wisdom can defend? This concerns your lordships every one in particular as
well as any. They of whose poisoning your petitioner complains, to wit king
James, the L. Marquis of Hamilto^, and others whose names after shall be
expressed, have been the most eminent of the kingdom, and satte on these
honorable benches whereon your honors now do sit. The party whom your
petitioner accuses the Duke of Buckingham is so powerful that unless the
whole body of a parliament lay hold upon him, no justice ca^ be had of him. For
what place is there of justice, what office of the crown, what degree of
honor in the kingdom which he has not sold, and sold in such crast that he
can shake the buyers out of them, and intrude others at his Pleasure? All the
Judges of the kingdom, all the officers of the state ar his bound vassals, or
allies, or afeared to become his outcasts, as is notorious to all his Majesty's
true and loving subjects. Yea so far has his ambitious practices gone, that
what he would have done should have been performed whether the king would or
not, and what the king would have done could not be done if he opposed,
vvherof many instances may be given whensoever they shall be required, neither
ar they vnkovven to this honorable assembly. Howsoever the means he uses be
lavfull or unlawful, humane or diabolike, so he tortereth the kingdom that
he procures the calling, breaking or continuing of parliaments at his
pleasure, placeing or displaceing the Officers of justice, of the counsel, of
the kings court, of the courts of justice to his violent pleasure, and as his
ambitious villainy moves him. What hope then ca^ your petitioner have that his
co^plainte shall be heard or being heard should take effect? To obtain justice
he may despair, to provoke the Duke to send forth a poysoner or other
murderer to dispetch him, and send him after his dead friends already
murdered, he may be sure this to be the event. Let the event be what it will,
come what soever can come, the loss of his own life your petitioner valueth
not, having suffered the loss of the lives of such eminent friends, esteeming
his life can not be better bestowed then upon the discovery of so heinous
murders. Yea the iustnes of the cause, the dearenes and neerenes of his
friends murdered, shall prevail so far with him that he shall unfold unto
your honors and to the whole world these raisons against the accused and named
by him the author of so great murders George Villiers Duke of Buckingham,
which against any private man ar sufficient for his apprehension and torture.
And to make his complaint not very tedious, he will only for the present
declare unto your honors the two most eminent murders committed by Buckingham,
to wit of the Kings Majesty, and of the L. Marquis of Hamilton, which for all
the subtilitie of his poisoning art could not be so cunningly conveyed as the
murderer thought, but that God has discovered manifestly the author. And to
observe the order of the time of there death because the L. Marquis of Hamilton
dyed first, his death shall be first related even from the root of his last
quarrel with Buckingham, albeit many other iarres have preceeded from time to
time betwixt them.

CONCERNING THE POISONING OF THE L. Marquis of Hamilton.
Bucikngham ones raised from the bottom to the top of fortunes wheel, by what
desert, by what right or wrong, no matter is it, by his carriage verifyed the
proverb, No thing more proud then baser broud when it does rise aloft.

Suffered his ambition to carry him self so far as to aspire to match his
blood with the blood Royal both of England and Scotland, and well knowing that
the L. Marquis of Hamilton was acknowledged by King James to be the prime man
in his dominions, who next to his own line in his propre season might clame an
hereditarie title to the Kingdom of Scotland by the daughter of King James the
first, and to the crown of England by Joan of Somerset wife to King James the
first, declared by act of parliament heretrix of England in her due rank,
never suffered the King to be at rest, but urged him always to send some of
the privy counsel to solicit the Marquis to match his eldest son with
Buckingha^s niece making great promises of co^ditio^s which the mean family
of the bride could not perform without the kings liberality, to wit fifty
thousand pounds sterling (valueing five hundredth thousand florens) with the
Erledome of Orknay under the title of a Duke whatsoever the Marquis would
accept, even to be the first Duke of Britan. The glorious title of a Duke the
Marquis refused twice upon special reasons reserved to him self. The matter
of money was no motive to cause the Marquis match his son so unequally to
his degree, seeing Buckingham him self the chief of his kindred was but a
nouice in nobility, his father obscure amongst gentlemen, his mother a serving
woman, and he being infamous for his frequent consultations with the
ringleaders of witches, principally that false Doctor Lamb publikly condemned
for vvitchcraft. VVherby the Marquis knovving that the king was so far
bewitched to Buckingham that if he refused the match demanded, he should find
the kings deadly hatred against him. And seeing that Buckinghams niece was not
yet nubile in years, and that before the marriage should be confirmed a way
might be found out to annull it, unto which he was forced by deceitful
importunity, therefore he yielded unto the kings desire of the match. whereupon
Buckingham and his faction fearing that delays Would breed lets, urged my L.
Marquis to send for his son upon a sunday morning be times in all have from
London to courtat Greenvvich, where never a word Was spoken of marriage to the
young lord, till a Little before supper, and the marriage made before the king
after supper. and to make it more authentike Buckingham caused his niece be
laid a bed with the Marquis his son for a short time in the kings chamber,
and in his Majeties presence, albeit the brid was yet innubile. Many were
astonished at the sudden nevves thereof. All the Marquis his friends fretting
thereat, and some writing unto him very scornful letters for the same. The
Marquis having satisfied the kings demand, did what he could to prevent the
confirmation of the marriage, and intended to send his son beyond the seaes to
travel through France and Italy, and so pass his time abroad until the time
that means were found to untie that knot which Buckingham had urged the king
to tie upon his son. But Buckingham to contreuene the Marquis his desaine
caused the king and the Prince to make the Marquis his son be sworn
gentleman of the Prince-his bedchamber, and so to be detayned with him within
the kingdom until that the bride was of years ripe for marriage.

The time expired that Buckingham his niece became marigeable, Buckingham sent
to the Marquis to desire him to make the marriage completly confirmed. The
Marquis not vvilling to hear of any such matter answered breefly, he scorned
the motion. This answer reported to Buckingham, and he seeing him self likly
to be frustrate of his ambitious matching of his niece, and perceauing that the
L. Marquis was able to raise a great faction aganst him whether king James did
live or die, was mightily ince^sed against the Marquis, at his first encounter
with him did challenge him of speaking disdainefully of him and his house. The
Marquis replied that he did not remember of any offensive words uttered by him
self against Buckingham, Then Buckingha^ proudly said unto him out of the
words of thy mouth I will judge the. For you have said you scorned the motion
of matching with my house, which I made unto you. The Marquis ansuered that
if he had said so, it became not the Duke to speak to him in that fashion. So
Buckingham threatened to be revenged, the Marquis vttrered his defiance. and
thus the quarrel begoud, which four or five times reiterate and as often
reconciled by the Marquis de Fiatta a little before the Marquis of Hamilton fell
sick, vvherin it is evident that the quarrel has been very violent that
needed so many reconciliations, the Ducks fire of his anger and fury being
inextinguible, as king James often did ce^sure him in his absence albeit a
favorite, that he was vvo^derfully vindicatiue whose malice insatiable
toward my L. Marquis of Hamilton did well shovv it self as shall appear
hereafter. Hardly can any man tell whether by the Marquis in his sickness
Buckingham was more suspected then accused of the poison given or to be given
him. For he would not taste of any thing that was sent to him by any of
Buckinghams friends but he would first have some of his servants taste it
before; and for the love that was mutual betwixt him and your petitioner whom
he would never suffer to go out of his sight during his sickness, your petitioner
also tasted of all that he took at that time, unto whom his suspicion of
Buckingham* he expressed by name, and to other sufficient witness, who will
justify it upon oath, if there be any course taken therein for the search
thereof. All the time of his sickness he entreated your petitioner not to suffer
my L. of Buckingham to come near him, but your petitioner having often sent
word and also sometimes signified him self to Buckingham that there was no
fit opportunity to see the Marquis, pretending something to be ministered unto
him, but when your petitioner could find no more excuses, he told my L.
Marquis that he had put my L. of Buckingham away so often that he could not
keep him away any longer, but that he must needs see him. Then he knovving
Buckinghams visit to proceed of dissimulation, requested your petitioner at
least to find the means, to get him away quikly, which your petitioner did,
interrupting Buckinghams discourse and entreating him to suffer my. L Marquis
to be quiet. This did euidenly shovv my L. Marquis his disliking and
distrusting of Buckingham, whereas he was well pleased with other noblemens
compainie. all the time of his sickness the Duke and my L. Denbigh would not
suffer his own son to come to him, pretending that he was also sick, which
was false for the time that my L. Marquis called for him after that your
petitioner advised his Lordship to dispose of his estate and of his conscience,
because his sickness was not without danger. which your petitioner four days
before my L. his death did in such manner that he gave him no cause to dispare
of his health, but entreated him to commit all the caire of his health to God
and his Physicians, assuring him howsoever he had gotten wrong abroad, he
should get none in the cure of his disease. At length his lordship burst out in
these words to my lord De^bigh, it is a great cruelty in you that you will
not suffer my son to come to me when I am a dying that I may see him and
speak to him before I die. so they delayed his coming with excuses until my
L. his agony of death was near, to the end that he should not have time to
give his son private instructions to shun the marriage of Buckinghams niece, or
to signify unto him the suspicion that he had of poison, for they had rather
his son should know any thing then either of these. Yet many did suspect
his poison before he dyed, for two days before his death two of his servants
dyed with manifest signs and symptoms of poison, one belonging to his wine
seller, and another to his kitchen. The fatal hour being come that my L.
Marquis deceased, your petitioner entreated them that were present to suffer no
man to toutch his body until that he returned to see it opened, for then he
protested earnestly that all the time of his sickness he judged him to be
poisoned, and in all consultations urged always antidotes to be administered,
but this poison was such and (...) far gone that none could help.
Nevertheless to have the matter concealed Buckinghams folks would have had him
buried that same night in, Westminster church, and the ceremonies of the
burial to be made afterward, saying that such delicate bodies as his, could
not be long kept. But his friends taking hold of the caveat given them by your
petitioner, refused so to do and replied that they would have him as became
him buried in Scotland in his own Chapel where his ancestors have been
buried about this four hundredth years ago, and that his body must be first
visited by his Physicians. No sooner was he dead, when the force of the
poison had overcome the forces of his body, but it begoud to swell in such
sort that his thighs were as big as six times there natural proportion, his
belly became as big as the belly of an ox, his arms as big as the natural
quantity of his thighs, his neck so broad as his shoulders, his cheeks over
the tope of his nose, that his nose could not be seen or distinguished, the
skin of his forehead over his eyes, and the same skin, with all the rest
of the skin of his head two finger high svvelled, his hair of his beard,
eyebrovves, and head, so far distant one from an other, as if an hundredth had
been taken out betwixt every one, and when one did toutch his hair it came
away with the skin as easily as if one had pulled hay out of an heap of hay.
He Was all over his breast, neck, shoulders, and arms, blistered with
blisters so big as ones fist, with blisters I say, of six diverse colors full
of waters of the same colors, some white, some black, some red, some
yeallovv, some green, some blevv, and that as well within his body as
without. Also the cauities of his liver green, his stomach in some places a
little purpurated with a blevvish clammie matter adharinge to the sides of it,
his mouth and nose foming blood mixed with froth of diverse coulors a yard high.
Your petitioner being sent for to come visit his body and his servants all
flocking about him saying see, see, presently weeping said he was poisoned,
and that it was a thing not to be suffered, moreover he said that albeit his
speech might cost him his life, yet seeing his sorrovv had extorted that speech
out of him, he would make it manifest and would have a jury of Physicians
present. Some of my L. Marquis of Hamiltons friends said, we must send to my
L. Duke that he may send his Physicians, but your petitioner replied what have
we to do with the Dukes Physicians? let us have indifferent men. Captain
Hamilton hearing your petitioner so boldly take exceptions at Buckingham, and
judging that he had good reason for what he had spoken said, for all that let
us send to the Duke, and signify that they all who see the Marquis his body
both Physicians and Chirurgians, and others, think that he is poisoned, and
that his friends desire more Physicians out of the College of London besides
the Dukes physicians, to bear witness in what case the Marquis his body is
in, and then if the Dukes conscience be guylty (said the Captain) it will show
it self. Which in deed it did. For the Duke being advertised hereof sent for
his own Physicians and others out of London, whom he caused first to be
brought to him before they went to see the Marquis his body, giving them his
direction in these words, my masters there is a brute spread abroad that the
Marquis of Hamilton is poisoned. Go and see, but beware, what you speak of
poison, (which he said in a threatening form of delivery) for now every noble
man that dies must be poisoned. If his conscience had not been guilty should
he not have commanded the Physicians to inquire be all means possible, and
make it known rather then to suppress the speech of the poisoning. These
Physicians being come, your petitioner with the one hand leading Doctor Moore
to the table where the Marquis his body was laid to be opened, and with the
other hand throwing of the clothe from the body said to him, look you here
upon this pitiful spectacle. At the sight thereof Doctor Moore lifting up both
his hands and his hat and his eyes to the heavens astonished, said Jesus bliss
me, I never saw the like. I can not know him, I can not distinguish a face upon
him, and in like manner all the rest of the Doctors and also the Chirurgians
affirmed that they never saw the like, albeit they had traveled and practiced
through the greatest part of Europe, only one that saw my L. of Southamptons
body opened in Holland (which L. was also one of Buckinghams opposits) said
that my L. of Southamptons body was blistered all within the breast as my L.
Marquis his was. Doctor Leester one of my L. of Buckinghams creatures, seeing
Doctor Moore and others so amassed at the sight of my lords body, drew first him
a side and then the others one after an other, and whispered them in the ear
to silence them. whereupon many went away without speaking one word, the others
who remained acknowledged that those accidents of the dead body could not be
without poison, but they said they could not know how such a subtle art of
poisoning could be brought into England, your pettioner replying that money
could bring both the art and the artist from the furthest part of the world
into England. from whence since your petitioner departed he has conferred
with the skilfullest pestmasters that could be found, who visit the bodies of
those that die of the venime of the pest. They all admire the description oe my
L. Marquis his body, and testify that never any of the pest hausuch accidents,
but carbuncles, bubons, or the spots, no such huge blisters with waters, and
such an huge uniform swelling to such dime^sions above six-tymes the natural
proportion. But he has met with some, who have practiced the poisoning of
dogs to try the forces of some antidotes, and they have found that some
poisons have made the dogs sick for a fortnight or more, without any
swelling until they were dead, and then they swelled above measure, and became
blistered with waters of diverse colors, and the hair came away with the skin
when it was toutched. The Plysitians then who remained were willing to
certify with there handwrit that my L. Marquis was poisoned, but your
petitioner told them it was not needful, seeing we must attend Gods leisure to
discover the author, the matter being so apparent, and so many hundreths having
seen his body to witness it, for the doors were kept open for every man to
behold and to be witness who would. The Duke of Buckingham making some
counterfeited show of sorrow to me^ of great quality, found no other shift to
divert the suspicion of the poisoning of the Marquis from his self, but to lay
it upon his Master the King, saying that the Marquis for his person, spirit,
and carriage, was such that he was borne worthy to reign, but the King his
Master hated him to death, because he had a spirit too much for the
commonwealth. Whereby the Duke show him self no good subject of the Kings, who
made the Kings humor to be tyrannical, and the King a bloodthristie murderer,
and a most vile dissembler having heaped so many honors daily upon the Marquis
even to the very last, making him Lord high Steward of his Majesty's house and
judge of the verge court, whom he had made before Viceroy of Scotland for the
time of the parliament in Scotland, Earl of Cambridge, a privy counselor in
England, and Knight of the garter, as if he had raised him to all these honors
that the murdering of him might be the less suspected to proceed from him.
The Kings nature has bee^ allways observed to be so gracious and so free
hearted to every one, that he would never have wished the Marquis any harm
unless that Buckingham had put great fears and ialousies in his mind, for if
any other had done it, he would have acquainted his favorite therewith, and
the^ was it Buckinghams duty to remove from the King such sinistrous conceits
of the Marquis, as the Marquis has often done for Buckingham, upholding him
in all occasions, and keeping the King from giving way to introduce any other
favorite. Wherefore Buckingha^ in that diuersion of the crime from him self,
has not only made the King but also himself guylty of the Marquis his death.
But Buckinghams falsehood and evil intention long before was rightly
discovered, when he did what he could to make the Earl of N^^esdale and my L.
Gordon both near Kinsmen of my Lord Marquis so ince^sed at him, that they had
likely all three killed one an other if it had not been that my L. Marquis by
his vvisdome did let them all know how they were abused. if any dissimulation
be greater then Buckinghams let any man judge, for when my L. Marquis his body
was to be transported from Whitehall to his house at Bishopsgate, Buckingham
came out muffed and furred in his coatch, giving out that he was sick for
sorrovv of my L. Marquis his death, but so soon as he went to his house out
of London before his coming to the King he triumphed and dominired with his
faction so excessively, as if he had gained some great victory, and the next
day coming to the King put on a most lamentable and mournful countenance for
the death of the Marquis of Hamilton. No greater victory could he have gotten
to his mind, then to have destroyed that man who could and would have fetched
his head of his shoulders if he had outliued King James to have known his
carriage in the poisoning him in his sickness, wherefore he thought it necessary
to remove the Marquis before hand. The same day that my L. Marquis dyed
Buckingham sent my Lord Marquis his son out of the town, keeping him as a
prisoner that none could have private conference with him until his marriage of
Buckinghams niece was complete, but always either my L. Denbigh or my lady
Denbigh or my L. of Buckingham or the countess of Buckingham or the Duchess
of Buckingham was present, that none could let him understand how his father
was murdered. even your pertioner him self when he went to see him within few
days after his fathers death was entreated not to speak to him of the
poisoning of his father which he did conceal at his first meeting because
there sorrovv was too recent, but he was prevented of a second meeting.
Neither would Buckingham suffer the young lord to go to Scotland to his
fathers funerals and to take order with his friends concerning his fathers
estate, for fear that there intended marriage, should be over thrown. This
captivity of the young lord Marquis lasted so long until that Buckingham
caused his Majesty King Charles take the young lord with him self and
Buckingham into K. James his Park discharging all others to follovv them, and
there to persuade and urge the young lord without any more delay to accomphih
his marriage with Buckinghams niece, which instantly was performed so that
Buckingham trusts and presumes that albeit the young lord should understand
how his father was poisoned by his means, yet being married to his niece,
should not stir to revenge it, but comport with it. To all what is observed
before, it is worthy to be added that the bruit went through London long
before my L. Duke of Richemonds death, or his brothers, or my lord of
Southamptons, or of the Marquis, that all the noblemen that were not of
Buckinghams faction should be poysoued, and so remoned out of his way. Also a
paper was found in kingstreete about the time of the Duke of Richemonds
death, wherein the names of all these noblemen who have dyed since were
expressed, and your petitioners name also set next to the lord Marquis of
Hamiltons name, with these words to embavvme him. This paper was brought him
by my lord Oldbarres dawghter cousin german to the lord Marquis. Likevvays a
mountebanke about that time was greatly countenanced by the Duke of
Buckingham, and by his means procured letters patents and recommendation from
the King to practice his skill through all England, who coming to London
offered to sell poisons to kill men or beasts within a year, or half a year,
or two years, or a month, or two, or what time praefixed any man desired,
in such sort that they could not be helped nor yet discovered, Moreover the
Christmas before my L. Marquis his death one of the Prince his footmen said
that some of the great ones at court had got poison in his belly but he
could not tell who it was. Here your honors considering the premises of my
L. of Buckingham his ambitious and most vindicatiue nature, his frequent
quarrels vvih my L. Marquis after so many reconciliations, his threatening of
him, his threatening of the Physicians to speak of poison, his triumphing after
my Lord Marquis his death, his detayning of his son almost as a prisoner
until the marriage complete with his niece, the preceding bruit of poisoning
of Buckinghams adversaries, the paper of there names found with sufficient
intimation of there death by the conclusion of the word Embavvming, the
poysonmunger mountibanck graced by Buckingham, may suffice for ground to take
him and torture him, if he were a private man. And herein your petitioner most
humbly and most ernesty demands justice against that treator, seeing by act of
parliament it is made treason to conspire the death of a privy counselor. out
of this declaration interrogatories may be drawn for examination of witness,
vvherin more is discovered to begin with all, then was laid open at the
beginning of the discovery of the poisoning of sir Thomas Ouerbury.

CONCERNING, THE POISONING OF KING James of happy memory, King of great
Britan, etc.
THe Duke of Buckingham being in Spain advertised by letters, how that the
King begoud to censure him in his absence freely, and that many spoke boldly to
the King against him, and how the King had intelligence from Spain of his
unworthy carriage in Spain, and how the Marquis of Hamilton upon the sudden
nevves of the Prince his departure, had noblely reprehended the King, for
sending the Prince with such a young man without experience, and in such a
private and sudden manner, without acquainting the nobility or counsel
therewith, vvrotte a very bitter letter to the Lord Marquis of Hamilton,
conceived new ambitious courses of his own, and used all the devises he
could to disgust the Prince his mind of the match with Spain so far
intended by the King. Made have home, where when he came he so carried him
self that what soever the King commanded in his bedchamber he controlled in
the next chamber. Yea received packets to the King from foreign Princes and
dispetched answers without acquainting the King therevvith not in a great
time thereafter. Whereas perceiving the King highly offended and that the Kings
mind was beginning to alter toward him, suffering him to be quarrelled and
effronted in his Majesty's presence, and observing that the King reserved my
Lord of Bristou to be a rod for him, urging daily his dispetch for France, and
expecting the Earl of Gondomar his coming to England in his absence, feared
much that the Earl of Gondomar, who as it seemed was greatly esteemed and
wonderfully credited by the King, would secund my Lord of Brestovves
accusations against him. He knevv also that the King had vowed, that in
despite of all the devils of hell he would bring the Spanish match about
again, and that the Marquis of E^echosa had given the King bad impressions of
him. by whose articles of accusation the King him self had examined some of
the nobility and privy counsel, and found out in the examination that
Buckingham had said after his coming from Spain that the King was an old
man, it was now time for him to be at his rest, and to be confined to some
park to pass the rest of his time in hunting, and the Prince to be crowned.
The more the King urged him to be gone to France the more shifts he made to
stay, for he did evidently see that the King was fully resolved to rid him
self of the oppression wherein he held him.

The King being sick of a tertian ague, and that in the spring which was of
it self never found deadly, the Duke took his opportunity when all the Kings
Doctors of Physic were at Dinner upon the monday before the King dyed,
without there knowledge or consent, offered to the King a white powder to
take, the which the King longtime refused, but overcome by his flattering
importunity at length took it, drunk it in wine, and immediately became worse
and worse, falling into many soundings and pains, and violent fluxes of the
belly so tormented, that his Majesty cried out aloud, o this white powder!
this white powder! would to God I had never taken it, it will cost me my liffe.
In like manner the countess of Buckingham my L. of Buckinghams mother upon the
friday thereafter, the Physicians also being absent and at dinner, and not made
acquainted with her doings, applied a plaster to the Kings heart and breast,
whereupon his Majesty grevv fainte, short breathed and in great agony. Some of
the Physicians after dinner retouning to see the King, by the offensive smell
of the plaster perceived some thing to be about the King hurtful to him, and
searched what it could be, found it out and exclamed that the King was
poisoned. Then Buckingham entering commanded the Physicians out of the room,
caused one to be committed prisoner to his own chamber, and another to remove
from court, quarrelled others of the Kings servants in the sick Kings own
presence, so far that he offered to dravv his svvord against them in the
Kings sight. And Buckinghams mother kneeling before the King, with a brazen
face cried out justice, justice, sir I demand justice of your Majesty. The
King asking for what? she answered, for that which there lives is no
sufficient satisfaction, for saying, that my son and I have poisoned your
Majesty, poisoned me said the King. with that he turning him self sounded,
and she was removed, The sunday thereafter the King dyed, and Buckingham
desired the Physicians who attended the King, to sign with there handvvrits
a testimony that the powder which he gave the King was a good and a safe
medicin, which they refused to do. Buckinghames creatures did spread abroad a
rumor in London that Buckingham was so sorry at the Kings death, that he would
have dyed, that he would have killed him self, if they had not hindered him.
Which your petitioner purposly inquired of them that were near him at that
time, who said that neither in the time of the kings sickness nor after his
death, he was more moved then if there had never happened either sickness or
death to the King. One day when the King was in great extremity he rode post
to London to pursue his sister in law to have her stand in sackcloth at
Povvles for adultery, an other time of the Kings agony he was bussy
contriuing and concluding a marriage for one of his cousins. Immediately after
the Kings death the Physician who was commanded to his chamber, was set at
liberty with a caveat to hold his peace, the others threatened if they kept
not good tounges in there heads. But in the mean time the Kings body and head
svvelled above measure, his hair with the skin of his head stuck to the
pillow his nails became loose upon his fingers and toes. your petitioner
needs to say no more to understanding men. Only one thing he beseeches that
taking the traitor who ought to be taken without any fear of his greatness, the
other matters be examined, the accessories with the guilty punished.


