The Ethiques of Aristotle, that is to say, precepts of good behauoure and
perfighte honesty, now newly translated into English.



The preface HIS RIGHT HOnorable Lord and Master Edward Earl of Derby, His
humble and obediente Servant Ihon Wylkinson, Saluteth.
ALthough the feeble and werie body, (right honorable lord and Master) be
satisfied with a restinge place: yet the mind cannot be so quieted or reposed,
but that of necessity it is evermore busi. Therefore it shall be good for every
man to provide for some virtuous occupiyng, against the multitude of pha^ta
sies, wherein may be fixed the labor of the mind, so that it stray not to far
in vain. I therefore intending to discharge a part of my duty toward your
Lordship have translated this book of the Ethiques of Aristotle, out of Jtalian
into our vulgar tongue, not for that your Lordship has not seen them
herebefore in the Italian to^g, but for the instruction and edifiyng of others
that have not seen them in English. Yet I can notboldli beseech your Lordshippe
nor others being of more knowledge then I am to allow this my simple dooyng:
but rather to correct the same, and not to judge or deem in me any presumcion.

The end of the preface.
The Ethiques of Aristotle.
Of Arts. The first Chapter.
Every art, every doctrine, eueri operacio^, and every election, semethe to
require so^thynge to be good: the^ it was well said of the Philosophers. Good
is that which every thing desires. According unto diverse arts, diverse
intencions: Some ben finished in works, and other that been no works.
Although they be many Arts or crafts, every one has his final intencion.

Example, Phisike intends health, and knighthod victory, ship work intends
sailynge: Governance of housolde intends to have riches. There be Arts
general and arts also that be special. Example, The science of knighthode
is general under the which ben contained other arts particulars, as Sa
delars, Armorers, and other crafts which may be nedeful in batel, and these
universal be more worthy and more noble than been the particulars, because, the
particulars be for the vniuersalles, as things which be made by nature, and
been an utter and fynall understanding, unto the which been ordained all the
operacion of these crafts. As a man that shoteth at his prick for his mark:
So every craft has his final intent which does set forth the work. Then the
art Civil that teaches to rule Cities is principal and sovereign of all other
arts, for under her ben contained diverse arts. Rethorique is also right
noble, for why? she does dispose and set in order all the other that be
contained under her: The fullness whereof and end, is the fulness and intent of
all the other. Than the wealth that follows her science is the wealth of man,
Because, it does co^strain from enyls. The right doctrine is that a man
proceed therein according as his nature may sustain.

Example, He that teaches Geometry, ought to proceed by strong arguments,
which been named demonstracio^s: and he that teaches Rethorique ought to
proceed by arguments sembla bles or very like. And this is for to wit, that
every artificer should judge well and say the truth of that which
apperteyneth to his craft. The science of rulyng of cities belongs not to
children, nor to men that follows their own wylles: For they be not wise in
two sorts, neither in age nor in manners, yet sometime old of time and young
in manners, and child of time and old in manners, then to such is convenient
to be rulers of cities which be no children of manners nor folowers of their
own wills.

There be things which be manifest unto nature, and things that be manifest
unto us, from whence this science ought to be given. Of the things that be
manifest unto us, a man that should study in this science and learn it, ought
to use himself in things good, just and honest. Also he ought to have his
mind naturally disposed to science. But a man that has none of these things
is unprofitable to this science.

Of the three lives. Ca. ii.
THe life's of name and fame been three: the one is the life of co^ cupyscence,
the other is ye life Civil: that is to say the life of honor and prudence:
the third is the life conte^platiue. There be many that live bestly, which is
called the life of concupiscence, for that they follow their wills, and echone
of these lives is for their propre intent, divided one from the other: as the
art of Phisike is divided from the art of knight hode, and as the Physician
intends health, so the knight will have battle and victory.

Of good. Capi. iii.
GOod is considered in two sorts, the one is good for himself, another good
is that a man desires for other. Good for thy self is beatitude. Good for
other is honor and virtue. And why would a man have these things, but for
to be happy? A natural thing it is to every man to be a Citiezen and to be
accustomed with Artificers, and not naturally to inhabit i^ deserts there
where is no company which naturally a man loves. Beatitude is a thing complete
that nedethe none other thing without it self, by the which the life of man
is laudable and glorious. The^ is beatitude the gretest wealth and the most
soueraiue thing a man can have.

Here is divided the powers of the Solle. Capi. iiii.
THe Solle of man has three powers, one is called ye life vegitable: in y^
which man is partener with trees and with plants: The second power, is the
life sensible in the which a man is partener with beasts, for why al beasts
have life's se^sible. The third, is called solle reasonable, by the which a man
differs from all other things, for there is none reasonable but man. And
this power reasonable is sometime in act, and sometime in power, from whence
the Beatitude is when it is in act and not when it is in power.

Every work that a man does, is either good or eiuell, and that man that
makes his work good, is worthi to have the perfection of the virtue of his
works: as we would say, he that har peth well, is worthy to have the praise of
his art, and the euel to have the contrary. The^ if the life of man, be
according to the operacion of reason, than his life is laudable, when he
leadethe it according to his propre virtue. But when many virtues be gathered
together in one man's living, then the life of that man is most best and much
honored and much worthy, so that it can be no more. For it is not one virtue
that makes a man blessed or happy, No more than one Swalowe is a perfight
token of the new spring. Then it is not in a little time of the life of man,
that he does good works, nor can be said, that man is happy.

Of three manner of welthes. Capitulo.v.
VUelth is divided in three parts, the one is the welthe of the solle, the
other is the welthe of the body, and the other is the welthe with out the
body. And of these three the wealth of the Solle is most worthy, and the form
thereof is not known but in works, which be with virtue. Beatitude
consists in the obteinyng of virtues and in the vsi^g of the^. But wha^
beatitude is in a man in habit and not in deed or act, than he is virtuous as
a man that sleapeth, whose virtue and whose works are not manifest, but of
necessite must needs work according to the art, and is in similitude to him
that stands in trauers and feightes, obtains and has the crou^e: although
there be no more stronger than he that has the victory, yet he has not
therefore the crown because he is most strong, except he feighte: Albeit by his
power he get the battle. And so the rewards of virtue, a man has not if he
bestow not himself in virtue actually: and this is for because the reward is
the Beatitude which he has so long as he works y^ works of virtue.

The just manne deliteth in justice, the wise man in Sapyence, the virtuous
man in virtue. And every work which is done by virtue, is fair and
delectable in it self. Beatitude is a thing Jocound and pleasant.

Beatytude that is in earth has need of outewarde health, for it is
impossyble to a man to do fair works and to have Art, which is seemyng
to good and virtuous living, with abundance of fre^des. prosperity of fortune,
without good outwardly. And therefore it is needful to have without forth,
whereby may be the more manifest the honor and value of man. And if any gift
be given to man in this world from the glorious God, it is a worthy thing to
believe this to be the Beatitude, because it is the best thing that may be in
man. For whi? it is an honorable and com plet form of virtue. There is no
generacyon nor kind that can have virtue and beatitude but man. There is
nether child nor beast that can have Beatitude, for whi? there works be not
according to virtue. Beatitutde is a thing steadfast and fyrm according to very
disposicio^, wherein nether falls variaunce nor permutacio^, as for to have
now well and now evil, but evermore well, and this is the goodness that is in
the works of man* The pillars of beatitude be the operacions which a man does
according to virtue. The pillars of the contrary, be those that a man does
according to vice.

These works be steadfast and stable in the mind of man, and the virtuous
manne is not moved nor trobled in him self for any thing that may happen
contrary, for then he should never have felicitee it he be trobled, because
sorrow takes away pleasure from felicity.

There be things which be hard to be born: but wha^ a man has borne them
patiently, he has showed the strength of his mind: and there be things also
which be light to be borne, in the sustainyng whereof there is no great
prudence showed therein. A hard thing it is to sustain sickness and death of
children: yet although they be strange and hard, they mouenot a man from his
Beati tude. The happynes of the man that is well fortuned, is so much to be
praised, as a thing sent from God, and is so much to be honored and commended:
that their laud and praise can not be spoken: and spe cially, it shall become us
to glory fie, honor and magnify almighty god above al things, and we ought to
think him in him self to have in his thought algoodnes and felicite, For whi?
he is the begi^ning and cause of algoodnes. Felicite and beatitude ar one
certain act, the which proceeds of ye solle and of the body. And like as the
perfect phisicia^ seeks and sercheth dt lige^tly the nature of the body of man
to thente^t to co^firm it in hell the: Likewise tt belongs unto good rulers
and gouerners of cities to look studi and provide toco^ serve the form of
felicite in ye mides of their citizens, and for to put them in comfort to work
accor ding to virtue which is the pre cious fruit y^ comes of felicite.

The powers of the solle, Chap^ter.vi.
The solle of man has diverse powers, as one called the power irracional: that
is to say unreasonable, wherein a man differs not from pla^tes and brute
beasts. And therefore this is not the propre power in manne. For by this power
manne may work his operacion sleapyng. The other is the power intellectiue,
according to whose work after the form aforsaid, is good and evil. And this
power works not in slepynge but manyfestely, and therefore it is said, that
the miserable differs not from the good in the lymittes of this life. For in
the time of sleep, which is the good, such is the euel, and is because that
man rests from the work by the whi che he is called good and evil: but this
is not treuth generallye, because the minds of the good, sees sometimes in
visions and dreams many good things and profitable, Which be not seen in the
minds of eiuell men. The other power that the sollc has, although it be not
racionall. Yet it takes part with reason, therefore it ought to obey unto the
virtue of reason, and this is called the virtue co^ cupissible. And a man
ought to know that in the solle there are sometime contrary mouinges Like as
are in the body, as when one membre moves in the Paralitico or Paulsye it
must move against nature: but this contrary is manifest in the bodi, and in
the solle hid and s^^rete. The power racional is to be said in two sorts, the
one is the power which is very reasonable: that lerneth deserneth and judges.
The other power, unreasonable, that is to say, the power concupissible, and is
called reasonable as long as it is obedyent and under the power of that which
is very reasonable, as the good child unto the father, whi che receaueth his
correction.

Of two manners of virtues. Chapter.vii.
THere be two virtues, one is called Intellectual, as Sapience science and
prudence: the other is called Moral, as chastity, liberality and humility,
then if we will praise a man in virtue Intellectual, we say this is a wise
man and subtle in understanding, and when we will praise a man for his moral
virtues, that is to sai in his ma ners, we say this is a chaste man and a
liberal.

How virtue grows in man. Chaptter.viii.
Although there be ii. virtues, the one intellectual, and the o there moral,
the Intellectual ingendreth and grows by doctrine and learning. And the
moral like wise ingendreth and grows by good use and custom, and this virtue
moral is not in us by na ture, for natural things can not be moved from their
disposicions by contrary use.

Example, the nature of the Stone is to goo down ward, and cannot be cast so
high but that it preaseth down again. The nature of the Fire is to gooe up:
and can not be driven so far down but that it preaseth upward. And
universally, nothing natural can naturalli work against nature The^ these
virtues be not in us by nature: the power to receive them is in us by nature,
the accomplisshynge is in us by use. The^ these virtues be not put in to us by
nature, but the roots and fulfillyng of the recepte of the^, is in us by
nature: and the fulness and perfection of the unco^meth to us by use. Eueri
thing that is in us by nature, is in us first by power: and after comes to
the act, as it comes to the senses of man. For first a man has power to
see and to here: and after by this power he hears and sees: and a man sees
not nor hereth before he have the power to hear and see: then now we see that
in these things of nature: the power goes before the act, and in things
moral, all contrary, for the act and the work goes before the power.

Example, A man has the virtue that is called Justice be cause he has dooen
ofttymes the works of Justice: Also the virtue of Chastity: for that he has
diverse times wrought the works of Chastity. And so it is of Artificers, a
man is called a Carpenter because he has wrought long in that art and craft:
Art will not be had without long time bestowed therein. Like as the Minstrel, by
the long use of Instruments, bears the name of that art: and the good man is
good by his good works, and euel for doing eiuell: one self thing ingendreth
in us virtues and corrupts. If this thing be done diversely, it is by virtue
as it is by health, for one self thing done in diverse fashions is both cause
of health and corrupcio^.

Example, labor temperate is health to man, and if it be little it corrupts,
to much or to litel corrupts, and to keep the mean conserueth. Example,
fear and folyshe hardiness corrupts the valiantnes of man, for whi? the
fearful flees from every thing. And the hardye assaileth every thing,
believing in himself to bring it to pass: another in the one nor in the other
there is no doutinesse, for prudence is in keeping the mean between fear and
folyshe hardynes. For a man ought to sle and assail there where it is to
assail. And so it is to be understand in all virtues, as it is to be
understand in prudence: that virtue is gotten and kept by holdyng of the mean.

How a man is virtuous Chapyter.ix.
Now it is needful to make distinction and put a difference between habit,
which are without virtue by grefe or by joy, which be done in their works.

Example, he ye sustaineth carnal wills, and of the abstaini^g from the^
reioiseth, is called chaste, and he that sustaineth carnal will and morneth is
called lecherus, and specially he that sustaineth terrible things and not
trobled therewith, is called prudent and strong, and he that sustaineth
perilous things and troubled with them is called fearful. Every operacion and
every fashion follows ple asure or displeasure. Then every virtue is with
delyghte or with grefe: and therefore the governors of Cities do honor
delectacions and plesures dewely taken: and scourge with diverse torments
delectacions not dewely taken.

The three desires of Man. Chapter.x.
THe things that man wills and desires be three: one is profitable, the
other delectable and the third good. The things contrary be also three, nether
profitable, delectable, nor yet good. He that uses reason in these things is
good: And he that uses not reason in these things is evil. And specially in
delectacion, for why? it is noryshed with us from our nativity. And therefore
it is a great thing for a man to have right measure in delectacion. Then all the
understanding of this our book, is to have delectacion with reason: and to
have reason in hard things it behooves to have art. Then the understanding of
arts was out of the science Civil: So that it gives delight unto his
citiesens, in things which be convenient, as where, when and how much, and
who that uses of these things well, is called good: and he that does contrary
is evil.

How a man is virtuous. Chapi.xi.
TO demand how a man is just according to the works of justice, and how he is
temperat, doing the works of te^peraunce, a man might say that it is like unto
these two virtues. As of gra^ mer, and to that man that is called a Gramarion,
that speaks according to Grammar: but in trothe it is not like, from the art
to virtues, for why? in art, that a man be good it needs not but to know, but
in virtue knoweledge suffices not, without work: for to know without work
it avails not. Like unto this is the sick which under stands all the
commandment of the Phisician, and does not thereafter. Such sickness is far
from health, so be men far from Beatitude if they have virtues and work them
not.

How virtues ar inhabit, Chapyter.xii.
IN the solle of man are three things habit, power, and passions. Passions be
these, Joye, desire, love, envy, and hate: the powers be natural by the which
we may do the foresaid things. Habyte is where a man is praised or dispraysed,
the^ I say that virtue is no power nor passion but habit: for another by
passion nor power, man is praised nor dyspraysed: but rather by habitee
standing and permanent in the solle of man.

What virtue is Chapter.xiii.
Virtues be found in things that have a mean between extremities, which are
either to much or to littel: and this mean is in ii. sorts, one accordig to
nature, and the other by comparison, and is called mean according to nature,
this in all thing is one self thing Example, if.x. be to much and vi. is to
litell. then.ii. is to be a mean, for why? vi. be so much more then.ii. as
they be les then x. the mean by comparison to us is this, nether to much nor
to littell.

Example, if taking a great quantity of food be to much, and a litel
quantity to litel, the mean may be understand in our handelyng, nether to
much nor to littel. Every artificer in his art inforseth himself to keep the
mean, from thextremitees. The^ the moral virtues be those works, in the
which to much and to litellbe aduoyded and abolyshed, and the mean to be
praised. Then virtue is one willing habit, that stands in the midward to us,
from whence the reason is determinate.

There is but one wate only to do well, and mani ways to do evil: and therefore
it is a hard thing and a laborus to be good, and a light and easy thing to be
evil: and there be mo of the euel sort then of the good. There be thiges in the
which there can no mean be found, because they be naught at all, as thette,
manslaughter, treason, and adultry: so there be things which be virtues, and
have no extremities: As te^peraunce and fortitude: for the mean has no
extremitee in it self. Fortitude or strength is a mean between fear and
folish hardiness: and Chastity is mean between the man that follows his will,
and he that utterly forsakes it. Liberalite is the mean between prodigalite
and Avarice, for the prodigal is less in receuing, then he is in giving, and
the covetous contrary, but the man that is liberal keeps the mean between
these two extremities. Liberalite, truth, and prodigalite in litel and mean
things: but in great things the mean is called Magnificence, the
superabu^da^ce has no name in Latin, but in Greek ir is called Pleonasmonus,
and the lyttel is called Pernesa, Mean in the will is equanimite, that is to
sat, equalnes, Equanimite are those that will not to much. The Magninimus is he
that wills to much, and he that will not is called pusillanimus. A man that
angreth with a thing so much as it veho ueth, is called meke: and he that is
angri with a thig withoutcause is called Irefull: and he that is not so angry
as he should be is called Iniracibile or angerles, truth is in the mids
between the two extremees, that is between ouermuche and to little. Those which
keep the mean between these two things, be called trusty, and they that
ouerpasse be called vaunters or boasters. And those that be to short in these
things, be called humble: and they that keep the mean in these things of
sport and play, be called in Greek Metrocalor and they that ouerpas, be
called skoffers, and they that lack, be called haskardes: and he that keeps
the mean in company is called co^paniable: and he that passes the mean loking
for no gaynes, is called a good fellow: and he that passes the midst, and al
forgaines, is called a flatterer. Shamfastnesse is a passion of the mind and
no virtue, and they that hold the mean in shame, be called shamfaste, and
they that be more ashamed than need is, be called in Greek Recoples and they
which shame, less than they should are called shameless.

How to know virtues. Chaptter.xiiii.
Three dysposicyons ben in the works of man: that is to say, much, lyttel and
mean. And al these three things been contrary amongst theymselues. For little
is contrary to much, and the mean is contrary to them both: that is to
say, to little and to much, whence if thou will make co^paryson, between
the mean and much, we may say to much: and if we will make comparison,
between the mean and litel, we may say to litel: whence if thou will make
comparison, between prowes and fear, there prowes shall be called hardines, and
if a man will compare, between prowes and hardines, verily their prowes shall be
called fear. But it is to be known that there is a greater contrary from the
one extreme to the other, the^ it is from the mean to the extremes, yet the
one is more nere to the mean then is the other.

Example, hardynes is more nearer to prowes then is fear, and prodygalitee is
more nearer to Lyberalitee then is Avarice, but the sencibilite of the carnal
will, is more near unto Chastitee, then it is to Lechery, and that is by two
reasons, the one reason is according to the nature of the thing, the other is
of our part by nature, and this is the reason whereof that fear is more
contrari unto Fortytude, then is hardynes of our part: because the extremities
unto the which we been most ready to fall by nature, been the furthest from
the mean, and therefore we fall more redily unto carnal desires, then we do to
the contrary. Then in so much that virtue is in the mean, and to take the mean
there needs so many consideracio^s, it is a hard thing for a man to become
virtuous. Every art apperteneth to every man, and every man ought to lern,
specially such as are wise and expert therein, for every man cannot find the
point of the cercle, but he only that is wise in Geometry. Can do and will do
the thing, is lightlye said, but to do with all dew circumstance appertcineth
only to them that be wise in that art. Every operacion that keeps the mean
is fair and worthi reward, and for this cause we ought to incline our mides,
contrary to our desires whereby we may come to the mean, although it be a hard
thing at the first. Then in all things the mean is to be praised, and the
extremities to be blamed.

How a man does well and euel. Chapter.xv.
THere be operacions which a man does not with his will, that is to say by
force or by ignorance, as if the wynd should take a man and carry him into
another countreye. There be other operacions, which a man does willyngly by
his own consent as a man that does a work of virtue or vice by his propre will.
And there be other operacions which be part by his will, and part not
according to his will: as if a man being upon the Sea in time of tempest and
casts forth his harnes and stuff to save him self: or as it has been
seen, that the lord has commanded his subject to slaie his father or mother
in pain of life. Such operacions be not co^pou^ded of the works of will nor
enforced: yet if thou do it, thou do it by thy will, although thou do it by
commandment, therefore such works have praise and dispraise. A man ought
rather to die, then to doc so fyithy a thing, as to kill father or mother, or
to do any such like things. Lack of wit and discrecion is the cause of all
eiuell, for lack of knowledge what is to be done, and what is not to be done,
is the only cause of the in crease of euel me^. In this know lage, the mind
sees not the evil name and peril that they run in to. Think you a dronken man
and Ireful, when he does any evil deed, that he does it by ignorance without
knowledge, al though he be ignorant in his deed. Nevertheless, the cause of
the malice is not without him, for why? the science of a man ca^ not depart
from him. Then the cause of the concupiscence of this euel, is but in the euel
doer, that follows his will: for it is impossyble, that a man may do well by
his will, and evil without his will. And likewise the will is more common and
more general then is the election. For why? the operacyon of the will, is
common with Beasts and children, but the election apperteineth not but to him
that abstaineth him self from concupiscence. Sometimes a man would have a thing
that is possible, and yet does chose for it that which is impossible. Also the
will is the^tent, but the election is an antecede^t unto thente^t, for why?
election goes before the operacion: and the operacion goth after. And a man is
called good or euel by the work: but by the election he is another called good
nor evil.

Also the opinion is of truth or falsehode: but the election is of well or
evil. And like opynions are of those things that a man knows not sureli.
But the election is of those things which a man knows of a surety. yet
every thing is not to be chosen, but those wherein a man has had council
before. And yet council is not to be kept in every thing: But of those wherein
wise men take council, but of the things whereof fools counsel is no
counsel to be made, but these things which be weighty and may be done by us,
the Issue being doutefull, that is to say doutefull in the end. There be
things which be to have council, as to give medysyns to a sick manne or
like things. Of other things, which appertains not to us, needs no
counsayll, as to keep council upon things that be perpetual, and of
necessity: as whether the son rise in the morning, or if it rain or not:
nor yet to council of things that come by chance, as too find a Pursse or
other treasure: nor yet to council upon the end, but rather upon the
things that go before the end.

The Physicyan counsaileth upon the life of the sick, and counsayleth how he
may heal him. The Rhethorician counsaileth not upon perswasyons: and he that
makethe the law, counsayleth not of the beatitude, but rather every man
counsayleth in those things by the which they may come to the things that
be needful to their art, by him or by his fre^des, as he would to himself.
The will is the end or the intent as it is said above, where it seems to
some men that to be good which please them, and other there be to whom it
seems that all is good that the most would have commonly: but according to the
truth it is not so, but good is that which seems good to them that be good,
that judge things as they be, and judge as does the whole man, that judges
that sweet, which is sweet, and that bitter, which is bitter. But the sick man
does al contrary, for he judges bitter to be sweet, and the sweet bitter,
and so unto an euel man that which is good seems evil, and that is evil
good, and this is because the euel man takes not delight to be good, but that
he delyteth to be evil: and there be many sick of this naughty syckenes,
because the works good and evil be in their judgment. Then it is in us to do
well, and also it is in us to do euel, and somtymes it is by the works of man
as it is with children, put the case that some be naught, the father thinks
him good. And that good and euel is in us, it appears by the^ that made the
law, which scourges them that do evil with dyuerie pains, and gives
honor to them that do well. The laws put men in comfort to do well, and
constrayne them from evil, and no man comfort another to do that thing
that is not in his power. There is none that will advise a man to mourn for
that thing that he should sorrow: nor there is none that will bear a man in
hand, he shall not warm standing nere the fire, and that he be not thrusty nor
hungry: and they that made the laws punish men for such Ignorance wherein
they be gilty. And it is to be known that there is doble ignorance, one is
this of the which a man is notcause, as the ignorance of the fool, and for
this a man is not to bepunished, another ignorance whereof a man is cause, as
the ignorance of a dronken man, And for that a man ought to be punished, for
every manne that passes the commandments of reason and of the law, ought
to be punished, and every man that is just, or evil, is such, because he
will be such. But when a man is made just or eeuill, he is not become just,
because he would become just: As it happens to a man that was wont to be
whole and is sick and is not healed because he had no will that he would not
belefe the Physician, nor use the things that conserueth health And such like
is he that casts a stone, that before he casts it, it is in his power to
hold it: But when he has cast it, it is not in his power to hold it nor in
his will. And so it is in a man that becomes evil: in the begin nyng it is in
his power to be come good.

Malice is not only in man by will: But more over it is in the body. As a man
to be blind andlame: and these evils may be in two sorts, y^ one is by
nature, as he that is borne blind and lame, the other may come by a man's
own folly. As by them that drink theimselfes blind, or fall to stealyng or
other evil dedees. Of such there is no pety to be taken except they repent
and amend them selfs. Then every manne is the cause of his own imaginacion,
for that a man has natural understanding to know good and evil. Then
ought we to will to do well and to fly from evil. And it is the best
thing, and not impossible to take a custom and doctrine in goodness, and he
that takes it at the beginning and continues, such a man has a good nature
and perfight. And who that takes the contrary has an evil nature But although
it be evil he may make it good if he will: For it is in him to take what he will,
then virtue and vice is according to the will of man. But mark this, that
operacion and habit be not according to the will of man in one sort but in
diverse. For why? The operacio^s from the beginning to the end is in the power
and will of man. But the habit is not in the power nor in the will of man if
it be not at his beginning.

The.xvj. Chapter. Of Fortitude.
LEt us speak now of every habit, and begin at strength. I lay that strength
is according as it is said before, a mean between fear and hardines. For there
be things that a man ought reasonably to fear, as vices and every thing that
puts a man in an evil name: and they that be not afraied of these things
be shameless and worthy to be blamed: And they that be afraid of these are to
be praised* There be men that be hardy in battle and there be that be
liberal in spendyng money: but the very strong man is nether more nor less
then needs, and is ready in all these things as needs to sustain: But the
irefull man excedeth in these things, and the fearful man lacks in them.
The things that be to be feared be not of one nature but of many sorts. For
there be diverse things that are to be fered of al men that have wit and
understanding: for he that fears not thondre and the waves of the sea is not
wise. And there be other things that every man fereth not, and those things
be according to the more or less: that is to say, according as on thing is
more to be feared then another. And as I say of things that be fearful, so
it is to be understand of hardines. For there be men that will show the^ selfs
hardy before they come to the deed, and make a great face, but when they come
to the deed bear themselfes not valiant. But a bold man and strong does the
contrary, that before he cum to the deed holds him still: and when he comes
to the deed he is hardy and strong. Strength is in five sorts, the first is
civil strength, because that men of Citees suffer much and many perels to
have honor and to be blameles of their citezens. The second sort is by wit and
policy that a man has in his office: As we se of men that be wise in
feactes of arms, that do great things trustyng in their Science, and be not
strong according to the truth, because that when these the danger of bat
taill, they flee being more afraied of death then of shame. But he that is
strong according to the truth, ought to do the contrary and to stand fast
in battaill, and fear more shame then death.

The third sort is by furye as we se in wild strength, that be strong and
hardy by the great furor that is in them, this is not the very strength, for
who so ever puts himself in perel by ire or furye, is not to be called
strong. But they that put them selfs in perell by a right understanding,
those be strong

The fourth sort is by strong mouyng of concupiscence, as we may se of brute
beasts in time of their copulacio^, and so many men let theimselfes fall
lightly, and they that keep well themselfes be strong.

The fifte sort is by surety where a man has had often times victory: as he yt
fights with one that he has often ouercomen, but when he fights with an
other, there he leseth his hardiness and strength. These five sorts be not
the very strength: for strength is a more worthy thing then Chastity, for it is
a lighter thing for a man to abstain himself from carnal concupissence, then
it is in things of grief.

The.xvij. Chapter. Of Chastitee.
Chastity is the mean between following all the delectacio^s of the body or not
to follow. For a man to delight himself in things convenient: where and when,
and how much, there needs no Chastity. For seeing of fair things, and
hering of merry tales, and smellyng of flouers: how much when and as it
behooves, there needs no Chastitee. For Chastity needs not but in two se^ces
of the body, that is to sai, in the taste and felyng, in the which we begin
with brute bea stes very strongly, as delighting themselfes in things that
they eat, drink, and touch: and specially in touching is great delectacion,
and therefore it is a beastly thing to follow to much the delectacion of
touching For in the taste, a man delights not so much as in touching For the
delectacion of tastyng is only when a man examineth the savor. There be
natural delectacions in the which a man may have measure, as in not to much
eating and drynkyng. This mesure may be called Chastitee, for the unchaste is in
the delectacions of the body and not in things of grief, for in things of
grief the mean is to be understand, strength. Some time a man is not
temperat nor chaste when he delights more then is due, and when he may have
the things that he desires, it is hard to find a man that delights himself
less then he should in carnal delectacio^s, such one has no name set. Then
they be chaste that keep the mean in delectacions, that is to sai, delight to
much in ha uing of them, nor sorrow not to much in lesing the^, but delight
himself temperately, content with sufficien^e to the good life of man. It
behooves a man to withstand the desire of delectacions, for if a man let
reason be overcome, it remaigneth under desires, therefore it is needful to
manne to be chaste from youth and to live un der commandments, or else shall
remain with him, desire to a greater age. And therefore it behooves us to
study that reason may remain above desire or concupissence.

The.xviij. Chapter. Of liberalite or Largess.
LIberalite is a mean in geuyng and in receiuyng of money: then he is liberal
that uses money conveniently: that is to say, he that gives it, where when,
and how much it behooves, and to who^. Prodigal or a waster, is he that
excedeth in geuyng and wants in receiving And the coueteous is the contrary.
And it is mete that liberalitee be more in geuyng then in receiuyng: For why?
It is a lighter thing, not to receive, the^ to give. And it is a more laudable
thing to give the thing where it is conueniente, then is to receive the thing
that is conueniente. And generally, it is a more worthy thing in virtue to do
well, then it is to abstain from evil. Nevertheless in these things ought to
be an equalitie^, that is to say little praise to the^ that receive temperatly
but they that give temperatly are to be praised, because they profit him that
receives the gift. He is not liberal that is sorry for his gift: For he
gives it not by liberalitee, but rather for shame, or other cause.

The^ he is liberal that gives cherefully: he that is liberal is content with
little, so yt he may do for many much or little. For he ever inforceth himself
to work liberalitee, according to his faculty it, is hard to find a man
liberal and rich, for riches increseth not by geuyng: but increases by
receiuyng. And it is often seen that the riches that a man has without labor
makes him liberal. And great marvel it is when a man is rich by great
labor if he be liberal. The Prodigal manne is not so evil as the coueteous,
for the couete ous is nether good to himself nor other, and therefore every man
hates him. Also the Prodigal may be remedied diverse ways But the coueteous
cannot be healed: and naturally a man is more given to Avarice then to
prodigalite: and departs further from the mean. There be many sorts of
liberalitee, and seldom it can be found in a man that is covetous in keeping his
own, that he is not also coueteous in desiryng of other men's. There ^e that
cannot keep their own: But in desiryng of other men's they be insaciat, and
go about to get by every filthye gaynes, as by maintegnyng of baudry, in
keeping of ruffians and hores, vsery, pla^e. And such sort of people sin
grievously in Prodigalitee.

The.xix. Chapter. Of magnificence.
MAgnificence is a virtue that works in riches, only in great expenses, and
the nature of the Magnificus or noble man ought to be diligente, that his
works be done with great honor and great expenses. For he that restrains
and will do his business with little cost: is not Magnificus, but rather
fearful in spe^dyng. The virtue of magnifice^ce is understand in great and
marvelous things, as to make temples and churches where god is worshipped from
whom it is sent and all goodness comes. Likewise in making great feasts, with
costly bankettes and su^pteous lodgyng and great presents. The magnificus or
noble man thinks not only upon his expenses, but thinks more over to make
other. In magnifice^ce it needs not only that there be haboundaunce of
things, but it needs therewith for a man to order and spend things where
it behooves, for himself or me^ of his stock. And whosoever he be, that
wants in these two things and under takes, is scorned, if he will take upon
him magnificence, a man that does excede in these things above said, is he
that expendeth more then he ought to do, and he that may expende little and
expendeth much, is as he that gives to iuglars and scoffers and as he that
casts purple in the way, and does not these for the love of virtue, but for
to apere glorious to the people.

Nigarde is he that in great things goth about to spend little, and marreth
the beauty of of his deed for a little spendyng, leseth great cost and great
honor, and these be the two extremites of magnificence. But they be not to be
blamed so that they hurt not according to their vice. Magnanimus is he that is
ready to do great deeds, and is ioious and merry in doing of them. But he that
undertakes to do great deeds and is not able, is called vainglorious: And he
that is worthy to have honor and dignitee, and is afraied to receive the^, is
called simple And immagnanimite is extremite by comparion of things, but as
to the operacio^ it is mean. The very Magnanimite is only in great things: yt
is to say in things by the which a man may or does serve almighty God. And
y^ very beatitude is in thynkyng of those so hie things, so great and so
honorable, yt of this thought comes all goodness, after so great
adversities: the which cannot be esteemed. The man that is magnanimus is the
gretest man and most honorable yt is, and moves not for little things, nor
does not inclyne his magnanimite to any foul things. The^ magnanimite is an
ornament and croune of all virtues, and therefore it is no light thing to find
the man magnanimus, but it is hard. For he is not only good to himself, but
also to many other. If a man be Magnanimus he reioyseth not too much in great
honor done to him, and yet so much honor cannot be done to answer to his
goodness and greatness. And more over, y^ magnanimus reioyseth not much in
prosperitee yt comes to him, nor troubled for aduersite. Nobilite of blood
riches and antiquite helps a man to be magnanimus And he is very magnanimus
y^ has in him two things by the which he ought to be honored, these be those
that be before said, the surety and goodness of a man magnanimus, is as much
that he passes not upon any perell, for that he doubts not but to bring his
life to good order, and takes pleasure to do for other, and is ashamed to take
of other, because it is a more noble thing to give then to receive. And when he
has received benefit he does study to recompense: he is ^lowe in little
expenses, but in great things where it is convenient he is not ^low. The man
that is Magnanimus loves other, and if he will evil, it is openly and not
closely, because he thinks great vileness to hide his will. He is sharp and
shows himself cruel, except in things of mirthe: he is conuer saunt with
men merely, and hates flaterars, as bablers and Scoffers, because slaterars
be bondmen and reme^breth wrongs, but he dispiseth them and cares not,
boasts not himself, nor praises other, he passes more on precious things
then upon vile things. As a man that suffiseth to himself, when he mouethe,
he is not in have, but gravely, and steadfast in words. And this is the
difinicio^ of the Magnanimus: and he that ouerpasseth these: is called
vainglorious, and they that take upon them great honors as if they were
worthy, where they be not. As in making costly apparel and other great
apperaunce, and think there by to be exalted: I say unto you, wise men take
them for fools.

Pusillanimus, is he that is worthy to have great honors, and is afraied to
take them upon him and hides him from himself: and this is evil, for every
manne ought to desire honor and benefit convenient to himself. Then every
manne erreth that departs from the mean: But there be not many evil in
this sort. In honor is found means and extremities, and in less things:
for in these things be found more less then mean. For a man may desire
more honor then he ought to have: And such have no name but ^omen, as it is
said before in the comparison between the large and the Magnanim^us, and
between their extremes. Therefore these be the greatest things and those the
least, the mean is to be honored and the extremities to be blamed.

The.xx. Chapter. Of Ire and Mekenes.
INire is a mean and an extreme, and thextremities have propre names, and the
mean is called Mekenes, and he that keeps ye mean, is called meke, and he
that does habound in ire is called Irefull. And he that is less angery then he
ought to be is called Iniracible or irelesse. And the very meke if he be angey
with who^, when and wherr, he is called irefull and reported y^ he that passes
the mean in these things, some angry some soft and that is the best that is
in him. For if all evil things should be together: it should not be
suffered. A man that is not angery where it behooves, when and with whom and
where is not to be punished. For he sustaineth vituperacion in that that is not
justly dooen to him or to his friends, sometime we praise such men that make
no great thing, and sometime the ireful: saying, that they be strong men and
hardy. And verily it is a hard thing to determyne by words the circumstance
of ire, but so much we ought to know, that to keep the mean is to be
praised, and the extremities is a thing to be vituperat.

The.xxi. Chapter. Of the conversation of man.
AFter we must speak of things which happen in company and in the
conversation of men and in comunicacion, for keeping the mean in these
things is to be praised, and the extremities to be blamed. And the mean is,
that a man be pleasant in speech and conversation with folks: and it behooves
to be co^ panable in things convenient to whom, when, how and wherefore for
such company is nere like unto friendship. There is difference in this, that
friendship has compassion and humble courage and conversation has not. For why?
A man may company with men that he knows not. And the man that does excede
in these things, is he that medleth him self vnco^ly to be acquainted with a
stranger and with a man that he knows not, neighbor or not neighbor without
respect: such one is called a merry fellow, if it be of nature: But he that
makes mirth for gains, is called a flatterer, and he that is sad is called
rude and vncherfull.

The.xxij. Chapter. Of Truth and liyng.
Truth and liynges be the most contrary things that can be in the world,
and be used in word and in deed. A honorable man and of a good courage uses
truth in word and deed: and the vile minded the contrary. The very man is he
that keeps the mean between the vau^ter that cracketh upon himself more then
he is, and he that dispraiseth himself in hidyng the goodness that is in him: In
somuche that the very man affirms y^ goodness that is in him another more nor
less, but he that dispraiseth is of better disposicion, then is he that
vaunteth himself: For the vaunter lies in word and in deed. Worsse in these
things a boue said, is he that knows not himself, and therefore he is more
vituperable the^ other, the truth is to be praised, and lies to be despised.
For the liar speaks such words as he makes in his mind: a man that is true,
for the love of truth, is better then he y^ is true for profit that he may
have thereby. He that bosteth and presumes for gold or silver, is like
vituperable to the vainglorious. But he that vaunteth himself for honor or
profit is not so blamable. There be men that rejoice themselfes in lies, and
other lie to be regarded: the humble man dispraiseth himself to fly strife and
business as did Socrates to have quiet life. and he y^ exalts himself in
little things is nothing to be named

The.xxiij. Chapter. How a man is known by his mouyng.
THe man that laugheth to much is vituperable, and he that never laugheth they
say he is sad and vncherful. But a man that is co^paniable with his fellow and
loureth not, nor moves not other by foul bourdyng and plaiyng, for sometime
iestyng moves a man to lechery, and is forbidden in the law, but to keep good
and loving compaignie such a one is to be praised.

Shamefastnes is a passion that is engendered with fere: for why? He that is a
shamed changes color with every thing, and also sometime they that be afraid
Shamfastnes is wit in youth and not vnconuentent to boys and wenches: for it
withdraws the^ from sin, but shame is to be blamed in old me^, for age
should do nothing whereof to be ashamed.

The.xxiiij. Chapter. Of Justice.
Justice is a commendable habit, by the which a man is made Just and does
the works of Justice, and wills and loves things that be just Insomuche as
it is the habit of justice, the which is virtue. Then injustice which is the
contrary, must needs be vice: Justice is said to be in three sorts, and
the unjust is also in three sorts, he is called unjust that does against the
law, and he that passes the nature of equalite, and he that meddeleth with
unlawful and dishoneste gaynes. And likewise a man is Just in three sorts,
for even so many sorts as is in the one, so many are in the other. So that the
just man is he that does observe the law, and the nature of the equalite, and
those that be content with lawful gaynes.

The.xxv. Chapter. Of the Law.
THe law is just, and all things of the law be just, for it commands the
works of virtue: which works make a man happy, and co^serueth the works of
happiness in him, and forbids al evil in citees and tountrees, and
commands unto good men great works: as to order and array battles, and
commands ye men beware of fornicacion and lechery, and commands that men
be peaceable from hurtyng one another and forbids unclean speech. And
generally it commands the works of justice, and to fly vice. Justice is
the most noble thing and the most stro^gest virtue that is. Wise me^ do love
y^ works of justice, having more mar uel of y^ goodness of the^ then of y^
shinyng ster, or y^ setting of the sun, or rising thereof, for it is y^ most
perfight virtue of all other. And the just man uses justice in himself and in
his friends: for a man y^ is not good to himself nor to his fre^des, is worst
of al other persons. For a man to be good it suffices not only to be good to
himself, but also to his friends. Justice is not part of virtue, but al. And
wrong is not part of vice, but al vice. There be kinds of vices openly for
bidden, as these, adultry, incha^tme^t false witness, treason fraud and deceit.
And there be kinds of vi ces, which be injurious, as killing, smiting, and
other like things, in the which the just man is sometime equaller, and sometime
measurer: in comparison he is called equaller between.ii. and a measurer
between many things and few, and is in relacion in.iiii. things. So the just
man can be no less then in.iiii. things. There be two persons between whom
Justice is to be do en, and.ii. be causes: that is to say, right and wrong,
and yet in these selfthinges may be equalite: for if there might be no
disequalnes there should be no equalnes, and so Justice is in proporcion of
number. And as justice is equal so is wrong unjust and unequal, and therefore
the Lord of the laws laboreth to bring euerithig equal. Wherefore he kills
one and scourges another, and other he sends to prison, until the par tie
have satisfied, and so laboreth to bring to much and to litel in to a mean.
Therefore he takes from one and gives to another, til they be egal, and
therefore the form thereof is to be known, to the intent that his subjects may
live steadfastly in the midst:

Yet of Justice, Chapter.xxvi.
THe inhabitors together in Cities, do take and give one to another, and every
one yeldeth too there according to the quantitee of their things, and al to
come to the midst: for we put the case, that the Smythe has a thing that is
worth one, and the Shomaker has a thing, that is worth two, the Carpe^ter has
a thing that is worth three, the^ the Smith must needs take of the Shomaker his
work: and the Shomaker must take of the Carpenter his work, yet the work
of the one, may be better then the other, therefore it is nedeful to some man of
equalytee, that may return them to a mean: and therefore was found money. For
money is a mean by the which a man may bring every vnegal into egal, and thereby
may be taken and given great things and litel things, and is an instrument,
whereby judges may do justice. Money is a liuelesse law, but the judge and the
laws have life. god is y^ universal law of al things, the vigor and strenthe
of egalnes stands fast by the obseruacion of the law of cities, and the
laborers of the fiel des and rilthe likewise increases thereby, and for lack
of justice fall in ruin. The prince is the obser uer of justice and egalnes:
and therefore he gives not the goods whereof he is Lord more to himself, the^
to other. Wherefore it is said honors and lordships makes a man known. The
people presupposes that liberalite is cause of Principalitee and Lordshippe,
and some say that riches is the cause, other put nobilitee of bloudde. But the
wise manne says, and believes that virtue is the cause, that a man is
worthy to have Lordshippe. Justice is in two sorts, one is natural, and
another according to the law: the law natural is one self nature in every
man, as the fire, whersoeuer it be, it goth upward: the other which is
accordig to the law, has many diuersyties, as we se in sacrifices, which be
diuersli done, some by beasts and some by certain generacyons of trees, and
in both these justices, equalite is to be under stand. He that re^dreth the
thing that he has in keeping, not willyngly but by fear: is not just by
himself, but by other: but he that yeldeth by himself because of honestye with
a good will, he is just. The hurtes which be commonly dooen amanges men, be
in three sorts. The first by error and by ignorance, the other is by ignorance
with will to hurt, the third by thought malice and in will to hurt. By ignorance
is when a man in his deed, has not studied as other and as he should, and
these two sorts be not imputed unjust, for why? their deeds proceed not of
malice, but when a man does hurt hy malice prepenced or by propre will, there
is no circumsta^ce, that can excuse his malice, for it is very euel and
vituperable. There be two manners of ignorances, one natural, as the na tural
fool, an other whereof a man is cause, as when a man is igno raunt, because he
will not study to know the thing that he ought to know of troth and well.
Above justice is better then justice, but according to the truth in the very
mean, there is no de uisio^: and the very justice is not that which is in the
laws, but that justice which is in the Almighty and glorious God, and is ge
ue^ to man, by the which justice man makes himself like unto god.

Of prowess, Cha, xxvii.
THere be two kinds of virtues, the one is called moral, the which
belongs too the life sencible, which has no reason, another virtue
intellectual or reasonable, the which is understanding and discrecion. Then
the life sen syble, does, flees and persecuteth without any delyberacyon:
and therefore it is said that this virtue desires concupyscence, but the
vnderstandying affirms and makes no election without him, the^ the beginning
of the election is desire intellectual, because of some thing. And no man
uses the election in the thing that is past before, because that which is done
can not be vndooen: for there upon is no power, nor there falls no election
in things of necessite, as in risyng and setting of the Su^ne that ryseth by
nature.

In the solle of man be five things, of the which may be spoken truth,
affirmynge and deniyng, that is to say: Art, science, Prudence, Sapience, and
understanding. Scyenceis by such demonstracion which can not be otherways,
and nether does engender nor corrupt, and every science or discipline that is
in use, so may be taught.

And every thing that is learned, must needs be learned by prynciples, the
which be manifest by them, and the Demonstracyons be ever true, and never
lie. For why? they be of things necessary. The disposicio^ of the art is of
very reason: the wise and prudent man can council himself and other, in
things that be good and evil, which be apperteining unto men. The^ prudence
is an habit, with the which a man may council with very reason in things
toward men good and evil.

Sapience is an aduaunsing or ioiyng ofartificers that has obtained science.
And when it is said of one that he is wise in his art, there is showed the
goodness and gretnes of his art. The understanding is it that takes the
commandment of things, reason science and understanding be of those things
that be naturally noble. There may be found young men, which be wise of
discipline: but not in prudence: to be wise in prudence would be had a long
knowlage in many particular things, the which cannot be had but by long time,
The adolescente and young man has but short time. Prudence measures the
beginning and the end of every thing, and by and by conscnteth to a good
council.

Wiliness, is of prudence, with the which a man comes to the intent by
great subteltie of his understanding, in things that be good, but the subtle
is called qualite, in things that be euel. As enchantme^tes, wytchecraftes.
Such are not called wise, but councelers of strife and wilybegylars.

Felicitee is not a thing to be chosen for other, but for himself as health, the
accions of the solle be according to the measure of Moral virtues, and
according to the measure of Prudence and of subtelty, then vertue-setteth
forth the right purpose of man, and prudence, that is to say knowlage
confirms it, and makes it good and conduces him vntoiustice. These moral
virtues make a man strong chaste and just from youth, as in children and some
manner of bestes, then these virtues be by nature, and not by understanding. But
the Lordshyp of all virtues belongs unto the virtues intellectual, for there
can be no election without the understanding, nor cannot be accomplished with
out moral virtue, and so prudence techeth to do that which ought to be done,
but moral virtue set teth forth the deed, to fulfill the work.

Of strength. Chapter.xxviii.
Strength is a laudable habit and good for the man that is very strong
sustayneth many terryble things, and despyseth death, in assailyng those
which behooves, and does the works of strength, not to have honor or
delectacion, but only for virtue. There be men which be constrained to work
the works of strength for shame, and to fle reproach, and to get them honor
put the^ selfs in peril of their lives, rather then to live with shame.

Wild strength is this that a man does in furor: as when a man is angry for
any thing done against him, and would be revenged. Bestial strength is the
fulfillyng of a man's lust burnynglye desired. Spiritual strength is that
which a man does to obtain honor and fame. Strength Deuyne is that which
strong men naturally love. And Gods men be very strong.

Of Chastitee, Chapter.xxix.
CHastitee is a temperance in eating and drinckinge and in delectacions, and he
that bestows himself temperatly in these things is to be praised, and he that
excedeth in these things is to be blamed, but few and syldome be found.
Chastitee is a fair thing, for it delyteth but when, where, and so much as
behooves, also there is a secular delectacio^ which is departed from the moving
of nature, and without comparison more vituperable then fornicacio^ or adultry,
that is to say, Masculine with Masculine To be inchast is in diverse sorts for
why? it may be in eating and drinking and other filthy things*

Of Meekness, Chapter.xxxi.
Meekness is an habit to be praised between being to ireful and to dull,
and so is Malyncoly in long perseverance. Malicious ire demau^deth great
vengeance for lyttel offense. But he that is not sturred for wrong or offense
dooen to him nor to his kin, is as a manthat has lost his fealyng.

Of Lyberalitee. Chapter.xxxii.
LIberalytee, Magnyfycence, and Mananimitee has a co^munite amongst the^
selfs, for why? they be al in receauyng and geuyng money: where when and how
much it behooves. And it is a more fearful thing to give then to receive, and
such men flee from filthy gaynes, and the covetous man is a great desyrer,
and therefore the lyberal possesses not so much as does the covetous.

Of Magnanimitee. Chapyter. xxxiii
THe Magnanimus does deserve great honors, and praises, and is evermore redye to
set his mind upon great things, and despyseth the littel and vile things, but
he that expendeth where he should not, is called Prodigal.

Envious is he that is sorry for the prosperity both of the good and evil,
without any difference Contrary to him is he that reioiseth in the prosperity
of them that be good and evil, the mean between them is he that ioyeth in
the prosperitee of them that be good, and soroweth for the evil, he that is a
shamed of every thing is called shamefaste: He that crackes upon himself and
dispiseth other men is called a proud vaunter.

The.xxxiij. Chapter. Of compaignie.
THere be men with whom it is paineful to live, because they of their nature
be not tractable. There be other that be flatterers of every body: and there be
other that keep a mean, and those be they that use themselves, as where when,
with whom, and how much and such manner of men be verily to be praised.
Scoffers be those which compaignieth amongst folks with laughyng bourding
and gestyng upon them selfs, their wifes and children, and not only upon
them, but also upon other men. Contrary to him is he that looks evermore as
he were troubled, lowryng, and is never merry amongst folks, nor cannot be
with them that be merry. And he that keeps the mean amongst such, is he
that uses mesure The just man is he that is called Equal or Equaller, and the
just equalleth things in two sorts, one sort is in deuidyng of money,
offices, and honors. The other in helyng the hurtes that one man takes of an
other, for men have business together in two sorts, the one is by will, that
is to say, when the beginning of the deed is in our arbitre. And out of the
will is this when a man has to do with an other, and will do it by force or
gyle, as rapine, stelth and other like things.

The.xxxiiij. Chapter. Of Justice:
THe factor of ye laws, are the equals, which are the co^traries ye be between
to much and to little. The equal judge deuideth money and honor, and makes de
uision between two at the least: Justice parts between four things, the
which things have proporcio^ from the first to the second, and from the
third to the fourth, and the equalnes of them is according to the proporcion
self: And Justice judges amongst them according to the qualitee of the
virtue, and of the merit. The maker whole that heals the facio^ of the
deeds that be dooen between men, is he that makes the laws: For he
decerneth and does justice between them that do wrong and them that take it,
and rendereth inheritance to the^ that have right thereto, and takes from
them that possesses wrongfully. Some condemn in person and some in their
goods, and some makes equal the little with the much, because he y^ receives
the injury is lessoned by him that does it, the judge is equallar between them
according to the mesure of Ar^smethi que. Therefore me^ go to ye judge because
the judge is said to be in similitude the life of Justice, because he
orders justice according moderately as it is possible, and justices is not in
every place in such sort, that to him that does, be done somuche as he has
done: and that from him that did take, be taken somuche as he has taken. For
why? The moderate equalness stands not evermore in this, and as the just
man is contrary to him that is not Just, so the equal is contrary to the
unequal and the mean is sometime more contrary to the one extreme, then it is
to the other: and the one extreme is more contrary to the other, the^ it is to
the mean. The Justice of citees is a mean, between lesyng and gettyng: and
cannot be done without taking and geuyngchange. As he that weiueth clothe for
other things that he needs. The smithe gives Iron for other things that he
needs, and therefore in these changes was great strife so was found the
thing that might equal all things together: This that is more worth with
that that is worth less, and this thing was money, which makes equal the
work of the Carpenter with the work of the shomaker. Above justice is more
then Justice. Then the man that is better then the good man, is good in all
sorts y^ may be. And he that is more Just then he that is just, is just in
all sorts that may be. Natural justice is better the^ justice that is
compounded by man, as the honey that is sweet by nature, is better then the like
honey that is made by craft.

The just man lives by life of life, that is to say, the great delectacion yt
he has to justice natural. It for it self, belongs and uses the just
thing, lokyng not to the punisher of the laws to put it generally in all
generacio^s, for because it is impossible that the general rules be followed
and kept in all these things, the which be not universal. Then the words
of the law ought to be perticulars, because they iudge^ of things corporal.

The.xxxv. Chapter. Of Vice.
THere be three manner of vices that be very evil, from the which every ma^ne
ought to fly, that is to say: Malice Cruelte and Lechery. And yet there be
to these three contrary virtues, that is to say: Benignitee Pity and
Chastitee. There be some men which be of a divine nature, by the abundance
of the virtues that be in them, and such an habit is all contrary to Cruelte,
and such men be Angelike divine, and the virtues of them be above the
virtues of other men. Like as the virtues of God be above all the virtues of
me^, so there be other men cruel in their manners and be of wild nature: and
such be far of from virtue. There be other men that be of the nature of
beasts, in following of their desires and their delectacions, and those be in
similitude like unto Apes and to hogs, and those men that follow their will
les be called Epicures, that is to say: men that think not but of their
bodies. Men that be called divine and men that be wild of custom: there
be but few in the world, and specially wild men, yet there be found in
thextreme regio^s, in the which they dwell, yt is in the southe parts where
as they find slaves, it is said of the divine man that he is chaste and
continent, for that he abstaineth himself from evil concupiscence, according
to the power of the virtue intellectual.

Manne has his limittes unto the which he moves naturally, wherein he
walks as in the mean, except his nature inclines too the nature of
beasts, which if they be loosed, follow the mouyng of their own desires in
runnyng through pastures, not abstaynyng them selves from any thing that their
nature leads them unto. And in this wise a man goes from his terms and
limettes, and such a man is worsse then a beast, by the evil life that he
choseth, because the science of man is truth. But that man that learneth
science according to the nature of Moral virtue and virtue divine and
intellectual, remaigneth within his bo^des and, uses universal proposicions
which conducteth him unto true knowledge.

The.xxxvi. Chapter. Of Delight.
THere be delectable things which be delectable by necessitee, and there
be things delectable by cleccion. And of those, there be that are to be
chosen for our selfs, and also of those that are to be chose^ for favor of
other. The necessari delectacio^s that a man has, be in eating, in drinkyng
and in lechery, and in all other corporal delectacion, there where is no
measure, those which a man choseth or electeth for himself, be these, that is
to say, certe^tye of knowledge and divine reason. Eleccio^s which be elect
for favor one of another be these, victory, honor, riches and al other things
good in the which beasts is comen with us: Who that keeps the mean in these
things is to be praised, and who that wa^teth in these things is to be blamed.

There be natural delectacions and beastly delectacions. Also there be wild
delectacions and there be delectacions by occasion of time, and there be other
delectacions by occasion of infirmity, and other that come by use, and other
by evil nature. Wildish delectacion is in them that make women with child to
be opened, because they will se how the child does lie in their bodies: And
as they that eats man's flesh and raw flesh. Delectacio^s of infirmity,
or by evil use, is of pickyng ye brows paryng nails, eating of coals, and
other trifles. Delectacio^ by evil nature is to lie one Masculyne with
another, and all other vituperable things of lechery. There be some malicious
and wild manners, as be in them that be unbridled, mad, and Melancolly, and
like unto the^, the furious man thinks that all that pleseth him is against
all other men. If he have a little cause to be angree runs in as a folishe
servant to do a thing before he be commanded and does as a dog y^
barketh both at friends and enemies. And this incontinence which is in Ire
comes of a light mind and by violence of mouyng. And therefore he is more to
be pardoned then he that incontinent follows his concupiscence. For as soon as
he seth the thing that delights him, he tarieth not the iudgeme^te of reason,
but rather searches for the thing that he desires. Then the incontinence of
Ire is more natural then is thin continence of concupiscence and demands
dark places. And therefore it is said of concupisce^ce that she overthrows
her son. The man that does evil and repents him not, can not be correct:
but the man that does evil and repe^teth, there is hope. They that have no
understanding be better then they that have it, and bestow it not. Therefore
they that let themself to be overcome with concupiscence by delight of
understanding, be like unto them that be dronken with little wine, by
feblenesse of the brain. The continent man that has understanding, affirms
himself and continues in very reason and wholesome eleccio^, and departs not
from the right moderacion. It is a more light thing to move custom then
nature, yet a hard thing it is to break custom, for custom is like nature.
There be men to whom it seems no delectacion to be good, nether to himself
nor yet to other. And there be other to who^ it seems that some delectacions
be good and some evil, and to some it seems that al manner of delectacions be
good: Delectacions without respect is not good. For why? It is of sensualite:
then it is not like un to things complet. The chaste man flies delectacions
because they make understanding dron ken and makes man to forget godnesse.
Children and beasts demand delectacions. There be some delectacio^s that
make a man seek and bring trouble, then a man that is of good understanding,
demands the pleasures of the body but moderately.

The.xxxvij. Chapter. Of Chastitet.
Chastity and contine^ce, are not al one thing: for Chastitieis an habit, the
which is fixed in the mind of man by long time, having overcome the desires
of the flesh, so that it fealeth no assaults of temptacions: but co^tine^ce is
an habit by the which a man sustaineth hard temptacions, much molested: But
nevertheless consents not thereto, so much reason is in him. Then Chastitee
and continence are not all one. The inchast is an habit by the which a man
sins in delectable things, with out great instance of temptacyons, as a man
not constrained and goes searchyng delectacyons. Then the incontinent is he
that is overcome with temptacions, which prick him strongly. But the unchaste
man is he that lets him self to be overcome with te^ptacions that pricketh
him not. And the incontinence is such by debilite of reason, and by littell
trust. Then there is no mean at al, but stands as an evil mean, and may be
correct, if virtue and hope lie together. But the inchaste can never be
correct, for virtue has no power in malice to much used. For the reason
often times corrupts by two much concupyscence: And the act of the malicious
is known, for ver tue is whole in reason, but in malice, reason is corrupt.

Of Constancy. Chapter.xxxviii.
THere be three manners of stablenes, one is that a man be stable in all his
works true or falce, whatsoever they be. The second is contrary to this. The
third is a man that will stand in the thing that is good, and lightely depart
from a thing that is evil. But generally the man that is constante, is better
then the manne that is mutable, for the mutable moves with every wind, but
the constante mouethe not for any strong desire, but sometime by his noble
delectacion mouethe from his falce credence, and consents to the trewthe. It
is impossible that a man be wise and incontinent to geather. For prudence is
but only in the work, often times incontinence and wylynes be together: and
so subteltie is divided from prudence: And prudence is in those thiges which be
good: But subteltee is both in the good and in the evil. And the wise man that
works not according to his science, is like to him that slepeth and is
droncke. The light and wanto^ man is the pit of carnal desires, afflict and
swalowed in the works of reason, and is as a drunckard which has bound his
wit and is smothered in his brain by the vapors of wine for to much wine
peruerteth the right judgment. The frendful man is he that wrongs other by
council prepensed, and by I re makes election without reason, which is euel
without remedy.

Of Amitee. cha. xxxix.
AMitee is one of the virtues of almighty God and of man, and is much nedeful
to thelife of man, and a man has need of friendship in this life as of other
things. And the mighty rich princes of the earth have need of friends, to
whom they may be beneficial and of whom they may receive thanks, honors and
services. A great surety it is to a man to have friends, for so much as aman is
in the degree of gretnes, the more egal he is to fall, and his fall most
perilous. Then friends are most needful in the time of stryffe and
aduersitee. And therefore it is a good and a sure refuge. For a man that has
no friend, is alone in his deeds: And when he is with his friend, he has
company and help to bring his work to pass. For why? of two perfytte
persons comes perfect work and understanding. The makers of the law put
their Citizens in comfort to have Charitee together with Justice. For why? if
every man were just, yet Charitee should be needful. But if every man were
friendly to other, Justice should not need: for whi? frendshippe destroys al
strife, and every discord that may be.

Of the kinds of Amitee. Chapter.xl.
THE kinds of Amitee be known by the things that a man loves, which be
three, that is to say: Good, Profitable, and delectable. And he that is such
one according to the truth, loves him that is like him. The kinds of amite
ben three, the one is loved for good, another for gains, and the other for
delectacio^s, and to every one it is needful to manifest tribulacio^. For they
that love, bears good will commonly one to another, and verily love the
things by the which they be friends, that is to say, delectacion and profit:
whence the amitee indureth so long as indureth the delectacio^ and the
perfect, and therefore they be fre^des and enemies. The fre^dshyp is in old
folks, but the friendship of delectacion is amongst them that be young,
howbeit the perfect Amite is in them that be good, and that be like in virtue,
and bear good will one to another, because they be like in their virtues. And
this frendshyp is a way that conteyneth al goodness, and amongst themthere is
no delectacio^ nor evil. And therefore this friendship cannot be be twene the
good man and the evil. but only amongst them that be good. But the amitee
that is by delectacion or for profit may be amongst good and euel, howbe it it
contyne weth not long. Amite is a laudable adornement to them that company
together and is a fair life, by the which they live together in tranquillitee:
and the tranquillttee that is amongst them, does not depart by the diuersitee
of places, and should not stand if they were far of, this may be a
departing and going out of the myndfulfrendship, and therefore it is a proverb,
that long viages depart frendshippe. A well-beloved thing has some noble
goodness, and therefore friends love together, and not because of fode or
repaste, but because of habit, and every friend loves his welthe, and rendereth
one to another according to equalitee.

How that the substance of the good should be common. Chapter.xli.
THe participacion of them that be parteners together in good and evil, in
merchandise and in conversation together, is ever a beginning of fre^d ship,
and according to the quan titee of the things, so is the quantitee of
frendshyppe, and they that have friends ought to common amongst them. For
amitee is a thing of commente, and every commontie desires like concupiscence.
And therefore is made the solempnitee of Pasch, oblacions and offerynges, so
that of these things may grow company and love amongst neighbors, of the
which thing proceeds honor and exaltacion of almighty God. And in old time
they kept their solempnitees after Corn Harvest, because at that time men
were most able to help their friends, and to give thanks to God for his
benefits received.

Of Principalitees. Chapter.xlii.
THere be three principalitees, the first of the King, another of the
Commonalte, and the third of the Father upon his children, and echone of
these has his conntrary. For the King inforceth his subjects to goodness, and
is studious to procure their good estate, as the Herdemanne is studyous upon
his stock. It is a difference between the Lordshippe of the king and other in
this: For the king is Lord universal of the people, the father is the cause
of the generacyon of his children and of the brynging up of them.

Then the father is natural lord of his children, and their love is great.
Therefore the father ought to be honored with the honor dew unto him. The
Justice of every manne is according to the quantitee of his virtue, then
whosoever is greateste, ought to be most loved and honored. The love of
brothers is as the love of fellows, because they come together and has one
symylitude when there comes aduersytee.

The Lord and the subiectc have one Relygyon together. Like as the crafts
manne and his instrumente, and as the body and the solle. And he that uses
the Instruemente profyteth thereby, and therefore he loves it, but the
Instrument loves not him that wearethe it.

And likewise the body loves not the solle: The Instrument is as the bond
man which loves not his Lord. The father loves the son, and the son the
father, because the one is made of the other: but the love of the father is
more stronger than the love of the son, and the reason is: for that the
father knows his son to be of him in short time after his birth: But the
son knows not the father of long after, that is when his wits be come to
him and discression comforts. More over, the father loves the son as
himself. But the son loves the father as a thing made of him. Brothers love
together as being of one beginning. For they be one thing: although they be
departed. And this that conforteth love emonges brethern is that they be
nourished and brought up together.

The.xliij. Chapter The love that a man has with GOD.
THe love that aman has with god, and the love that a man has to his father,
is of one nature. For why? Each one of their loves is by a recordacio^ of
grace. But the love of God ought to be preferred before the love of the
father. For ye benefits that a man receives of God: be more great and more
noble then they which be received of the father The amite of kyndred, friends,
neighbors and strangers, is more and less according to the diversity of the
causes, by y^ which one bears good will unto another. Therefore they that be
brought up together, being of long time conversant together be of great
friendship. The love that is between a man and his wife is love natural, and a
more ancient love then is ye love of citeze^s amongst the^, and in this love
is great profit. For why? the works of the man is diverse from the works of
the woman. And that which the one can not do, the other does, and so they
fulfill their business: The children be bonds which bind the womanne to the
husband in love, because the children be the common wealth of them both.

How that love is increased by co^municacion of friends Chapyter.xliiii.
COmmunicacio^ ioineth them that be good together in one love, by occacion of
virtues: which verily be loving together in them selves, for there is not
amongst them any strife or contencion, nor will to have victory the one of the
other: but only to serve and please, for why? It is a great pleasure when a man
has dooen service to his friends. There be frendships which be called
questionalles, and those frendshippes be in men which receive one of another,
whereof comes great accusacions, as when the one says: I have dooen thee
pleasure, and thou have done me none: Such friendship cannot long endure.

Amitee is like unto Justice and according to justice in two sorts, that is to
say: Natural and legal. So is friendship in two sorts, natural and legal:
And the legal is called amitee, and the particular is a market of change, as
she that stands in geuyng and receiuyng naturally from hand to hand. There
are diverse men that be pleased with that thing which is well and convenient,
but notwithstanding they leave the good and take the profitable. A good thing
it is to do good to other without any hope of gaynes. But profitable is when a man thinks to have a greater power. This service is it that a man does
to him that is mighty and able to give rewards and change for service dooen.

The.xlv. Chapter. Of the love that ought to be amongst men.
Love is the price of virtue and thanks or benefits received Gaynes or
wynnyng is severally of need, and the greater man ought to give unto the less
winnyng, and the less ought to give unto the greater honor and reverence. And
this ought to be according to the deseruyng of them both: In these ways is
conserved frendeship. The honor that a man ought to do to almighty God and
to his father, is not like other honors; for no man can give sufficient
honores and thanks to God and to his father. Although he enforce himself to do
what he can, the commendable equalnes is to equal the kinds of amite that be
diverse, as it is in the orderyng of citees, that the shomaker sells his
shoes as he will, and likewise other crafts men amongst them. One thing is
loved by the which all marchaundise be made equal and confirmed, this is
Gold and silver. When the lover loves his love for delectacion, and she loves
him for profit, they love not the one the other right well, therefore such love
is sone lost. Every love y^ is for light things does shortly depart. But the
reasons that be strong and steadfast causes friendship, and love to continue
that is by virtue, for the good is long laster. For why? Virtue cannot be
removed but profit departs when profitable is taken away. A man that
syngeth for gaynes, if a man should sing one song for another, he would not
be content, because he looks for another reward. Then there shall be no concord
in merchandise, if there be not concord of wills, and that is when a man
receives for that that he gives, that he would have. And sometimes it is for
that for y^ which he gives nothing but honor and reverence, as did Pithagoras
the which would have nothing of his Scholars for his doctrine but honor and
reverence. And sometime for doctrine a man will have money, as the Mechaniques,
but it is not so in Philosophy, for he that teaches other knowledge; ought to
receive of his disciple honor and subieccion, as a lord and father. It is
needful for a man to know the dignity of men. So that every man may give
honor according to his duty. For a man owes one honor to his father,
another to the people, another to the Lord of the host, another to the
fellow, another to the neighbor, and another to the stranger. He that uses
fraud in friendship, is worse the^ he that uses fraud in gold and silver,
eue^ somuche as frenship is more precious then gold and silver, so much the
wourse is he that fraudeth amity, then he that deceives in Gold and silver.
And like as false money is shortly broken, so false frenship shortly departs.

The.xlvi. Chapter. How almighty God departs all goodness.
THE equal part of goodness is almighty God, which gives too every one
according as their nature is apt to receive. The man that is good delights
in himself, having joy of the good works, and if he be good reioyseth him
much with his friend, which he takes as himself. But the evil manne flies
from the good and noble operacions, and if he be very evil he flies from
himself. For when he stands alone he is rebuked in himself, in rememberyng
the evil works which he has dooen, and neither loves himself nor other,
because the nature of goodness is mortified in him in the depenesse of
iniquite, ^e delights not fully in y^ evil that he does. For the nature of
goodness draws unto delectacion and deu^ death in himself. And therefore he is
in perpetual troble and pains full of bitterness and dronken in filthiness
and of diuersitee. Then to such a man no man ca^ be afrende: For a friend
ought to have in him a thing to be loved, and such one has in himself so
much misery that there is no remedy, that he may come to felicite. Then let no
man fall in to this pit of Iniquite, but rather enforce him to come to
goodness, by the which he may have delectacio^ and joy in him self. Comfort
is not friendship although it be like unto it. The beginning of friendship is
pleasure had in times past. As the love of a woman of the which a man has
had pleasure and delectacion, and is a bond of love and follows it
inseparable, the desperacio^ of the which proceeds. Comfort may be
friendship by similitude, till it be growe^ by custom of time and the office
of comfort apperteigneth unto him that has in him grace and grauite, and
excercised in virtue knitte of love and concord: for discord in opinions is
to be drawn out of a noble congregation, so that it may remaigne in unity
and peace and in concord of wills. Those things that give other verite and
dignitee to rule be virtuous and their works. And the unite of opinions be
found in good men, because they be firm and stable emo^gest them self in
outward things, for they bear good will continually: but seldom men agree in
one opinion. And to fulfill their desires they sustain great strife and much
business, but not because of virtue. And be solicitous to deceive them with
who^ they have to do, and ever be in strief and in contencio^. The benefactors
love their beneficiates more then they be loved of them. For the benefactor
loves with pure liberalite, but the beneficiates louen their benefaccores by
debte of thanks. And moreover the benefactor loves the beneficiate as
creditor: But the beneficiate loves as a debtor, y^ creditor reioyseth against
his debtor. The debtor is trobled because he fears his debtor: then the
beneficiates fain to love their benefactours because they would not be rebuked
of unkindness. And yet the receite of the benefit is factor: and in special
if he have mind. For why? The vttermoste perfeccio^ of man is in his operacio^

The.xlvij. Chapter. How man delights him in many things.
A Man delights in three things, that is to say: in things present in
vsyng of them: In things past in reme^bryng of them, and in things to come in
trustyng of them. The works good and noble contine we long and be delectable
to remembrance. But the delectable and profitable satisfy but little, and the
memory shortly past. Every manne loves more the things that he gets with
pain, then the thing that he gets without pain, as it is of money: which
when it is gotten with great labor, it is kept with great study and moderatly
spente. And who y^ gets it without labor spends it without moderacio^. And
this is the cause wherefore the mother loves y^ child more then does the
father. For why? She suffers great trauail and anguishe in the birthe. Now in
somuche that it is a light thing to receive benefits, and a hard thing to give
them, the benefactor loves better his benefactor, then the benificiator
loves his benefactor. There be men that love themself to much, and that is
called a filthy love. The evil man does every thing upon will, but the good
and verteons manne does the works which be good and verteous, for the love
of virtue and good nes. And there be other men that by y^ nobilitee of their
minds, be good to their friends, in leuyng them their goods. So that their
works may remain in perpetual memory. My friend is another. This is a
proverb. By a proverb it is said Friends have one life and one blood, and
all their things be be equally comen: as the nose to the face, the knee to
the leg and the finger to the hand. A man ought to love his friend, for in
loving him he loves him self, and should not be loved for honor or corporal
delectacion, but rather for the very love of virtue. And the manne that loves
his friend in this sort, is a very friend, he helps and supporteth with body
and goods, and with his life if need be. The full felicitee of mankind is in
the obteignyng of friends, for no man would have all the goods of the world to
live alone. Then a man has need of friends, to whom he may be benificiall,
and with whom he may comenly use felicite. It is a natural thing to man to
live citezenly, and a necessary thing to a man to accomplish his business of
necessitee by his neighbores and friends, which cannot be done by himself. To
do well it is a noble and delectable thing: and the virtues elect in good
deeds be few. But the profitable and delectable be many The friends of
pleasure should not be many, for they be but for disgestion of meat. There
can be but one verteous friend. As a man can have but one lover that he loves
intierly. For whi? That love is of abundance, the which is but to one alone.
But counsel honest and conueniente, ought to be to every man by duty of
virtue. A man has need of friends in time of aduersitee and prosperitec to be
comen with him in his goods: and living in joy and pleasure, so that men
may become the better one by another. And in aduersitee, so that a man may
have help and counsel of his friend.

The.xlviij. Chapter. How Delectacion is natural.
DElectacio^ is borne and norished with us from the beginning of our nature,
therefore children should be taught at the beginning, to delight themselfes in
things convenient, and likewise against that to mislike the contraries. And
this is the foundacions of virtue moral, and in process growethe and is
known the beatitude of the life. For when a man delights in a thing, it is
his choice, and when it greueth, he flies it. And there be men which be
servants to the delectacions, wherefore their delectacions be destroyed
against God of this that they owe. Those me^ which claim delectacions and
follow them say against their minds, and say not evil of them concerning
the virtue. For the true word does ever help and amendeth the manners of the
life better: but the operacion woorketh more then does the word. And therefore
the good man informs his life with good words and good works. The thing
that is desired for it self is best and the grief is evil. For why? It is
contrary to delectacion, and also every thing that is good helps unto another
thing to make it good. And delectacion helps other things and makes them
better. Then she is good Plato says. That delectacion was not good, and
paraduenture he says not truth. For why? In every thing is naturally some
thing that is good, then in delectacio^ is some thing that is good. It is a
thing impossible that one good thing be contrary to the other. And it is
impossible that one evil be not contrary to another, and both two are to be
fled: But two goods are not contrary together, but rather be like, and both
two are to be elect and chosen, but yet the one may be better then the
other: As one man may be more wise then the other and more just. Delectacio^
is not moving, for every thing that may move has tariyng and hastyng. But
things relative have no mouyng by themselfes, then delectacion is not mouyng.

The.xlix. Chapter. Of Delectacion sensible and intellectual.
DElectacio^ is either se^cible or intellectual and there where is the felyng,
there is the delectacion, then it must needs be that this delectacion be in
the sencible life. And there where is the understanding is the operacio^
sencible. Then it is of necessitee that these delectacions be in the mind
intellectual. And many times before the delectacions of the senses is grief.
As before delectacion of eating manne has honger. And before delectacion of
drinkyng a man has first, but before the delectacio^ of hering, seeing,
orsmellyng: there is no grief. And like as in althynges of delectacions
intellectual, delectable things be had in men which have perverse nature,
and be not to be called delectables, according to the truth. As things that
apere bitter to the sick and are not bitter according to ye truth. So of every
operacion: for as the just man delights in justice, so the wise man
delights in the works of Sapience. Every man is pleased with the operacions
in the which he delights, and the delectacio^ makes the works perfight.
Delectacion is a complete form which has no need to her acco^plishyng,
nether of time nor of mouyng. That is to say: there is no mouyng according to
her form in the time, but fulfilleth her self out of time, as if there were no
mouyng circuler. The sencible delectacio^ is according to the quantitee of the
felyng, and in the thing that is felt, and in the operacio^ between the one
and the other. Then when the senses be strong: the things be more
delectable, when the strength of delectacton is given to delighte. Because the
goodness of the work is in the strength of the thing that does and is the
beginning of the thing that it suffers.

The.l. Chapter. The most delectable delectacion.
THE most delectable delectacions be those which be most complete and most
perfect. And those which fulfill all the delectacio^s of man. And so long
indureth the delectacio^s as the virtue of the things indureth by the which a
man delights him as youth when it has the thing that pleseth. And therefore
the delectacions cannot suffice: till they become less, as it comes to age.
When the virtue minisheth, the man that desires life desires delectacion, for
delectacion is complete of the life The delectacio^ intelligible differs from
the se^cible, and every delectacion multiplieth and increases her works, and
by this is multiplied Arts and sciences, because man delights in them. There
be delectacions of operacions, which sometime lets other delectacions or
operacions. As a man that delights in Harpyng, somuche that he forgets
other works that he has in hand. Delectacions that be in noble operacions:
be noble and are to be followed. And the vile is vile and not to be followed.
Those delectacions be diverse in kind: which be diverse in operacion, in
kind as delectacions intellectual and sensible. And these be of diverse
kinds which be likewise diverse in operacions as of the sight and felyng.
Every beast has his delectacion in the which he delights: but of all other
delectacions the intellectual is most delectable, and most noble amongst
all other delectacio^s. As the gold amongst all other mettalles, according to
ye diversities of men, by diverse delectacions. But those be very good that
apere good to them that be good, and not to the vicious, as a thing that is
sweet and bitter to the whole man and not the sick.

The.lj. Chapter. How that beatitude is the fulness of virtue.
Since y^ we have spoken of virtue and delight it therefore behooves us to speak
of felicite and beatitude, which be tha co^pleshyng of all the goodness of
man. This felicite is not habit, but rather Act, to the which a man
intends to common by him self or by other. Beatitude is a thing out of it
self, the man that has not tasted the sweetness of Beatitude in the which is
the delight of the understanding of man: has his refuge to the plesures of the
body, in the which he has put his trust. And they be not of a truth to be
called delectacions. Beatitude is not to be chosen by boys, but verily in
this that seems to be delectable to the^ that be good men. Felicite is not in
sport and plaic, but rather in things had by labor and study. It is a
manifest thing of blessedness, when a man laboreth with virtue in ordinat
things and in things of solace. And therefore it is said: that the
understanding is a more noble thing then is y^ nose, for because the most
noble member does the most noble operacion, and the best ma^worketh the best
work, by y^ which it is a worthy thing that felicite be operacion of the most
noble virtue which is naturalli purposed to al things ye be given of God to
man. And felicitee is no another thing but be steadfast in virtue and in her to
works. The most perfight delectacions that be, are in thacte of felicite, and
marvelous delectacions be found in philosophy by the truth and by certe^ty that
is found in y^ laws. And a more sauerous delectacion is this, that a man has
when he knows the thing, then when he thinks to know. Then the operacion
of this virtue is uppermost and supreme felicite. The wise manne has need of
things y^ be necessary to y^ life as other has. For virtue is busied in
outward things: as in Justice* Chastity and strength, and in other ordinate
operacions: because y^ matter of operacio^ is outward, but the operacion of
sapience is inward, as to the necessitee. But nevertheless if a man have help
he woorketh more perfightly in his thought. Then this felicite is no another but
hope to know And of thought, felicite represe^teth battle because of health
and of peace, and this apereth manifestly in y^ citees which make war to have
rest and peace, and like so to all other virtues of battle. For every manne
intends some outward things, but the understanding speculatiue is ever in
peace and in tra^quilite. But it has need of lo^gtyme. For it is not semyng or
convenient to felicitee, to have any thing imperfecte. And when a man comes to
this degree of felicite, he lives not by the life of man, but lives by that
divine thing which is in man. Then the life that aperteineth to this act is
divine life. But the life that aperteineth to y^ acts of other virtues, is
humain. Therefore it is not convenient to a good man that his diligence be
humain, nor his desire be not moral, although it so apere. But yet is bounden
to enforce himself to be moral according to his power. And yet ever to
enforce himself to live by the most noblest life that is in him. For although a
man be but little of person, he is above all other creatures. whence the most
delectable life that a man has is by understanding.

The.lij. Chapter. Of the moral virtue and of the happy manne.
THese virtues moral or Civil will, be in more trouble and more solicit
then the intellectualles, for that liberalitee has need of riches. The just
man is busied with them that commau^de justice, and likewise of the strange
man and chaste, but these virtues intellectual have no need, for the
accomplishyng of their operacio^s of outward things. But rather many times the
very perfight me^: be sped in these virtues of the outward things. But a man
that cannot come to the perfeccion of this life, ought to chose a way to
live, according to the comen laws. For the operacio^ of the understanding
speculatiue, is in thend of example of the very beatitude of man: And manne is
likened to God and his angels. For the other operacions be not worthy to be
likened to God nor to heavenly things. God and his angels have most noble
life, for they be ever in the most best speculacion, and their speculacion
never wereth nor fails. And the manne that inforceth himself most
contynually to understand and think of these things, is most like unto
them that be in the very beatitude.

The.liij. Chapter. Of the knowledge of Uertues.
AMan to be happy in this world has need of moderate conductingin outward
things, for because nature gives not sufficient inwardly of these things. As
to be satisfied in bread and of wine, and of other things that be nedeful to
the life of man. But it is not nedeful to be lord of the sea and of the land,
for such things may happen to the^ that are of less degree of riches, that
be more ware to be happy then the Lords of these things. And therefore it is
well said of Anaxagoras: that felicite is not in riches nor in lordeship his
saying is to be noted, for the words of him are to be alleged, whose works
agree with his saying. A man that makes his orision according to the obedience
of the order of the understanding: is loved of God, If almighty God have cure
of man which is a worthy thing to believe? Then most cure he has of the^ that
most inforceth themselfes to be like unto him, and best rewards them, and
delights him to them, that is to say, with them as one friend with another.
The^ according to this saying, we ought to think that it is sufficient to
obtain felicite, only to know y^ things written in this book of virtues and
friendship, and of other things, but the acco^plishyng is in the operacions.
For this thing that of nature ought to be done suffices not only to be said,
but to be done. And in this form is fulfilled the goodness of man.

The.liiij. Chapter. Yet of like matter.
THE knowledge of virtue makes a ma^ne of power to be admonished un to good
works, specially such as have good nature and moved by admonision to do well.
Also pain makes a man to flee from vice, for fear of punishment, and not for
the love of virtue, but for fear of pain, and think not well though they
do well. It is not possible for them that be hardened in malice to be
corrected by words. There be men which be good by teaching. And those men
that be good by nature have it not of them selfs but by the grace of God,
which is vetely called good nature. Then the solle of him that has the
garmente of goodness and of right love, hates evil: the mouyng ingendereth
virtue in her as does the seed that is cast upon good ground. And to the
intent that a man have a good custom from the beginning, and to use to love
things that be good and to hate evil, he ought to be brought up from his
youth according to the noble laws, and use the works of virtue: and this
ought to be in manner of continence, although it be not delectable to many
men, yet the hand may not be withdrawn from chastesyng of children, yea and
from childhode till they be great. There be men which may not be
corrected by words. And there be that cannot be by words but by pain.
And there be other which will not be corrected by another of these sorts.
And those be to be taken from other. The good and noble ruler of the city,
makes good citezens, which obscrue the laws and do y^ work that it
commands. They be adversaries that observe not the laws and
commandments: although they do well. In diverse Citees there is no good
rule because they live dissolutly in following their wills. The most
convenient rule that may be in citees, is that which is te^pered prouidently
in such sort as may be kept not to heavy, and that which manne desires to
be observed in him and in his children and in his friends. The good punisher
of y^ laws is he that makes rules universal, which be determinate in this
book, and conioyne them to the perticulars which comes daily in hands,
therefore to order the laws well, it is needful to have reason and experience.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in the parish of Christ's Church within new gate by
Richard Grafton, Printer too our sovereign lord King Edward the. VI. 1547.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

SVSCIPITE INCITVM VERBVM and IACO.I




