THE PARADISE OF DAINTY DEVISES.

Containyng sundry pithie precepts, learned Counsels and excellent
Inventions: right pleasant and profitable for all estates.

Devised and written for the most part, by M. EDWARDES, sometime of her
Majesty's Chapel: the rest by sundry learned Gentlemen, both of Honor and
Worship, whose names hereafter follow.

AT LONDON, Printed by Robert Walde-graue, for Edward White, dwelling near the
little North-doore of Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gun. Anno. 1585.

The names of those who wrote these Devises.
Saint Barnard. E. O. Lord Vaux, the elder. W. Hunis. Jasper Heiwood. F.
Kindlemarshe. D. Sand. M. Yloop.
To the right honorable Sir Henry Compton Knight, Lord Compton of Compton.
RIght Honorable, and my very good Lord (presuming upon your courtesy) I am
bold to present unto your honor, this small Volume, entitled, The Paradise of
dainty Devises, being penned by diverse learned Gentlemen* and collected
together through the travail of one both of worship and credit, for his
private use: who not long since departed this life, which when I had perused
over, not without the advice of sundry of my friends, I determined by their
good motion to set them in Print, who thereunto greatly persuaded me, with
these and like words. The writers of them, were both of honor and worship,
besides that, our own Contrymen, and such as for their learning and
gravity, might be accoumpted of among the wisest. Furthermore, the ditties
both pithie and pleasant, as well for the Invention as Meeter, and will yield a
far greater delight, being as they are, so aptly made to be set to any song
in five parts, or song to Instrument. Which well considering, I purposed not
to forsake so good an occasion, beseeching your honor to accept in good part,
chiefly for the Aucthours sakes: who though some of them are departed this
life, yet their worthy doings shall continue for ever, for like as the shadow
follows the body, so praise follows virtue, and as the shadow goes
sometimes before, and sometimes behind, so does praise also to virtue: but the
later it comes, the greater it is, and to be the better esteemed. Thus
fearing to offend your Honor with these my rude speeches, I end, wishyng your
Lordshyp many years of joy.

Your good Lordships wholly to command H. Dizle.

The Paradise The translation of the blessed S. Bernardes Verses, conteinyng
the unstable felicity of this wayfaring world.
Cur mundus militat, sub vana gloria, cuius prosperitas est transitoria?
Tam cito labitur, eius potentia quam vasa figuli, quae sunt fragilia.
WHy does each state apply it self to worldly praise?
And undertake such toil, to heap up honors gain.
Whose seat though seeming sure, on fickle Fortune stays,
Whose gifts were never proved, perpetual to remain,
But even as yearthen pot, with every fillip fails,
So Fortunes favor flits, and Fame with Honor quails.
Plus creed litteris, scriptis in glacie quam mundi fragilis, vanae fallaciae,
Faellax in praemiis, virtutis specie, quae nunquam habuit, tempus fiduciae.
Think rather firm to find, a figure graven in Ise,
Whose substance subject is, to heat of shining Sun,
Then hope for steadfast stay, in wanton worlds devise,
Whose feigned fond delights, from falsheades forge do come,
And under virtues veil are largely dealt about,
Deceiving those, who think their date will out.
Magis credendum est viris fallacibus, quam mundi miseris prosperitatibus,
Falsis insaniis and voluptatibus, falsisque studiis and vanitatibus.
The trifely truthlesse tongue of rumors liyng lips,
Deserves more trust then does the highest happy hap,
That world to worldlinges gives, for see how honor slippes,
To foolish fond conceiptes, to pleasures poisoned sap,
To studies false in proof, to arts applied to game,
To fickle fancies toys, which wisdom deemeth vain.
Dic vbi Solomon* olim tam nobilis, vel vbi Sampson est, dux inuincibilis,
Veldulcis Ionathas, multum amabilis, vel pulcher Absolon, vultu mirabilis.
Where is the sacred king, that Solomon the wise?
whose wisdom former time of duty did commend,
where is that Sampson strong, that monstrous man in size?
whose forced arm did cause the mighty pillars bend,
Where is the Pearelesse Prince, the friendly Ionathas:
Or Absolon whose shape and favor did surpass.
Quo Caesar abiit? celsus imperio, vel dives splendidus, totus in prandio,
Dic vbi Tullius, clarius eloquio, vel Aristotelus, summus ingenio.
where is that Caesar now, whose high renowned fame?
Of sundry conquestes won, throughout the world did sound:
Or Dives rich in store, and rich in richely name,
whose chest with gold, and dishe with dainties did abound,
where is the passing grace of Tullies pleading skill?
Or Aristotle's vain, whose pen had wit and will.
O esca vermium, o massa pulueris, o ros, o vanitas, cur sic extolleris?
Ignoras penitus vtrum cras vixeris, fac bonum omnibus, quam diupoteris.
O food of filthy worm, oh lompe of loathsome clay,
O life full like the dew, which morning soon does wast,
O shadow vain whose shape, with Sun does shrink away,
why gloriest thou so much, in honor to be plast?
Since that no certain hour of life thou do enjoy,
Most fit it were, thy time in goodness to employ.
Quem breue festum est, haec mundi gloria, vt vmbra hominum, sic eius gaudia,
Quae semper subtrahit aeterna praemia, and ducunt hominum, ad dura deuia.
How short a banquet, seems the pomp of high renown?
How like the senseless shape of shiuering shadows thin?
Are wanton worldly toys, whose pleasure plucketh down,
Our hearts from hope, and hands from works, which heaven should win,
And takes us from the trod, which guides to endless gain,
And sets us in the way, that leads to lasting pain.
Haec mundi gloria, quae magnipenditur, sacris in litteris, flos foeni dicitur,
Vt leui folium, quod vento rapitur, sic vita hominum, hac vita tollitur.
The pomp of worldly praise, which worldlinges hold so dear,
In holy sacred book, is likened to a flower,
whose date does not contain, a week, a month, or year,
But springing now does fade again within an hour,
And as the lightest leaf, with wind about is thrown,
So light is life of man, and lightly hence is blown.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
1. Our pleasures are but vanities.
BEhold the blast, which blows the blossoms from the tree,
The end whereof, consumes and comes to naught we see:
Ere thou therefore, be blown from life that may not last,
Begin for grace to call, for time misspent and past.
Have mind on brittle life, whose pleasures are but vain,
On death likewise bethink, how thou shall not remain:
And fear thy Lord to grieve, which sought thy soul to save,
To sin no more be bent, but mercy ask and have.
For death who does not spare, the kings on earth to kill,
Shall reap also from thee, thy pleasure, life and will:
That life which yet remains, and in thy breast appears,
Has sown in thee such seeds, you ought to weed with tears.
And life that shall succeed, when death is worn and past,
Shall spring for ever then, in joy or pain to last:
Where death on life, has power ye see, that life also,
Has mowen the fruits of death, which never more shall grow.
FINIS.
W. Hunis.

2. Who waighteth on this wavering world, and veweth each estate, By trial
taught shall learn it best. to live in simple rate.
AMid the vale the slender shrubbe, is hid from all mishap,
when taller tree that stands alofe, is rent with thunder clap:
The turrets tops which touch the clouds, are beat with every blast,
Soon shiuered are their stones with storm, and quickly ouercast.
Best bodied tree in all the wood, for timber beam is found,
And to the axe the stu^rdiest oak, does yield and fall to ground:
The highest hill does soonest feel, the flash of lightninges flame,
And soon decays the pomp and pride, of high renowned name.
Of all the Heard the hunteman seeks, by proof as does appear,
with double forked arrow head, to wound the greatest Dear:
The haughtiest head of all the drove, enioyest the shortest life,
And stains the slaughter house with blood* at prick of Butchers knife,
Thus what thing highest place attaines, is soonest overthrown,
UUhat ever Fortune sets aloft, she threats to throw it down.
And though no force resist thy power, and seek thee to confound,
Yet does the paise of weighty things, decline it self to ground.
For restless tipe of rowlling wheel, example has it tried,
To heavy burden yield it must, full soon and slip aside:
UUhat vailes the rich his bed of Down, the sighs for sleeplesse thought,
what time in couche of flock, the poor, sleeps sound and fears naught
At homely boorde his quiet foot, his drinks in treene be taken,
when often the proud in cups of gold, with wine receive their bane:
The bed, the board, they dread in doubt, with train to be oppressed:
when fortune frowns, their power must yield, as wire unto the wrest.
who so thou be that sits allow, and tread the valleys pathe,
Thou needs not fear the Thunder boltes of mighty Jove his wrath:
If Icarus had not presumed too high, to take his flight,
He had not yet been drowned in Seas, that now Icarian hight,
If Phaeton had not enterprised, to guide his fathers seat,
His fires had not inflamed the world, nor been destroyed with heat:
But who so climes above the mean, there is no hope of stay,
The higher up, the sooner down, and nearer his decay.
Then you that here in pomp are plaste, to guide the golden mace,
Let Crown and Scepter both obey, the mean of virtues race:
For neither shall renowned virtue, see the pit of hell,
Nor yet in tomb of Marble stone, she shall abide to dwell.
And in that tomb full bravely deckte, when that she shall depart,
God send her rest and all things well, according to desarte:
But from Sepulcher flies she hence, beyond the skies above,
And glistering in the blisfull stars, she reigns with mighty Jove.
FINIS.
Jasper Heiwood.

3. The perfect trial of a faithful friend.
NOt stayed state, but feeble stay, not costly robes, but bare araie,
Not passed wealth, but present want, not heaped store, but slender skant
Not plenties purse, but poor estate, not happy hap, but froward fate:
Not wish at will, but want of joy, not hearts good health, but hearts anoye.
Not freedoms use, but prisoners thrall, not costly seat, but lowest fall:
Not weal I mean but wretched woe, does truly try the friend from foe:
And naught but froward fortune proves, who fauning feines, or simply loves.
FINIS.
M. Yloop.

4. Being asked the occasion of his white head, he answers thus.
WHere sighing sighs, and sorrow sobbes,
Has slain the slippes that Nature set,
And scalding showers, with stony throbbes,
The kindly sap from them has fet,
what wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be,
UUhere thought has thrilde and thrown his spears,
To hurt the heart that harmeth him not,
And groaning grief has ground forth tears,
Mine eyne to stayne, my face to spot,
what wonder then, though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
UUhen pinching pain himself has plaste,
There peace with pleasures were possessed,
And where the walls of wealth lie waste,
And poverty in them is pressed,
what wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
UUhere wretched woe will weane her web,
UUhere care the clewe can catch and cast,
And floods of joy are fallen to ebb,
So lo, that life may not long last,
what wonder then though that you see,
Upon my head white hears to be.
These hears of age are messengers,
which bid me fast, repent and pray:
They be of death the Harbingers,
That does prepare and dress the way,
wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such hears to be.
They be the lines that lead the length,
How far my race is for to run:
They say my youth is fled with strength,
And how old age is weak begun:
The which I feel, and you may see,
Upon my head such lines to be.
They be the stringes of sober sound,
Whose Music is harmonicall:
Their tunes declare a time from ground,
I came, and how thereto I shall:
Wherefore I joy that you may see,
Upon my head such stringes to be.
God grant to those that white hears have,
No worse them take then I have meant:
That after they be laid in grave,
Their souls may joy their lives well spent,
God grant likewise that you may see,
Upon your head such hears to be.
FINIS.
W.H.

5. Beware of had I wist.
BEware of had I wist, whose fine bringes care and smart,
Esteem of all as they deserve, and deem as deemde thou art:
So shall thy perfect friend, enjoy his hoped hire,
And faithless faunyng foe shall miss, the effect of his desire:
Good will shall have his gain, and hate shall heap despite,
A faithless friend shall find distrust, and love shall reap delight:
Thy self shall rest in peace, thy friend shall joy thy fate,
Thy foe shall fret at thy good hap, and I shall joy thy state:
But this my fond advise, may seem perchance but vain,
As rather teaching how to lose, then how a friend to gain:
But this not my intent, to teach to find a friend,
But safely how to love and live, is all that I intend:
And if you prove in part, and find my counsel true,
Then wish me well for my good will, it is all I crave adue,
FINIS,
My luck is loss.
6. M. Edwardes May.
WHen May is in his prime, then may each heart rejoice,
When May bedeckes each branch with green, each bird streines forth his voice:
The lively sap creepes up, into the bloming thorn,
The flowers which cold in prison kept, now laughes the frost to scorn:
All Natures Impes triumphs, whiles joyful May does last,
UUhen May is gone of all the year, the pleasant time is past.
May makes the cheerful hue, May breeds and bringes new blood,
May marches throughout every lim, May makes the merry mood:
May pricketh tender hearts, their warbling notes to tune,
Full strange it is, yet some we see, do make their May in June:
Thus things are straungely wrought, whiles joyful May does last,
Take May in time, when May is gone, the pleasant time is past.
All ye that live on earth, and have your May at will,
Rejoice in May, as I do now, and use your May with skill:
Use May while that you may, for May has but his time,
UUhen all the fruit is gone, it is to late the Tree to clime:
Your liking and your lust, is fresh whiles May does last,
When May is gone, of all the year, the pleasant time is past.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

7. Fair words make fools feign.
IN youthful years, when first my young desires began,
To prick me forth, to serve in court, a slender tall young man:
My fathers blessing then, I asked upon my knee,
UUho blessing me with trembling hand, these words began say to me:
My son, God guide thy way, and shield thee from mischaunce,
And make thy just desartes in Court, thy poor estate to advance:
Yet when thou art become, one of the Courtly train,
Think on this Proverb old (quoth he) that fair words make fools feign.
This counsel gravely given, most strange appears to me,
Till tract of time with open eyes, had made me plainly see:
UUhat subtle sleightes are wrought, by painted tales devise,
UUhen hollow hearts with friendly shows, the simple do entise,
To think all gold that shines, to feed their fond desire,
Whose shiuering cold is warmde with smoke, in steed of flaming fire:
Since talk of tickle trust, does breed a hope most vain,
This proverb true by proof I find, that fair words make fools feign.
Fair speech always does well, where deeds ensue fair words,
Fair speech again always does evil, that bushes give for birds:
Who hopes to have fair words, to try his luckie lot,
If I may counsel, let him strike it while the Iron is hot.
But them that feed on cloddes, in steed of pleasant grapes,
And after warning often given, for better luck still gapes:
Full loath I am, yet must I tell them in words plain,
This proverb old proves true in them, that fair words make fools feign.
Woe worth the time, that words so slowly turn to deeds,
Woe worth the time that fair sweet flowers, are grown to rotten weeds:
But thrice woe worth the time, that truth away is fled,
UUherein I see how simple hearts, with words are vainly fed.
Trust not fair words therefore, where no deeds do ensue,
Trust words as skillful Falkners do, trust Hawks that never flue:
Trust deeds, let words be words, which never wrought me gain,
Let my experience make you wise, and let words make fools feign.
FINIS
M. Edwardes.

8. In his extreme sickness.
WHat grieves my bones, and makes my body faint?
UUhat pricks my flesh, and tears my head in twain?
UUhy do I wake, when rest should me attaint?
UUhen others laugh, why do I live in pain?
I toss, I turn, I change from side to side,
And stretch me often, in sorrows linckes betide.
I toss, as one betost in waves of care,
I turn, to fly the woes of loathsome life?
I change, to spy if death this corpse might spare,
I stretch to heaven, to rid me of this strife.
Thus do I stretch, and change, and toss, and turn,
UUhile I in hope of heaven, my life do burn.
Then hold thee still, let be thy heaviness,
Abolish care, forget thy pining woe:
For by this means, sone shall thou find redress,
When often betost, hence thou to heaven must go.
Then toss and turn, and tumble frank and free,
O happy thrice, when thou in heaven shall be.
FINIS
L. Vaux.

9. Eor Christmas day. Rejoice, rejoice, with heart and voice, In Christ's birth
this day rejoice.
FRom virgins womb this day did spring,
The precious seed that only saved man:
This day let man rejoice and sweetly sing,
Since on this day salvation first began.
This day did Christ man's soul from death remove,
With glorious saints to dwell in heaven above.
This day to man, came pledge of perfect peace,
This day to man, came love and unity:
This day man's grief, began for to surcease,
This day did man receive a remedy,
For each offense, and every deadly sin,
With gilty heart, that erst he wandered in.
In Christ's flock, let love be surely plaste,
From Christ's flock, let concord hate expel:
Of Christ's flock, let love be so embraste,
As we in Christ, and Christ in us may dwell.
Christ is the author of unity,
From whence proceeds all felicity.
O sing unto, this glittering glorious king,
O praise his name, let every living thing:
Let heart and voice, like Belles of silver ring,
The comfort that, this day did bring.
Let Lute, let Shalme* with sound of sweet delight.
The joy of Christ's birth this day resight.
FINIS
F. Kindlemarshe.

10. For Easter day.
AL mortal me^n this day rejoice, in Christ that you redeemed has,
By death with death sing we with voice, to him that has appeasde Gods wrath:
Due unto man for sinful path, wherein before he went astray,
Give thanks to him with perfect faith, that for mankind has made this
glorious day.
This day he rose from tomb again, wherein his precious corse was laid,
Whom cruelly the Jews had slain, with bloody wounds full ill arayd:
O man be now no more dismayed, if thou henceforth from sin do stay,
Of death thou need not to be afraid, Christ conquered death for this his
glorious day.
His death prevailed had no whit, as Paul the Apostle well does write,
Except he had vprised it, from death to life by godlike might:
With most triumphant glittering light,
This day his glory shined I say, and made us bright as sun this glorious
day.
O man arise with Christ therefore, since he from sin has made thee free,
Beware thou fall in sin no more, but rise as Christ did rise for thee:
So may thou him in glory see, when he at day of doom shall say,
Come thou my child and dwell with me, God grant us all to see that glorious
day.
FINIS
Jasper Heiwood.

11. For Whitsonday.
COme holy Ghost eternal God, and ease the woeful grief,
That through the heaps of heavy sin, can no where find relief:
Do thou O God redress,
The great distress,
Of sinful heaviness.
Come comfort the afflicted thoughts, of my consumed heart,
O rid the pearcing pinching pains, of my tormenting smart:
O holy Ghost grant me,
That I by thee,
From sin may purged be.
Thou art my God, to thee alone I will commend my cause,
Nor glittering gold nor precious stone, shall make me leave thy laws:
O teach me then the way,
Whereby I may,
Make thee my only stay.
My lips, my tongue, my heart and all, shall spread thy mighty name,
My voice shall never cease to sound, the praises of the same:
Yea every living thing,
Shall sweetly sing,
To thee (O heavenly king.)
FINIS
F. Kindlemarsh.

12. No pleasure without some pain.
SUUeet were the joys, that both might like and last,
Strange were the state, exempt from all distress,
Happy the life, that no mishap should taste:
Blessed the chance, might never change success,
UUhere such a life to lead, or state to prove,
UUho would not wish, that such a life were love.
But O the sowrie sauce of sweet unsure,
UUhen pleasures fly, and fly with wast of wind:
The trustlesse trains, that hoping hearts allure,
UUhen sweet delights, do but allure the mind.
UUhen care consumes, and wastes the wretched wight,
UUhile fancy feeds, and draws of her delight.
UUhat life were love, if love were free from pain?
But O that pain, with pleasure matched should meet:
UUhy did the course, of Nature so ordain,
That sugared sour, must sauce the bitter sweet?
UUhich sour from sweet, might any means remove,
UUhat hap, what heaven, what life were like to love?
FINIS
W. Hunis.

13. Who minds to bring his Ship to happy shore, Must care to know the laws
of wisdoms lore.
MY friend, if thou will credit me in ought,
To whom the truth, by trial well appears:
Naught worth is wit, till it be dearly bought,
There is no wisdom, but in hoarie hears:
Yet if I may, of wisdom often define,
As well as others have of happiness:
Then to my words, my friend thy ear incline,
The things that make thee wise, are these I guess.
Fear God, and know thy self in each degree,
Be friend to all, familiar but to few:
To light of credit, see thou never be,
For trial ought, in trust does treason show:
To others faults, cast not to much thy eye,
Accuse no man of guilt, amend thy own:
Of meddling much, does mischief ought arise,
And often debate, by tickle tongue is sown.
What thing thou will have hid, to none declare,
In word or deed, beware of had I wist:
So spend thy good, that some thou ever spare,
For friends like Hawks, do soar from empty fist:
Cut out thy coat, according to thy cloth,
Suspected persons, see thou always flee:
Believe not him, that once has broke his troth,
Nor yet of gift, without desert be free.
Time quickly slippes, beware how thou it spend,
Of wanton youth, repentes a painful age:
Begin nothing, without an eye to the end,
Nor bow thine ear, from counsel of the sage:
If thou to far, let out thy fancy slip,
And witless will, from reasons rule outstart:
Thy folly shall at length be made thy whip,
And sore the stripes of shame shall cause thee smart.
To do to much for old men is but lost,
Of friendship had to women comes like gain:
Bestow not thou on children to much cost,
For what thou do for these, is all in vain:
The old man or he can requite, he dies,
Unconstant is the woman's wavering mind:
Full soon the body thy friendship will despise,
And him for love, thou shall ungrateful find.
The aged man is like the barraine ground,
The woman like the reed that wagges with wind:
There may no trust in tender years be found,
And of the three, the boy is most unkind:
If thou have found a faithful friend in deed,
Beware thou lose not love of such a one:
He shall sometime stand thee in better steed,
Then treasure great, of gold or precious stone.
FINIS.
Jasper Heiwood.

14. Of the unconstant stay of Fortunes gifts.
IF Fortune be thy stay, thy state is very tickle,
She bears a double face, disguised, false and fickle:
This day she seems to smile, to morrow will she frown,
What now she sets aloft, anon she throws down:
Fly Fortunes slye deceipte, let Virtue be thy guide,
If that you do intend, in happy state to abide.
Upon the settled rock, thy building surest stands,
Away it quickly wears, that rests on the sands:
Dame Virtue is the rock, that yeldes assured stay,
Dame Fortune is the sand, that scoureth soon away:
Chose that is certain, let things uncertain pass,
Prefer the precious gold, before the brittle glass.
Slye Fortune has her sleightes, she plays upon the pack,
Look whom she favors most, at length she turns to wrack:
But Virtue simply deals, she shuns deceptfull train.
Who is by Virtue raised up, shall never fall again:
Stick fast to Virtue then, that gives assured trust,
And fly from Fortunes frekes, that ever prove unjust.
FINIS.
F. K.

15. Promise is debt.
IN my account, the promise that is vowed,
Among the good, is holden such a debt:
As he is thought, no whit to be allowed,
That sets light, his promise to forget:
And for my part, I will not link in love,
UUith fickle folk, whose fancies ought remove.
My happy gain, I do esteem for such,
As few have found, in these our doubtful days:
To find a friend, I think it be as much,
As to win a fort, full fraught of noble praise:
Of all the goods, that there may be possessed,
A faithful friend, I judge to be the best.
O friendly league, although to late begun,
Yet time shall try, our troth as well employed:
And that we both, shall see that we have done,
Such fastened faith, as can not be destroyed:
By envious rage, or slanders bitter blow,
That always seeks the good to overthrow.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

16. No words, but deeds.
THe wrong is great, the pain above my power,
That yeldes such care, in doubtful dens to drown:
Such hap is hard, where Fortune does so lower,
As friendly look, is tournd to froward frown.
Is this the trust, that faithful friends can find?
With those that yet have promise broke?
By deeds in doubt, as though no words can bind,
A vowed friend, to hold him to his yoke.
O faithless friend, what can assure your mind?
That doubts so soon, before you have cause why?
To what hard hap, does Fortune here me bind,
UUhen words nor deeds, can no where satisfy:
UUhat can I write? that has not often been said,
UUhat have I said? that has not been affirmed:
UUhat not approved? that ought to be assayed,
Or what is vowed? that shall not be performed.
Cast of mistrust, in have no credit give,
To this or that, that breeds friends unrest:
No doubt at all, but trust me if I live,
My deeds shall prove, that all is for the best:
And this believe, the sea shall cease to flow,
The sun to shine, within the settled sky:
All things on earth, shall leave to spring and grow,
Yea every foul, shall want his wings to fly.
Ear I in thought, shall seem once to retire,
If you my friend, remain as I desire:
Now lose no time, but use that while you may,
Forget not this, a Dog shall have a day.
FINIS.
R. D.

17. He desires exchange of life.
THe day delayed, of that I most do wish,
UUherewith I feed, and starve in one degree:
UUith wish and want, still served in one dish,
A live as dead, by proof as you may see:
To whom of old, this Proverb well it serves,
UUhile grass does grow, the silly horse he sterues:
Tweene these extremes, thus do I rome the race,
Of my poor life, this certainly I know:
Tweene would and want, unawarely that do pass,
More swift then shot, out of the Archers vow:
As Spider draws her line all day,
I watch the net, and others have the pray.
And as by proof, the greedy Dog does gnaw,
The bared bone, all only for the taste:
So to and fro, this loathsome life I draw,
UUith fancies forced, and fed with vain repast:
Narsissus brought, unto the water drink,
So aye thirst I, the more that I do drink.
Lo thus I dye, and yet I seem not sick,
UUith smart unseen my self, my self I wear:
UUith prone desire, and power that is not quick,
UUith hope a loft, now drenched in disprayre:
Trained in trust, for no reward assignde,
The more I have, the more I come behind.
UUith hurt to heal, in frozen Ise to fry,
UUith loss to laugh, this is a wondrous case:
Fast fetred here, is forced away to fly,
As hunted Hare, that Hound has in the chase:
UUith wings and spurs, for all the have I make,
As like to lose, as for to draw the stake.
The days be long, that hang upon desert,
The life is irke of joys that be delayed:
The time is short, for to requite the smart,
That does proceed, of promise long unpaid:
That to the last, of this my fainting breath,
I wish exchange of life, for happy death.
FINIS.
L. Vanx.

18. Of the instabilitie of youth.
WHen I look back, and in my self behold,
The wandering ways, that youth could not descry:
And mark the fearful course, that youth did hold,
And met in mind, each step youth strayed awry:
My knees I bow, and from my heart I call,
O Lord forget, these faults and folies all.
For now I see, how void youth is of skill,
I see also his Prime time and his end:
I do confess my faults and all my ill,
And sorrow sore, for that I did offend:
And with a mind, repentaunt of all crimes,
Pardon I ask for youth, ten thousand times.
The humble heart, has daunted the proud mind,
Eke wisdom has given ignorance a fall:
And wit has taught, that folly could not find,
And age has youth, her subject and her thrall:
Therefore I pray, O Lord of life and truth,
Pardon the faults committed in my youth.
Thou that did grant the wise king his request,
Thou that in the Whale, thy Prophet did preserve:
Thou that forgauest the wounding of thy breast,
Thou that did save, the thief in state to sterue:
Thou only God, the giver of all grace,
Wipe out of mind, the path of youths vain race.
Thou that by power, to life did raise the dead,
Thou that restorest the blind to perfect sight:
Thou that for love, thy life and love out blead,
Thou that of favor, made the lame go right:
Thou that can heal, and help in all assayes,
Forgive the gilt, that grew in youths vain ways.
And now since I* with faith and doubtless mind,
Do fly to thee, by prayer to appease thy Ire:
And since that thee, I only seek to find,
And hope by faith, to attain my just desire:
Lord mind no more, youths error and vnskill,
And able age, to do thy holy will.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

19. Most happy is that state alone, Where words and deeds agree in one.
BY painted words, the silly simple man,
To trustlesse trap, is trained now and than:
And by conceit, of sweet alluring tale,
He bites the baytes, that breeds his bitter bale:
To beauties blaze, cast not thy rouing eye,
In pleasant green, do stinging Serpents lie:
The golden Pill, has but a bitter taste,
In glittering glass, a poison ranckest plast,
So pleasant words, without performing deeds,
May well be deemed, to spring of Darnell seeds:
The friendly deed is it, that quickly tries,
Where trusty faith, and friendly meaning lies:
That state therefore, most happy seems to be,
Where words and deeds, most faithfully agree.
My friend if thou will keep thy honest name,
Fly from the blot, of barking flaunders blame:
Let not in word, thy promise be more large,
Then thou in deed, art willing to discharge:
Abhorred is that false dissembling brood,
That seems to bear, two faces in one hoode:
To say a thing, and not to mean the same,
Will turn at length, to loss of thy good name:
Wherefore my friend, let double dealing go,
In stead whereof, let perfect plainness flow:
Do thou no more, in idle words exceed,
Then thou intendes, to do in very deed:
So good report, shall spread thy worthy praise,
For being just, in word and deed always.
You worldly wightes, that worldly doers are,
Before you let, your word slip out to far:
Consider well, what inconvenience springes,
By breach of promise made, in lawful things:
First, God mislikes where such deceit does swarm,
Next, it redoundeth unto thy neighbors harm:
And last of all, which is not least of all,
For such offense, thy conscience suffer shall:
As barren grounds, bringes forth but rotten weeds,
From barren words, so fruitless chafe proceeds:
As sauerie flowers, do spring in fertile ground,
So trusty friends, by trial soon are found:
To shun therefore, the worst that may ensue,
Let deeds always, approve thy sayings true.
FINIS.
F. K.

Who will aspire to dignity: 20. By learning must advanced be.
THe poor that live in needy rate, by learning do great richesse gain,
The rich that live in wealthy state, by learning do their wealth maintain:
Thus rich and poor, are furthered still,
By sacred rules of learned skill.
All fond conceiptes of frantic youth, the golden gift of learning stays,
Of doubtful things to search the truth, learning sets forth the ready ways*
O happy him do I repute,
UUhose breast is fraught with learning fruit.
There grows no corn within the field, that Ox and plough did never till,
Right so the mind no fruit can yield, that is not lead by learninges skill:
Of ignorance comes rotten weeds,
Of learning springes right noble deeds.
Like as the Captain has respect, to train his soldiers in array,
So learning does man's mind direct, by virtues staff his life to stay:
Though friends and Fortune waxes scant,
Yet learned men shall never want.
You impes therefore in youth be sure, to fraught your minds with learned
things,
For learning is the fountain pure, out from the which all glory springes:
Who so therefore will glory win,
With learning first must needs begin.
FINIS
F. Kindlemarsh.

21. Man's flittyng life finds surest stay: Where sacred virtue bears sway.
THe sturdy rock for all his strength, by raging seas is rent in twain,
The marble stone is pearst at length, with little drops of drilling rain:
The Ox does yield unto the yoke,
The Steel obeys the hammer stroke.
The stately stagge that seems so stout, by yalping hounds at bay is set,
The swiftest bird that flees about, is caught at length in foulers Net:
The greatest fish in deepest brook,
Is soon deceived with subtle hook.
Yea man himself, unto whose will, all things are bounden to obey,
For all his wit and worthy skill, does fade at length and fall away:
There is nothing, but time does wast,
The Heavens, the Earth, consume at last.
But virtue sits triumphing still, upon the trone of glorious fame,
Though spitfull death man's body kill, yet hurtes he not his virtuous name:
By life or death, what so betides,
The state of virtue, never slides.
FINIS.
M. T.

22. Nothing is comparable unto a faithful friend.
Since this our time, of friendship is so scant,
Since friendship now, in every place does want:
Since every man, of friendship is so hollow,
As no man rightly knows, which way to follow:
Cease not my Muse, sease not in these our days,
To ring loud peales, of sacred frendships praise.
If men be now, their own peculiar friends,
And to their neighbors friendship none pretendes:
If men of friendship, show them selves so bare,
And of their brethren, take no friendly care:
Forbear not then my Muse, nor fear not then,
To ring disprayse, of these unfriendly men.
Did man in friendship know the mighty power?
How great effects, it works every hour:
What store of hidden friendship it retaynes,
How still it powers forth abundant gaynes:
Man would with thee, my Muse in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred frendships praise.
Friendship releeueth man's necessity,
Friendship comfort man's adversity:
Friendship augmenteth man's prosperity,
Friendship preferres man to felicity:
Then ring my Muse, ring out in these our days,
Ring out loud peales, of sacred frendships praise.
Of friendship, grows love and charity,
By friendship, men are linked in amity:
From friendship springs all commodity,
The fruit of friendship is fidelity:
Oh ring my Muse, ring out in these our days,
Peale upon peale, of sacred frendships praise.
That man with man, true friendship may embrace.
That man to man, may show a freendly face:
That every man, may sow such freendly seeds,
As freendship may be found in freendly deeds.
And join with thee my muse in these our days,
To ring loud peales of sacred freendships praise.
FINIS.
F. Kindlemarsh.

Golden precepts.
PErhaps you think me bold that dare presume to teach,
As one yt runns beyond his race, and rows beyond his reach,
Sometime the blind do go, where perfect sights do fall,
The simple may sometimes instruct, the wisest heads of al.
If needful notes I give, that unto virtue tend,
Me thinks you should of right, vouchsafe your listening ears to lend:
A Whetstone cannot cut, yet sharpes it well we see,
And I though blunt, may whet your skils, if you attentife be.
First these among the rest, I wish you warely heed,
That God be served, your prince obayed, and friends releeu'd at need:
Then look to honest thrift, both what and how to have,
At night examine so the day, that bed be thought a grave.
Seek not for others goods, be just in word and deed,
For got with shifts, are spent with shame, believe this as thy creed
Boste not of Natures gifts, nor yet of parents name,
For Virtue is the only mean, to win a worthy fame.
Ere thou do promise make, consider well the end,
But promise past be sure thou keep, both with thy foe and freende:
Threat not revenge to much, it shows a crauens kind,
But to prevail, and then forgive, declares a noble mind.
Forget no freendships debt, wish to requite at least,
For God and man, yea all the world, condems the ungrateful beast:
Bear not a friendly face, with heart of Judas kiss,
It shows, a base and vile conceit, and not where valor is.
Fly from a faunyng flurt, and from a coggyng mate,
Their loves breeds loss, their praise reproach, their friendship breeds but
hate,
Seek not to loose by wiles, that law and duty binds,
They be but helps of Banckrupts heads, and not of honest minds.
The motions of the flesh, and Collers heat restrain,
For heaps of harms do daily hap, where lust or rage does reign:
In diet, deed and words, a modest mean is best,
Enough suffices for a feast, but riot finds no rest.
And so to make an end, let this be borne away:
That virtue always be thy guide, so shall thou never stray.
FINIS*
In praise of the Snayle.
THe deep turmoyled wight, that lives deuoyde of ease,
Whose wayward wits are often found, more wavering then the seas:
Seeks sweet repose abroad, and takes delight to rome,
Where reason leaves the Snayle for rule, to keep a quiet home.
Leap not before thou look, lest harm thy hope assail,
Have havoc makes in hurtful wise, wherefore be slow as Sail:
Refrain from rash attempt, let take heed be thy skill,
Let wisdom bridle brainsicke wit, and leisure work thy will.
Dame reason biddes I say, in things of doubt be slack,
Lest rashness purchase us the wrong, that wisdom wills us lack:
By rashness diverse have been deadly overcome,
By kindly creepyng on like Snayle, duke Fabe his fame has won.
Though some as swift as hawks, can stoop to every stale,
Yet I refuse such sudden flight, and will seem slow as Snayle:
Wherefore my pretty Snaile, be still and lap thee warm.
Save enuies frets mauger their fumes, ther^ few shall do thee harm.
Because in some respect, thou holds me to be wise,
I place thee for a Presedent, and sign before mine eyes:
Was never any yet, that harm in thee could find,
Or dare auow that ever Snaile, wrought hurt to human kind.
I know dame Physic does, thy friendly help implore,
And crau's the salve from thee ensues, to cure the crased sore:
Since Physic then alowes, the virtues in degree,
In spite of spite I wear thee still, that well contenteth me.
FINIS.
21. Remember thy end.
TO be as wise as Cato was, or rich as Cresus in his life:
To have the strength of Hercules, which did subdue by force or strife.
What helps it when death does call,
The happy end exceeds all.
The rich may well the poor relieve, that rulers may redress each wrong:
The learned may good counsel give, but mark the end of this my song.
Who does these things, happy they call,
Their happy end, exceeds all.
The happiest end, in these our days, that all do seek, both small and great:
Is either for fame, or else for praise, or who may sit in highest seat.
But of these things hap, what hap shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
A good beginning often we see, but seldom standing at one stay:
For few do like the mean degree, then praise at parting some men say.
The things whereto each wight is thrall,
The happy end exceeds all.
The mean estate, that happy life, which lives under governance:
Who seeks no hate, nor breeds no strife, but takes in worth his happy chance.
If contentation him befall,
His happy end exceeds all.
The longer life that we desire, the more offense does daily grow:
The greater pain it does require, except the judge some mercy show.
Wherefore I think and ever shall,
The happy end exceeds all.
FINIS.
D. S.

24. He persuades his friend from the fond affectes of love.
VUhy art thou bound and may go free, shall reason yield to raging will?
Is thraldom like to liberty? will thou exchange thy good for ill?
Then shall thou learn a childish play, and of each part to taste and prove:
The lookers on shall judge and say, lo this is he that lives by Love.
Thy wits with thoughts, shall stand at stay, thy head shall have but heavy rest,
Thy eyes shall watch for wanton prays, thy tongue shall show thy hearts request:
Thy ears shall hear a thousand noise, thy hand shall put thy pen to pain,
And in the end, thou shall dispraise, thy life so spent, for such small gain.
If love and list might ever cope, or youth might run in reasons race,
Or if strong suit might win sure hope, I would less blame a lovers case:
For love is hot, with great desire, and sweet delight makes youth so fond,
That little sparks will prove great fire, and bring free hearts to endless bonds
First count the care, and then the cost, and mark what fraud in faith is
found,
Then after come, and make thy boast, and show some cause why thou art bound:
For when the wine does run full low, you shall be feign to drinck the lies,
And eat the flesh full well I know, that has been blown with many flies.
We see where great devotion is, the people kneel and kiss the cross,
And though we find small fault of this, yet some will gilt a bridles bosse*
A fool his babble will not change, not for the scepter of a King,
A lovers life is nothing strange, for youth delights none other thing.
FINIS.
Tho. Churchyard.

25. Wanting his desire, he complayneth.
THe sailyng ships with joy at length, do touch their long desired port,
The hewing axe the oak does wast, and battryng Canon breaks the fort:
Hard hagred hawks stope to the lure, wild colts in time the bridle tames,
There is nothing so out of ure, but to his kind long time it frames.
Yet this I find in time, no time can win my suit,
Though often the tree I climb, I cannot catch the fruit.
And yet the pleasant branches often, in yeldyng wise to me they bow,
UUhen I would touch they spring, sone are they gone I wot not how:
Thus I present that fleetyng flood, the Tantalus in hell below,
UUould God my case she understood, which can full soon relieve my woe.
UUhich if to her were known, the fruit were surely mine,
She would not let me groan, and brouse upon the rine.
But if my ship with tackle torn, with rented sails must needs retire,
And stream and wind have plainly sworn, by force to hinder my desire:
Like one that strikes upon the rocks, my weary wrack I should be wail,
And learn to know false fortunes mockes, who smiles on me to small avail.
Yet since she only can, my rented Ship restore,
To help her wracked man, but once I seek no more.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

28. Try before you trust.
IN friends are found a heap of doubts, that double dealyng use,
A swarm of such I could find out, whose craft I can accuse:
A face for love, a heart for hate, these feigned friends can bear,
A tongue for troth, a head for wiles, to hurt each simple care.
In humble poort, is poison part, that plainness can not spy,
UUhich credites all, and can not see, where stingyng Serpents lie:
Through hasty trust, the harmless heart, is easily hampred in,
And made believe it is good gold, when it is Lead and Tin.
The first deceit that bleres mine eyes, is feigned faith professed,
The second trappe is gratyng talk, that gripes each strangers breast:
The third deceit is greetyng words, with colors painted out,
UUhich bids suspect to fear no smart, nor dread no dangerous doubt.
The fourth, and last is long repair, which creepes in friendships lap.
And daily hauntes, that under trust, deuiseth many a trap:
Lo how false friends can frame a fetch, to win their will with wiles,
To sauce their sleights with sugared sops, and shadow harm with smiles,
To serve their lusts, are sundry sorts, by practice diverse kinds,
Some caries honey in their mouths, and venoume in their minds:
Me thinks the stones within the streets, should cry out in this case,
And every one that does them meet, should shun their doubble face.
FINIS.
D. S.

27. A Lady forsaken complayneth.
IF pleasures be in paynfulnes? In pleasures does my body rest,
IF joys accord with carefulnes? A joyful heart is in my breast:
If prison strong be liberty? In liberty long have I been,
If joys accord with misery? who can compare a life to mine.
Who can unbind that is sore hound? who can make free that is full thrall,
Or how can any means be found, to comfort such a wretch withal:
None can, but he that has my heart, convert my pains to comfort then,
Yet since his servant I became, most like a bondsman have I been.
Since first in bondage I became, my words and deeds were ever such,
That never once he could me blame, except from loving him too much.
Which I can judge no just offense, nor cause that I deserve disdain,
Except he mean through false pretense, through forged love to make a train
Naie, naie, alas, my feigned thoughts, my friended and my feigned ruth,
My pleasures past my present plaints, show well I mean but to much truth.
But since I cannot him attain, against my will I let him go,
And least he glory at my pain, I will attempt to cloak my woe:
Youth, learn by me, but do not prove, for I have proved to my pain,
What grievous greefes do grow by love, and what it is to love in vain.
FINIS.
M. D.

28. Finding worldly joys but vanities, he wishes death.
Forlorn in filthy froward fate, wherein a thousand cares I find:
By whom I do lament my state, annoyde with fond afflicted mind.
A wretch in woe, and dare not cry,
I live, and yet I wish to die.
The day in dole, that seems long, to pass with sighs and heavy cheer:
And with these eyes I vewe the wrong, that I sustain by living here.
UUhere my mishaps as rise do dwell,
As plagues within the pit of hell.
A wailyng wight I walk alone, in desert dens there to complain:
Among the savage sort to move, I flee my friends where they remain.
And pleasure take to shun the sight,
UUhere erst I felt my great delight.
A captive clapped in chains of care, lapt in the laws of lethall love:
My flesh and bones consumed bare, with crauling griefs full strange to prove.
Though hap does bid me hope at least,
UUhiles grass does grow, yet starues the beast.
A sieged fort with foreign force, for want of aid, must yield at last,
So must my wearied pined corse, submit it self to bitter taste:
Of craulyng care that crackes my breast,
Till hope of death, shall break my rest.
FINIS.
F. M.

A reply to M. Edwardes May.
I Read a Maiyng rhyme of late, delighted much my ear,
It may delight as many more, as it shall read or hear:
To see how there is showed, how May is much of price,
And eke to May when that you may, even so is his advice.
It seems he meant to May himself, and so to use his skill,
For that the time did serve so well, in May to have his will:
His only May was ease of mind, so far as I can guess,
And that his May his mind did please, a man can judge no less.
And as himself did reap the fruits, of that his pleasant May,
He wills his friend the same to use, in time when as he may:
He is not for himself it semes, but wishes well to all,
For that he would they should take May, in time when it does fall.
So use your May, you may, it can not hurtful be,
And May well used in time and place, may make you merry glee:
Modest Maiyng meetest is, of this you may be sure,
A modest Maiyng quietness, to Mayers does procure.
Who may and will not take, may wish he had so done,
Who may and it does take, may think he took to soon:
So join your May with wisdoms lore, and then you may be sure,
Who makes his May in other sort, his vurest may procure.
Some May before May come, some May when May is past,
Some make their May too late, and some do make post have:
Let wisdom rule I say your May, and thus I make an end,
And May, that when you list to May, a good May God you send.
FINIS.
M. S.

30. Having married a worthy Lady, and taken away by death, he complayneth his
mishap.
IN youth when I at large did lead, my life in lusty liberty,
When heavy thoghts no one did spread, to let my pleasant fantasy:
No fortune seemd, so hard could fall,
This freedom then, that might take thrall.
And twenty years I scarce had spent, when to make full my happy fate
Both treasures great were on me cast, with lands and titles of estate:
So as more blessed then I, stood than,
Eke as me thought was never man.
For of Dame Fortune who is he, could more desire by just request,
Then health, with wealth, and liberty, al which at once I this possessed:
But masking in this jolly joy,
A sudden sight, prooud all a toy.
For passing on these merry days, with new devise of pleasures great,
And now and the^ to view the rays, of beauties works with cunning feate:
In heavenly hewes, all which as one,
I often beheld, but bound to none.
And one day rowlyng thus my eyes, upon these blessed wights at ease,
Emongst ye rest one did I se, who straight my wa^dring look did sease:
And stayed them firm, but such a sight,
Of beauty yet saw never wight.
What shall I seek to praise it more, where tongs cannot well praise ye same,
But to be short to lovers lore, I straight my se^ces al did frame
And were it wit, or were it chance,
I won the Garlande in this dance.
And thus where I before had thought, no hap my fortune might increase,
A double bliss this chance forth brought, so did my Ladies love me please:
Her faith so firm, and constant such,
As never heart, can praise too much.
But now with torments strange I taste, the fickle stay of fortunes wheel,
And where she raised from high to cast, with greater force of grief to feel:
For from this hap of sudden frown,
Of Princes face she threw me down.
And thus exchange now has it made, by liberty a thing most dear,
In hateful prison for to fade, where sundred from my loving fear:
My wealth and health, stands at like stay,
Obscurely to consume away.
And last when human force was none, could part our love wherein we lived,
My Ladies life alas is gone, most cruel death has it bereued:
Whose virtues, her, to God has won,
And left me here, a man undone.
FINIS.
F.G.

31. A worthy dittie, song before the Queens Majesty at Bristow.
MIstrust not troth, that truly means, for every ielous freke,
In stead of wrong, condemn not right, no hidden wrath to wreke:
Look on the life of faultlesse life, how bright her virtues shine,
And measure out her steps each one, by level and by line.
Deem each desert by upright guess, whereby your praise shall live,
If malice would be matched with might, let hate no judgment give:
Enforce no fear with wresting wits, in quiet conscience breast,
Lend not your ears to busy tounges, which breeds much unrest.
In doubtful driftes wade not to far, it wearies but the mind,
Seek not to search the secret hearts, whose thoughts are hard to find:
Avoid from you those hateful heads, that helps to heap mishap,
Be slow to hear the flatterers voice, that creeps in your lap.
Embrace their love that wills you good, and sport not at their praise,
Trust not too much unto your self, for feeble are your stays:
How can your seat be settled fast, or stand on steadfast ground.
So propped up with hollow hearts, whose surety is unsound,
Give faith to those that fear for love, and not that love for fear,
Regard not them that force compels to please you every where:
All this well wayed and borne away, shall stablish long your state,
Continually with perfect peace, in spite of puffing hate.
FINIS.
D. S.

32. An Epitaph upon the death of Sir Edward Saunders Knight, Lord chief Baron
of the Exchequer.
YOu Muses wear your mourning weeds, strike on the fatal drome,
Sound Triton out the trumpe of fame, in spite of Pareas dome:
Distill Parnassus pleasant drops possess Pierides place,
Apollo help with doleful tune, to wayle this woeful case*
UUring hard your hands, wayle on your loss, lament the fate that fell,
UUith sobs and sighs to Saunders say, oh Saunders now farewell:
UUhom Phoebus fed with Pallas papp, as one of Sibils seed,
Lo here where death did rest his corpse, the vermin foul to feed.
UUhom Impes of Jove with Necter sweet, long in Libethres noursht,
Behold how dreadful death him brought, to the whence he came first:
Lycurgus he for learned laws, Radamantus race that ran,
An other Nector for advice, Zalucus fame that wan.
A Damon dear unto his friend, in faith like Phocion found,
A Cato that could counsel give, to Prince a subject sound:
Not Athens for their Solon sage, not Rome for Numa wayle,
As we for Saunders death have cause, in floudes of tears to sail.
Nor Sparta card for Chilos death, nor proud Prienna pressed,
To weep for Bias as we wayle, our Saunders late possessed:
His learned paths, his talentes rare, so now by death appears,
As he that Solomon sought to serve, in prime and youthful years,
His counsel sad, his rules, his Laws, in country soil so wrought.
As though in Cuma he had been, of sage Sibilla taught:
His virtuous life was such I say, as virtue did embrace,
By virtue caught in virtues school, to grow in virtues race.
Might tender babes, might orphantes weak, might widows rear the cry,
The sound thereof should pearce the clouds, to scale the empire sky:
To bid the Gods to battle bend, and to descend in sight,
Though far unfit, and mates unmeet, with mortal men to fight.
Too late (alas) we wish his life, too soon deceiues us Death,
Too little wit we have to seek, the dead again to breath:
UUhat helpelesse is, most careless be, as Natures course does show,
For death shall reap what life has sown, by nature this we know.
UUhere is that fierce Achilles fled, where is king Turnus shroude?
UUhat is become of Priamus state, where is Periander proud?
Hector, Hanno, Hanniball, dead, Pompei, Pirrhus spild,
Scipio, Cyrus, Caesar slain, and Alexander killed.
So long there Fortune fast did flow, and charged Fame to sound,
Till frowning Fortune foild by fate, which fawning Fortune found:
Shun Fortunes feakes, shake Fortune of, to none is Fortune sound,
Since none may say of Fortune so, I Fortune faithful found.
Behold where Fortune flowed so fast, and favored Saunders lure,
Till fickle Fortune false again, did Saunders death procure:
Lo clothed cold in cloddes of clay, in drossie dust remain,
By fate returned from whence he came, to his mothers womb again,
UUho welnigh thirty years was Judge, before a Judge did fall,
And judged by that mighty Judge, which Judge shall judge us all:
The heavens may of right rejoice, and earth may it bewail,
Since heaven wan, and earth has lost, the guide and arc of veil.
The gain is much, our loss is great, their mirth, our moan is such,
That they may laugh as cause do yield, and we may weep as much.
O happy he, unhappy we, his hap does aye increase,
Happy he, and hapless we, his hap shall never cease.
We live to dye, he died to live, we want and he possessed,
UUe bide in bands, he bathes in bliss, the Gods above him blessed:
Being borne to live, he lived to dye, and dyed to God so plain,
That birth, that life, that death do show, that he shall live again.
His youth to age, his age to death, his death to fame applied,
His same to time, his time to God, thus Saunders lived and dyed:
O happy life, O happier death, O ten times happy he,
Whose hap it was, such hap to have, a Judge this age to be.
Oh joyful time, Oh blessed soil, where Pallas rules with wit,
O noble state, O sacred seat, where Saba sage does sit*
Like Susan sound like Sara sad, with Hesters Mace in hand,
With Iudithes sword Bellona like, to rule this noble land.
I had my will, you have your wish, I laugh, rejoice you may,
I wanne now much, you gain no less, to see this happy day.
Wherein I dyed, wherein you live, oh treble happy cost,
Wherein I ioyed in glory great, wherein you triumph most.
Kneel on your knees, knock hard your breasts, sound forth the joyful drome,
Clap loud your hands, sound Echo say, the golden world is come.
Rejoice you Judges may of right, your mirth may now be such,
As never erst you Judges had, in England mirth so much.
Here Cuma is, here Sibill reigns, on Delphos seat to sit,
Here she like Phoebus rules, that can Gordius knot unknit.
I lived to Nature long enough, I lived to honor much,
I lived at wish, and died at will, to see my country such.
As neither needs it Numas laws, nor yet Apollos sweard,
For mauger Mars yet Mars shall be of this our Queen afeard.
O pearelesse pearl, O Diamond dear, O Queen of Queens farewell,
Your royal Majesty God preserve, in England long to dwell.
Farewell the Phaenix of the world, farewell my sovereign Queen,
Farewell most noble virtuous Prince, Mineruas mate I ween.
No Jewel, Gemme, no Gold to give, no Pearls from Pactol^s lo,
No Persian Gaze, no Indian stone, no Tagus sands to show.
But faith and will to native soil, a live and dead I find,
My heart my mind, my love I leave unto my Prince behind,
Farewell you Nobles of this land, farewell you Judges grave,
Farewell my fellows, friends and mates, your Queen I say God save.
What rise in time, in time does fall, what flows in time does ebb,
What lives in time, in time shall dye, and yield to Parcus web.
The Sun to darcknesse shall be turned, the stars from skies shall fall,
The Moon to blood, the world with fire shall be consumed all.
As smoke or vapor vanish straight, as bubbles rise and fall,
As clouds do pass, or shadow shifts, we live, we dye so all.
Our pomp, our pride, our triumph most, our glory great herein,
Like shattering shadow pass away, as though none such had bin.
Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, as they were erst before,
A lump confused, and Chaos called, so shall they once be more.
And all to earth, that came from earth, and to the grave descend,
For earth on earth, to earth shall go, and earth shall be the end.
As Christ ascended up the clouds, so Christ in clouds shall come,
To Judge both good and bad on earth, at dreadful day of dome.
From whence our flesh shall rise again, even from the drossie dust,
And so shall pass I hope, unto the Mansion of the just.
FINIS.
Lodowicke LLoyd.

33. His good name being blemished, he bewayleth.
Framed in the front of forlorn hope, past all recovery,
I stailes stand tabide, the shocke of shame and infamy:
My life through lingering long is lodged, in lare of loathsome ways,
My death delayed to keep from life, the harm of hapless days:
My sprites, my heart, my wit and force, in deep distress are dround,
The only loss of my good name, is of these griefs the ground.
And since my mind, my wit, my head, my voice, and tongue are weak,
To utter, move, devise, conceive, sound forth, declare, and speak:
Such pearsing plaintes, as answer might, or would my woeful case,
Help crave I must, and crave I will, with tears upon my face:
Of all that may in heaven or hell, in earth or air be found,
To wail with me the loss of mine, as of these griefs the ground.
Help Gods, help saints, help sprites and powers, that in the heaven do dwell,
Help ye that are aye wont to wail, ye howling hounds of hell:
Help man, help beasts, help birds and worms, that on the earth does
toil,
Help fish, help foul, that flocks and feeds upon the salt sea soil:
Help Echo that in the air does flee, shrill voices to resound,
To wail this loss of my good name, as of these griefs the ground.
FINIS.
E. O.

34. Of Fortunes power.
POlicrates whose passing hap, caused him to lose his fate,
A golden ring cast in the seas, to change his constant state:
And in a fish yet at his bourd, the same he after found,
Thus fortune lo, to whom she takes, for bounty does abound.
The mizers unto might she mountes, a common case we see,
And mighty to great misery, she sets in low-degree:
UUhom she, to day does rear on hye, upon her whirling wheel,
To morrow next she dingeth down, and casts at her heel.
No measure has she in her gifts, she does reward each sort,
The wise that counsel have, no more, then fools that makes sport:
She uses never parciall hands, for to offend or please,
Give me good Fortune all men says, and throw me in the seas.
It is no fault or worthiness, that makes men fall or rise,
I rather be borne fortunate, then to be very wise:
The blindest man right soon, that by good fortune guided is,
To whom that pleasant Fortune pipes, can never dance amiss.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

36. Though triumph after bloody wars, the greatest brags do bear, Yet
triumph of a conquered mind, the crown of fame shall wear:
WHo so does mark the careless life, of these unhappy days,
And sees what small and slender hold, the state of virtues stays:
He finds that this accursed trade, proceeds of this ill,
That men be given too much to yield, to their untamed will.
In lack of taming witless will, the poor we often see,
Enuies the rich, because that he, his equal can not be:
The rich advanced to might by wealth, from wrong does not refrain,
But will oppresses weaker sort, to heap excessive gain.
If Fortune were so blind, to give to one man what he will,
A world would not suffice the same, if he might have his fill:
We wish, we search, we strive for all, and have no more therein,
Then has the slave, when death does come, though Cresus wealth he win.
In getting much, we get but care, such brittle wealth to keep,
The rich within his walls of stone, does never soundly sleep:
When poor in weak and slender house, do fear no loss of wealth,
And have no further care but this, to keep them selves in health.
Affection may not hide the sword of sway, in judgment seat,
Least partial favor execute, the law in causes great:
But if the mind in constant state, affection quite do leave,
The higher state shall have their rightes, the poor no wrong receive.
It is accounted greater praise, to Caesar's lofty state,
Against his vanquest foes, in wars to bridle wreckfull hate:
Then when to Rome he had subdued, the people long unknown,
Whereby as far as land was found, the same abroad was blown.
If honor can self will refuse, and Justice be upright,
And private state desires but that, which good appears in sight:
Then virtue shall with sovereign show, to every eye reveal,
An heavenly life, a wealfull state, a happy common weal.
Let virtue then the triumph win, and govern all your deeds,
Your yelding to her sober hestes, immortal glory breeds:
She shall vpreare your worthy name, shinyng into the skies,
Her beams shall blaze in grave obscure, where shriued carcass lies.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

37. Of perfect wisdom.
WHose will be accounted wise, and truly claim the same,
By joining virtue to his deeds, he must atcheue the same:
But few there be, that seek thereby, true wisdom to attain,
O God so rule our hearts therefore, such fondness to refrain.
The wisdom which we most esteem, in this thing does consist,
UUith glorious talk to show in words, our wisdom when we list:
Yet not in talk, but seemly deeds, our wisdom we should place,
To speak so fair, and do but ill, does wisdom quite disgrace.
To bargayne well, and shun the loss, a wisdom compted is,
And thereby through the greedy coin, no hope of grace to mis:
To seek by honor to advance, his name to brittle praise,
Is wisdom which we daily see, increases in our days.
But heavenly wisdom sower seems, too hard for them to win.
And weary of the suit they seem, when they do once begin:
It teaches us to frame our life, while vital breath we have,
UUhen it dissolueth earthly mass, the soul from death to save.
By fear of God to rule our steps, from sliding into vice,
A wisdom is, which we neglect, although of greater price:
A point of wisdom also this, we commonly esteem,
That every man should be in deed, that he desires to seem.
To bridle that desire of gain, which forces us to ill,
Our hautie stomachs Lord repress, to tame presuming will:
This is the wisdom that we should, above each thing desire,
O heavenly God from sacred throne, that grace in us inspire.
And print in our repugnant hearts, the rules of wisdom true,
That all our deeds in worldly life, may like thereof ensue:
Thou only art the living spring, from whom this wisdom flows,
O wash therewith our sinful hearts, from vice that therein grows.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

38. A friendly admonition.
YE stately wightes, that live in quiet rest,
Through worldly wealth, which God has given to you:
Lament with tears and sighs from doleful breast,
The shame and power, that vice obtains now:
Behold how God does daily profer grace,
Yet we disdain repentance to embrace.
The suddes of sin do soke into the mind,
And cancred vice, does virtue quite expel:
No change to good, alas can resting find,
Our wicked hearts, so stoutly do rebel:
Not one there is, that hastes to amend,
Though God from heaven his daily threats down send:
UUe are so slow to change our blamefull life,
UUe are so pressed, to snatche a luring vice:
Such greedy hearts, on every side be rife,
So few that guide, their will by counsel wise:
To let our tears lament the wretched case,
And call to God for undeserved grace.
You worldly wightes, that have your fancies fixed,
On slipper joy, of terraine pleasure here:
Let some remorse, in all your deeds be mixed,
Whiles you have time, let some redress appear:
Of sudden death, the hour you shall not know,
And look for death, although it seems slow.
Oh he no Judge, in other men's offense,
But purge thy self, and seek to make thee free:
Let every one, apply his diligence,
A change to good, within him self to see:
O God direct our feet in such a stay,
From cancred vice, to shun the hateful way.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

39. Sundry men, sundry affectes.
IN every wight, some sundry sort of pleasure I do find,
UUhich after he does seek, to ease his ioyling mind*
Diana with her trainyng chase, of hunting had delight,
Against the fearful Dear, she could direct her shot a right.
The lofty years in every age, does still embrace the same,
The sport is good, if virtue do assist the cheerful game.
Minerua in her chattering arms, her courage does advance,
In trial of the bloody wars, she gives luckie chance:
For sauegard men embrace the same, which do so needful seem,
That noble hearts their chief delights, in use thereof esteem.
In warlike games to try or ride, the force of arms they use,
And base the man we do attempt, that does the same refuse.
The silver sound of Musickes cords, does please Apollos wit,
A sentence which the heavens advance, where it deserves to sit:
A pleasure apt for every wight, relief to careful mind,
For woe redress, for care a salve, for sadness help we find.
The sovereign praise of Music still, does cause the Poets feign,
That whirling Spheres, and eke the heavens do hermonie retain.
I heard, that these three powers, at variaunce lately fell,
UUhiles each did praise his own delight, the other to excel:
Then fame, as an indifferent Judge, to end the case they call,
The praise pronounced by her to them, indifferently does fall.
Diana health and strength maintain, Minerua force does tame,
And Music gives a sweet delight, to further others game.
These three delights to hautie minds, the worthiest are esteemed,
If virtue be annexed to them, they rightly be so demed:
UUith joy they do revive the wit, with sorrow often oppressed,
And never suffer solemn grief, too long in mind to rest.
Be wise in mirth, and seek delight, the same do not abuse,
In honest mirth a happy joy, we ought not to refuse.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

40. Of a friend and a flatterer.
A Trusty friend is rare to find, a fawning foe may soon be got,
A faithful friend bear still in mind, but fawning so regard thou not.
A faithful friend no cloak does crave, to coler knavery withal,
But Sicophant a gun must have, to bear a port what ere be fall.
A nose to smell out every feast, a brazen face to set it out,
A shameless child or homely gest, whose life does like to raunge about:
A fawning foe while wealth does last, a thief to rob and spoil his friend,
As strong as oak while wealth does last, but rotten stick does prove in ye
end.
Look first, then leap, beware the mire,
Burnt child is warnd to dread the fire*
Take heed my friend, remember this,
Short horse (they say) soon curried is.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes,

41. Of sufferaunce comes ease.
TO seem for to revenge each wrong in hasty wise,
By proof of guiltless men, it has not been the guise:
In slanders loathsome brute, where they condemned be,
With ragelesse mood they suffer wrong, where truth shall try them free.
These are the pacient pangues, that pass within the breast,
Of those, that feel their cause by mine, where wrong has right oppressed:
I know how by suspect, I have been judged awrie,
And granted guilty in the thing, that clearly I deny.
My faith may me defend, if I might loved be,
God judge me so, as from the guilt, I know me to be free:
I wrote but for my self, the grief was all mine own,
As, who would prove extremity, by proof it might be known.
Yet are they such, that say they can, my meaning deem,
Without respect of this old troth, things prove not as they seem.
Whereby it may befall, in judgment to be quick,
To make them selves suspect therewith, that needed not to kick.
Yet in resisting wrong, I would not have it thought,
I do amiss, as though I knew, by whom it might be wrought:
If any such there be, that herewithall be vexed,
It were their virtue to beware, and deem me better next.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

43. All things are vain.
ALthough the purple morning, brags in brightness of the Sun,
As though he had of chased night, a glorious conquest won:
The time by day, gives place again, to force of drousie night,
And every creature is constrained, to change his lusty plight.
Of pleasures all, that here we cast,
We feel the contrary at last.
In Spring, thou pleasant Zephirus, has fruitful earth inspired,
And never has each bush, each branch, with blossoms brave attired:
Yet fruits and flowers, as buds and blomes full quickly withered be,
When stormy winter comes to kill, the summers iolitie.
By time are got, by time are lost,
All things wherein we pleasure most.
Although the Seas so calmely glide, as dangers none appear,
And doubt of storms, in sky is none, king Phoebus shines so clear:
Yet when the boisterous winds break out, and raging waves do swell,
The selie bark now heaues to heaven, now sinckes again to hell.
Thus change in every thing we see,
And nothing constaunt seems to be.
Who flows most in worldly wealth, of wealth is most unsure,
And he that chiefly tastes of joy, do sometime woe endure:
Who vanteth most of numbered friends, forgo them all he must,
The fairest flesh and lively blood, is tourn'd at length to dust.
Experience gives a certain ground,
That certain here, is nothing found.
Then trust to that which aye remains, the bliss of heavens above,
UUhich Time, nor Fate, nor Wind, nor Storm, is able to remove.
Trust to that sure celestial rock, that restes in glorious throne,
That has been, is, and must be still, our anchor hold alone.
The world is but vanity,
In heaven seek we our surety.
FINIS.
F. Kindlemarshe.

44. A virtuous Gentlewoman in the praise of her love.
I Am a virgin fair and free, and freely do rejoice,
I sweetly warble sugared notes, from silver voice:
For which delightful joys, yet thank I courteous Love,
By whose almighty power, such sweet delights I prove.
I walk in pleasant fields, adorned with lively green,
And vewe the fragrant flowers, most lovely to be seen:
The purple Columbine, the Couslippe and the Lilly,
The Uiolet sweet, the Daizie and Daffadillie.
The woodbines on the hedge, the red Rose and the white,
And each fine flowers else, that renders sweet delight:
Among the which I chose, all those of seemeliest grace,
In thought, resembling them, to my dear lovers face.
His lovely face I mean, whose golden flouring gifts,
His everliving fame, to lofty sky vpliftes:
UUhom loving me I love, only for virtues sake,
UUhen vertuosly to love, all only care I take.
Of all which fresh fair flowers, that flower that does appear,
In my conceit, most like to him I hold so dear:
I gather it, I kiss it, and eke devise with it,
Such kind of lovely speech, as is for lovers fit.
And then of all my flowers, I make a garland fine,
UUith which my golden wier hears, together I do twine:
And set it on my head, so taking that delight,
That I would take, had I my lover still in sight.
For as in goodly flowers, mine eyes great pleasure find,
So are my lovers gifts, most pleasant to my mind:
Upon which virtuous gifts, I make more repast,
Then they that for love sportes, the sweetest joys do taste.
FINIS.
F. K.

45. Oppressed with sorrow, he wishes Death.
IF Fortune may enforce, the careful heart to cry,
And gripyng grief constrain, the wounded wight lament:
UUho then alas to mourn, has greater cause then I,
Against whose hard mishap, both heaven and earth is bent.
For whom no help remains, for whom no hope is left,
From whom all happy hap is fled, and pleasure quite bereft:
UUhose life naught can prolong, whose health, naught can procure,
UUhose passed proof of pleasant joy,
Mischaunce has changed to griefs anoy.
And lo whose hope of better day,
Is ouerwhelm'd with long delay.
Oh hard mishap.
Each thing I plainly see, whose virtues may avail,
To ease the pinching pain, which gripes the groaning wight:
By Phisickes sacred skill, whose rule does seldom fail.
Through labors long inspect, is plainly brought to light.
I know, there is no fruit, no leaf, no root, no rind,
No herb, no plant, no juice, no gum, no metal deeply mind:
No Pearl, no precious stone, ne Gem of rare effect,
Whose virtues, learned Gallens books, at large do not detect.
Yet all their force can not appease,
The furious fittes of my disease:
For any drugge of Phisickes art,
Can ease the grief that gripes my heart.
Oh strange disease.
I hear the wise affirm, that Nature has in store,
A thousand secret salues, which wisdom has out found:
To cool, the scorching heat, of every smarting sore,
And heals deepest scarre, though grievous be the wound.
The ancient Proverb says, that none so fostred grief,
Does grow, for which the Gods themselves, have not ordained relief:
But I by proof do know, such Proverbs to be vain,
And think that Nature never knew, the plague that I sustain.
And so not knowing my distress,
Has left my grief remediless.
For why, the heavens for me prepare,
To live in thought, and dye in care.
Oh lasting pain.
In change of air I see, by haunt of heathfull soil,
By diet duly kept, gross humors are expeld:
I know that griefs of mind, and inward hearts turmoyle,
By faithful friends advise, in time may be repeld.
Yet all this naught auayles, to kill that me annoyes,
I mean to stop these floudes of care, that ouerflow my joys:
No none exchange of place, can change my lucklesse lot,
Like one I live, and so must dye, whom Fortune has forgot.
No counsel can prevail with me,
Nor sage advise with grief agree:
For he that feels the panges of hell,
Can never hope in heaven to dwell.
Oh deep despair.
What lives on earth but I, whose travail reapes no gain,
The wearied Horse and Ox, in stall and stable rest:
The Ante with summers toil, bears out the winters pain,
The foul that flies all day, at night returns to rest.
The Ploughmans weary work, amid the winters mire,
Rewarded is with summers gain, which yeldes him double hire:
The silly laboring soul, which drudges from day to day,
At night his wages truly paid, contented goes his way.
And coming home, his drousie head,
He coucheth close in homely bed:
Wherein no sooner down he lies,
But sleep has straight possessed his eyes.
Oh happy man.
The Soldier biding long, the brunt of mortal wars,
UUhere life is never free, from dint of deadly foil:
At last comes joyful home, though mangled all with scarres,
Where frankly, void of fear, he spendes the gotten spoil.
The Pirate lying long, amid the foming floudes,
With every flaw in hazaed is, to lose both life and goods:
At length finds vewe of land, where wished Port he spies,
UUhich once obtained, among his mates, he parts the gotten prise.
Thus every man, from travail past,
Death reap a just reward at last:
But I alone, whose troubled mind,
In seeking rest, unrest does find.
Oh lucklesse lot.
Oh cursed caitife wretch, whose heavy hard mishap,
Does wish ten thousand times, that thou had not been borne:
Since fate has thee condemned, to live in sorrows lap,
UUhere wailynges wast thy life, of all redress forlorn.
UUhat shall thy grief appease? who shall thy torment stay?
UUilt thou thy self, with murdering hands, enforce thy own decay:
No, far be thou from me, my self to stop my breath,
The Gods forbid, whom I beseech, to work my joys by death.
For lingryng length of loathsome life,
Does stir in me such mortal strife:
That whiles for life, and death I cry,
In death I live, and living dye.
Oh froward fate.
Lo here my hard mishap, lo here my strange disease,
Lo here my deep despair, lo here my lasting pain:
Lo here my froward fate, which nothing can appease,
Lo here how others toil, rewarded is with gain.
With lucklesse, lo I live, in loss of labors due,
Compeld by proof of torment strong, my endless grief to rue:
Is which, since needs I must, consume both youth and age,
If old I live, and that my care no comfort can assuage.
Henceforth I banish from my breast,
All frustrate hope of future rest:
And truthlesse trust to Times reward,
With all respects of joys regard.
Here I forswear.
47. Where reason makes request, there wisdom ought supply. With friendly
answer pressed, to grant or else deny.
I Sigh, why so? for sorrow of her smart,
I mourn, wherefore? for grief that she complains:
I pity, what? her oppressed heart,
I dread, what harm? the danger she sustaines.
I grieve, whereat? at her oppressing pains,
I feel, what force the fittes of her disease,
UUhose harm does me and her, a like displease.
I hope, what hay? her happy healthes retire,
I wish, what wealth* no wealth, nor worldly store:
But crave, what craft? by cunnyng to aspire
Some skill, whereto? to salve her sickely sore.
UUhat then? why then would I her health restore
UUhose harm me hurtes, how so? so works my will:
To wish my self and her, like good and ill.
UUhat moves thy mind, whereto? to such desire,
Ne force, ne favor, what then? free fancies choice:
Art thou to chose? my charter to require,
Each Ladies love, is fed by customs voice,
Yet are there grauntes, the evidence of their choice.
UUhat then, our freedom is at large in chosing,
As women's wills are froward in refusing.
Wotes she thy will? she knows what I protest,
Damde she thy suit? she daungered not my talk:
Gave she consent? she granted my request,
What did thou crave? the root, the fruit, the stalk,
I asked them all, what gave she, cheese, or chalk?
That taste must try, what taste? I mean the proof,
Of friends, whose wills withhold their bow aloof.
Meanst thou good faith? what else, hopest thou to speed?
why not, O fool untaught in carpell trade,
Know not what proofs from such delays proceed,
will thou like headless Cock be caught in glade?
Art thou like Ass, too apt for burden made?
Fie, fie, will thou for faint adore the shrine?
And woe her friend, ere she be wholly thine.
Who drew this drift? moved she, or thou this match?
It Was I: oh fool unware of women's wiles,
Long may thou wait, like hungry hound at hatch:
She crafty Fox, the silly Goose beguiles,
Thy suit is shaped, so fit for long delay,
That she at will may check, from yea to nay.
But in good sooth, tell me her friends intent,
Best learn it first, their purpose I not know:
why then thy will to worse and worse is bent,
Do thou delight, the vnkindled coal to blow:
Or childlike love, in ankred Boat to row,
what mean these terms? who since thy suit is such,
Know of or on, or thou affect too much.
No have but good, why no, the mean is best,
Admit she love, mislike in lingering grows:
Suppose she is caught, then woodcocke on thy crest,
Till end approues, what scornful seeds she sowes.
In loytring love, such dangers ebbes and flows,
what help herein? why wake in dangerous watch:
That to, nor fro, may make thee mar the match.
Is that the way, to end my weary work?
By quick dispatch, to lessen long turmoyle:
Well well, though loss in lingering wontes to lurk,
And I a fool, most fit to take the foil.
Yet proof from promise, never shall recoyle,
My words with deeds, and deeds with words shall wend:
Till she or hers, gainsay that I intend.
Art thou so fond? not fond, but firmly fast,
Why fool, her friends, wot how thy will is bent:
Yet thou like dolt, whose wit and sense is past,
See not what frumpes, do follow thy intent.
Ne know, how love in few of scorn is lent,
Adue, for sighs such folly should prevent:
Well well, their scoffs with scorns might be repayed.
If my requests, were fully yead or nayed.
UUel well, let these with wisdoms praise be wayed:
And in your chest of chiefest secrets laid.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
48. What joy to a contented mind.
THe faith that fayles, must needs be thought untrue,
The friend that faignes, who holds not unjust:
UUho likes that love, that changes still for new,
UUho hopes for truth, where troth is void of trust.
No faith, no friend, no love, no troth so sure,
But rather fayles, then steadfastly endure.
UUhat head so stayed? that alters not intent,
what thought so sure? that steadfast did remain,
what wit so wise? that never needs repent:
what tongue so true? but sometime wontes to feign,
what foot so firm? that never treades awrie,
what sooner dimde? then sight of clearest eye.
UUhat heart so fixed? but soon enclines to change,
what mood so mild? that never moved debate:
what faith so strong? but lightly likes to raunge,
what love so true? that never learnd to hate.
what life so pure? that lastes without offense,
what worldly mind? but moves with ill pretense.
UUhat knot so fast? that may not be untied,
what seal so sure? but fraud or force shall break,
what prop of stay? but one time shrinkes aside,
what ship so stauche? that never had a leake.
what grant so large? that no exception makes,
what hoped help? but friend at need forsakes.
UUhat seat so high? but low to ground may fall,
what hap so good? that never found mislike:
what state so sure? but subject is to thrall,
what force preuayles? where Fortune list to strike.
what wealth so much? but time may turn to want,
what store so great? but wasting makes scant.
UUhat profits hope? in depth of dangers thrall,
what trust in time? but waxes worse and worse:
what helps good heart, if Fortune frown withal,
what blessing thriues against heavenly helpelesse curse.
what winnes desire, to get and cannot gain,
what boots to wish, and never to obtain.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
49. Donec eris Faelix multos numerabis amicos, Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus
^pes.
Even as the Raven, the Crow, and greedy Kite,
Do swarming flock, where carren corpse does fall:
And tiring tear with beak, and talentes might,
Both skin and flesh, to gorge their guts withal*
And never cease, but gather more to more,
Do all to pull, the carkas to and fro:
Till bared bones, at last they leave behind,
And seek elsewhere, some fatter food to find.
Even so I see, where wealth does wax at will,
And gold does grow, to heaps of great increase:
There friends resort, and profering friendship still,
Full thick they throng, with never ceasing prease.
And slily make, a show of true intent,
when naught but guile, and inward hate is meant:
For when mischaunce, shall change such wealth to want,
They pack them thence, to place of richer haunt.
FINIS.
My luck is loss.
50. Amantium irae amoris redinte gratio est.
IN going to my naked bed, as one that would have slept,
I heard a wife sing to her child, that long before had wept:
She sighed sore, and sang full sweet, to bring the babe to rest,
That would not cease, but cried still, in sucking at her breast.
She was full weary of her watch and grieved with her child,
She rocked it, and rated it, till that on her it smilde:
Then did she say, now have I found, this Proverb true to prove,
The falling out of faithful friends, renuyng is of love
Then took I paper, pen and Ink, this Proverb for to write,
In register for to remain, of such a worthy wight:
As she proceeded thus in song, unto her little brat,
Much matter uttered she of weight, in place where as she sat.
And proved plain, there was no beast, nor creature bearing life,
Could well be known to live in love, without discord and strife:
Then kissed she her little babe, and swear by God above,
The falling out of faithful friends, renuyng is of love.
She said that neither King ne Prince, ne Lord could live a right,
Until their puissance they did prove, their manhood and their might:
when manhood shall be matched so, that fear can take no place,
Then weary works make warriors, each other to embrace.
And leaued their force that failed them, which did consume the rout,
That might before have lived their time, and Nature out:
Then did she sing, as one that thought, no man could her reprove,
The falling out of faithful friends, renuyng is of love.
She said she saw no fish ne foul, nor beast within her haunt,
That met a stranger in their kind, but could give it a taunt:
Since flesh might not endure, but rest must wrath succeed,
And force the fight to fall to play, in pasture where they feed.
So noble Nature can well end, the work she has begone,
And bridle well that will not cease, her tragedy in some:
Thus in song she often rehearst, as did her well behoue,
The falling out of faithful friends, renuyng is of love.
I marvel much pardy quoth she, for to behold the rout,
To see man, woman, boy and beast, to toss the world about:
Some kneel, some couche, some beck, some check, and some ca^ smothly smile,
And some embrace others in arm, and there think many a wile.
Some stand a loofe at cap, and knee, some humble and some stout,
Yet are they never friends in deed, until they once fall out:
Thus ended she her song, and said before she did remove,
The falling out of faithful friends, renuyng is of love.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

51. Think to dye.
THe life is long, which lothsomely do last,
The doleful days, draw slowly to their date:
The present pangues, and painful plagues forepast,
Yeldes grief aye green, to stablish his estate,
So that I feel in this great storm and strife,
That death is sweet, that shortneth such a life.
And by the stroke, of this strange overthrow,
All which conflict, in thraldom I was thrust:
The Lord be praised, I am well taught to know,
From whence man came, and eke whereto he must.
And by the way, upon how feeble force,
His term does stand, till death does end his course.
The pleasant years, that seems so sweetly run,
The merry days to end, so fast that fleet:
The joyful wights, of which days draws so soon,
The happy hours, which more do miss then meet:
Do all consume, as snow against the Sun,
And death makes end of all that life begun.
Since death shall dure, till all the world be waste,
what means man, to dread Death then so sore?
As man might make, that life should always last,
without regard, the Lord has led before.
The dance of Death, which all must run on row,
The hour wherein, only himself does know.
If man would mind, what burdens life does bring.
what grievous crimes, to God he does commit:
what plagues, what peril thereby spring,
with no sure hour, in all his day to sit.
He would sure think, as with great cause I do,
The day of death, is happier of the two.
Death is the door, whereby we draw to joy,
Life is the lack, that drowneth all in pain:
Death is so dole, it seaseth all away,
Life is so lend, that all it yeeldes is vain.
And as by life in bondage man is brought,
Even so by Death, is freedom likewise wrought.
wherefore with Paul, let all men wish and pray,
To be dissolved, of this foul fleshly mass:
Or at the least, be armed against the day,
That they be found, good soldiers pressed to pass.
From life to death, from death to life again,
And such a life, as ever shall remain.
FINIS.
D. S.

51. If thou desire to live in quiet rest, Give ear and see, but say the best.
IF thou delight, in quietness of life,
Desire to shun, from braules, debate and strife:
To live in love with God, with friend and fo,
In rest shall sleep, when others can not so.
Give ear to all, yet do not all believe,
And see the end, and then do sentence give:
But say for truth, of happy lives assinde,
The best has he, that quiet is in mind.
FINIS.
W. Hunis.

52. Being forsaken of his friend, he complayneth.
WHy should I linger long to live,
In this disease of fantasy:
Since Fortune does not cease to give,
Things to my mind most contrary.
And at my joys does lowre and frown,
Till she has turned them vpsidowne.
A friend I had to me most dear,
And of long time faithful and just:
There was no one, my heart so near,
Nor one in whom I had more trust.
whom now of late, without cause why,
Fortune has made my enemy.
The grass me thinks should grow in Sky,
The Stars unto the earth cleave fast:
The water stream should pass awrie,
The winds should leave their strength of blast.
The Sun and Moon by one assent,
Should both forsake the firmament.
The fish in air should fly with finne,
The fowls in flood, should bring forth fry:
All things me thinks should erst begin,
To take their course unnaturally,
Before my friend should alter so,
without a cause to be my foe.
But such is Fortunes hate I say,
Such is his will on me to wreake:
Such spite he has at me always,
And ceasseth not my heart to break*
with such despite of cruelty,
wherefore then longer live should I.
FINIS.
E. S.

45. Prudence. The history of Damacles, and Dionise.
WHo so is set in Princely throne, and craves rule to bear,
Is still beset on every side, with peril and with fear:
High trees by stormy winds are shakt, and rent up from the ground,
And flashly flackes of lightning flames, on turrets do rebound.
When little shrubes in safety lurk, in covert all allow,
And freshly flourish in their kind, what ever wind do blow,
The cruel king of Scisile: who fearing Barbares hands:
was wont to singe his beard himself, with coal and fire brandes,
Has taught us this, the proof whereof, full plainly we may see,
Was never thing more lively touched, to show it so to be:
This king did seem to Damacles, to be the happiest wight,
Because he thought none like to him, in power or in might.
who did alone so far excel, the rest in his degree,
As does the Sun in brightness clear, the darkest star we see:
will thou (then said this cruel king) prove this my present state,
Possess thou shall this seat of mine and so be fortunate.
Full gladly then this Damacles, this proferd honor took,
And shooting at a Princely life, his quiet rest forsook*
In honors seat then was he plast, according to his will,
Forthwith a banquet was prepared, that he might feast his fill.
Nothing did want wherein it was thought, that he could take delight,
To feed his eye, to fill his mouth, or please the appetite:
Such store of plate, I think in Greece, there scarsly was so much,
His seruitures did Angels seem, their passing shape was such.
No dainty dish but there it was, and thereof was such store.
That through out Greece so Princely cheer, was never seen before:
Thus while in pomp and pleasures seat, this Damacles was plast,
And did begin with gladsome heart, each dainty dish to taste.
At length by chance cast up his eyes, and began the house to view,
And saw a sight that him enforst, his Princely state to rue:
A sword forsooth with downward poinct, that no stronger thread,
Then one horse hear that peised it, direct upon his head.
Wherewith he was so sore amas'd, and shook in every part,
As though the sword that hong above, had stroke him to the heart:
Then all their pleasures took their leave, and sorrow came in place,
His heavy heart the tears declard, that trickled down his face.
And then forthwith with sobbing voice, besought the king of grace,
That he would license him with speed, to depart out of that place*
And said that he full long enough, had tried now with fear,
What it is to be a happy man, and princely rule to bear.
This deed of thine oh Dionise, deserves immortal fame,
This deed shall always live with praise, though thou did live with shame
Whereby both kings be put in mind, their dangers to be great,
And subjects be forbid to climb, high steps of honors seat.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

55. Fortitude. A young man of Aegipt and Valerian.
Each one deserves great praise to have, but yet not like I think,
Both he that can sustain the yoke of pains, and does not shrink
And he whom Cupids covert craft can nothing move at all,
Into the hard and tangled knots of Venus snares to fall.
Besturre you then who so delights, in virtues race to run,
The flying boy with bow ibent, by strength to overcome:
As one did once when he was young, and in his tender days,
Whose stout and noble deed of his, has got immortal praise.
The wicked Romans did pursue, the silly Christians than,
What time Valerian Emperor was, a wicked cruel man:
who spared not with bloody draughtes, to quench his own desire,
Dispatching all that stuck to Christ, with hot consuming fire.
At length a man of tender years, was brought before his sight,
Such one as nature seemed to make, a witness of her might:
For every part so well was set, that nothing was depraved.
So that the cruel king himself, would gladly him have saved.
So loath he was to see a work, so rare of natures power,
So finely built, so suddenly destroyed within an hour:
Then means he sought to overcome, or win him at the lest,
To slip from Christ, whom he before, had earnestly professed:
A bed prepared, so finely dect, such diverse pleasant smells,
That well it might appear a place, where pleasure only dwells:
By him he laid a naked wench, a Venus darling sure,
With sugared speech and lovely toys, that might his mind allure.
such wanton lovers as these he thought, might easly him entise.
Which things he knew with lusty youth, had always been in prise:
such ways I think the Gods them selves, could have invented none.
For flattering Venus ouercomes, the senses euerychone.
And he himself was even at point, to Venus to consent,
Had his stout and manly mind, resisted his intent:
When he perceived his flesh to yield, to pleasure not wanton toys,
And was by slight almost provoked, to cast of Venus joys.
More cruel to himself then those, that glad would him undo,
With bloody tooth, his tender tongue, bit quite and clean in two:
Thus was the pain so passing great, of this his bloody bit,
That all the fire and carnal lust, was quenched every whit.
Do ill and all thy pleasures then, full soon will pass away,
But yet the shame of those thy deeds, will more decay:
Do well, and though thy pains be great, yet soon each one will cease,
But yet, the praise of those thy deeds, will evermore increase.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

56. Justice, Zaleuch and his son.
LEt rulers make most perfect laws, to rule both great and small,
If they themselves obey them not, it booteth not at all:
As laws be naught but rulers dome, containyng equal might,
So rulers should be speaking Ladies, to rule by line of right.
Zaleuch the Prince of Locrine once, appointed by decree,
Each lecherer should be punished, with loss of either eye:
His son by chance offended first, which when his father saw,
Lord God how earnest then was he, to execute the law.
Then ran the people all by flocks, to him with weeping eyes,
Not one among the rout there was, but pardon, pardon cries:
By whose outcries and earnest suit, his son in hope did stand,
That he thereby should then obtain, some pardon at his hand.
But all in vain, for he is found, to be the man he was,
And makes have so much the more, to have the law to pass:
The people yet renewed their suit, in hope of some relief,
Whose faces all besprent with tears, did testify their grief.
And cried all for pities sake, yield now to our request,
If all you will not clean remit, yet ease the pain at least:
Then somewhat was the father moved, with all the peoples voice,
And every man did give a shoute, to show they did rejoice.
well then (quoth he) it shall be thus, the law shall be fulfilde,
And yet my son shall favor have, according as you wild:
One eye of his shall be pulde out, thus has his lewdness got,
And likewise so shall one of mine, though I deserve it not.
This word no sooner was pronounced, but strait the deed was done,
two eyes, no more were left, between the father and the son:
Say now who can, and on my faith Appollo he shall be,
UUas he more gentle father lo? or iuster judge trow ye.
this man would not his laws belike, the webbes the spiders weue,
UUherein they lurk when they intend, the simple to deceive:
UUherewith small flies full soon be caught, and tangled ere they wist,
UUhen great ones fly and escape away, and break them as they list.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

57. Temperaunce* Spurina and the Roman Ladies.
IF nature bear thee so great love, that she in thee have beauty plast,
Full hard it is as we do prove, to keep the body clean and chaste:
Twixt comeliness and chastity,
A deadly strife is thought to be.
For beauty which some men suppose, to be as tware a golden ill,
Provoke strife and many foes, that seek on her to work her will:
Assaults to towns if many make,
No town so strong but may be take.
And this Spurina witness can, who did for beauty bear the bell,
So clean a wight so comely made, no dame in Rome but loved well:
Not one could cool her hot desire,
So burning was the flame of fire.
Like as when bait cast in the flood forthwith does cause the fishes come,
That pleasauntly before did play, now presently to death to run:
For when they see the bait to fall,
Straight way they swallow hook and all.
So when Spurina they did see, to him they flocked out of hand,
So happiest dame was thought to be, that in his favor most did stand:
Not knowing under sweet deceits,
How Venus hides her poisoned baits.
But when he saw them thus to range, whom love had linked in his chain,
This means he sought for to assuage, these Ladies of their grievous pain:
His shape entending to disgrace,
UUith many wounds be scorcht his face.
By which his deed it came to pass, that he that seemed an angel bright,
Even now so clean disfigured was, that he became a loathsome wight:
And rather had he be foul and chaste,
Then fair, and filthy joys to taste.
What pen can write, or tongue express, that worthy praises of this deed,
Me think that God can do no less, then grant him in heaven for his meede:
UUho for to save himself upright,
Himself has first destroyed quite.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

58. A branch of herbs and flowers.
IF that each flower, the Gods have framed, or shapt by sacred skill,
UUhere as I would (no wrong to wish) and mine to wear at will
Or else each tree, with lusty top, would lend me leave to love.
UUith sprigs displaied to spread my suit, a wayling heart to prove.
Upon my helm some should you see, my head advanced hye.
Some slip for solace there to set, and wear the same would I:
Yet would I not for great delight, the Daises strange desire,
The Lilly would not like my lust, nor Rose would I require.
The Marigolde might grow for me, Rosemarie well might rest,
The Fenell to, that is more fit: for some unfriendly gest:
Nor Cowslops would I crave at all, sometime they seem too coye,
Some ioly youth the Gelliflower, esteems for his joy.
The Lauender sometimes aloft, allures the lookers eyes,
The Paunsie shall not have the praise, where I may give the prise.
And thus no flower my fancy feeds, or likes so my lust,
As that I may subject my self, to toys of tickle trust.
For flowers though they be fair and fresh, of sent excelling sweet,
Yet grow they on the ground below, we tread them with our feet:
And shall I then go stoop to such? or else go seek to chose,
Shall flowers enforce me once to faune, for fear of friends or foes.
Yet rather yield I to the right, as reason has assignd,
Mine author said there was no salve, in flowers for me to find:
And yet perhaps some Tree there is, to shroud me from the shower,
That with her arms may salve the soul, that yields to her power.
UUhere I may find some pleasant shade, to salve me from the sun,
Each thing we see that reason has, unto the Trees do run:
Both men and beasts such fowls as flies, the treasures are the Trees,
And for my part when branches fall, I wish no other fees.
But when that storms beset me round, such succor God me send,
That I may find a friendly Tree, that will me well defend:
No Tree there is which yeeldes no good, to some that does it seek,
And as they are of diverse kinds, their uses are unlike.
The Ewe Tree serve the Bowyers turn, the Ash the Coupers art.
The puissant Oak does make the post, the Pine some other part:
The Elm does help to hide the birds, in weary UUinters night,
The Briers I guess are nothing worth, they serve but for despite.
The willow wished I far from hence, good will deserve no wrong,
The Sallow well may serve their states, that sing so sad a song:
The Box and Beeche each for himself, above the rest does boste,
The Eglantine for pleasure often, is pricked upon the post.
The Hauthorne is so sad in price, the Baies do bear the bell,
And that these Baies did bring no bliss, I like it not so well:
As erst I do that seemly Tree, by which those bays I found,
And wherewithal unwittingly, I took so great a wound,
As if the tree by which I lean, does lend me no relief,
There is no help but down I fall, so great is grown my grief:
And therefore at the last I crave, this favor for to find,
when every tree that here is told, begins to grow unkind.
The B. for beauty whom I boste, and shall above the rest,
That B. may take me to her trust, for B. does please me best:
It likes me well to walk the way, where B. does keep her bower,
And when it raynes to B. I run, to save me from the shower:
This branch of B. which here I mean, to keep and chiefly crave,
At beck unto this B. I bow, to serve that beauty brave:
What shall I say the time does pass, the tale to tedious is,
though soth to leave, yet leave I must, and say no more but this,
I wish this B. I might embrace, when as the same I see,
A league for life then I require, between this B. and me?
And though unworthy, yet good will, does work the way herein,
And B. has brought the same above, which beauty did begin.
Finis.
59. In commendation of Music.
WHere griping grief the heart would wound, and doleful dumpes the mind
oppress,
There Music with her silver sound, is wont with speed to give redress
Of troubled minds for every sore, sweet Music has a salve in store,
In joy it makes our mirth abound, in grief it cheeres our heavy sprites,
The careful head relief has found, by Musickes pleasant sweet delites,
Our senses, what should I say more, are subject unto Musickes lore.
The Gods by Music has their pray, the foul therein does joy,
For as the Roman Poets say, in seas whom Pirates would destroy:
A Dolphin saude from death most sharp, Arion playing on his Harp,
Of heavenly gift, that turns the mind like as starne does rule the ship:
Oh Music whom the Gods assignde to comfort man, who^ cares would nip,
Since thou both man and beast do move, what wisman then will thee reprove.
FINIS.
60. A Dialogue between the Author and his Eye.
Aucthour. MY Eye why do thou light on that, which was not thine?
UUhy have thou with thy sight, thus slain an heart of mine*
O thou unhappy Eye, would God thou had been blind,
UUhen first thou did her spy, for whom this grief I find.

Eye. UUhy sir it is not I, that do deserve such blame,
Your fancy, not your Eye, is causer of the same:
For I am ready pressed, as Page that serves your ease:
To search what thing is best, that might your fancy please.

Aucthour. I sent thee forth to see, but not so long to bide,
Though fancy went with thee, thou were my fancies guide:
Thy message being done, thou might return again,
So Cupid Venus son, no whit my heart should pain.

Eye. Where fancy bears sway, there Cupid will be bold,
And reason flies away, from Cupids shaft of gold:
If you find cause thereby, some deal of painful smart,
Alas blame not your eye, but blame consent of heart,

Aucthour. My heart must I excuse, and lay the fault on thee,
Because thy sight did choose, when heart from thought was free:
Thy fight thus brought consent, consent has bred my grief,
And grief bids be content, with sorrow for relief.

FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

61. Finding no joy, he desires death.
THe Connie in his Cave, the Ferret does annoye,
And fliyng thence his life to save, himself does he destroy:
His berrie round about beset, with Hunters snares,
So that when he to escape starts out, is caught therein unawares,
Like choice poor man have I, to bide and rest in Love,
Or else from thence to fly, as bad a death to prove.
I see in Love no rest, unkindness does pursue,
To rent his heart out of his breast, which is a Lover true:
And if from Love I starte, as one that Love forsakes,
Then pensive thoughts my heart does pearce, and so my life it takes:
Then thus to fly or bide, hard is the choice to choose,
Since death has camp'd, and trenched each side, and says life now refuse.
Content I am therefore, my life therein to spend,
And death I take a salve for sore, my weary days to end:
And thus I you require, that faithful Love profess,
UUhen carcass cased in his Chest, and body laid on hearse.
Your brinish tears to save, such as my corse shall move,
And therewith write upon my grave, behold the force of Love.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Hope well and have well.
IN hope the shipman hoyseth sail, in hope of passage good,
In hope of health the sick man, death suffer loss of blood:
In hope the prisoner linckt in chains, hopes liberty to find,
Thus hope breeds health and health breeds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope desire gets victory, in hope great comfort springes,
In hope the Lover lives in joys, he fears no dreadful stinges*
In hope we live and may abide, such storms as are assignde,
Thus hope breeds health, and health breeds ease, to every troubled mind.
In hope we easily suffer harm, in hope of future time,
In hope of fruit, the pains seems sweet, that to the tree does clime:
In hope of Love, such glory grows, as now by proof I find,
That hope breeds health, and health breeds ease, to every trobled mind.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

He requesteth some freendly comfort. affirming his constancy.
THe mountains hie whose lofty topps, does meet the hautie sky
The craggy rock that to the Sea, free passage does deny:
The aged Oak that does resist, the force of blustering blast,
The pleasant herb that every where, a fragrant smell does cast.
The Lions force whose courage stout, declares a princelike might,
The Eagle that for worthiness, is borne of kings in fight:
The Serpent eke whose poyfoned jaws, does belch out venime vile,
The loathsome Tode that shunneth light, and lives in exile.
These these I say, and thousands more, by tract of time decay,
And like to time do quite consume, and vade from time to clay:
But my true heart and service vowde, shall last time out of mind,
And still remain as thine by dome, as Cupid has assignde.
My faith lo here I vow to thee, my troth thou know right well,
My goods, my friends, my life is thine, what need I more to tell?
I am not mine but thine I vow, thy hestes I will obey,
And serve thee as a servant ought, in pleasing if I may.
And since I have no flying wings, to see thee as I wish,
Ne sins to cut the silver streams, as does the gliding fish:
Wherefore leave now forgetfulness, and send again to me,
And strain thy Azured veins to write, then I may greeting see.
And thus fare well more dear to me, then chiefest friend I have,
UUhose love in heart I mind to shrine, till death his see do crave.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

He complayneth his mishap.
SHall rigor reign where ruth has run, shall fancy now forsake?
Shall fortune lose that favor won, shall not your anger slake?
Shall hateful heart be had in you, that friendly did pretend,
Shall slipper thought and faith untrue, that heart of yours defend?
Shall Nature show your beauty fair, that gentle seems to be?
shall frowardness your fancies heir, be of more force then she?
shall now disdain the dragge of Death, direct and lead the way?
shall all the Impes upon the earth, rejoice at my decay?
Shall this the service of my youth, have such reward at last?
shall I receive rigor of ruthe, and be from favor cast?
shall I therefore berent my hears, with wightes that wish to dye;
Or shall I bathe my self with tears, to feed your fickle eye.
No, no, I shall in pain lie still, with Turtle Dove most true,
And vow my self to wit and will, their counsels to ensue:
Good Ladies all that lovers be, and that to be pretend,
Give place to wit, let reason seem, your enemies to defend.
Least that you think as I have thought, your self to strive in vain,
And so to be in thraldom brought, with me to suffer pain.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

No foe to a flatterer.
I Would it were not as I think, I would it were not so,
I am not blind although I wink, I feel what winds do blow:
I know where craft with smiling cheer, creepes into boldned breast
I hear how feigned speeches speaks fair, where hatred is possessed.
I see the serpent lie and lurk, under the green allow.
I see him watch a time to work, his poison to bestow.
In friendly look such fraud is found, as faith for fear is fled,
And friendship has receiu'de such wound, as he is almost dead:
And hateful heart with malice great, so boyles in cankred mind,
That flattery flearing in the face, had almost made me blind.
But now I see all is not gold, that glittereth in the eye,
Nor yet such friends as they profess, as now by proof I try.
Though secret spite by craft, have made a coat of Panters skin,
And thinks to find me in the shade, by sleight to wrap me in:
Yet God be praised my eye is clear, and can behold the Sun,
UUhen falsehood dare not once appear, to end that he begun.
Thus time shall try the thing amiss, which God save shortly send,
And turn the heart that feigned is, to be a faithful friend.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

His comparison of Love.
THe spider with great skill, does travel day by day,
His limms no time lie still, to set his house in stay:
And when he has it wrought, thinking therein to reign,
A blast of wind unthought, does drive it down again.
The proof whereof is true, to make his work endure,
He pains himself a new, in hope to dwell more sure:
And in some secret place, a corner of a wall,
He frames himself apace, to build and rest withal.
His pleasure sweet to stay, when he to rest is bent,
An ugly shamble Flee, approaches to his Tent:
And there intendes by force, his labors great to win,
Or else to yield his corse, by fatal death therein.
Thus is the spiders nest, from time to time thrown down,
And he to labor pressed, with endless pain unknown:
So such as lovers be, like travel do attain,
Those endless works ye see, are always full of pain.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

A Lovers joy.
I Have no joy, but dream of joy, and joy to think on joy,
A joy I withstoode, to finish mine annoye:
I hate not without cause alas, yet love I know not why,
I thought to hate, I cannot hate, although that I should dye.
A foe most sweet, a friend most sower, I joy for to embrace;
I hate the wrong, and not the wight, that workt my woeful case:
What thing it is I know not I, but yet a thing there is,
That in my fancy still persuades, there is no other bliss.
The joys of life, the pangues of death, it makes me feel each day,
But life nor death, this humor can, devise to wear away:
Feign would I dye, but yet in death, no hope I see remains,
And shall I live? since life I see, a course of sorry pains.
UUhat is it then that I do seek, what joy would I aspire,
A thing that is divine belike, too high for man's desire.
FINIS.
F. K.

Evil to him that evil thinks.
THe subtle s^ily slightes, that worldly men do work,
The freendly shows, under whose shade, most craft does often lurk*
Enforces me alas, with yernfull voice to say,
UUoe worth the wily heads, that seeks the simple man's decay.
The bird that dreades no guile, is soonest caught in snare.
Each gentle heart deuoyde of craft, is soonest brought to care:
Good Nature soonest trapt, which gives me cause to say,
woe worth the wily heads, that seek the simple man's decay.
I see the serpent vile, that lurkes under the green,
How subtly he shrowdes himself, that he may not be seen:
And yet his fosters bane, his learing looks bewray,
woe worth the wily heads that seeks, the simple man's decay.
Woe worth the feyning looks, on favor that we do wait,
woe worth the feyned friendly heart, that harbors deep deceit:
woe worth the Uipers brood, oh thrice woe worth I say,
All worldly wily heads, that seeks the simple man's decay.
FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

He assures his constancy.
WIth painted speech I list not prove, my cunning for to try,
Nor yet will use to fill my pen, with guilefull flattery:
UUith pen in hand, and heart in breast, shall faithful promise make
To love you best, and serve you most, by your great virtues sake.
And sure dame Nature has you decked, with gifts above the rest,
Let not Disdain a harbor find, within your noble breast:
For Love has led his Law a like, to men of each degree,
so that the Beggar with the Prince, shall Love as well as he.
I am no Prince, I must confess, nor yet of Princes line,
Nor yet a brutish Beggar borne, that feeds among the swine:
The fruit shall try the tree at last, the blossoms good or no,
Then do not judge of me the worse, till you have tried me so.
As I deserve, so then reward, I make you judge of all,
If I be false in word or deed, let Lightning thunder fall:
And furies Fell with frantic fittes, bereave and stay my breathe,
For an example to the rest, if I shall break my faith.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Complaining of his mishap to his friend, he complains wittely.
A. THe fire shall freeze, the frost shall fry the frozen mountains hie,

B. what strange things has dame natures force, to turn her course awrie:

A. My love has me left, and taken a new man.


B. This is not strange, it happes often times, the truth to scan.


A. The more is my pain,

B. her love then refrain.


A. who thought she would flit,

B. each one that has wit:

A. Is this not strange*

B. light love will change.


A By skillful means I here reclayme, to stoop unto my lure,

B. Such haggard Hawks will soar away, of them who can be sure:

A. With silver belles and hoode, my joy was her to deck.


B. She was full gorgde, she would the sooner give the check.


A. the more is my pain,

B. her love then refrain,

A. UUho thought she would flit,

B. each one that has wit:

A. Is not this strange,

B. light love will change.


A. Her chirping lips should chirpe to me, sweet words of her desire,

B. such chirping birds who ever saw, to preach still on one Brire:

A. She said she loved me best, and would not till she dye,

B. She said in words, she thought it not, as time does try.


A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain,

A. UUho thought she would flit,

B. each one that has wit:

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.


A. Can no man win a woman so, to make her Love endure,

B. To make the Fox his wiles to leave, what man will put in ure:

A. why then there is no choice, but all women will change,

B. As men do use, so some women do Love to raunge.


A. The more is my pain,

B. her Love then refrain,

A. who thought she would flit,

B. each one that has wit:

A. Is not this strange,

B. light Love will change.

A. Since slipper gain falls to my lot, farewell that gliding pray,

B. Since that the Dice does run awrie, betimes leave of thy play:

A. I will no more lament, the thing I may not have,

B. Then by exchange the loss to come, all shall thou save.


A. Love will I refraigne,

B. thereby thou shall gain,

A. with loss I will leave,

B. she will thee deceive,

A. That is not strange,

B. then let her raunge.


FINIS.
M. Edwardes.

No pains comparable to his attempt.
LIke as the doleful Dove, delights alone to be,
And does refuse the bloumed branche, choosing the leaflesse tree:
whereon wailyng his chance, with bitter tears besprent,
Does with his bill, his tender breast, often pearse and all to rent.
UUhose grievous groninges tho whose gripes of pinyng pain,
whose ghastly looks, whose bloody streams out flowing from each vain:
UUhose falling from the tree, whose panting on the ground,
Examples be of mine estate, tho there appear no wound.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

He repents his folly.
Alack when I look back, upon my youth that's past,
And deeply ponder youths offense, and youths reward at last:
With sighs and tears I say, O God I not deny,
My youth with folly has deserved, with folly for to dye.
But yet if ever sinful man, might mercy move to ruth,
Good Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth.
In youth I rangde the fields, where vices all did grow,
In youth alas I wanted grace, such vice to overthrow:
In youth what I thought sweet, most bitter now do find,
Thus has the follies of my youth, with folly kept me blind.
Yet as the Eagle castes her bill, whereby her age renueth,
So Lord with mercy do forgive, the follies of my youth.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

No pleasure without some pain.
HOw can the tree, but wast and wither away,
That has not sometime comfort of the Sun:
How can that flower but fade, and soon decay,
That always is with dark clouds run.
Is this a life, nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
What foodlesse beast, can live long in good plight,
Or is it life, where senses there be none:
Or what avails eyes, without their light?
Or else a tongue, to him that is alone.
Is this a life? nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
Whereto serve ears, if that there be no sound,
Or such a head, where no devise does grow*
But all of plaintes, since sorrow is the ground,
Whereby the heart, does pine in deadly woe.
Is this a life, nay death you may it call,
That feels each pain, and knows no joy at all.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

The fruit of feyned friends.
IN choice of friends what hap ha^ I* to choose one of Sirens kind,
Whose harp, whose pipe, whose melody could feed my ears and make me blind:
UUhose pleasant voice made me forget, that in sure trust is great deceit,
In trust I see is treason found, and man to man deceiptfull is.
And where as treasure does abound, of flatterers there do not miss,
UUhose painted speech, and outward show, do seem as friends and be not so.
UUould I have thought in thee to be, the nature of the Crocadill,
UUhich if a man a sleep may see, with bloody thirst desires to kill:
And the^ with tears a while began weep, that death of him thus slain a sleep
O fauell false, thou traitor borne, what mischief more might thou devise:
Then thy dear friend to have in scorn, and him to wound in sundry wise,
UUhich still a friend pretendes to be, and art not so by proof I see.
Fie, fie, upon such treachery. W.H.
If such false ships do haunt the shore,
Strike down the sail and trust no more.
M, Edwardes.

A Dialogue between a Gentleman and his Love.
A. SHall I no way win you, to grant my desire?


B. UUhat woman will grant you, the thing you require?


A. You only to love me, is all that I crave,

B. You only to leave me, is all I would have.


A. My dear alas, now say not so,

B. To love you best, I must say no,

A. Yet will I not flit,

B. then play on the bit:

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrew me than.

A. The swifter I follow, then you fly away,

B. Swift hawks in their flying, often times miss their pray,

A. Yet some kills deadly, that fly to the mark:

B. You shall touch no feather, thereof take no carke,

A. Yet hope shall further my desire:

B. You blow the coals, and raise no fire,

A. Yet will I not flit,

B. then play on the bit:

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrew me than.


A. To love is no danger, where true love is meant.


B. I will love no raunger, least that I repent:

A. My love is no raunger, I make God auow,

B. To trust your smoth sayings, I sure know not how:

A. Most truth I mean, as time shall well try,

B. No truth in men, I often epsy:

A. Yet will I not flit,

B. than play on the bit,

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrew me than.


A. Some women may say nay, and mean love most true,

B. Some women can make fools, of as wisemen as you:

A. In time I shall catch you, I know when and where.


B. I will soon dispatch you, you shall not come there.


A. Some speedes at length, that often have mist,

B. I am well armde, come when you list:

A. Yet will I not flit,

B. then play on the bit,

A. I will,

B. do still,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B. beshrew me than.


A. Yet work your kind kindly, grant me love for love,

B. I will use you friendly, as I shall you prove:

A. Most true you shall find me, I this do protest,

B. Then sure you shall bind me, to grant your request.


A. O happy threede, now have I sponne,

B. You sing before the conquest won.


A. Why then, will you swerve,

B. even as you deserve:

A. Love still,

B. I will,

A. yet kill not,

B. I will not,

A. Make me your man,

B, come to me than.


FINIS.
M, Edwardes.

Exclayming upon his unkind Love, his friend replyeth wittely.
M. WHat death may be, compared to Love?


H. UUhat grief therein, now do thou prove?


M. My pains alas, who can express,

H. I see no cause of heaviness.


M. My Ladies looks, my woe has wrought,

H. Then blame thine eyes, that first has sought*

M. I burn alas, and blow the fire,

H. A fool consumes by his desire.


M. What shall I do than? come out and thou can:

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy:

M. My sugared sweet, is mixed with gall,

H. Thy Lady can not do with all:

M. The more I seek, the less I find,

H. Then strive not with the stream and wind.


M. Her must I love, although I smart,

H. UUith her own sword, thou slayest thy heart:

M. Such pleasant baits, who can refrain,

H. Such baits will sure breed thee great pain.


M. UUhat shall I do than?


H. Come out and thou can,

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.


M. Her golden beams, mine eyes do daze,

H. Upon the Sun, thou may not gaze:

M. She might reward, my cruel smart,

H. She thinks thou hardst a feigned heart.


M. she laughes to hear my woeful cries,

H. Forsake her then, in time be wise:

M. No, no, alas, that may not be,

H. No wiseman then, will pity thee:

M. what shall I do than?


H. Come out and thou can,

M. Alas I die,

H. what remedy.


M. A living death, lo thus I prove,

H. Such are the fruits of froward love:

M. O that I might her love once gain,

H. Thy gain would not, half quite the pain.


M. Her will I love, though she be coye,

H. A fool himself, will still annoye:

M. who will not die, for such a one?


H. Be wise at length, let her alone.


M. I can not do so,

H. then be thy own foe,

M. Alas I dye,

H. what remedy.


FINIS.
E.S.

The complaint of a Lover, wearing Black and Taunie.
A Crown of bays, shall that man wear,
That triumphs over me:
For black and taunie will I wear,
Which mourning colors be.
The more I follow on, the more she fled away,
As Daphne did full long ago, Apollos wishfull pray:
the more my plaintes I resounde, the less she pities me,
The more I sought, the less I found, that mine she meant to be.
Melpomene alas, with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis, woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes bays shall that man wear, that triumphs over me,
For black and taunie will I wear, which mourning colors be.
Droune me you trickling tears, you wailfull wights of woe,
Come help these hands to rent my hears, my rufull hap to show!
Of whom the scorching flames of Love, does feed you see,
Ah a lalalantida my dear Dame, has thus tormented me.
Wherefore you Muses nine, with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me forsaken man:
Then Daphnes bays shall that man wear, that triumphs over me,
For black and taunie will I wear, which mourning colors be.
An Ankers life to lead, with nails to scratch my grave,
where earthly worms on me shall feed, is all the joys I crave:
And hide my self from shame, since that mine eyes do see,
Ah a lalalantida my dear Dame, has thus tormented me.
And all that present be, with doleful tunes help than,
And sing Bis woe worth on me, forsaken man.
FINIS.
E. O.

Findyng no relief, he complayneth thus.
IN quest of my relief, I find distress,
In recompense of Love, most deep disdain:
My langour such as words may not express,
A shower of tears, my watrie eye does rain.
I dream of this, and do define of woe,
I wander in the thoughts of my sweet foe.
I would no peace, the cause of war I fly,
I hope, I fear, I burn, I chill in Frost:
I lie a low, yet mountes my mind on hye,
thus doubtful storms, my troubled thoughts have tossed.
And for my pain, this pleasure do I prove,
I hate my self, and pine in others Love.
The world I graspe, yet hold I naught at all,
At liberty I seem, in prison pent:
I taste the sweet, more sower then bitter gall,
My ship seems sound, and yet her ribs be rent.
And out alas, on Fortune false I cry,
Look what I crave, that still she does deny.
Both life and death, be equal unto me,
I do desire to dye, yet crave I life:
My wits with sundry thoughts do disagree,
My self am with my self at mortal strife.
As warmeth of Sun, does melt the silver snow,
The heat of Love, behold consumes me so.
FINIS.
R. Hill.

Written upon the death of his especial good friend Master John Barnabe, who
departed this life at Bensted, in the County of Southampton. 25. January.
1579. Aeratis. 76.
MIne own good father thou art gone, thine ears are stopped with clay,
Thy ghost is fled, thy body dead, thou hearst not what I say:
Thy dearest friends may sigh and sob, thy children cry and call
Thy wife may wail, and not prevail, nor do the good at all.
Though reason would we should rejoice, and trickling tears restrain,
Yet kindlinesse and friendlinesse, enforce us to complain:
Thy life was good, our loss the more, thy presence cheard our heart,
Thy lack and absence turnde therefore, our solace into smart.
I found thee both a kindly friend, and friendly father too,
Barnabie lacks breath, O cruel death, and could thou part us two:
But death derides my woeful words, and to my saying says,
Thus foolish wight I did but right, I force no friend nor faith.
The Lord of life and Lord of death, my threatening hand did let,
Else when that he in cradell lay, I might have claimd my debt:
His corpse is clad with cloddes of the earth, his soul does soar on hye,
Before the throne of God above, whose servant he did die.
And thou his friend, and she his spouse, and they his children shall,
Behold the father, friend and mate, whose absence greeues you all:
But he nor can, nor will return, to thee, to her, or them,
For heaven is his, he lives in bliss, ye dwell with mortal men.
Ye dwell in dark, and dreadful den, in prison pent are ye,
He lives in light, and all delight, from thraldom frank and free:
wish not that he should come to you, for then ye do him wrong,
But wish that ye may go to him, the blessed saints among*
FINIS.
H. D.

Coelum non solum.
IF care or skill, could conquer vain desire,
Or reasons reigns, my strong affection stay:
Then should my sighs, to quiet breast retire,
And shun such sighs, as secret thoughts bewray,
Uncomely love, which now lurkes in my breast,
Should cease my grief, through wisdoms power oppressed.
But who can leave, to look on Venus face,
Or yeldeth not to Iunos high estate:
What wit so wise, as gives not Pallas place,
These virtues rare, each Gods did yield a mate.
Save her alone, who yet on earth does reign,
whose beauties string, no God can well destraine.
What worldly wight, can hope for heavenly hire,
when only sighs, must make his secret move:
A silent suit, does seeld to grace aspire,
My hapless hap, does roll the restless stone.
Yet Phoebe fair, disdain the heavens above,
To joy on earth, her poor Edimions love.
Rare is reward, where none can justly crave,
For chance is choice, where reason makes no claim:
Yet luck sometimes, dispairing souls does save,
A happy star, made Giges joy attain.
A slavish Smith, of rude and rascal race,
Found means in time, to gain a Goddess grace.
Then lofty Love, thy sacred sails advance,
My sighing seas, shall flow with streams of tears:
Amidst disdain, drive forth my doleful chance,
A valiant mind, no deadly danger fears.
who loves a loft, and sets his heart on hye,
Deserves no pain, though he do pyne and dye.
FINIS.
E.O.

A Lover rejected, complains.
THe trickling tears, that falls along my cheeks,
The secret sighs that shows my inward grief:
The present pains perforce, that Love aye seeks,
Bids me renew my cares without relief.
In woeful song, in dole displaie,
My pensive heart for to bewraie.
Bewraie thy grief, thy woeful heart with speed,
Resign thy voice, to her that causde thy woe:
with irksome cries, bewail thy late done deed,
For she thou love, is sure thy mortal foe.
And help for thee, there is none sure,
But still in pain thou must endure.
The stricken Dear, has help to heal his wound*
The haggard Hawk, with toil is made full tame:
The strongest Tower, the Canon lays on ground,
The wisest wit, that ever had the fame.
was thrall to Love, by Cupids sleightes,
then way my cause, with equal weightes.
She is my joy, she is my care and woe,
She is my pain, she is my ease therefore:
She is my death, she is my life also,
She is my salve, she is my wounded sore.
In fine, she has the hand and knife,
that may both save and end my life.
And shall I live on earth to be her thrall?
And shall I sue and serve her all in vain?
And kiss the steps that she lets fall,
And shall I pray the Gods to keep the pain?
From her, that is so cruel still,
No, no, on her work all your will.
And let her feel, the power of all your might,
And let her have her most desire with speed:
And let her pine away, both day and night,
And let her move, and none lament her need.
And let all those that shall her see,
Despise her state, and pity me.
FINIS.
E.O.

Not attaining to his desire, he complayneth.
I Am not as I seem to be, nor when I smile, I am not glad,
A thrall although you count me free, I most in mirth, most pensive sad:
I smile to shade my bitter spite, as Haniball that saw in sight,
His country soil with Carthage town, by Roman force defaced down.
And Caesar that preserved was, with noble Pompeis princely head,
As twere some Judge to rule the case, a flood of tears he seemd to shed:
Although in deed it sprung of joy, yet other thought it was annoye,
Thus contraries be used I find, of wise to cloak the covert mind.
I Haniball that smiles for grief, and let you Caesar's tears suffice,
The one that laughes at his mischief, the other all for joy that cries:
I smile to see me scorned so, you weep for joy to see me woe,
And I in heart by Love slain dead, presents a place of Pompeis head.
O cruel hap, and hard estate, that forces me to love my foe,
Accursed be so foul a fate, my choice for to prefixe it so:
So long to fight with secret sore, and find no secret salve therefore,
Some purge their pain by plaint I find, but I in vain do breath my wind.
FINIS.
E.Ox.

A young Gentleman willing to travel into forreygne parts being entreated to
stay in England: Wrote as follows.
WHo seeks the way to win renown,
Or flies with wings of high desire
Who seeks to wear the Laurel crown,
Or has the mind that would aspire,
Let him his native soil eschew
Let him go range and seek anewe.
Each hautie heart is well content,
With every chance that shall betide
No hap can hinder his intent.
He steadfast stands though Fortune slide:
The Sun says he does shine as well
Abroad as erst where I did dwell.
In change of streams each fish can live,
Each foul content with every air:
The noble mind each where can thrive,
And not be drowned in deep despair:
Wherefore I judge all lands alike
To hautie hearts that Fortune seek.
To toss the Sea^ some thinke^ a toil,
Some think it strange abroad to rome,
Some think it grief to leave their soil
Their parents, kinsfolks, and their home.
Think so who list, I like it not,
I must abroad to try my Lot.
UUho lust at home at carte to drudge
And carcke and care for worldly trashe:
with buckled shoe let him go trudge,
In stead of lance a whip to swash.
A mind that's base himself will show,
A carrion sweet to feed a Crow,
If Jason of that mind had binne,
Or wandering Prince that came from Greece.
The golden fleece had binne to win,
And Pryams Troy had been in bliss,
Though dead in deeds and clad in clay,
Their worthy Fame will nere decay.
The worthies nine that wear of mightes,
By travail wanne immortal praise:
If they had lived like Carpet knights,
(Consuming ydely) all their days,
Their praises had with them been dead,
where now abroad their Fame is spread.
FINIS.
No joy comparable to a quiet mind.
IN loathsome race, pursued by slippery life,
whose sugared guile, does glistering joy present:
The careful ghost, oppressed sore with strife,
Yeeldes ghostly groans, from painful passions sent.
The sinful flesh, that bears him here in vewe,
In steed of life, does dreadful death pursue.
The way he sees, by touch of merits grace,
Wherein to run, alas he gladly would:
But filthy flesh, his wretched dwelling place,
Does so rebel, at that which do he should.
That silly soul, who feels his heavy need,
Can only will, but naught perform in deed.
Thy will through grace, does often desire the good,
But all in vain, for that the fleshly foe:
Yeeldes forth such fruits, as sins has bred in bud,
And blindly suckes, the sap of deadly woe.
Esteeming shows of fickle fancies known,
And scorning fruit by grace, eternal sown.
Though eye does see, that death does swallow all,
Both life and lust, and every sound delight:
Yet wretched flesh, through sin is made so thrall,
That naught it marks, apparent things in sight.
That might him train, to care of better grace,
Both does his bale, with greedy lust embrace.
Then since desert, and al things wear away,
That naught remain, but fruit of grace or sin:
God build in us, such conscience, as can say,
This fruit not mine, but sin that dwelt in me,
For why to sin, I daily do in sight,
that unto Christ, I may revive my spright.
quod Candishe.

FINIS.
That Love is required by disdain.
IN search of things that secret are, my mated muse began,
What it might be, molested most the head and mind of man:
The bending brow of Princes face, to wrath that does attend,
Or want of Parents, wife or child, or loss of faithful friend.
the roaring of the Canon shot, that makes the piece to shake,
Or terror such as mighty Jove, from heaven above can make:
All these in fine may not compare, experience so does prove,
Unto the torments sharp and strange, of such as be in Love.
Love looks a loft, and laughes to scorn, all such as grief anoy,
The more extreme their passions be, the greater is his joy:
thus love as victor of the field, triumphs above the rest,
And joys to see his subjects lie, with living death in breast.
But dire disdain letts drive a shaft, and gauls this bragging fool,
He pluckes his plumes, vnbe^ds his bow, and setts him new to school
Whereby this boy that bragged late, as conqueror over all,
Now yeldes himself unto disdain his vassal and his thrall.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Of a contented state.
IN wealth we see some wealthy men, abound in wealth most wealthely,
In wealth we see those men again, in wealth do live most wretchedly:
And yet of wealth having more store,
Then erst of wealth they had before.
These wealthy me^ do seem to want, they seem to want that most they have,
The more posses, the more they crave, the more they crave, the greater store:
That most they have, they think but skant,
Yet not content, woe be therefore.
The simple men that less wealth have, with lesser wealth we see content:
Content are they twixt wealth and scathe, a life to lead indifferent:
And thus of wealth, these men have more,
Then those of which we spoke before.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Being disdayned, he complayneth.
IF friendless faith? if guiltless thought may shield?
If simple truth, that never meant to swerve?
If dear desire, accepted fruit do yield,
If greedy lust, in loyal life do searue.
then may my plaint, bewail my heavy harm,
That seeking calm, have stumbled on the storm.
My wonted cheer, Eclipsed by the cloud,
Of deep disdain, through error of report,
If weary woe, enwrapped in the shroude,
Lies slain by tongue, of the unfriendly sort.
Yet heaven and earth, and all that nature wrought,
I call to vow of my unspotted thought.
No shade I seek, in part to shield my tainte,
But simple truth, I hunt no other suit:
On that I gape, the issue of my plainte,
If that I quayle, let justice me confute.
If that my place, amongst the giltlesse sort,
Repay by doom, my name and good report.
Go heavy verse, pursue desired grace,
Where pity shrinde, in cell of secret breast,
Awaites my have, the rightful lot to place,
And lothes to see, the guiltless man oppressed.
Whose virtues great, has crownde her more with fame,
then kingly state, though largely shine the same.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Of the mean estate.
THe higher that the Cedar tree, unto the heavens do grow,
the more in dangers is the top, when sturdy winds began blow:
Who judges then in Princely throne, to be deuoide of hate,
Does not yet know what heaps of ill, lies hid in such estate.
Such dangers great, such gripes of mind, such toil do they sustain,
that often times of God they wish, to be vnkingd again.
For as the huge and mighty rocks, withstand the raging seas,
So kingdoms in subjection be, whereas dame Fortune please:
Of brittle joy, of smilyng cheer, of honnie mixed with gall,
Allotted is to every Prince, in freedom to be thrall.
UUhat watches long, what sleeps unsure, what grief and care of mind,
UUhat bitter broils, what endless toils, to kingdoms be assignde.
The subject then may well compare, with Prince for pleasant days,
whose silent night bringes quiet rest, whose steps no storm bewraies:
How much be we then bound to God, who such provision makes,
to lay our cares upon the Prince, thus does he for our sakes,
to him therefore let us lift up our hearts, and pray amain,
that every prince that he has plaste, may long in quiet reign.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Of a contented mind.
WHen all is done and said, in the end thus shall you find,
the most of all does bathe in bliss, that has a quiet mind:
And clear from worldly cares, to deem can be content,
the sweetest time of all this life, in thinking to be spent.
The body subject is, to fickle Fortunes power,
And to a million of mishaps, is casual every hour:
And death in time, does change it to a clodd of clay,
UUhen as the mind which is divine, runs never to decay.
Companion none is like, unto the mind alone,
For many have been harmde by speech, through thinking few or none
Few often times restrains words, but makes no thoughts to cease,
And stay he speaks best that has the skill, when for to hold his peace.
Our wealth leaves us at death, our kinsmen at the grave,
But virtues of the mind, unto the heavens with us have,
wherefore for virtues sake, I can be well content,
the sweetest time of all my life, to deem in thinking spent.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Try before you trust.
TO counsel my estate, abandonde to the spoil,
Of forged friends whose grosest fraud, is set with finest foil:
To verefie true dealing wightes, whose trust no treason treades,
And all too dear th'acquaintance be, of such most harmefull heads.
I am advised thus, who so does friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next he feared, for to become a foe.
To have a feined friend, no peril like I find,
Often flering face may mantell best, a mischief in the mind:
A pair of Angels ears often times, does hide a Serpents heart,
Under whose gripes who so does come, to late bewailes the smart,
wherefore I do advise, who so does friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next, he should become a mortal foe.
Refuse respecting friends, that courtly know to feign,
For gold that winnes for gold, shall lose, the self same friend again:
The quayle needs never fear, the foulers netts to fall,
If he would never bend his ear, to listen to his call.
Therefore trust not to soon, but when you friend, friend so,
As though to morrow next, ye fearde for to become a fo.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

He renounceth all the effects of Love.
LIke as the Heart, that lifts up his ears,
To hear the hounds, that has him in the chase:
Does cast the wind, in dangers and in fears,
UUith flying foot, to pass away apace.
So must I fly, of Love the vain pursuit,
whereof the gain, is lesser then the fruit.
And I also, must loath those learing looks,
UUhere Love does lurk, still with his subtle slight:
with painted mockes, and inward hidden hooks,
To trappe by trust, that lies not in wait.
The end whereof, assay it who so shall,
As sugared smart, and inward bitter gall.
And I must fly such Syrian songs,
Wherewith that Circes, Ulysses did enchaunt:
These willie wattes, I mean with filed tongues,
That hearts of steel have power to daunt:
Who so as Hawk, that stoopeth to their call,
For most deserte, receives least of all.
But woe to me, that first beheld these eyes,
The trappe wherein, I say that I was taken:
An outward salve, which inward me destroys,
Whereto I run, as rat unto her bane.
As to the fish, sometime it does befall,
that with the bait, does swallow hook and all.
UUithin my breast, wherewith I daily fed,
The vain repast, of amorous hot desire:
with loytering lust, so long that has me fed,
Till he has brought me to the flaming fire.
In time as Phoenix ends her care and carkes,
I make the fire, and burn my self with sparks.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Bethinking himself of his end, writes thus.
WHen I behold the Baier, my last and posting horse,
that bare shall to the grave, my vile and carren corse:
Then say I seely wretch, why do thou put thy trust,
In things either made of clay, that soon will turn to dust.
Do thou not see the young, the hardy and the fair,
that now are past and gone, as though they never were:
Do thou not see thy self, draw hourly to thy last,
As shaftes which that is shot, at birds that flies fast.
Do thou not see how death, through smites with his lance,
Some by war, some by plague, and some by worldly chance:
UUhat thing is there on earth for pleasure that was made,
But goes more swift away, then does the summer shade.
Lo here the summer flower, that sprung this other day,
But winter wears as fast, and blows clean away:
Even so shall thou consume from youth to loathsome age,
For death he does not spare, the Prince more then the Page.
Thy house shall be of clay, a clotte under thy hedde,
Until the latter day, the grave shall be thy bed:
Until the blowing trompe does say to all and some,
Rise up out of the grave, for now the judge is come.
FINIS.
L. Vaux.

Being in Love, he complains.
ENforst by Love and fear, to please and not offend,
Within the words you would me write, a message I must send:
A woeful errande sure, a wretched man must write,
A wretched tale, a woeful head, beseems to indite.
For what can he but wayle, that has but all he would,
And yet that all is naught at all, but lack of all he should:
But lack of all his mind, what can be greater grief,
That have and lack that likes him best, must needs be most mischief.
Now fool what makes thee wail, yet some might say full well,
That have no harm but of thy self, as thou thy self can tell:
to whom I answer thus, since all my harms do grow,
Upon my self, so of my self, some hap may come I trow.
And since I see, both hap and harm betides to me,
For present woe, my after bliss, will make me not forget thee:
UUho has a field of gold, and may not come therein,
Must live in hope, till he have force, his treasure well to win.
UUhose joys by hope of dread, to conquer or to lose,
So great a wealth does rise, and for example does disclose:
to win the golden Fleece, stood Jason not in dread,
Till Medeas hope of health, did give him hope to speed.
Yet sure his mind was much, and yet his fear the more,
That has no hap, but by your help, may hap for to restore:
The raging Bulls he dread, yet by his Ladies charm,
He knew it might be brought to pass, they could do little harm.
Unto whose grace yield he, as I do offer me,
Into your hands to hap, not like him for to be:
But as king Priamus, did yield him to the will,
Of Cressed false, which him forsook with Diomede to spill.
So I to you commend my faith, and eke my joy,
I hope you will not be so false, as Cressed was to Troy:
For if I be untrue, her Lazars death I wish,
And eke in thee if thou be false, her clapper and her dish.
FINIS.
R. L.

Being in trouble, he writes thus.
IN terrors trap, with thraldom thrust,
Their thornie thoughts, to taste and try:
In conscience clear, from cause unjust,
With carping tears did call and cry.
And said O God, yet thou art he,
That can and will deliver me. Bis.
Thus trembling there, with tears I trod,
To totter tide, in truths defense:
With sighs and sobbes, I said O God,
Let right not have this recompense.
Least that my foes, might laugh to see,
That thou would not deliver me. Bis.
My soul then to repentance ran,
My ragged clothes all rent and torn:
And did bewail the loss it wanne.
With loathsome life, so long forlorn,
And said O God, yet thou art he,
that can and will deliver me. Bis.
Then comfort came, with clothes of joy,
whose seames were faithful steadfastness:
And did bedecke the naked ^oe,
that erst was full of wretchedness.
And said be glad, for God is he:
that shortly will deliver thee.
FINIS.
W. Hunnis.

Being troubled in mind, he writes as follows.
THe bitter sweat, that straynes my yielded heart,
the careless count, that does the same embrace:
The doubtful hope, to reap my due desarte,
The pensive pathe, that guides my restless race.
Are at such war, within my wounded breast,
As does bereue my joy, and eke my rest.
My greedy will, that seeks the golden gain,
My lucklesse lot, does always take in worth:
My mated mind, that dreades my suits in vain,
My pitious plaint, does help to set it forth.
So that between, two waves of raging Seas,
I drive my days, in troubles and disease.
My woeful eyes do take their chief delight,
To feed their fill upon the pleasant maze,
My hidden harms that grow in me by sight:
With pinyng pains do drive me from the gaze,
And to my hope, I reap no other hire,
But burn my self, and I do blow the fire.
FINIS.
I. Haiwood.

Look or you leap.
IF thou in surety safe wilt sit,
If thou delight at rest to dwell,
Spend no more words then shall seem fit,
Let tongue in silence talk expel,
In all things that thou see men bent,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
In worldly works degrees are three,
Makers, doers, and lookers on,
The lookers on, have liberty:
Both the others to judge upon,
Wherefore in all, as men are bent,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
The makers often, are in fault found,
The deers doubt of praise or shame.
The lookers on find surest ground,
They have the fruit, yet free from blame*
This does persuade in all here meant,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
The Proverb is not South and west,
which has been said long time ago,
Of little meddling comes great rest:
The busy man never wants woe,
The best way is, in all worlds sent,
See all, say naught, hold thee content.
FINIS.
I. Haiwood.

A description of the world.
WHat is this world, a net to snare the soul,
A mass of sin, a desert of deceit,
A momentes joy, an age of wretched dole:
A lure from grace, for flesh a loathsome bait,
Unto the mind a canker worm of care,
Unsure, unjust, in rendering man his share.
A place where pride orerunnes the honest mind,
where rich men ioynes, to rob the shiftlesse wretch,
where bribing mistes, do blind the Judges eyes:
where Parasites, the fattest croms do catch,
where good vesartes, which challenge like reward,
Are over blown, with blastes of light regard.
And what is man? dust, slime, a puff of wind,
Conceiude in sin, plast in the world with grief,
Brought up with care, till care has caught his mind:
And then till death vouchsafe him some relief,
Day, yea nor night, his care does take an end,
To gather goods, for other men to spend.
Oh foolish man, that art in office plaist,
Think whence thou camste, and whether thou shall go,
The haut high ekes, small winds have ouercast:
when slender weeds, in roughest weather grow,
Even so pale death, often spares the wretched wight,
And wounds you, who wallow in delight.
You lusty youths, that nourish high desire,
Abase your plumes, which makes you look so big,
The Colliers Cut, the Courtiers Steed will tire:
Even so the Clarke, the Parsons grave does dig,
whose hap so is, yet here long life to win,
Does heap God wott, but sorrow upon sin.
And to be short, all sorts of men take heed,
The thunderboltes, the lofty towers tear,
The lightning flash, consumes the house of reed:
Yea more in time, all earthly things will wear,
Save only man, who as his earthly time is,
Shall live in woe, or else in endless bliss.
FINIS.
G. Gask.

A witty and pleasant consaite.
WHat fond delight, what fancies strange,
what deep despite, what sudden change:
what stilling strife, what deep debates,
Do run so rife, in doltishe pates.
Who vewes and sees, and takes no heed,
who seeks degrees, and can not speed:
In stead of joys, shall reap such woes,
As breed annoyes, twixt friends and foes.
who wiuing wantes, and lives alone,
when thriuing scantes, is overthrown:
who seeks to thrive, and find no way,
May chance to strive, and mar the play.
who spendes his wealth, and winnes the wine,
Does hurt himself, and help the swine:
who hauntes the house, where Ale is sold,
May gain a croust, and lose his gold.
Who spinnes by spite, and reeles to woe,
Who takes delight, in roling so:
Does dubbe himself, a drousie hedde,
And bringes drousie fool to bed.
Who rides a loft, and cannot rule,
Who sitts not soft, and keeps his stool:
Does both content, themselves with wrong,
But wisemen will not use it long.
FINIS.
I.H.

The complaynt of a Sinner. And song by the Earl of Essex upon his death bed
in Ireland.
O Heavenly God, O Father dear, cast down thy tender eye,
Upon a wretch, that prostrate here, before thy face does lie:
O pour thy precious oil of grace, into my wounded heart,
O let the drops of mercy swage, the rigor of my smart.
My fainting soul suppressed sore, with careful clogge of sin,
In humble sort submittes it self, thy mercy for to win:
Grant mercy then, O Savior sweet, to me most woeful thrall,
UUhose mournful cry, to thee O Lord, does still for mercy call.
Thy blessed will I have despised, upon a stubburne mind,
And to the sway of worldly things, my self I have inclinde:
Forgetting heaven, and heavenly powers, where God and Saints do dwell,
My life had like to tread the pathe, that leads the way to hell.
But now my Lord, my Lodestarre bright, I will no more do so,
To think upon my former life, my heart does melt for woe:
Alas I sigh, alas I sobbe, alas I do repent,
That ever my licencious will, so wickedly was bent.
Since thus therefore, with careful plaint, I do thy mercy crave,
O Lord for thy great mercies sake, let me thy mercy have:
Restore to life the wretched soul, that else is like to dye,
So shall my voice unto thy name, sing praise eternally.
Now blessed be the Father first, and blessed be the Son,
And blessed be the holy Ghost, by whom all things are done:
Bless me O blessed Trinity, with thy eternal grace,
That after death my soul may have, in heaven a dwelling place.
FINIS.
F. Kindlemarshe.

The fruit that springes from wilful wits, is ruth and ruin rage* And
sure what headless youth committes, repentance rues in age.
I Rage in restless youth, and ruins rule my days,
I rue (too late) my restless youth, by rules of reasons ways:
I ran so long a race, in search of surest way,
That leisure learnd me trade, the trace that lead to leude decay.
I gave so large a rain, to unrestrained bitte,
That now with proof of after pain, I wail my want of wit:
I trifled forth the time, with trust to self conceiptes,
UUhilst plenties use pricked forth my time, to seek for sugared baits.
wherein once learnde to find, I found so sweet a taste,
That due foresight of after speed, selfewill esteemed wast:
which will through wilfulness, has wrought my witless fall,
And heedelesse youths unskillfulness, has lapt my life in thrall.
whereby by proof I know, that pleasure breeds pain,
And he that evil seed does sow, evil fruit must reap again:
Let such therefore whose youth, and purses are in prime,
Foresee and shun the helpelesse ruth, which sues misspent of time.
For want is next to wast, and shame does sin ensue,
Evil speeding proof has heedelesse have, my self have proved it true:
UUhen neighbors next house burns, it is time thereof take heed,
For fortunes wheel has choice of turns, which change of chances breed.
My sail has been aloft, though now I bear but low,
who climbes so high seeld falls soft, deadst ebb has highest flow.
FINIS.
quod Yloop.

Master Edwardes his I may not.
IN may by kind Dame Nature wills, all earthly wights to sing,
In may the new and coupled fowls, may joy the lively spring:
In May the Nightingall, her notes does warble on the spray,
In May the birds their mossie neastes, do timber as they may.
In May the swift and turning Hare her bagged belly slakes,
In May the little sucking UUatts, do play with tender Flax:
All creatures may, in May be glad, no may can me remove,
I sorrow in May, since I may not, in May obtain my love.
The stately Heart in May does mue, his old and palmed beams,
His state renewes in May, he leapes to view Appollos streams:
In May, the Bucke his horned tops, does hang upon the pale,
In May, he seeks the pastures green, in ranging every Dale.
In May, the vgley speckled Snake, does cast her loathsome skin,
In May, the better that he may increase his scaley skin:
All things in May I see, they may rejoice like Turtle dove,
I sorrow in May since I may not, in May obtain my love.
Now may I mourn in fruitful May, who may or can redress,
May may is sorrow since she that may, with holds my may a fresh:
Thus I must may in pleasant May, till I may May at will,
with her in May, whose may my life, now may both save and spill.
Contented hearts that have your hope, in May you may at large,
Untolde your joys, expel your cares, and baske in pleasure barge:
Save I alone in May, that may lament for my behoue,
I mourn in May, till that I may, in May obtain my love.
FINIS.
The complaint of a sorrowful Soul.
O Sovereign salve of sin, who do my soul behold,
That seeks her self from tangling faults, by striving to unfold,
What plea shall I put in, when thou do Summons send:
To judge the people of the earth, and give the world and end,
UUhen every deed and word, yea every secret thought,
In open vewe of all the world, shall unto light be brought.
So many Judges shall against me sentence give,
As by example of good works, has taught how I should live:
So many pleaders shall confound my careful case,
As have in one by sound advise, sought to engraft by grace.
So many shall that time, against me witness bear,
As have beheld my fruitless faith, and saw my sins appear.
Whereon whils I do muse, in my amazed mind,
Froward thoughts, familiar foes, most fires assaults I find:
My conscience to my face, does flatly me accuse,
My secret thoughts within my ears, do whisper still these news.
Mine avarice and briberie* my pride does brag me down,
Mine envy frets me like a file, at other folks renown.
Concupiscence inflames, and lusts my limbs infect,
My meat does burden, and my drink my weakness does detect:
My slanders rend my fame, ambition does supplant,
My greediness is not content, but makes me wail for want.
My mirth but flattery is, my sorrows are unkind,
Since pleasures run me out of breath, and greefs suppress my mind.
Behold my God, whose might, may me a freeman make,
These were my friends, whose counsels cursed, I was content to take:
These were the lawless Lords, whom I did serve alwaie,
These were the masters whose mad hests, I did too much obaie
Behold my faults most foul, which folly first did frame,
In loving them I should have loathed, whens breeds all my bane.
Now I do look aloft, with bashful blushing face,
On glory thine, that so I may discern my own disgrace
My many spots and great, must needs increase my gilt,
Unless thou wash them in the blood, that for my sake was spilt.
Forgive the faults O Lord, which I from heart repent,
And grant my days to come, may be in thy sweet service spent.
FINIS.
I. Heiwood.

Alluding his state to the prodigal child.
THe wandering youth, whose race so rashly run,
Has left behind, to his eternal shame:
The thriftlesse title of the Prodigal son,
To quench, remembrance of his other name.
Mate now divide, the burden of his blame,
with me, whom wretchlesse thoughts entised still:
To tread the trackt of his unruly will.
He took his childs part, at his fathers hands,
Of Gods free grace, his gifts I did receive:
He traueld far, in many foreign lands,
My restless mind, would never raging leave.
False queanes did him, of all his coin bereave,
Fond fancies stuffed my brain with such abuse:
That no good hap could seek to any use.
They drove him out, when all his pense was spent.
My lusts left me, when strength with age was worn,
He was full feign, a Fermars hoggs to tent:
My life misled, did reap deserved scorn,
Through hunger huge, where with his trips were torn,
He wished for swaddes, even so wished I most vain,
In fruitless pleasure, fondly to remain.
Now to come home with him, and pardon pray,
My God I say, against the heavens and thee,
I am not worthy, that my lips should say:
Behold thy handie work, and pity me,
Of mercy yet my soul, from faults set free.
To serve thee here, till thou appoint the time,
Through Christ, unto thy blessed joys to climb.
FINIS.
I. Heiwood.


