A Prayer said in the kings Chapel in the time of his graces Sickness, for
the restauracion of his health, commanded to be said there, by the right
Honorable Earl of Bedford, and niete to be used of all the Kings true
Subjects. Set forth the.xix. day of June. M. D. LIII.
royal blazon or coat of arms

Allmighty, and most merciful Lord, the only life and health, of all them
that trust in thee, which workest salvation in thy elect, as well by sickness as
other wise, and therefore bring them very low, and yet restorest to health
again: look down with thy pytyfull Eyes upon thy servant Edward our King,
and upon this Realm of England, professing thy word and holy name, and as
thou did most favorably deliver King Ezechias from extreme sickness, and
prolongedst his life for the saluegarde of thy people the Israelites, and
defendedst them and the City from the Tyranny of the Assyrya^s: so we most
entierlye appeal to thy great mercies, graciously to restore the health and
strength again of thy seru^^^t Edward our Sovereign Lord, that as tho^ haste
begone by him the rooting out of Error, Idolatry and Supersticion, and the
planting of true Religion, true worshippyng and verity: so it may please thy
mercyful goodness, long to preserve him for the confyrmacyo^ and establishme^t
of the same, and also for the saulfgarde and defense of this Realm, from al
outward and inward Enemies, for the glory of thy holy name. Look not herin
(O Lord) upon our deserts, which for abusinge thy word, and sinfulnes,
deserve great punishments, but upon thy plentyful mercyes, which reioycest to
heal the greatest myseries. Be no less favorable (O Lord) at this present,
to Edward our king, restorynge thy true religion: then in times past to
Ezechias refourmyng thy Religion. Be no less merciful to England thy Church
now: then in those days to Jury thy Church than. But as thy heavenly grace
has been more reveled in these days by the coming of thy dear Son our
Savior and master Christ, and preaching of the Gospel: so it may please thy
fatherlye love and goodness, to bestow upon us more abundaunce of the same
favorable grace and mercy, according to thy will in this our humble request. Do
this O most mercyful Father for thy own names sake, and for the merytes and
death of thy Son our only medyator and redemer Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the Sign of the Rose Garland, by
wyllyam Copland.


