A Pleasant new Ballad between King Edward the fourth, and a Tanner of
Tamworth, as he rode upon a time with his Nobles on Hunting, toward Drayton
Basset.


IN Summer time when leaves grew green,
and birds sitting on every tree:
King Edward would a hunting ride,
some pastime for to see.
Our King he would a hunting ride,
by eight a clock of the day,
And well was he ware of a bold Tanner,
come riding on the way.
A good russet coat the Tanner had on,
fast buttoned under his chin:
And under him a good Cow-hide,
and a Mare of four shilling.
New stand you here good my Lords all,
under this trusty tree:
And I will wend to yonder fellow,
to know from whence came he.
God speed, God speed, then said our King,
thou art welcome good fellow (quoth he)
Which is the way to Drayton Basset?
I pray you show it to me.
The way to Drayton Basset,
from this way as thou do stand,
The next pair of Gallows thou come to,
thou must turn upon the left hand.
That is not the way then said our King,
the readiest way I pray thee show me.
Wether thou be thief or true man quoth the Tanner,
I am weary of thy company.
Away with a vengeance quoth the Tanner,
I hold thee out of thy wit:
For this day have I ridden and gone,
and I am fasting yet.
^^^^^^th me to Drayton Basset, said our King,
(...) D^inties we will lack:
(...) I have meat and drink of the best,
and I will pay for the shot.
Godamercie for nothing quoth the Tanner
thou shall pay for no dinner of mine:
I have more groats and nobles in my purse,
than thou have pence in thine.
God save your goods then said our King,
and send them well to thee.
Be thou thief or true man said the Tanner,
I am weary of thy company.
Away with a vengeance quoth the Tanner,
of thee I stand in fear:
The apparel thou wearest on thy back,
may seem a good Lord to wear.
I never stole them said our King,
I swear to you by the rood:
Thou art some Ruffian of the Country,
thou ridest in the midst of thy good.
What news do you hear then said our King,
I pray what news do you hear?
I hear no news answered the Tanner,
but that Cow-hides be dear.
Cow-hides, Cow-hides then said our King,
I marvel what they be.
Why art thou a fool quoth the Tanner?
look I have one under me.
Yet one thing of thee I would thee pray,
so that thou would not be strange:
If thy Mare be better than my Steed,
I pray you let us change.
But if thou needs with me wilt change,
as change full well may ye:
By the faith of my body quoth the Tanner,
I look to have boot of thee.
What boot will thou ask then said the King,
what boot will thou ask on this ground?
No pence nor halfepence said the Tanner,
but a Noble in gold so round.
The second Part of King Edward the fourth, and the Tanner of Tamworth.


Here Is twenty good groats then said the King,
so well paid see that you be:
I love thee better than I did before,
I though thou had never a penny.
But if so be we must needs change,
as change we must abide:
Though thou have gotten Brocke my Mare,
thou shall not have my Cow-hide.
The Tanner he took the good Cow-hide
that of the Cow was hilt,
And threw it upon the Kings Saddle,
that was so fairly gilt.
Now help me, help me up quoth the Tanner,
full quickly that I were gone:
For when I come home to Iillian my wife,
she will say I am a Gentleman.
The King took the Tanner by the leg,
he girded a fart so round:
You are very homely then said the King,
were I aware I Would a laid you o'th ground.
But when the Tanner was in the Kings Saddle,
astouied then he was:
He knew not the stirrops that he did wear,
whether they were gold or brass.
But when the Steed saw the black Cow-taile wag,
for and the black Cow-horne:
The Steed began to run away,
as the Devil the Tanner had borne.
Until he came unto a nooke,
a little beside an Ash:
The Steed gave the Tanner such a fall,
his neck was almost brast.
Take thy horse again with a vengeance, he said,
with me he shall not abide:
It is no marvel said the King, and laughed,
he knew not your Cow-hide.
But if that we must needs now change here,
as change well that we mote:
I Will swear to you plain, if you have your (...)
I do look to have some boot.
What boot will thou ask, quoth the Tanner,
what boot will thou ask on this ground?
No pence nor halfepence, said the King,
but in gold twenty pound.
Here Is twenty groats said the Tanner,
and twenty more I had of thine:
I have ten groats more in my purse,
we will drink five of them at the Wine.
The King set a Bugle horn to his mouth,
that blew both loud and shrill,
Then five hundred Lords and Knights,
came riding over a hill.
Away with a vengeance quoth the Tanner,
with thee I Will no longer abide:
Thou art a strong thief, yonder us thy fellow^
they will steal away my Cow-hide.
No I protest then said our King,
for so it may not be:
They be Lords of Drayton Basset,
come out of the North country.
But when they came before the King,
full lo they fell on their knee:
The Tanner had rather than a hundred pound
he had been out of their company.
A Collar, a Collar, then said the King,
a Collar that he did cry:
Then would he ha'giu'n a thousand pound,
he had not been so nie.
A Collar, a Collar, quoth the Tanner,
that is a thing will breed sorrow,
For after a Collar comes a halter,
and I shall be hanged to morrow.
No do not fear, the King did say,
for pastime thou have shown me:
No Collar nor halter thou shall have,
but I will give thee a fee.
For Plumton Park I will thee give,
with the Tenements three beside;
Which is worth five hundred pound a year,
to maintain thy good Cow-hide.
Godamercie, Godamercie, quoth the Tanner,
for this good deed thou have done:
If ever thou come to merry Tamworth,
thou shall have clouting leather for thy shone
FINIS
London, Printed by A. M.


