THE CVRE OF ALL SORTS OF FEVERS, Both general, and particular, with their
Definition, Kinds, Differences, Causes, Signs, Prognostication, and manner of
Cure, with a prespectation, their Intentions Curative, with their Symptoms, and
diverse other things herein very necessary to be judiciously observed in every
FEVER.

Lately compiled by ED. EDWARD'S Doctor in Physic. Ann. Dom. 1637.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by William Sheeres, at
his shop in Bedford-street over against the New-Exchange. 1638.

To the friendly Reader.
FOr as much as perfect knowledge in any faculty is the Mother of perfection
therein, a virtue worthy commendations of all wise men, discovering the
Ignorant; for Ignorance is the shame, disgrace, and overthrow of noble Arts and
Sciences to such as profess them, being ignorant. Example, a thing much to be
lamented of all people, because it concerns all, to behold how the thrice
worthy and needful faculties of Physic and Chirurgerie are abused, which
far exceed all other faculties, Divine precept excepted, for there is as much
difference between this and all other Faculties, as between the body and the
garment: if we cannot forbear the builders of houses, much less the Repayrers
of our sick, sore, and decayed bodies. If we build an house, we seek not to a
Tailor, or a Weaver to do it, but to one skillful in that Profession: if so,
why do we seek to the Ignorant for health, which know not what Health is, nor
how to preserve it, and being absent, know not which way to help it? but we
should not prize our health at so low a rate, being so precious a jewel: For
what joy have they in this life, which lie in extreme pains, misery, and
torment for want of health, who do not prize health before wealth, but now
behold the intolerable abuse with an inundant deluge of overwhelming
make-shifts or smoothing sycophants, fit to be unmasked, and repressed, worthy
puniishment, being a rabble of idle droans swarming in all places of the
Kingdom, practicing Physic and Chyrurgerie, making it a fanctuarie of
idleness to the dishonor of God, and great hurt to the people, deceiving the
vulgar sort; they being unable to distinguish the learned and expert from the
ignorant Impostor, which lies lurking, watching a fit opportunity to seize on
some prey to maintain a wicked and idle life: and not only those male-kinde,
of caterpillars, but also we have now a huge swarm of petticoat Physicians and
Chyrurgians, being tatling gossips, who being frequent among sick folks, and
hearing the advice and counsel of the learned and expert physician prescribing
many fit things to his Patient, as diet, and also the making of julips,
barley-water, broths, jellies, almund-milk, cullaces, and diverse things
necessary for to comfort the sick Patient. Hereupon these audacious gossips
will give syrups, senae, Rubarb, Cassia, Manna, Aloes, etc. and not only
clysters, but also strong purges, and vomits, and those no more fit for the
disease, but by chance, than its possible for a Shoemaker to make shoes fit
for every man's foot upon one Last: If these learned faculties were so easily
attained, as these idle wretches account them, surely they may well know, that
men would never bestow so long time and great charges in study, and learning
to attain the deep knowledge herein, which they do for Gods glory, and their
Countries good. How then dare this godless crew, offer to minister medicines
from so slender a groundwork? some of these get medicines by relation of
others, or by reading many medicines in books which please their palates;
having no ground to show why this or that medicine is fit, but imagination
only, able to yield no reason how or why it should do good? I grieve to think
that people should be so sottish to neglect the counsel and good advice of the
wise, learned, expert, and skillful Artists (that have searched out the very
secrets of nature, to do good) to hearken to the subtle syrene-songs of
Sycophants, whose eyes are as sharp as Lynx, who is said to see an hundred
miles: so are many of these as sharp set for gains, and some for applause: how
unworthy soever, these wretches swarm in every Town and Village, and hereby
they leave the counsel of the learned and expert, to follow and ask counsel
of an Ass, which know not with what, nor how to perform any cure, but by
great chance, as the blind man shot the Crow; but if it happen a cure to be
performed under their hands that brings no small applause of the vulgar, what a
miracle there is done, truly I am also of that mind, indeed that it is a
miracle that it had that success, they being so unable to yield any reason how
it came so to pass, which the learned and expert Artist can do: also these
idle rabble will warrant to cure any thing they undertake to finger money be it
never so unpossible to be done: it is the office of God, and not of man to
warrant any, but its very frequent with these make-shifts and idle crew, to do
all: the expert do not so, but use that which is fit, and leave the success to
the divine power, using his painful diligence and industry advisedly, and
skilfully.

I do not here tax nor rank among this rabble of Idlers, those charitable and
well-disposed people, which in the absence of the learned or expert Physician
or Surgeon, do give some comfortable things, whose virtues or helps they
know by experience to do good in the like case, to comfort a friend or a
neighbor till better help may be had, or in charity to help the poor that
have not wherewith to pay for their cure, leaving all other to the learned and
expert in those worthy faculties, who know best how to deal with them rightly:
and commonly these charitable people have this care, if they see their
medicines prevail not, they advise them that be able speedily to seek better
help, knowing that delays breed danger. But the abovesaid wicked crew will
never give them over so long as they can finger any undeserved reward, holding
them on with false promises for money, and then leave them miserably to their
fortunes when their money is gone: or left uncurable, which peradventure alone
might at the first, or by the skillful Artist have been prevented, a thing
sooner to be lamented then redressed. Also I know many of those well-disposed
charitable people abovesaid chiefly in Chirurgerie (wherein the eye must
direct the hand) do perform many very desperate and dangerous cures by their
experience, when many that make great show with their painted sheath come short
in their performance, that should show better fruits: the cause I know not,
whether neglect, ignorance or arrogance shorte^ Gods blessing, not taking him
along with them. God bids us begin with him first, and then what he has
promised to such, I need not to relate* Scripture says, God hides things from
the wise and prudent, and opens them to babes and sucklings: I accuse none,
but let us all examine our selves fully, and in what we find our selves
defective, first seek to God for his grace and assistance, and then carefully
with full resolution, and diligence in our selves, seek to amend what we find
amiss in us, that God may bless our endeavors, to his own glory, the
patients good, and our comforts. And thus praying to God that the well-doers
may be protected, and that rabble of idle Syeophants and Impostors may be
abolished, to Gods glory, and my Countries good, I do here abruptly cease.

Vale in Christo.
The sum of this Book consists in these 6. particulars following.
1 First, what a Fever is. 2 Secondl^^ ^he number of Fevers be 1 generally,
iii. 2 particularly 20.
3 Thirdly, an Explication or Exposition of all Fevers. 4 Fourthly, of Fevers
by Inflammation of the spirits only without putrefaction of humors. 5
Fifthly, of Fever putrida, of putrefaction of humors both 1 simple, 2 compound.
6 Sixthly, of Fever Hectic, of unnatural heat kindled in the solid parts of
the body, the iii. kinds.
A Discourse of all sorts of Fevers.
First what a Fever is.
A Fever is an unnatural heat kindled either of the
1 Spirits, 1 Being inflamed without putrefaction of matter. 2 Causing either
Diaria 1 Simplex lasting 24. hours. 2 Plurimum i. dier. lasting Some days.

2 Humors causing a prefixed or rotten Fever, they rot either 1 In the
vessels, and that three ways, for either 1 All the humors rot equally, as in
Synonochus putrida. 2 Humors rot; and that either, 1 Equal. 2 Inequall.
3 One humor alone causing a Fever continual according to the nature of the
humor putrified.
2 In the vessels causing an intermitting fever according to the nature of the
humor putrified in the missenteries, etc. 3 In and without the vessels, both
causing a compound fever both intermitting, and continual.
3 Solid parts of the body, causing a Fever Hectic.
The number of Fevers are generally two.
(...)e two i. the
1 General be three capital Fevers, from which the particulars are derived.
i. 1 Diaria, 2 Putrida, 3 Hectica.
2 Particular be 20. i. as, 1 Diaria, ii. kinds, 2 Febris putrida, in general
3 Synochus putrida 4 Synochides 5 Causon 6 Causonydes 7 Synoche, a continual
fever, iii. kinds. 8 Semitertiana, iii. sorts, 9 Epyola 10 Lyparia 11 Emphisoda
12 Erratica 13 Tetrach 14 Eucretica 15 Febris intermittens, in general. 16
Cotidiana 17 Tertiana 1 vera, diverse sorts as follows in their proper Chapters.
2 notha, diverse sorts as follows in their proper Chapters.
18 Quartana 19 Pestilentia, under which are comprehended the 1 plague, 2
spotted fever, 3 sweating sickness, 4 malign fevers.
20 Hectic Fever iii. kinds, i. 1 ros, 2 cambium, 3 glutin.


(...)very necessary note to be observed of the three general or capital
Fevers, with their derivations or branches as follows.
(...)r
1 Diaria, sprung of an unnatural heat kindled in the spirits, 1 without
putrefaction, 2 hurting the actions, 3 by vapors that rise either from the 1
blood inflamed, 2 humors, 3 aliment, 4 excrements.
4 From these most commonly proceed all other fevers.
2 Putrida, whereof some be 1 simple and 1 continual, as the fever 1 causon,
continual is of matter putrified within the veins. 2 tertian, continual is
of matter putrified within the veins. 3 cotidian, continual is of matter
putrified within the veins. 4 quartane, continual is of matter putrified
within the veins.
2 intermitting, i. 1 quotidian, etc. of matter putrified without the veins. 2
tertian, etc. of matter putrified without the veins. 3 quartane, etc. of
matter putrified without the veins. 4 epiola, etc. of matter putrified without
the veins.

2 compound and 1 continual as, 1 Synochus putrida, 2 Synochides, 3
causonides, 4 lyparia, 5 semitertiana, 6 pestilentia, and its species.
2 intermitting, as, 1 tertiana notha, 2 emphysoda, 3 tetrath, 4 erratic* etc.


3 Hectica, of ii. sorts, i. the 1 general be ii. i. 1 simple, an unnatural
heat in the fleshy parts kindled without putrefaction. 2 compound either 1 with
1 distillation, 2 tabes.
2 joined with a putrified fever, etc.

2 particular, being of some named 1 iii. as 1 ros, 2 cambium, 3 gluten.
2 but ii. as 1 Hectica febris 2 Marasmus.



An Explication or Exposition of all Fevers.
(...)
(...) Definition, etc. 1 an unnatural heat kindled either in the 1 spirits,
hurting the action. 2 humors, hurting the action. 3 solid parts hurting the
action.
2 sometimes 1 a disease, 2 an accident of some other disease.

(...) Kinds are generally ii. i. the 1 general, being iii. capital Fevers as
aforesaid. 2 particular, i. the 20. aforesaid, whereof some be 1 simple, 2
compound.

(...) Differences are in the 1 kinds, 2 causes, 3 signs, 4 prognostication,
5 times of the disease, fits. 6 place wherein the matter is contained, 7
symptoms, 8 cure.
(...) Causes are either, 1 general, being iii. i. either 1 primitive, 2
antecedent, 3 conjunct.
2 particular, being iii. i. either 1 distempter, of spirits, humors, or
excrements. 2 ill mixture, of spirits, humors, or excrements. 3 putrefaction of
spirits, humors, or excrements.

(...) Signs be according to the 1 kinds, 2 causes, 3 place wherein the
matter is contained, etc.
6 Prognostication, some be 1 simple and easy to know, 2 compound and hard to
know, 3 dangerous, 4 not dangerous.
7 Cure, in which consider the prospectation, wherein consider the 1 fever,
Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and
how to remove it. 2 kind, Herein observe every particular very well, what the
offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 3 difference, Herein observe every
particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 4
cause, Herein observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is,
and how to remove it. 5 signs, Herein observe every particular very well, what
the offensive matter is, and how to remove it. 6 prognostication, Herein
observe every particular very well, what the offensive matter is, and how to
remove it. 7 cure, Herein observe every particular very well, what the
offensive matter is, and how to remove it.
Intentions curative, Consider the fever, first what it is, rottenness, with
the abundance of it, obstruction, perspiration let.
And proceed in the cure thus: 1 first empty the abundance, 2 open the
obstructions, 3 free the perspiration, 4 cleanse the rottenness, 5 quench the
fever, 6 reject the accidents.


Of the Fever Diaria, or Ephemera.
(...)
1 Definition, its a fever of unnatural heat kindled in the spirits. 1 or
ayrie part of the blood or humors by riot, etc. hurting the action. 2 without
putrefaction.
2 Kinds are ii. i. Diaria, 1 simplex, 2 plurimum dierum.
3 Difference, the 1 first lasts but 24. hours, 2 the second lasts 2, 3,
4. days or more without putrefaction.
4 Causes are diverse, as 1 primitive, whose distemper heateth, i. e. inflameth
the spirits. 2 antecedent, whose distemper heateth, i. e. inflameth the
spirits. 3 conjunct, whose distemper heateth, i. e. inflameth the spirits. 4 by
the abuse of the 6. thing not natural.
5 Signs are a fever, 1 easy and gentle in the first kind, 2 hotter and
stronger in the second kind, as appears in the 1 fever, 2 accidents.

6 Prognostication, 1 in hot and dry complexions they soon turn either into 1
acute rotten fevers, 2 Hectica.
2 If it continue long they turn either into 1 acute rotten fevers, 2 Hectica.
3 the 1 first if well used is cured in 24. hours, 2 second lasts more days.
4 both sorts if ill handled or delayed, is the original of diverse dangerous
fevers.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespectation, in it consider, the cause 1
precedent being from out ward means. 2 conjunct, i. inflammation of the spirits.
use good order in the 6. things not natural, this fever if simple need no
purging: eschew 1 fasting, etc. it makes it of more force presently. 2
watching, etc. it makes it of more force presently.
the cure must be diverse according to the 1 disease, 2 accidents.
use nothing herein to cool above the first degree.
intentions curative, use, diet, 1 fit, S. A. 2 to attenuate, 3 meats of good
juice:
bazes to open the pores if need be. 3 herein 1 no cool thing above the first
degree according to the temper of the body. 2 things 1 differing according to
the cause of the distemper and accidents. to help the cruditie of the stomach,
in it consider if the womb be costive or loose.


particular remedies* S. A. according to the particular cause, as after shall
appear.

Of the fever Diaria, plurimum dierum.
(...)e
1 Definition, its a continual fever 1 inflaming the spirits above 24. hours,
2 of 2. 3. or 4. days or more without putrefaction, hurting the action.
2 Kinds are ii. i. Diaria 1 simplex, 2 plurimum dierum.
3 Differences 1 in their kinds is in their 1 time of continuance, 2 increase
of accidents.
2 from all other fevers is in 1 cause, 2 matter, 3 accidents, 4 cure. 5 so
long as this is free from putrefaction or Hectica.

4 Cause is, 1 often riot or abuse of the 6. things not natural. 2 inflammation
by excess, heat kindling the thin parts of the blood, yet without
putrefaction. 3 vapors retained, the pores and passages being stopped up*
5 Signs are, 1 body 1 inflamed and puffed up with vapors, 2 full and pineth
not away suddenly, 3 in a continual hot fit, 4 with urine not much altered.
2 diverse according to the particular causes and accidents.
6 Prognostic. 1 they are most subject to this that 1 riot much, and disorder
themselves. 2 have full bodies and narrow pores, unapt to breath out vapors.
2 small danger in it self only, 3 danger if chiefly turning into other
fevers, 4 the distemper, signs, and accidents are according to the
obstruction, as that is either 1 greater, 2 lesser.

7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation in it, consider well the 1 cause, 2
greatness of the obstruction, 3 if bleeding have been omitted, do it at any
time, says the learned. 4 bleeding and drinking of cold water is the best
cure. 5 great abstinence after surfeit of meat is good, if caused by surfeit of
meat, bleed not before the 2. or 3. day. 6 best method to cure it.
intentions curative, 1 bleed plentifully at first, if nothing forbid it. 2 use
medicines to scour and cleanse that heat least, 3 bathe 1 if need be to open
the pores of the utter skin. 2 but first anoint the body with warm sweet oil
of Camomile, etc. with moderate frication to open the pores.
4 after a bath, 1 open the inward obstructions, by drinking decoctions fit,
etc. that heat least. 2 then cool the heat of the fever. S. A.



Of the Fever Putrida in general.
(...)
1 Definition Febris putrida is any rotten fever of humor putrified sometimes
1 within the veins or vessels. without the veins or vessels.
2 both within and without, as appears in their proper chapters.
2 Kinds are generally ii. i. 1 simple, 2 compound.
3 Differences are according to the 1 cause, 2 matter offending, 3 place
wherein the matter is contained, 4 fits, for some be 1 continual, 2
intermitting, and be either 1 typick, 2 erratick.
3 both continual, and intermitting.

4 Cause is 1 ever unkind heat, and unnatural, kindled in the putrified
humors. 2 as is further showed particularly, in their proper Chapters.
5 Signs 1 general, are 1 grilling cold, or shivering, 2 fits intermitting at
the first in all. 3 anguish by thick smoaks or vapors, 4 accidents in the
state be much. 5 feebleness, 6 the fever abides not in one state.
2 particular are, 1 diverse, as are showed in their particular chapters
following. 2 some be 1 continual, 2 intermitting, 3 called typhodes, i. the
sweating sickness, etc.


6 Prognostic. 1 most of these rotten fevers of matter putrified within the
vessels be dangerous, as is showed in their proper chapters. 2 the Sweating
sickness kills many of all degrees.
7 Cure, consider in it the 1 prespectation, in it consider the 1 putrefaction,
if it come either of 1 one only humor alone. 2 more humors, and that either, 1
equal, 2 inequal.

2 Fever, 1 whether it be either, 1 a disease, 2 an accident.
2 if mingled with fevers of its own nature, or otherwise.
3 cure how to begin, and so to proceed the right way, as in their particular
Chapters. S. A. 4 Intentions curative, and follow the best method. S. A.
2 intentions curative, use, 1 fit diet. S. A. 2 prepare the matter, 3
evacuation. S. A. 4 coroborate the parts weakened, 5 correct the accidents. S.
A. 6 In all things the fittest according to the 1 kind of the Fever. 2 nature
of the Fever. 3 time of the Fever.



Of Fever Synochus putrida.
(...)
(...) Definition, its a continual Rotten Fever without great mutation from
the beginning to the end. (...) Kinds are ii. i. 1 Synochus putrida, being
divided into these three kinds, i. 1 augmastica, 2 epamastica, 3 peramastica.
2 Synochides.
3 Difference 1 Synochus putrida is, 1 when all the 4. humors putrify within
the veins, 1 ad justitiam, 2 non ad pondus.
2 divided into iii. particular sorts. i. 1 Augmastica wastes no more hot
vapors, then it ingendreth, and so stands at a stay. 2 Epamastica does
inge^der more hot vapors then it wastes, and so increases higher. 3
Peramastica wastes more hot vapors then it ingendereth, and so the fever
decreaseth.

2 Synochides, herein blood and choler both putrify within the veins.
4 Cause is when unkind heat does putrify the whole mass of blood ad
justitiam, as the 4. humors putrify as abovesaid. we abuse the 6. things not
natural in riot and excess.
5 signs 1 Astimal hot fever without rest with excess boiling heat of the
blood. 2 are partly according to the different kinds. 3 the 1 Augmastick
stands ever at one stay in show from the beginning to the end, ut vinum Inopis,
as dark wine. 2 Epamastica ever increases. 3 Peramastica, ever diminishes* 4
same fever happens Chiefly in bodies, 1 gross and full, 2 sanguine, 3 of
Bacchus crew.
Seldom in bodies lean, old, or cold temperatures,


6 Prognostic. the ii. first particulars few escape death, third or last kind
all escape if they disorder not themselves.
if the humor be much putrified, to draw much blood its dangerous.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider the 1 fever, 2
kinds, 3 differences, 4 cause, 5 signs, 6 prognostic. 7 manner of cure which
must be according to the 1 kind, 2 differences, 3 cause, 4 time of the
disease, 5 accidents, etc.

2 Intentions curative, 1 empty the abundance, 2 open the obstructions, 3 free
the perspiration, 4 cure the rottenness, 5 correct the accidents, 6 quench the
fever.


Of the compound hot continual Fever Synochides.
(...)
1 Definition, its a continual hot burning rotten Fever, without rest or
intermission. 2 Kinds are as abovesaid in Synochus putrida. 3 Difference, 1
its hotter, 2 accidents more vehement then in Synochus putrida. 3 its composed
partly of Fever 1 causon, 2 Synochus.
4 its not so hot and vehement as the Fever 1 causon, 2 causonides.

4 Cause is ii. parts blood, or most blood, and less choler putrified within
the veins and arteries. i. part choler, or most blood, and less choler
putrified within the veins and arteries.
5 Signs 1 are partly as in Fever Synochus, but sharper. Causon, but milder.
2 it do participate between Synochus and Causon, but nearer to Synochus
putrida. 3 are a continual hot burning fever without rest or intermission. 4
are headache sharp. 5 are thirst great, 6 are watch and ill rest, 7 are urine
high and thick.
6. Prognostic. its very dangerous, and most of them dye. 7 Cure, in it
consider the 1 prespectation, in it consider the 1 Fever rightly. 2 humors, and
1 their quantities, how unequal they be. 2 provide for both. S. A.
3 difficulty in discerning perfectly these compound fevers the one from the
other, else you shall ever err in the cure. 4 cure in this fever must incline
most to the cure of Synochus putrida, and less to causon, both in preparing,
purging, and correcting the accidents. 5 best method, and use all. S. A. trust
not wholly to the urine, but examine the party, and symptoms exactly.
2 intentions curative, 1 use diet cooling inclining to dryness. 2 evacuate by
1 clyster, S. A. 2 bleeding, S. A. 3 purge senitive, S. A. 4 sweats, etc. S. A.
3 corroborate the weak parts, as you find in those ii. Fevers abovesaid. 4
correct the accidents, as you find in those ii. Fevers abovesaid.


Of the Fever Causon, the hottest burning fever continual.
(...)e
1 Definition, its the hottest continual restless burning Fever above all
other. 2 Kinds are ii. i. 1 Vera, the true Causon Fever. 2 Non vera, i. the
Fever Causonides following.
3 Differences, the fever 1 Causon 1 proceeds of one only humor, i. yellow
choler simply, 2 is more vehement in the fever and accidents then all other
fevers.
2 Causonides is 1 compound of ii. humors, see the Chapter. 2 milder in the
fever and accidents then Causon.

4 Cause is 1 yellow choler putrified within the veins and arteries near 1
heart, 2 lungs, 3 liver, 4 stomach, etc.
2 not the heat of blood, but the burning of choler.
5 Signs are 1 a continual hot sharp burning fever without rest. 2 tongue
hot, dry, and black. 3 thirst extreme. 4 breath hot, and sharp. 5 watch
continual, and alienation of mind.
6 Prognostic, few of these escape with life, but death attacheth them. 7 Cure,
consider the 1 prespectation, in it consider 1 well 1 whether it be an
exquisite Causon or no. 2 the time of the disease. 3 in the beginning, and
increase of all choleric fevers eschew all 1 cooling binding things. 2 both
inward and outward. 3 rubarb, 4 absinth, etc.
4 the accidents if their violence require present help.
2 if you let blood, 1 do it in cruditie, not after concoction appears. 2
draw not above 4. or 5. ounces, except cause require it.
3 before to take a right and perfect method, and perform it effectually. S. A.
2 intentions curative, consider, 1 whether, the disease and the complexion do
agree, or be contrary to each other. use 1 diet cold and moist in all, as in a
pure tertian. 2 evacuation by 1 clyster to cool and void excrements. 2
bleeding, Basilica. S. A. purging choler, as in a pure tertian.

3 corroborate and nourish the breast after bleeding with things that cool, dry
little, and fortify. stomach after bleeding with things that cool, dry little,
and fortify.
4 correct the accidents as in other hot fevers. quench the heat of the Fever.
S. A.


Of the compound fever Causonides.
(...)e
1 Definition, its a continual hot burning putrified Fever. 2 Kinds are
before set down with Fever Causon. 3 Differences are before declared. 4 Cause
is, 1 choler ii. parts, and blood i. part, putrified within the veins and
arteries. 2 its compounded of Fever 1 Causon most. 2 Synochus putrida least.

5 Signs are partly as in Fever 1 Causon, but not so vehement, but milder. 2
Synochides, but more sharp. 3 tertian continual, but without show of
intermission.
6 Prognostic. its very dangerous, and kills many. few escape death.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 prespectation, 1 diligently seek to know the
kind perfectly of this mixed Fever: for where the kind is unknown, the cure
is unknown. 2 herein be more signs of Fever Canson then of Synochus, yet
signs of both. 3 Herein follow the cure of both warily, but chiefly of Causon.
2 intentions curative, 1 both in the 1 disease, must wisely be gathered out
of the aforesaid Fevers. 2 accidents. must wisely be gathered out of the
aforesaid Fevers.
2 are chiefly to be taken both in the Fever and accidents, as in those fevers
from which it deriveth.


Of Febris continualis, i. a hot burning Fever with evident show of
intermission.
(...)
1 Definition, its a continual hot burning Fever, yet with some show of
intermission, i. a show of shaking between the fits. 2 Kinds are iii. i. the
continual 1 quotidian, 2 tertian, 3 quartane.
3 Differences the 1 first seems to have an extraordinary fit every day. 2
second seems to have an extraordinary fit every other day. 3 third seems to
have an extraordinary fit every third day.
4 Causes, if 1 phlegm putrify alone within the veins, it causes a continual
Fever quotidian, 2 choler putrify alone within the veins, it causes a
continual Fever tertian, 3 melancholy putrify alone within the veins, it
causes a continual Fever quartane.
5 Signs, 1 none of these slake wholly between the fits. 2 there is a show of
an extraordinary fit either once every day. other day. third day.
are both in the Fever and accidents much like to diverse other hot fevers
herein related.
6 Prognostic. 1 it is 1 dangerous, 2 Typhodes, i. burning and perilous.
2 bodies of bad juice often get these by obstructions. 3 these are rotten
fevers, therefore remove the rottenness.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespectation, in which consider, 1 well which of
the iii. sorts it is. 2 the greater the obstruction, the greater the Fever. 3
how to deal with every of these in particular. 4 begin the cure, and so to
proceed. S. A. 5 where the disease and cause thereof is unknown, there the cure
is also unknown.
2 intentions curative, are, 1 partly as in other fevers. 2 first empty the
abundance of obstructive matter by 1 clyster, 2 bleeding, 3 purging, 4 sweat, 5
urine, etc. S. A.
3 open the obstructions 1 present with 1 frication, 2 things that 1 scour
with least heat. 2 cleanse with least heat.

2 which be either 1 universal, and is of ii. sorts either in the 1 pores of
the utter skin. 2 veins either in 1 quantity 2 quality.

2 particular, either in the 1 gall. 2 liver. 3 mesenteries. etc.


4 free the perspiration. 5 cure the rottenness. 6 quench the fever.


Of the Semitertiana or Hemitritian Fevers.
(...)
1 Definition 1 Semitertian or Hemitriteos, a halfetertian. 2 its 1 a compound
hot burning Fever. 2 both intermitting, and continual.

2 Kinds are generally iii. i. the 1 less Hemitritian fever. 2 middle
Hemitritian fever. 3 great Hemitritian fever.
3 Difference is ii. fold: 1 according to the matter putrified within and
without the veins and arteries. 2 in the quantity of the humors, 1 either 1
equal, 2 inequall.
2 exceeding more or less.

4 Causes general, are ii. i. the 1 first is in 3. sorts, i. when 1 fleme do
putrify within the vessels and choler without 2 choler do putrify within the
vessels and phlegm without 3 melancholy do putrify within the vessels and
choler without
2 second is ever the mixture of ii. fevers of contrary qualities i. the 1 one
makes the continual feverish fit 2 other makes the intermitting feverish fit

5 Signs of the 1 first are much like the continual quotidian fever. 2 second
have stronger heat the other day. 3 third is worst of all in 1 heat every third
day. 2 accidents every third day.

6 Prognostic. 1 these are deadly, and seldom cured. 2 the 1 first is hard to
cure, and soon causes lytargy, 2 second is worse to cure, and few escape, and
soon causes Frenzy. 3 third is mortal, incurable, and soon turns to death.
3 by example of these, learn to cure all other compound fevers.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespectation, consider in the 1 general, these
5. things, i. the 1 Kinds, which of the 3. sorts it is. 2 matter whereof it
comes. 3 manner of the fits, and place of the matter. 4 signs are chiefly to
be regarded, the better to judge the diversity of the iii. sorts. 5 accidents,
see more of it in their proper places.
2 particulars in the cure to 1 empty the abundance. 2 open the obstructions, 3
free the perspiration, 4 remove the rottenness, 5 quench the fever.

2 intentions curative, 1 first empty by clyster, prepare and purge. S. A. by
vomit, laxes, sweat, urine, etc.

2 secondly corroborate the stomach. 3 correct the accidents. 4 open and cool
the liver, 5 mix things rightly against the offensive humors. S. A.


Of the fever Epiola.
(...)he
1 Definition Epiola, is a continual fever with ii. contrary distempers at one
time sensibly felt, that is extreme 1 heat. 2 cold.
2 Kinds are after some writers ii. i. 1 Epiola. 2 lyparia.
3 Differences are generally in the 1 humors offending. 2 manner of the
affects.
4 causes of 1 Epiola is glassie phlegm some 1 putrified, 2 not putrified.
2 liparia is of glassie phlegm mixed with choler.
5 Signs in 1 Epiola the 1 inner parts be burning hot, sensibly felt. 2 utter
parts be chilling cold, sensibly felt.
2 Liparia the 1 inner parts be coldish, sensibly felt. 2 utter parts be hot
and burning, sensibly felt.

6 Prognostic. the 1 first is hard to dissolve, and most of them dye. 2 second,
most of them escape.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in which consider the 1 kinds, 2
differences, 3 causes, 4 signs, 5 prognostication, 6 best method for the cure.
7 party must 1 not bleed in this fever. 2 use things to 1 heat, 2 make thin,
3 cut and divide.


2 intentions curative be 4. i. 1 diet to 1 heat, 2 dry, 3 attenuate and make
thin.
2 digest the matter. S. A. 3 purge the cold gross glassie phlegm. 4 correct
the accidents, which be 1 thirst, 2 belly-ach, 3 tenasmus, etc.



Of the Fever Lyparia.
(...)he
1 Definition, its a compound hot burning Fever with intermission. 2 Kinds,
are before declared in Epiola. 3 Differences, are before declared in Epiola. 4
Cause is, 1 choler corrupt under the skin. 2 also glassie phlegm crude within
the body.
5 Signs, are also showed in the Chapter of Epiola. 6 Prognostic. are also
showed in the Chapter of Epiola. 7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspectation,
in it consider the 1 humors whether 1 inflamed or corrupted. 2 one be
inflamed, and the other crude. 3 both be corrupted and rotten.
2 equality of the humors. 3 inequality of the humors.
2 Intentions curative, these must be either as in the
1 bastard tertian. 2 middle Hemitertian fever.


These compound humors in Fevers must be carefully considered, and so
advisedly dealt with in the cure of them.

Of the fever Emphysoda a hot burning fever.
(...)
1 Definition, its an hot compound burning Fever, with intermission by fits. 2
Kinds are ii. i. 1 Liparia aforesaid. 2 Emphysoda, of choler and phlegm, but
not glassie phlegm.
3 Difference 1 from Lyparia is in that the phlegm is glassie, in this its not
so. 2 in some the choler and phlegm be 1 equal, observe it well. 2 unequal,
observe it well.
3 is not much from other compound fevers of that nature either in the 1
matter, 2 cause, 3 accident, 4 cure.

4 cause is either 1 choler vehemently about the liver or gall mixed with
unnatural phlegm. 2 putrefaction of choler and phlegm in the stomach, or
liver, or in both. 3 of obstruction of the gall.
5 Signs are 1 vehement heat by fits, the 1 hands and feet are cold. 2 whole
body inflamed inwards.
2 wheales about the mouth. 3 scabs about the mouth. 4 blisters in the mouth.
6 Prognostic. its very 1 troublesome, yet many escape. 2 dangerous, yet many
escape.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider 1 well 1 cause
of the matter offensive. 2 equality of the matter offensive. 3 inequality of
the matter offensive. 4 kinds of the matter offensive. 5 nature of the matter
offensive.
2 how it agrees with any other fever, and so proceed in the cure.
2 intentions curative, 1 bleed in this fever safely, if cause require it. 2
use 1 diet to cool and moisten. S. A. 2 prepare and purge with such as cool
and compresse.
3 take your Indications curative from other fevers that agrees most with this
fever. 4 correct the accidents as in other fevers of this nature.


Of Fever Erratick, i. a wandering uncertain Fever.
(...)e
1 Definitio Febris, i. Erretica, a wandering or unstable fever. 2 Kinds are
ii. i. the 1 general be ii. 1 simple, 2 compound.
2 particular be 1 pthisis, 2 Erratic, 3 planetica.

3 Differences are in the 1 kinds, 2 matter offending either 3 manner of the
fits. 1 simple of one only fever. 2 compound or mixed with 2. or 3. fevers. 3
equal, 4 inequall. 5 crude and raw. 6 putrified, or but inflamed.
4 place wherein the matter is contained. 5 Physica Febris, is any intermitting
fever, that returns at any uncertain time. 6 Erretica Febris, is of diverse
fevers mixed together with uncertain fits often in a day, etc. 7 Planetica
Febris, erreth as the Planets do, etc.
4 Cause is either 1 blood thick and gross which do obstruct. 2 unnatural, 1
choler, that do offend. 2 phlegm, that do offend. 3 melancholy, that do offend.

5 Signs are fits 1 unconstant, 2 at uncertain times. 3 according to the
number of humors offending unmixt. fevers offending unmixt.

6 Prognostic. if many humors be inflamed with choler, they be filthy, and
villainous pernicious fevers. 7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspectation, in
it consider 1 kinds, 2 differences, 3 matter what it is, whether 1 equal, 2
inequall, 3 compound, 4 simple, 5 the fits be 1 frequent, or be 2 slow. 3 how
often they afflict.

4 fever whether it be either a disease of it self, an accident.
The best way to cure it.
2 intention curative, in it consider 1 to vary in all according to the 1 manner
of the fever. 2 particulars herein required. S. A.
2 diet must vary according to the 1 disease, 2 cause of the disease. 3 time of
the disease. 4 complexion, 5 age, etc.
cannot otherwise be here described, but according to the admonition set down
in other fevers of like nature.

3 matter whether it be either 1 simple if 1 blood 1 inflamed, do as in fever
Diaria bleed, etc. 2 putrified, do as in Synochus putrida.
2 choler, phlegm, or melancholy, do as in fevers of that kind.
2 compound, consider the humors, if 1 equal or inequall, 2 crude inflamed or
putrid, 3 you observe this order in all compound fevers, you do well.



Of the fever Tetrath.
(...)e
1 Definition, its a fever that may vex every part of the body either 1
universal, 2 particular.
2 kinds are ii. the 1 universal, 2 particular.
3 Differences are 1 ii. fold, according to the 1 place of the motion either 1
general, 2 particular.
2 matter which is either 1 putrified, 2 not putrified.

2 diverse in the cure which must be in all according to the variety of the 1
matter, 2 place, 3 symptoms.

4 Cause is sometimes of unnatural 1 phlegm either 1 sour and cold. 2 adust,
and turned into melancholy.
2 melancholy being the dregs of all the natural humors adust, 1 chiefly 1
phlegm, 2 melancholy
2 putrified in the place moved.

5 Signs are 1 gaping, 2 shaking, and quivering of the place ill affected. 3
an Intermitting Fever with great vexation often times by fits. 4 if the matter be
1 not putrified, it seldom causes a Fever. 2 putrified its 1 either 1
universal in all the parts. 2 particular, in one part only.
2 then ever with a Fever.

5 pain of the spleen. 6 in some there is perilous accidents, as 1 swounding,
2 hycket, 3 convulsions, etc. 4 a fit once in 5. 6. or 7. days with shaking.

6 Prognostic. this is 1 hard to cure, yet curable for the most part. 2 caused
either of 1 a quartaine, 2 black jaundies, 3 the scurbutus, trembling, and il
spleen.

7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider the 1 kind, 1
universal, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4 with 1 a
quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not

2 difference, 1 universal, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4
with 1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not

3 causes, 1 universal, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified, or not 4 with
1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not

4 manner whether it be 1 universal, or not 2 particular, or not 3 putrified,
or not 4 with 1 a quartaine or not 2 black jaundies or not 3 scorbutus or not

5 best method to follow.
2 intentions curative, 1 diet must be 1 in quality contrary to the offensive
matter. 2 as in the cure of 1 melancholy. 2 quartaine. etc.
3 cutting, and dividing, and concocting.
2 prepare the matter, and purge as in 1 melancholy, 2 quartaine.
3 bleed if cause require it. S. A. 4 corroborate the 1 heart, 2 stomach, 3
spleen.
5 repress the accidents. S. A.


Of the Fever Encretica.
(...)e
1 Definition Encreticus morbus and been terminalis, it may be taken for any
fever diminishing.
2 Kinds are 1 diverse according to the fever. 2 any fever 1 decreasing, 2
without danger.

3 Differences are according to the 1 fever, 2 causes, 3 symptoms, etc.
4 Causes are taken from the 1 variety of the fever. 2 kind of the fever. 3
time of the fever.
5 Signs are 1 according to the kind of the fever. cause of the fever. time
of the fever. symptoms of the fever. decrease of the fever.
2 urine with sediment or Ipostasies Rubea.
6 Prognostic. 1 easy to escape and recover. 2 this is every fever decreasing
to health, except they overthrow themselves by disorder.
7 Cure, in which consider the 1 perspectation, in which consider the 1 kind
of the fever. 2 difference of the fever. 3 cause of the fever. 4 manner, if fit
to use medicine 1 or no 2 and 1 wherefore. 2 what is required.

5 intentions 1 if any be required. 2 and what must be done.
6 best method if need require any.
2 intentions curative, be 8. i. 1 diet. S. A. 2 evacuate the abundance if need
be either by 1 clyster, 2 bleeding in some, 3 in some not so. 4 by vomit, 5
purge, 6 sweat, 7 urine, etc.
3 open the obstructions, 4 free the perspiration, 5 cure and resist the
rottenness. 6 corroborate the parts weakened with fit cordials, etc. S. A. 7
quench the fever. 8 repress or prevent accidents if need be.
matter well that you have to do, and do it as in other Fevers and symptoms of
like nature.

Of the Fever Pestilence.
The
1 Definition, its 1 a continual hot burning infective fever. 2 a kind of a
venomous putrified fever.
2 Kinds are iii. i. 1 Pestilentia, 2 Epidimia, 3 Vndimia.
3 Differences the 1 first infecteth man and beast only by evil air. 2
second infecteth man and beast only by evil air. 3 third brings forth a
pestilent botch, etc.
4 Causes, the 1 first is Gods hand to punish sin. 2 second is venomous air.
3 third is generally these ii. i. 1 corrupt air. 2 bad humors 1 of corrupt
diet. 2 fit to join with the infected air.


5 Signs in the 1 beginning, are 1 shivering cold, 2 back-ach, 3 worms, 4
heaviness, 5 drowsinesse.
2 increase be 1 more as 1 a burning fever, 2 headache, very heavy, and sleepy,
3 lack of sleep, 4 countenance changed, 5 sloth. 6 urine 1 thick, and stinking
commonly. 2 in some differ but little from a healthy body.

2 chiefly a tumor either in the emunctories, as 1 behind the ears, 2 under
the arme-pits, 3 about the groyne.


6 Prognostic. 1 death for the most part. 2 if nature be strong, and puts out
the botch, etc. in some Emunctorie, etc. as abovesaid, such escape often.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 prespectation, in it consider, 1 first submit
thee to God, acknowledge thy sins with hearty repentance. 2 then fly
betimes, fly far, return late and slowly, the cure do consist in these iii.
points, i. order, diet, physic helps.

2 intentions curative, be 4. i. 1 diet, 2 evacuation by clyster, bleeding in
some, in some not, purges, sweat, etc. good antidotes.
3 corroborate with fit cordials. S. A. 4 repress the accidents, etc.


Of Intermitting fevers in general.
(...)he
1 Definition, its a Fever having a fit either 1 every 1 day, 2 other day, 3
third day.
2 often in one day. 3 once in many days.
2 Kinds are generally ii. i. the general be ii. i. 1 vera. 2 mendosa.
2 particular be diverse.
3 Difference is in the 1 kinds some be 1 simple, 2 compound.
2 matter offending, 3 place offended or obstructed, greatness or smallness
of the obstruction. time of the fit being either typick, erratick.

4 Cause is either choler obstructing the miserayacts. etc. phlegm obstructing
the miserayacts. etc. melancholy obstructing the miserayacts. etc. mixed humors
obstructing the miserayacts. etc.
5 Signs, 1 are according to their causes, as in their proper Chapters is
showed.
6 Prognostic. few of these are dangerous simply in themselves, but by
accident, as in their proper chapters does appear. 7 Cure, in it consider the
1 perspectation, wherein consider the 1 kinds, 2 differences, 3 causes, 4
signs, 5 manner and times of the fits, 6 accidents, and how to remove them, 7
best method for the cure.
2 intentions curative are generally ii. i. the 1 general, be 5. i. 1 void the
abundance of obstructive matter, etc. S. A. 2 open the obstructions, 3 free the
perspirations, 4 expel and prevent the rottenness, 5 quench the Fever.
2 particular as in their proper Chapters, in which 1 use fit diet, prepare the
matter. S. A. evacuate the matter. S. A. corroborate the parts weakened.
correct the accidents, do all in each particular. S. A.



Of the Intermitting cotidian Fever.
(...)he
1 Definition its a fever or common ague, with a fit once in 24. hours every
day.
2 Kinds are ii. i. the 1 continual before spoken of, 2 intermitting cotidian.
3 Differences are in the 1 kinds, 2 manner of the fits either typick,
erratick.
3 place in which the matter is contained. etc.
4 Causes, the 1 continual is phlegm putrified within the veins, 2
intermitting is phlegm putrified in the mesenteries.
5 Signs, the 1 first never cease till it end either by 1 health, 2 death.
2 second has a fit 1 once in a day, 2 first cold, and after burning hot.

6 Prognostic. the 1 continual cotidian is dangerous, and kills many. 2
intermitting is seldom dangerous. often of long continuance.

7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider whether the 1
phlegm be 1 sweet and easy to turn into blood, there bleed to open the
obstructions. 2 salt, purge it. S. A. 3 sour, there bleed not. 4 glassi, there
bleed not.
2 party must bleed or no. 3 method general be best.
2 intentions curative, be 6. i. 1 diet as in oedema. 2 secondly, give a
clyster. S. A. 3 thirdly, prepare the matter. 4 fourthly, purge the phlegm, S.
A. by 1 vomit, 2 stool. 5 corroborate the parts weakened. 6 correct the
accidents.


Of the intermitting tertian fever.
The
1 Definition, this tertiana febris intermittence is here taken for a common
agur, having a fit every other day. 2 Kinds are diverse, 1 generally ii. i. the
1 continual tertian before spoken of. 2 intermitting as 1 vera, 2 mendosa.

2 others which here I omit.
3 Differences are the continual, is choler putrified in the veins.
Intermitting tertiana 1 Vera is choler putrified in the missenteries. 2 Mendosa
is choler and phlegm putrified in the missenteries.

4 Causes are generally according to each kind, etc. 5 Signs are 1 proper to
each fever and causes. in the 1 continual, a continual fit without
intermission. 2 Vera a fit of 12. hours each other day, first with shaking
cold, and after very burning hot.
3 Mendosa a fit of 16. or 18. hours, first with very cold shivering, and
after ends with burning heat.


6 Prognostic. the 1 first is dangerous, and do kill many. 2 ii. last not
dangerous of themselves, except with some other disease.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider the 1 kinds, 2
differences, 3 causes and humors whether 1 simple, 2 compound, 3 equal, if
compound, or 4 inequall if compound.
4 Signs, 5 Prognostic. 6 iii. deadly enemies to all agues, i. 1 fasting, 2
bleeding, 3 purging. S. A.
7 intentions curative 8 way to begin the cure, and so to proceed methodically.
S. A.
2 intentions curative, must be 1 in all things according to 1 fever, 2 humor,
3 accidents.
2 vary herein, in all things according to the matter and place wherein it is
contained.


Of the bastard tertian fever.
The
1 Definition, this mendosa or bastard tertian fever intermitting. 2 Kinds are
as aforesaid in the former Chapter. 1 Vera, the true simple, tertian fever. 2
Mendosa, i. the bastard compound tertian fever.
3 Differences are in the 1 kinds. 2 humors, the 1 first is simply of choler
putrified in the missenteries, the fit not above 12. hours. 2 second is
compound of choler and phlegm, the fit commonly 16. or 18. hours.

4 Causes are in the 1 exquisite tertian, of pure red or yellow choler,
putrified in the missenteries. 2 bastard tertian is choler, and phlegm, mixed in
one, putrified in the missenteries.
5 Signs the 1 first have a fit of 1 9. or 12. hours every other day. 2
second have a fit of 2 16. or 18. hours every other day. fits are first very
cold, and after burning hot.
6 Prognostic. 1 these be not 1 reckoned among great diseases. 2 dangerous in
themselves.
2 the bastard tertian is worse to remove then the exquisite.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, wherein consider the 1 kinds, 2
differences, 3 causes, 4 signs, 5 prognostic. 6 best method to cure it.
2 intentions curative, be 8. i. 1 diet inclining to heat that do 1 attenuate,
2 make thin, 3 insise, etc.
2 prepare choler and phlegm both. S. A. 3 purge choler and phlegm both. S. A.
4 open the obstructions, 5 free the perspiration, 6 remove and resist
putrefaction, 7 corroborate the parts weakened, 8 correct the accidents.


Of the Intermitting quartaine fever.
The
1 Definition, its an intermitting Ague or Fever, called of the vulgar, the
third days ague, or quartaine fever. 2 Kinds be 1 generally, ii. i. the 1
continual quartaine fevers. 2 intermitting quartaine fevers.
2 particular be diverse, as many authors declare.
3 Differences are in the 1 kinds, 2 matter being either of 1 natural
melancholy. 2 unnatural melancholy.
3 manner of the fits, the 1 first is continual, 2 second, have a fit every
third day.
4 place the first is contained in the veins, second is contained in the
messenteries.
5 cure which must be according to the fever.
4 Causes be generally 4. i. the 1 first 2 second is melancholy putrified 1
within the veins, 2 in the messenteries.
3 third is unnatural melancholy putrified in the messenteries 4 fourth is
atrabilis putrified in the messenteries
5 Signs the 1 first have a continual fit, but worse every third day. 2
second, i. intermitting quartaine have a fit of 24. hours, and then ii. days
free between every fit. 3 other have a moving according to the matter dull or
sharp, Fit comes ever with grilling cold, and ends in burning heat.
6 Prognostic. this fever with the black jaundies, they hardly escape. some
have it 1,2,3,4,5,6, or 7. years.
7 Cure, in it consider the 1 perspectation, in it consider the 1 kind of the 1
fever. 2 melancholy, what sort it is.
2 difference, 3 cause, 4 best method, and follow it. S. A. 5 give no medicine
till 7. fits be past.
2 intentions curative, be these 6. 1 diet hot and moist, 2 bleed if need
require, S. A. 3 prepare S. A. 4 purge S. A. 5 corroborate the parts weakened.
6 correct the accidents being these 8. i. 1 heart faint, 2 bowels weak, 3
obstructions, 4 perspiration let, 5 shivering grilling cold, 6 headache, 7
thirst, 8 trembling cold.



Of Fever Hectica.
The
1 Definition, it is 1 properly a consumption of all the body universally. 2
sometimes 1 a disease of it self, 2 an accident of another disease, 3 simple
of it self. 4 compound with tabes, etc.

2 Kinds are iii. 1 ros, 2 cambium, 3 glutin.
3 Differences i. 1 ros, consumes the dewie moisture. 2 cambium consumes the
natural moisture. 3 glutin consumes the radical moisture.
4 Causes, its 1 often from some other disease as from 1 some 1 other fever. 2
passion of the mind.
2 tabes, etc.
2 an unnatural heat kindied in the solid parts of the body. 3 default of the
assimulative virtue.
5 Signs, 1 they feel no pain. 2 its either with, or without a fever or
ague. 3 in 1 ros the heat increases after meat, and hard to discern. 2
cambiu^ the heat increases and felt to increase more. 3 glutin the heat
increases most of all.
4 the eyes wax hollow, and the flesh consumes.
6 Prognostic. the 1 first kind is hard to know and easy to cure. 2 second
kind is easy to know and hard to cure. 3 third kind is uncurable called
marasmus. Hectic with tabes confirmed it uncurable for the most part.
7 Cure, the 1 perspectation, consider 1 the kind, and whether it be a disease
of it self, or an accident, with tabes.
2 if curable or no, and the reason how, and why it may, or may not be. 3 help
the first quickly, that it fall not into the second. 4 neither 1 purge nor
bleed in a simple hectic, 2 use hot things, 3 Venus sports do most destroy them.

2 intentions curative are 1 in the ii. first kinds 1 use diet cold and moist.
S. A. 2 neither purge nor bleed.
2 in Marasmus if you do any thing use 1 diet in all things hot and moist. 2
clysters often of good broth to nourish. 3 restoratives.
3 corroborate the parts weakened. 4 correct the accidents which be most
commonly these 9. i. 1 sweat, 2 syncope, 3 costivenesse, 4 looseness, 5
thirst, 6 kidneis hot, 7 apostume, 8 dropsy, 9 Atrophia, etc.



Of the spotted Fever.
(...)e
1 Definition, Febris petechialis is a malign fever with spots like
fleabitings. 2 Kinds are ii. i. 1 simple of one only humor. 2 compound of 2.
or 3. humors mixed.
3 Differences are in the 1 kinds, 2 humor or humors offending, 3 cause, 4
signs, 5 quantity, 1 budding forth according to the 1 strength of nature. 2
weakness of nature.
2 some be 1 greater, 2 lesser, 3 put out according to the 1 thickness of the
matter, 2 thinness, of the skin.



4 Cause is sometimes 1 blood, putrified within the veins either 1 simple, 2
mixed.
2 choler, putrified within the veins either 1 simple, 2 mixed.
3 melancholy, putrified within the veins either 1 simple, 2 mixed.
4 all the humors putrified within the veins either 1 simple, 2 mixed.
Its ever a malignevenemous matter mixed with the blood and humors.
5 Signs are 1 head pained. 2 heart pained. 3 a sluggish fever in some 1
sharp, according to the matter offending. 2 dull, according to the matter
offending.
4 spots if red blood abound, if yellow or greenish choler, if blackish obloish
melancholy or choler adust. like flea-bitings appearing in all parts of the
body, the back chiefly.


6 Prognostic. spots 1 red is best of blood, 2 yellow or green show 1 a malign
fever of great danger, 2 putrefaction of ill condition.
3 black or bluish is worst, 4 these are all very dangerous, and do infect,
and kill many.
7 Cure, 1 perspectation, consider the 1 kind, 2 differences, 3 causes, 4
signs, 5 spots, if 1 any appear, neither bleed nor purge' use diaphoreticks
to expel the venom, open the pore of the skin to breathe vapors.
The color shows the humor offending. they 1 lie hid, or be long, or they
appear. 2 be either 1 well colored, so judge of it. 2 ill colored, so judge
of it.

2 the matter abound either in 1 quantity, so differ the cure 2 quality, so
differ the cure

6 cure, deal with it as in other malign fevers of like nature.
2 intentions curative, 1 note that the cure 1 is chiefly to cure the
malignitie, 2 do differ as the malignity do differ
2 if the urine be thick and troubly, then 1 bleeding is hurtful and weakeneth
the strength, and 2 purging is hurtful and weakeneth the strength
3 bleed before the fourth day, or not at all. 4 if a lask happen stop it not,
1 except it exceed, give nature leave. 2 meddle not with natures office.
5 mean time, 1 remove the cause of the malignitie, 2 use fit antidotes and
cordials to expel the malignitie.
6 do all in this and in other 1 malign fevers. S. A. 2 pestilent fevers. S.
A. 3 infectious fevers. S. A.



FINIS.
Methodicum istum de Febribus tractatum quantum per ^mporis angustiam mihi
concessam licuit percurri. In eo ^ulta proba ac rara deprehendi. Sicut nolo
multus esse in ^bjiciendo autoris encomio: utpote cujus eruditio, diligentia ^
praxi medicinae, atque mores integri satis nota sunt eis, ^ibus ille innotuit:
It a non possum non existimare libri hu^^ Lectionem utilem futuram eis, qui in
Febrium curatione ^am operam locant.

Alexander Read medicinae Doctor, acsocius Collegii Medici Londinensis.
Imprimatur Tho. Weeks R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.



