THE REIGN OF KING EDWARD the third: As it has bin sundry times played
about the City of London.

LONDON, Printed for Cuthbert Burby. 1596.

THE REIGN OF K: Edward the third.
Enter King Edward, Derby, Prince Edward, Audely and Artoys. King. RObert of
Artoys banished though thou be,
From France thy native Country, yet with us,
Thou shall retain as great a Seigniorie:
For we create thee Earl of Richmond here,
And now go forwards with our pedigree,
Who next succeeded Phillip of Bew,

Ar. Three sons of his, which all successefully,
Did sit upon their fathers regal Throne:
Yet dyed and left no issue of their loins:

King: But was my mother sister unto those:

Art: She was my Lord, and only Issabel,
Was all the daughters that this Phillip had,
Whom afterward your father took to wife:
And from the fragrant garden of her womb,
Your gracious self the flower of Europes hope:
Derived is inheritor to France.
But not the rancor of rebellious minds:
When thus the lynage of Bew was out;
The French obscurd your mothers Privilege,
And though she were the next of blood, proclaimed
John of the house of Valoys now their king:
The reason was, they say the Realm of France,
Repleat with Princes of great parentage,
Ought not admit a governor to rule,
Except he be descended of the male,
And that's the special ground of their contempt:
Where with they study to exclude your grace:
But they shall find that forged ground of theirs,
To be but dusty heaps, of brittile sand.

Art: Perhaps it will be thought a heinous thing,
That I a French man should discover this,
But heaven I call to record of my vows,
It is not hate nor any private wrong,
But love unto my country and the right,
Prouokes my tongue thus lavish in report.
You are the lyneal watch men of our peace,
And John of Valoys, in directly climbes,
What then should subjects but embrace their King,
Ah where in may our duty more be seen,
Then stryuing to rebate a tyrants pride,
And place the true shepherd of our comonwealth,

King: This counsel Artoyes like to fruictfull shewers,
Has added growth unto my dignitye,
And by the fiery vigor of thy words,
Hot courage is engendered in my breast,
Which heretofore was rakt in ignorance,
But now does mount with golden wings of fame,
And will approve fair Issabells descent,
Able to yoke their stubburne necks with steel,
That spurn against my souereignety in France. sound a horn
A messenger, Lord Awdley know from whence,

Enter a messenger Lorragne, And: The Duke of Lorrayne, having crossed the seas,
In treates he may have conference with your highness.

King: Admit him Lords, that we may hear the news.
Say Duke of Lorrayne wherefore art thou come.

Lor: The most renowned prince K. John of France,
Does greet thee Edward, and by me commandes,
That for so much as by hi^ liberal gift,
The Guyen Dukedom is entayld to thee,
Thou do him lowly homage for the same.
And for that purpose here I somon thee,
Repair to France within these forty days,
That there according as ^he coustome is.
Thou may be sworn true liegeman to our King,
Or else thy title in that province dies,
And he him self will repossesse the place.

K. Ed: See how occasion laughes me in the face,
No sooner minded to prepare for France,
But straight I am invited, nay with threats,
Upon a penalty inioynd to come:
Twere but a childish part to say him nay,
Lorrayne return this answer to thy Lord,
I mean to visit him as he requests,
But how? not seruilely disposd to bend,
But like a conqueror to make him bow,
His lame unpolished shists are come to light,
And truth has pulled the visard from his face,
That set a glass upon his arrogannce,
Dare he command a fealty in me,
Tell him the Crown that he usurps, is mine,
And where he sets his foot he ought to knele,
It Is not a petty Dukedom that I claim,
But all the whole Dominions, of the Realm,
Which if with grudging he refuse to yield,
I Will take away those borrowed plumes of his,
And send him naked to the wilderness.

Lor: Then Edward here in spite of all thy Lords,
I do pronounce defyaunce to thy face.

Pri: Defiance French man we rebound it back,
Even to the bottom of thy masters throat,
And be it spoke with reverence of the King,
My gracious father and these other Lords,
I hold thy message but as scurrylous,
And him that sent thee like the lazy droane,
Crept up by stelth unto the Eagles nest,
From whence well shake him with so rough a storm,
As others shall be warned by his harm,

War: Bid him leave of the Lions case he wears,
Least meeting with the Lion in the feeld,
He chance to tear him peecemede for his pride.

Art: ^^e soundest counsel I can give his grace,
Is to surrender ere he be constraynd.
A voluntary mischief has less scorn,
Then when reproach with violence is borne,

Lor. Regenerate Traitor, viper to the place,
Where thou was fostred in thine infancy:
Bear thou a part in this conspiracy?
He draws his Sword.
K. Ed. Lorraine behold the sharpnes of this steel:
Fervent desire that sits against my heart,
Is far more thornie pricking than this blade.
That with the nightingale I shall be ^^ard:
As often as I dispose my self to rest,
Until my colors be displaide in France:
This is thy final Answer, so be gone.

Lor. It is not that nor any English brave,
Afflicts me so, as does his poisoned view,
That is most false, should most of all be true.

K. Ed. Now Lord our fleeting Bark is under sail:
Our gage is thrown, and war is soon began,
But not so quickly brought unto an end.

Enter Mountague. Moun. But wherefore comes Sir william Mountague?
How stands the league between the Scot and us?

Mo. Cracked and disseuered my renowned Lord:
The treacherous King no sooner was informde,
Of your with drawing of your army back:
But straight forgetting of his former oath,
He made invasion on the bordering Towns:
Barwicke is won, Newcastle spoyld and lost,
And now the tyrant has beguirt with seege,
The Castle of Rocksborough, where inclosd,
The Countes Salsbury is like to perish:

King. That is thy daughter Warwick is it not?
Whose husband has in Brittayne serud so long,
About the planting of Lord Mouneford there?

War. It is my Lord.

Ki: Ignoble David have thou none to grieve,
But silly Ladies with thy threatening arms:
But I will make you shrink your snailie horns,
First therefore Audley this shall be thy charge,
Go levy footmen for our wars in France;
And Ned take muster of our men at arms,
In every shire elect a several band,
Let them be Soldiers of a lusty spirit,
Such as dread nothing but dishonors blot,
Be wary therefore since we do comence,
A famous War, and with so mighty a nation:
Derby be thou Ambassador for us,
Unto our Father in Law the Earl of Henalt:
Make him acquainted with our enterprise,
And likewise will him with our own allies,
That are in Flaundsrs, to solicit to,
The Emperor of Almaigne in our name:
Myself whilst you are jointly thus employed,
Will with these forces that I have at hand,
March, and once more repulse the traiterous Scot:
But Sirs be resolute, we shall have wars
On every side, and Ned, thou must begin,
Now to forget thy study and thy books,
And ire thy shoulders to an Armors weight.

Pr. As cheereful sounding to my youthful spleen,
This tumult is of wars increasing broils,
As at the Coronation of a king,
The joyful clamours of the people are,
When Aue C^sar they pronounce alowd;
Within this school of honor I shall learn,
Either to sacrifice my foes to death,
Or in a rightful quarrel spend my breath,
Then cheerfully forward each a several way,
In great affairs it is naught to use delay.
Exunt.
Enter the Countess. Alas how much in vain my poor eyes gaze,
For souccour that my sovereign should send;
A co sin Mountague, I fear thou wants,
The lively spirirt sharply to solicit,
With vehement suit the king in my behalf:
Thou do not tell him what a grief it is,
To be the scornful captive to a Scot,
Either to be wooed with broad untuned oaths,
Or forced by rough insulting barbarism:
Thou do not tell him if he here prevail,
How much they will deride us in the North,
And in their vild vnseuill skipping giggs,
Bray forth their Conquest, and our overthrow,
Even in the barraine, bleake and fruitless air,

Enter David and Douglas, Lorraine. I must withdraw, the everlasting so,
Comes to the wall, I Will closely step aside,
And list their babble blunt and full of pride.

K. Da: My Lord of Lorrayne, to our brother of France,
Commend us as the man in Christendom,
That we must reverence and entirely love,
Touching your embassage, return and say,
That we with England will not enter parlie,
Nor never make fair wether, or take truce,
But burn their neighbor towns and so persist
With eager Rods beyond their City York,
And never shall our bonny riders rest:
Nor rust in canker, have the time to eat,
Their light borne snaffles, nor their nimble spu
Nor lay a side their Iacks of Gymould mayle,
Nor hang their staves of grayned Scottish ash,
In peaceful wise, upon their City walls,
Nor from their buttoned tawny leatherne belts,
Dismiss their biting whinyards, till your King,
Cry out enough, spare England now for pity,
Farewell, and tell him that you leave us hear,
Before this Castle, say you came from us,
Even when we had that yielded to our hands,

Lor: take my leave and fayrely will return
Your acceptable greeting to my king.
Exit Lor.
K. D: Now Duglas to our former task again,
For the division of this certain spoil.

Dou: My liege I crave the Lady and no more,

King. Nay soft ye sir, first I must make my choice,
And first I do bespeake her for my self,

Da. Why then my liege let me enjoy her jewels,

King. Those are her own still liable to her,
And who inherits her, has those with all.

Enter a Scot in have. Mes: My liege, as we were pricking on the hills,
To fetch in booty, marching hitherward,
We might discry a mighty host of men,
The Sun reflicting on the armor showed,
A field of plate, a wood of pickes advanced:
Bethink your highness speedely herein,
An easy march within four hours will bring,
The hindmost rank, unto this place my liege.

King: Dislodge, dislodge, it is the king of England.

Dug: Iemmy my man, saddle my bonny black.

King: Meanst thou to fight, Duglas we are to weak.

Du: I know it well my liege, and therefore fly.

Cou: My Lords of Scotland will ye stay and drink:

King: She mocks at us Duglas, I cannot endure it.

Count, Say good my Lord, which is he must have the Lady,
And which her jewels, I am sure my Lords
Ye will not hence, till you have shard the spoils.

King: She heard the messenger, and heard our talk.
And now that comfort makes her scorn at us.

Annother messenger. Mes: Arm my good Lord, O we are all surprisde*
After the French ambassador my liege,
And tell him that you dare not ride to York,
Excuse it that your bonnie horse is lame.

K. He heard that to, intolerable grief:
Woman farewell although I do not stay.
Exunt Scots.
Count: It Is not for fear, and yet you run away,
O happy comfort welcome to our house,
The confident and boystrous boasting Scot,
That swore before my walls they would not back,
For all the armed power of this land,
With facelesse fear that ever turns his back:
Turned hence again the blasting North-east wind:
Upon the bare report and name of Arms.

Enter Mountague. Mo: O Summers day, see where my Cousin comes:
How fares my Aunt? we are not Scots,
Why do you shut your gates against your friends?

Co: Well may I give a welcome Cousin to thee:
For thou con^st well to chase my foes from hence.

Mo: The king himself is come in person hither:
Dear Aunt descend and gratulate his highness.

Co: How may I entertayne his Majesty,
To show my duty, and his dignity.

Enter king Edward, VVarwike, Artoyes, with others. K. Ed: What are the
stealing Foxes fled and gone
Before we could vncupple at their heels.

War: They are my liege, but with a cheereful cry,
Hot hunds and hardy chase them at the heels.

Enter Countess. K. Ed: This is the Countess Warwike, is it not.

War: Even she liege, whose beauty tyrants fear,
As a May blossom with pernicious winds,
Has sullied, withered ouercast and done.

K. Ed: Has she been fairer Warwike then she is?

War: My gracious King, fair is she not at all,
If that her self were by to stain herself,
As I have seen her when she was her self.

K. Ed: What strange enchantment lurk in those her eyes?
When they excelled this excellence they have,
That now her dym declyne has power to draw,
My subject eyes from persing majesty,
To gaze on her with doting admiration.

Count: In duty lower then the ground I kneel,
And for my dull knees bow my feeling heart,
To witness my obedience to your highness,
With many millions of a subjects thanks.
For this your Royal presence, whose approach,
Has driven war and danger from my gate.

K. Lady stand up, I come to bring thee peace,
How ever thereby I have purchased war.

Co: No war to you my liege, the Scots are gone,
And gallop home toward Scotland with their hate,
Least yielding here, I pyne in shameful love:
Come well pursue the Scots, Artoyes away.

Co: A little while my gracious sovereign stay,
And let the power of a mighty king
Honor our roof: my husband in the wars,
When he shall hear it will triumph for joy.
Then dear my liege, now niggard not thy state,
Being at the wall, enter our homely gate.

King. Pardon me countess, I will come no near,
I dreamde to night of treason and I fear.

Co: Far from this place let ugly treasonly.

K: No farther off, then her conspyring eye,
Which shoots infected poison in my heart.
Beyond repulse of wit or cure of Art.
Now in the Sun alone it does not lie,
With light to take light, from a mortal eye.
For here to day stars that mine eyes would see,
More then the Sun steals mine own light from me:
Contemplative desire, desire to be,
In contemplation that may master thee.
Warwike, Artoys, to horse and lets away.

Co: What might I speak to make my sovereign stay?

King: What needs a tongue to such a speaking eye,
That more perswads then winning Oratorie.

Co: Let not thy presence like the April sun,
Flatter our earth, and suddenly be done:
More happy do not make our outward wall,
Then thou will grace our inner house withal,
Our house my liege is like a Country swain,
Whose habit jude, and wanners blunt and plain,
Presageth naught yet inly beautified,
With bounties riches; and fair hidden pride:
For where the golden Ore does buried lie,
The ground vndect with natures tapestrie,
Seems barrayne, ^^re, vnfertill, f^uctles dry,
And where the upper turfe of earth does boast,
His pride perfumes, and party colloured cost,
Delue there, and find this issue and their pride,
To spring from ordure, and corruptions side:
But to make up my all to long compare,
These ragged walls no testomie are,
What is within, b^t like a cloak does hide,
From weathers West, the under garnisht pride:
More gracious then my terms can let thee be,
Entreat thy self to stay a while with me.

Kin: As wise as fair, what fond fit can be heard,
When wisdom keeps the gate as beuties guard,
Countess, albeit my business urges me,
Yt shall attend, while I attend on thee:
Come on my Lords, here will I host to night.
Exeunt.
Lor: I might perceive his eye in her eye lost,
His care to drink her sweet tongues utterance,
And changing passion like inconstant clouds:
That rack upon the carriage of the winds,
Increase and die in his disturbed cheeks:
Lo when she blushed, even then did he look pale,
As if her cheeks by some inchaunted power,
Attracted had the cherie blood from his,
A none with reverent fear, when she grewpale,
His cheek put on their scarlet ornaments,
But no more like her oryent all red,
Then Brick to Corrall, or live things to dead,
Why did he then thus counterfeit her looks,
If she did blush it was tender modest shame,
Being in the sacred present of a King.
If he did blush, it was red immodest shame,
To wail his eyes amiss being a king:
If she looked pa^e, it was silly woman's fear,
To bear her self in presence of a king:
If he looked pa^e, it was with guilty fear,
To dote a mi^se being a mighty king,
Then Scottish wars farewell, I fear twill prove
A lingering English seege of peevish love,
Here comes his highness walking all alone.

Enter King Edward. King: She is grown more fairer far since I came thither,
Her voice more silver every word then other,
Her wit more fluent, what a strange discourse,
Unfolded she of David and his Scots:
Even thus quoth she, he spoke, and then spoke broad,
With epithites and accents of the Scot:
But somewhat better then the Scot could speak,
And thus quoth she, and answered then herself,
For who could speak like her but she herself:
Breathes from the wall, an Angels note from Heaven:
Of sweet defiance to her barbarous foes,
When she would talk of peace me thinks her tongue,
Commanded war to prison: when of war,
It wakened Caesar from his Roman grave,
To hear war beautified by her discourse,
Wisdom is foolishnes, but in her tongue,
Beauty a slander but in her fair face,
There is no summer, but in her cheerful looks,
Nor frosty winter, but in her disdain,
I cannot blame the Scots that did besiege her,
For she is all the Treasure of our land:
But call them cowards that they ran away,
Having so rich and fair a cause to stay.
Art thou thete Lodwicke, give me incke and paper?

Lo: I will my liege.

K: And bid the Lords hold on their play at Chesse,
For we will walk and meditate aloue.

Lo: I will my sovereign.

Ki: This fellow is well read in poetry,
And has a lusty and perswasiue spirit:
I will acquaint him with my passion,
Which he shall shadow with a veil of lawne,
Through which the Queen of beauties Queen shall see,
Herself the ground of my infirmity.

Enter Lodwike. Ki: Have thou pen, ink and paper ready Lodowike,

Lo: Ready my liege.

Ki: Then in the summer arber sit by me,
Make it our counsel house or cabynet:
Since green our thoughts, green be the conuenticle,
Where we will case us by disburdning them:
Now Lodwike invoke some golden Muse,
To bring thee hither an enchanted pen,
That may for sighs, set down true sighs indeed:
Talking of grief, to make thee ready groan,
And when thou writest of tears, encouch the word,
Before and after with such sweet laments,
That it may raise drops in a Torterseye,
And make a flynt heart Sythian pytifull,
For so much moving has a Poets pen:
Then if thou be a Poet move thou so,
And be enriched by thy sovereign love:
For if the touch of sweet concordant strings,
Could force attendance in the ears of hell:
How much more shall the strains of poets wit,
Beguild and ravish soft and humane minds.

Lor: To whom my Lord shall I direct my style.

King: To one that shames the fair and sots the wise,
Whose body is an abstract or a brief,
Contains each general virtue in the world,
Better then bewtifull thou must begin,
Devise for fair a fairer word then fair,
And every ornament that thou would praise,
Fly it a pitch above the soar of praise,
For flattery fear thou not to be convicted,
For were thy admiration ten times more,
Ten times ten thousand more thy worth exceeds,
Of that thou art to praise their praises worth,
Begin I will to contemplat the while,
Forget not to set down how passionat,
How heart sick and how full of languishment,
Her beauty makes me,

Lor: Writ I to a woman?

King: What beauty else could triumph on me,
Or who but women do our love lays greet,
What thinekst thou I did bid thee praise a horse.

Lor, Of what condition or estate she is,
Twere requisite that I should know my Lord,

King: Of such estate, that hers is as a throane,
And my estate the footstool where she treads,
Then may thou judge what her condition is,
By the proportion of her mightines,
Write on while I peruse her in my thoughts,
Her voice to music or the nightingale,
To music every summer leaping swain,
Compares his sunburnt lover when she speaks,
And why should I speak of the nightingale,
The nightingale singes of adulterate wrong,
And that compared is to satirical,
For sin though fynne would not be so esteemd,
But rather virtue sin, sin virtue deemd,
Her hair far softor then the silk worms twist,
Like to a flattering glass does make more fair,
The ye low Amber like a flattering glass,
Comes in to soon: for writing of her eyes,
I Will say that like a glass they catch the sun,
And thence the hot reflection does rebounde,
Against my breast and burns my heart within,
Ah what a world of descant makes my soul,
Upon this voluntary ground of love,
Come Lodwick have thou turned thy ink to gold,
If not, write but in letters Capital my mistres name,
And it will guild thy paper, read Lord, read,
Fill thou the empty hollowes of mine ears,
With the sweet hearing of thy poetry.

Lo: I have not to a period brought her praise.

King: Her praise is as my love, both infinite,
Which apprehend such violent extremes,
That they disdain an ending period.
Her beauty has no match but my affection,
Hers more then most, mine most, and more then more,
Hers more to praise then tell the sea by drops,
Nay more then drop the massy earth by sands,
And said, by said, print them in memory,
Then wherefore talkest thou of a period,
To that which craves vnended admiration.
Read let us hear,

Lo: More fair and chaste then is the queen of shades:

King: That love has two falts gross and palpable,
Comparest thou her to the pale queen of night,
Who being set in da^ke seems therefore light,
What is she, when the sun lifts up his head,
But like a fading taper dym and dead.
My love shall brave the ey of heaven at noon,
And being unmasked outshine the golden sun,

Lo: What is the other fault, my sovereign Lord,

King. Readeore the line again,

Lo: More fair and chaste,

King: I did not bid thee talk of chastity,
To ransack so the treason of her mind,
For I had rather have her chased then chaste,
Out with the moon line, I will none of it,
And let me have her likened to the sun,
Say she has thrice more splendor then the sun,
That her perfections emulats the sun,
That she breeds sweets as plenteous as the sun,
That she does thaw cold winter like the sun,
That she does cheer fresh summer like the sun,
That she does dazzle gazers like the sun,
And in this application to the sun,
Bid her be free and general as the sun,
Who smiles upon the basest weed that grows,
As lovingly as on the fragrantrose,
Lets see what follows that same moonelightline,

Lo: More fair and chaste then is the lover of shades,
More bold in constancy.

King: In constancy then who,

Lo: Then Judith was,

King: O monstrousline, put in the next a sword
And I shall woo her to cut of my head
Blot, blot, good Lodwicke let us hear the next.

Lo: There Is all that yet is done.

King: I thancke thee then thou have don little ill,
But what is don is passing passing ill,
No let the Captain talk of boystrous war,
The prisoner of emured dark constraint,
The sick man best sets down the pangs of death,
The man that starues the sweetness of a feast,
The frozen soul the benefit of fire,
And every grief his happy opposite,
Love cannot sound well but in lovers toungs,
Give me the pen and paper I will write,

Enter Countes. But so^t here comes the treasurer of my spirit,
Lodwick thou know not how to draw a battle,
These wings, these flankars, and these squadrons,
Argue in thee defective discipline,
Thou should have placed this here, this other here,

Co. Pardon my boldness my thrice gracious Lords,
Let my intrusion here be called my duty,
That comes to see my sovereign how he fares,

Kin: Go draw the same I tell thee in what form.

Lor: I go.

Con: Sorry I am to see my liege so sad,
What may thy subject do to drive from thee.
Thy gloomy consort, sullome melancholy,

King: Ah Lady I am blunt and cannot straw,
The flowers of solace in a ground of shame,
Since I came hither Countes I am wronged.

Cont: Now God forbid that any in my house
Should thinck my sovereign wrong, thrice gentle King:

King: Acquant me with their cause of discontent.
How near then shall I be to remedy.

Cont: As nere my Liege as all my woman's power,
Can pawn it self to buy thy remedy.

King: If thou speakst true then have I my redress,
Engage thy power to redeem my Joys,
And I am joyful Countes else I die.

Coun: I will my Liege.

King: Swear Counties that thou will.

Coun: By heaven I will,

King: Then take thy self a litel way a side,
And tell thy self a King does dote on thee,
Say that within thy power does lie.
To make him happy, and that thou have sworn,
To give him all the Joy within thy power,
Do this and tell me when I shall be happy.

Coun: All this is done my thrice dread sovereign,
That power of love that I have power to give.
Thou have with all devout obedience,
Inploy me how thou will in proof thereof,

King. Thou hearst me say that I do dote on thee,

Coun: Yfon my beauty take yt if thou can,
Though little I do prise it ten times less,
If on my virtue take it if thou can,
For virtues store by giving does augment,
Be it on what it will that I can give,
And thou can take away inherit it.

King. It is thy beauie that I would enjoy,

Count. O were it painted I would wipe it of,
And disposse my self to give it thee,
But sovereign it is souldered to my life,
Take one and both for like an humble shadow,
Yt hauntes the sunshine of my summers life,
But thou may leave it me to sport with all,

Count: As easy may my intellectual soul,
Be lent away and yet my body live,
As lend my body palace to my soul,
Away from her and yet retain my soul,
My body is her bower her Courther abey,
And she an Angel pure divine unspotted,
If I should leave her house my Lord to thee,
I kill my poor soul and my poor soul me,

King. Did thou not swear to give me what I would,

Count: I did my liege so what you would I could.

King: I wish no more of thee then thou may give,
Nor beg I do not but I rather buie,
That is thy love and for that love of thine,
In rich exchange I tender to thee mine,

Count. But that your lips were sacred my Lord,
You would profane the holy name of love,
That love you offer me you cannot give,
For Caesar owes that tribut to his Queen,
That love you beg of me I cannot give,
For Sara owes that duty to her Lord,
He that does clip or counterfeit your stamp,
Shall die my Lord, and will your sacred self,
Commit high treason against the King of heaven,
To stamp his Image in forbidden mettel,
For getting your allegiance, and your oath,
In violating marriage secred law,
You break a greater honor then your self,
To be a King is of a younger house,
Then to be married, your progenitour
Sole ragning Adam on the universe,
By God was honored for a married man,
But not by him anointed for a king,
It is a pennalty to break your statutes,
Though not enacted with your highness hand,
How much more to infringe the holy act,
Made by the mouth of God, sealed with his hand,
I know my sovereign in my husbands love,
Who now does loyal service in his wars,
Does but to try the wife of Salisbury,
Whither she will hear a wantons tale or no,
Lest being therein giulty by my stay,
From that not from my liege I turn away:
Exit.
King: Whether is her beauty by her words dyuine,
Or are her words sweet chaplains to her beauty,
Like as the wind does beautify a sail,
And as a sail becomes the unseen wind,
So do her words her bewties, beauty words,
O that I were a honey gathering be,
To bear the comb of virtue from his flower,
And not a poison sucking envious spider,
To turn the vice I take to deadly venom,
Religion is austere and bewty gentle,
To stricke a gardion for so fair a weed,
O that she were as is the air to me,
Why so she is, for when I would embrace her,
This do I, and catch nothing but my self,
I must enjoy her, for I cannot beat
With reason and reproof fond love away.

Enter Warwick. Here comes her father I will work with him,
To bear my colors in this field of love.

War: How is it that my sovereign is so sad,
May I with pardon know your highness grief,
And that my old endeavor will remove it,
It shall not comber long your majesty,

King: A kind and voluntary giift thou proferest.
That I was forward to have begd of thee,
But O thou world great nurse of flattery,
Why do thou tip men's tongues with golden words,
And peise their deeds with weight of heavy lead,
That fair performance cannot follow promise,
O that a man might hold the hearts close book,
And choke the lavish tongue when it does utter
The breath of falsehood not carectred there:

War: Far be it from the honor of my age,
That I should owe bright gould and render lead,
Age is a cyncke, not a flatterer,
I say again, that I if knew your grief,
And that by me it may be lesned,
My proper harm should buy your highness good,
These are the vulger tenders of false men,
That never pay the duty of their words,

Kin: Thou will not stick to swear what thou have said,
But when thou know my greifes condition,
This rash disgorged vomit of thy word,
Thou will eat up again and leave me helples.

War. By heaven I will not though your majesty,
Did bid me run upon your sword and di^
Say that my grief is no way ^dicinable,
But by the loss and bruising ^e honor,

War: If nothing but that loss may vantage you,
I would accomplish that loss my vauntage to,

King. Think that thou can answer thy oath again,

War: I cannot nor I would not if I could.

King. But if thou do that shall I say to thee,

War: What may be said to any periurd villane,
That break the sacred warrant of an oath,

King. What will thou say to one that breaks an oath,

War. That he has broke his faith with God and man,
And from them both stands excommunicat,

King. What office were it to suggest a man,
To break a lawful and religious vow.

War. An office for the devil not for man,

Ki. That destilles office must thou do for me,
Or break thy oath or cancel all the bonde^,
Of love and duty twixt thy self and me,
And therefore Warwike if thou art thy self,
The Lord and master of thy word and oath,
Go to thy daughter and in my behalf,
Comaund her, woo her, win her (...) wares,
To be my mistres and my secret love,
I will not stand to hear thee make reply,
Thy oath break hers or let thy sovereign dye.
Exit,
King: O doting King, or detestable office,
Well may I tempt my self to wrong my self,
When he has sworn me by the name of God,
To break a vow made by the name of God,
What if I swear by this right hand of mine,
To cut this right hand of the better way,
Were to prophaine the Idol then confound it,
But neither will I do I Will keep mine oath,
And to my daughter make a recantation,
Of all the virtue I have preached to her,
I Will say she must forget her hu^^and Salisbury,
If she remember to embrace the king,
I Will say an oath may easily be broken,
But not so easily pardoned being broken:
I Will say it is ^^ue charity to love,
But not true love to be so charitable;
I Will say his greatness may bear out the shame,
But not his kingdom can buy out the sin;
I Will say it is my duty to persuade,
But not her honesty to give consent.

Enter Countess. See where she comes, was never father had,
Against his child, an embassage so bad.

Co: My Lord and father, I have sought for you:
My mother and the Peers importune you,
To keep in promise of his majesty.
And do your best to make his highness merry.

War: How shall I enter in this graceless arrant,
I must not call her child, for where is the father,
That will in such a suit seduce his child:
Then wife of Salisbury shall I so begin:
No he is my friend, and where is found the friend
That will do friendship such indammagement:
Neither my daughter, nor my dear friends wife,
I am not Warwike as thou think I am,
But an atturnie from the Court of hell:
That thus have housd my spirit in his form,
To do a message to thee from the king:
The mighty king of England dotes on thee:
He that has power to take away thy life,
Has power to take thy honor, then consent,
To pawn thine honor rather then thy life;
Honor is often lost and got again,
But life once gone, has no recovery:
The Sun that withersheye goth nourish grass,
The king that would distaine thee, will advance thee.
The Poets write that great Achilles spear,
Could heal the wound it made: the morrall is,
What mighty men misdoo, they can amend:
The Lion does become his bloody jaws,
And grace his ^orragement by being mild,
When vassell fear lies trembling at his feet,
The king will in his glory hide thy shame,
And those that gaze on him to find out thee,
Will loose their eie-sight looking in the Sun:
What can one drop of poison harm the Sea,
Whose hugie vastures can digest the ill,
And make it loose his operation:
The kings great name will temper their misdeeds,
And give the bitter portion of reproach:
A sugared sweet, and most delitious taste:
Besides it is no harm to do the thing,
Which without shame, could not be left undone;
Thus have I in his majesty's behalf,
Apparraled sin, in virtuous sentences,
And dwell upon thy answer in his suit.

Cou: Unnatural beseege, woe me unhappy,
To have escapt the danger of my foes,
And to be ten times worse in^^erd by friends:
Has he no means to stayne my honest blood,
But to corrupt the author of my blood,
To be his scandalous and vile soliciter:
No marvel though the branches be then infected,
When poison has encompassed the root:
No marvel though the leprous infant dye,
When the stern dame inuennometh the Dug:
Why then give sin a pasport to offend,
And youth the dangerous reign of liberty:
Blot out the strict forbidding of the law,
And cancel every cannon that prescribes,
A shame for shame, or penance for offense,
No let me die, if his too boystrous will,
Will have it so, before I will consent,
To be an actor in his graceless lust.

Wa: Why now thou speakst as I would have thee speak,
And mark how I vnsaie my words again,
An honorable grave is more esteemd,
Then the polluted closet of a king,
The greater man, the greater is the thing,
Be it good or bad that he shall undertake,
An vnreputed mote, flying in the Sun,
Presents a greater substance then it is:
The freshest summers day does soonest taint,
The lothed carrion that it seems to kiss:
Deep are the blows made with a mighty Axe,
That sin does ten times agreuate it self,
That is committed in a holy place,
An evil deed done by authority,
Is sin and subbornation: Deck an Ape
In tissue, and the beauty of the robe,
Adds but the greater scorn unto the beast:
A spacious field of reasons could I urge,
Between his gloomie daughter and thy shame,
That poison shows worst in a golden cup,
Dark night seems darker by the lightning flash,
Lillies that fester, smell far worse then weeds,
And every glory that inclynes to sin,
The shame is treble, by the opposite,
So leave I with my blessing in thy bosom,
Which then convert to a most heavy curse,
When thou conuertest from honors golden name,
To the black faction of bed blotting, shame.

Coun: Ils follow thee, and when my mind turns so,
My body sink, my soul in endless woo.
Exeunt.
Enter at one door Derby from Eraunce, At an other door, Audley with a Drum.
Der. Thrice noble Audley, well incountred here,
How is it with our sovereign and his peers?

And. It Is full a fortnight since I saw his highness,
What time he sent me forth to muster men,
Which I accordingly have done and bring them hither,
In fair array before his majesty:

King: What news my Lord of Derby from the Emperor.

Der. As good as we desire: the Emperor
Has yielded to his highness friendly aid,
And makes our king leiuetenant general
In all his lands and large dominions,
Then via for the spacious bounds of France;

And. What does his highness leap to hear these news?

Der. I have not yet found time to open them,
The king is in his closet malcontent,
For what I know not, but he gave in charge,
Till after dinner, none should interrupt him:
The Countess Salisbury, and her father Warwike,
Artoyes, and all look underneath the brows.

And: Undoubtedly then some thing is a miss.

Enter the King. Dar. The Trumpets sound, the king is now abroad,

Ar. Hhere comes his highness.

Der. Befall my sovereign, all my sovereigns wish,

King. Ah that thou were a Witch to make it so.

Der. The Emperor greeteth you.

Kin. Would it were the Countess.

Der. And ^^th accorded to your highness suite,

King. Thou lie she has not, but I would she had,

Au. All love and duty to my Lord the King.

Kin. Well all but one is none, what news with you?

Au. I have my liege, levied those horse and foot,
According as your charge, and brought them hither.

Kin. Then let those foot trudge hence upon those horse,
According too our discharge and be gonne:
Darby I Will look upon the Countess mind anon,

Dar The Countess mind my liege.

Kin. I mean the Emperor, leave me alone,

Au. What is his mind?

Dar: Lets leave him to his humor.
Exunt.
Ki: Thus from the hearts abundant speaks the tongue,
Countess for Emperor, and indeed why not?
She is as imperator over me, and I to her
Am as a kneeling vassaile that observes,
The pleasure, or displeasure of her eye

Enter Lodwike. Ki: What says the more then Cleopatras match,
To Caesar now?

Lo: That yet my liege ere night,
She will resolve your majesty.

Ki: What drum is this that thunders forth this march,
To start the tender Cupid in my bosom,
Poor shipskin how it braules with him that beats it:
Go break the thundering parchment bottom out,
And I will teach it to conduct sweet lines,
Unto the bosom of a heavenly Nymph,
For I will use it as my writing paper,
And so reduce him from a scoulding drum,
To be the herald and dear counsai^e bearer,
Betwixt a goddess, and a mighty king:
Go bid the diummer learn to touch the Lute,
Or hang him in the braces of his drum,
For now we think it an uncivil thing,
To trouble heaven wrth such harsh resounds, Away. Exit.
The quarrel that I have requires no arms,
But these of mine, and these shall meet my foe,
In a deep march of penytrable groans,
My eyes shall be my arrows, and my sighs
Shall serve me as the vantage of the wind,
To wherle away my sweetest artyilerie:
Ah but alas she winnes the sun of me,
For that is she her self, and thence it comes,
That Poets term, the wanton warrior blind:
But love has eyes as judgment to his steps,
Till two much loved glory dazies them?
How now.

Enter Lodwike. Lo. My liege the drum that stroke the lusty march,
Stands with Prince Edward your thrice valiant son.

Enter Prince Edward. King. I see the boy, oh how his mothers face,
Modeld in his, corrects my straid desire,
And rates my heart, and chides my theeuish eye,
Who being rich ennough in seeing her,
Yet seek, elsewhere and basest theft is that,
Which cannot cloak it self on poverty.
Now boy, what news?

Pr. E. I have assembled my dear Lord and father,
The choysest buds of all our English blood,
For our affairs to France, and here we come,
To take direction from your majesty.

Kin: Still do I see in him deliniate,
His mothers visage, those his eyes are hers,
Who looking wistely on me, make me blush:
For faults against themselves, give evidence,
Lust as a fire, and me like lantern show,
Light lust within themselves; even through them selves:
Away loose ^^lkes or wavering vanity,
Shall the large limmit of fair Brittayne.
By me be overthrown, and shall I not,
Master this little mansion of my self;
Give me an Armor of eternal steel,
I go to conquer kings, and shall I not then
Subdue my self, and be my enemies friend,
It must not be, come boy forward, advance,
Lets with our coullours sweet the Air of France.

Enter Lodwike. Lo. My liege, the Countess with a smiling cheer.
Desires access unto your Majesty.

King. Why there it goes, that very smile of hers,
Has ransomed captive France, and set the King,
The Dolphin and the Peers at liberty,
Go leave me Ned, and revel with thy friends. Exit Pr.
Thy mother is but black, and thou like her.
Do put it in my mind how foul she is,
Go fetch the Countess hither in thy hand, Exit Lod.
And let her chase away these winter clouds,
For she gives beauty both to heaven and earth,
The sin is more to hacke and hew poor men,
Then to embrace in an unlawful bed,
The register of all rarieties,
Since Letherne Adam, till this youngest hour.

Enter Countess. King. Go Lodwike, put thy hand into thy purse,
Play, spend, give, riot, wast, do what thou will,
So thou will hence awhile and leave me here.
Now my souls plaiefellow art thou come,
To speak the more then heavenly word of yea,
To my objection in thy beauteous love.

Count. My father on his blessing has commanded.

King. That thou shall yield to me.

Coun: I dear my liege, your due.

King. And that my dearest love, can be no less,
Then right for right, and render love for love.

Count: Then wrong for wrong, and endless hate for hate:
But fith I see your majesty so bent,
That my unwillingness, my husbands love,
Your high estate, nor no respect respected,
Can be my help, but that your mightines:
Will ouerbeare and awe these dear regards,
I bynd my discontent to my content,
And what I would not, I Will compel I will,
Provided that your self remove those lets,
That stand between your highness love and mine,

King: Name then fair Countess, and by heaven I will.

Co: It is their lives that stand between our love,
That I would have chokt up my sovereign.

Ki. Whose lives my Lady?

Co. My thrice loning liege,
Your Queen, and Salisbury my wedded husband,
Who living have that title in our love,
That we cannot bestow but by their death,

Ki: Thy opposition is beyond our Law,

Co. So is your desire, if the law
Can hinder you to execute the one,
Let it forbid you to attempt the other:
I Cannot think you love me as you say,
Unless you do make good what you have sworn.
No mo^, ethy husband and the Queen shall dye,
Fairer thou art by far, then Hero was,
Beardles Leander not so strong as I:
He swome an easy curraunt for his love,
But I will throng a hellie spout of blood,
To arryue at Cestus where my Hero lies.

Co: Nay you will do more, you will make the Ryuerto,
With their heart bloods, that keep our love asunder,
Of which my husband, and your wife are twain.

Ki. Thy beauty makes them guilty of their death,
And gives in evidence that they shall dye,
Upon which verdict I their Judge condemn them.

Co: O periurde beauty, more corrupted Judge:
When to the great Star Chamber ore our heads,
The vniuersell Sessions calls to count,
This packing evil, we both shall tremble for it.

Ki. What says my fair love, is she resolute?

Co. Resolute to be dissolude, and therefore this,
Keep but thy word great king, and I am thine,
Stand where thou do, i will part a little from thee
And see how I will yield me to thy hands:
Here by my side does hang my wedding knifes,
Take thou the one, and with it kill thy Queen
And learn by me to find her where she lies
And with this other, I Will dispatch my love,
Which now lies fast a sleep within my heart,
When they are gone, then I Will consent to love:
Stir not lascivious king to hinder me,
My resolution is more nimbler far,
Then thy prevention can be in my rescue,
And if thou stir, I strike, therefore stand still,
And hear the choice that I will put thee to:
Either swear to leave thy most unholy suit,
And never hence forth to solicit me,
Or else by heaven, this sharp poynted knyfe,
Shall stain thy earth, with that which thou would stain:
My poor chaste blood, swear Edward swear,
Or I will strike and die before thee here.

King. Even by that power I swear that gives me now,
The power to be ashamed of my self,
I never mean to part my lips again,
In any words that tends to such a suit.
Arise true English Lady, whom our I Will
May better boast of then ever Roman might,
Of her whose ransackt treasury has taskt,
The vain endeavor of so many pens:
Arise and be my fault, thy honors fame,
Which after ages shall enrich thee with,
I am awaked from this idle dream,
Warwike, my Son, Darby, Artoys and Audley,
Brave warriors all, where are you all this while?

Enter all. Warwike, I make thee Warden of the North,
Thou Prince of Wales, and Audley straight to Sea,
Scour to New-hauen, some there stay for me:
My self, Artoys and Darby will through Flaunders,
To greet our friends there, and to crave their aid,
This night will scarce suffice me to discover,
My follies seege against a faithful lover,
For ere the Sun shall guide the esteem sky,
Well wake him with our Marshall harmony.
Exeunt.
Enter King John of France, his two sons, Charles of Normandy, and Phillip,
and the Duke of Lorraine. King John. Here till our Navy of a thousand and
sail,
Have made a breakfast to our foe by Sea,
Let us incampe to wait their happy speed:
Lorraine what readiness is Edward in?
How have thou heard that he provided is
Of marshiall furniture for this exployt.

Lo: To lay aside unnecessary soothing,
And not to spend the time in circumstaunce,
It Is bruted for a certenty my Lord,
That he is exceeding strongly fortified,
His subjects flock as willingly to war,
As if unto a triumph they were led.

Ch: England was wont to harbor malcontents,
Blood thirsty, and seditious Catelynes,
Spend thrifts, and such as gape for nothing else,
But changing and alteration of the state,
And is it possible,
That they are now so loyal in them selves?

Lo: All but the Scot, who sollemnly protests,
As here to fore I have enformd his grace,
Never to sheath his Sword, or take a truce.

Io: Ah, that's the anchredge of some better hope,
But on the other side, to think what friends,
King Edward has retaynd in Netherland,
Among those euer-bibbing Epicures:
Those frothy Dutch men, puffed with double beer,
That drink and swill in every place they come,
Does not a little aggrauate mine ire,
Besides we hear the Emperor conioynes,
And stalls him in his own authority:
But all the mightier that their number is,
The greater glory reapes the victory,
Some friends have we beside drum stricke power,
The stern Polonian and the warlike Dane:
The king of Bohemia, and of Cycelie.
Are all become confederates with us,
And as I think are marching hither apace,
But soft I hear the music of their drums.
By which I guess that their approach is near.

Enter the King of Bohemia with Danes, and a Polonian Captain with other
soldiers another way. King of Boheme. King John of France, as league and
neighborhood,
Requires when friends are any way distressed,
I come to aid thee with my countries force,

Pol. Cap. And from great Musco fearful to the Turk,
And lofty Poland, nurse of hardy men,
I bring these seruitors to fight for thee,
Who willingly will venture in thy cause.

K. Io: Welcome Bohemian king, and welcome all,
This your great kindness I will not forget.
Besides your plentiful rewards in Crowns,
That from our Treasory ye shall receive,
There comes a hare braind Nation decked in pride,
The spoil of whom will be a trebble game,
And now my hope is full, my joy complete,
At Sea we are as puissant as the force;
Of Agamemnon in the Haven of Troy:
By land with Zerxes we compare of strength,
Whose soldiers drancke up rivers in their thirst:
Then Bayard like, blind ouerweaning Ned,
To reach at our imperial dyadem,
Is either to be swallowed of the waves,
Or hackt a pieces when thou come a shore.

Enter. Mar. Near to the cost I have discribde my Lord,
As I was busy in my watchful charge.
The proud Armado of king Edwards ships,
Which at the first far off when I did ken,
Seemd as it were a grove of withered pines,
But drawing near, their glorious bright aspect,
Their streaming Ensigns wrought of coulloured silk,
Like to a meddow full of sundry flowers,
Adornes the naked bosom of the earth.
Maiesticall the order of their course,
Figuring the horned Circle of the Moon,
And on the top gallant of the Admiral,
And likewise all the handmaides of his train:
The Arms of England and of France unite,
Are quartred equally by Heralds art;
Thus titely carried with a merry gale,
They plough the Ocean hitherward amayne:
Dare he already crop the Flewer de Luce:
I hope the honey being gathered thence,
He with the spider afterward approcht
Shall suck forth deadly venom from the leaves,
But where is out Navy, how are they prepared,
To wing them selves against this flight of Ravens.

Ma. They having knowledge, brought them by the scouts,
Did break from Anchor straight, and puffed with rage,
No otherwise then were their sails with wind,
Made forth, as when the empty Eagle flies,
To satifie his hungry griping mawe.

Io: Thees for thy news, return unto thy bark,
And if thou escape the bloody struck of war,
And do survive the conflict, come again,
And let us hear the manner of the fight, Exit.
Mean space my Lords, it is best we be dispersed,
To several places least they chance to land:
First you my Lord, with your Bohemian Troops,
Shall pitch your battles on the lower hand,
My eldest son the Duke of Normandy,
Togeither with this aid of Muscouites,
Shall clyme the higher ground an other way:
Here in the middle cost betwixt you both,
Phillip my youngest boy and I will lodge,
So Lords begone, and look unto your charge. Exunt.
You stand for France, an Empire fair and large,
Now tell me Phillip, what is their concept,
Touching the challenge that the English make.

Ph: I say my Lord, claim Edward what he can,
And bring he nere so plain a pedigree,
It Is you are in possession of the Crown,
And that's the surest point of all the Law:
But were it not, yet ere he should prevail,
I Will make a Conduit of my dearest blood,
Or chase those straggling vpstarts home again,

King: Well said young Phillip, call for bread and Wine,
That we may cheer our stomachs with repast, The battle hard a far off.
To look our foes more sternely in the face.
Now is begun the heavy day at Sea,
Fight Frenchmen, fight, be like the field of Bears,
When they defend their younglings in their Caves:
Stir angry Nemesis the happy helm,
That with the sulphur battles of your rage,
The English Fleet may be dispersed and sunk,

Ph. O Father how this eckoing Cannon shot. Shot.
Like sweet hermonie disgests my cates.
Now boy thou hear what thundering terror it is,
To buckle for a kingdoms souerentie,
The earth with giddie trembling when it shakes,
Or when the exalations of the air,
Breaks in extremity of lightning flash,
Affrights not more then kings when they dispose,
To show the rancor of their high swollen hearts,
Retreae is sounded, one side has the worse, Retreat.
O if it be the French, sweet fortune turn,
And in thy turning change the forward winds,
That with advantage of a savoring sky,
Our men may vanquish and thither fly.

Enter Mariner. My heart misgiues, say mirror of pale death,
To whom belongs the honor of this day,
Relate I pray thee, if thy breath will serve,
The sad discourse of this discomfiture.

Mar. I will my Lord.
My gracious sovereign, France has t^ne the foil,
And boasting Edward triumphs with success;
These Iron hearted Nauies,
When last I was reporter to your grace,
Both full of angry spleen of hope and fear:
Hasting to meet each other in the face,
At last conioynd, and by their Admiral,
Our Admiral encountered many shot,
By this the other that beheld these twain,
Give earnest penny of a further wrack,
Like fiery Dragons took their haughty flight,
And like wise meeting, from their smoky wombes,
Sent many grym Ambassadors of death,
Then began the day to turn to gloomy night,
And darkness did as well enclose the quick,
As those that were but newly reft of life,
No leisure serud for friends to bid farewell,
And if it had, the hideous noise was such,
As each to other seemed deaf and dombe,
Purple the Sea whose channel filled as fast,
With streaming gore that from the maimed fell,
As did her gushing moisture break into,
The cranny cleftures of the through shot planks,
Here flew a head dissuuered from the tronke,
There mangled arms and legs were tossed a loft,
As when a wherle wind takes the Summer dust,
And scatters it in middle of the air,
Then might ye see the reeling vessels split,
And tottering sink into the ruthlesse flood,
Until their lofty tops were seen no more.
All shifts were tried both for defense and hurt,
And now the effect of valor and of force,
Of resolution and of a cowardice:
We lively pictured, how the one for fame;
The other by compulsion laid about;
Much did the N^m per illa, that brave ship,
So did the black snake of Bullen, then which
A bonnier vessel never yet spread sail,
But all in vain, both Sun, the Wine and tide,
Revolted all unto our foe men's side,
That we perforce were feign to give them way,
And they are landed, thus my tale is done,
We have vntimly lost, and they have woone.

K. Io: Then rests there nothing but with present speed,
To join our several forces al in one,
And bid them battle ere they raingc to far,
Come gentle Phillip, let us hence depart,
This soldiers words have perst thy fathers heart.
Exeunt
Enter two French men, a woman and two little Children, meet them another
Citizens. One: Well met my masters: how now, what is the news,
And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff:
What is it quarter day that you remove,
And carry bag and baggage too?

Two: Quarter day, I and quartering pay I fear:
Have we not heard the news that flies abroad?

One: What news?

Three: How the French Navy is destroyed at Sea,
And that the English Army is arrived.

One: What then?

Two: What then quoth you? why is it not time to fly,
When envy and destruction is so nigh,

One. Content thee man, they are far enough from hence,
And will be met I warrant ye to their cost,
Before they break so far into the Realm.

Two: I so the Grasshopper does spend the time,
In mirthfull iollitie till Winter come,
And then too late he would redeem his time,
When frozen cold has nipt his careless head:
He that no sooner will provide a Cloak,
Then when he sees it does begin to reign,
May peradventure for his negilgence,
Be thoroughly washed when he suspects it not,
We that have charge, and such a train as this,
Must look in time, to look for them and us,
Least when we would, we cannot be relieved.

One: Be like you then despair of ill success,
And think your Country will be subiugate.

Three. We cannot tell, it is good to fear the worst.

One: Yet rather fight, then like unnatural sons,
For sake your loving parents in distress.

Two. Tush they that have already taken arms,
Are many fearful millions in respect
Of that small handful of our enemies:
But it is a rightful quarrel must prevail,
Edward is sonnne unto our late kings sister,
Where John Valoys, is three degrees removed.

Woe: Besides, there goes a Prophecy abroad,
Published by one that was a Friar once,
Whose Oracles have many times proved true,
And now he says the time will shortly come,
When as a Lion rowsed in the west,
Shall carry hence the fluerdeluce of France,
These I can tell ye and such like surmises,
Strike many french men cold unto the heart:

Enter a French man. Fly cuntry men and cytizens of France,
Sweet flowring peace the root of happy life,
Is quite a bandoned and expulst the land,
Insted of whom ransackt constraining war,
Syts like to Ravens upon your houses topps,
Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets.
And unrestrained make hauock as they pass,
The form whereof even now my self beheld,
Upon this fair mountain whence I came,
For so far of as I directed mine eyes,
I might perceive five Cities all on fire,
Come fields and vineyards burning like an oven,
And as the leaking vapor in the wind,
I turned but a side I like wise might disserne.
The poor inhabitants escapt the flame,
Fall numberles upon the soldiers pikes,
Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath,
Do tread the measures of their tragic march,
Upon the right hand comes the conquering King,
Upon the left is hot unbridled son,
And in the midst our nations glittering host,
All which though distant yet conspire in one,
To leave a desolation where they come,
Fly therefore Citizens if you be wise,
Seek out some habitation further of,
Here if you stay your wives will be a bused,
Your treasure sharde before your weeping eyes,
Shelter you your selves for now the storm does rise*
Away, away, me thinks I hear their drums,
Ah wreched France, I greatly fear thy fall,
Thy glory shakes like a tottering wall.

Enter King Edward and the Earl of Darby With Soldiers, and Gobin de Graie.
Kin: Where Is the French man by whose cunning guide,
We found the shalow of this River Sone,
And had direction how to pass the sea.

Go: Here my good Lord.

Kin: How art thou calde, tell me thy name.

Go: Gobin de Graie if please your excellence,

Kin: Then Gobin for the service thou have done,
We here enlarge and give thee liberty,
And for recompenc beside this good,
Thou shall receive five hundred marks in gold,
I know not how we should have met our son,
Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.

Enter Artoyes. Good news my Lord the prince is hard at hand,
And with him comes Lord Awdley and the rest,
Whom since our landing we could never meet.

Enter Prince Edward, Lord Awdley and Soldiers. K. E: Welcome fair Prince,
how have thou sped my son,
Since thy arrival on the coaste of France?

Pr. Ed: Succesfullie I thank the gracious heavens,
Some of their strongest Cities we have won,
As Harslen, Lie, Crotag, and Carentigne,
And others wasted, leaving at our heels,
A wide apparent field and beaten path,
For sollitarines to progress in,
Yet those that would submit we kindly pardned,
For who in scorn refused our poffered peace,
Indurde the penalty of sharp revenge.

Ki. Ed: Ah France, why should thou be this obstinate,
Against the kind imbracement of thy friends,
How gently had we thought to touch thy breast,
And set our foot upon thy tender mould,
But that in froward and disdainful pride
Thou like a skittish and untamed coult,
Do start aside and strike us with thy heels,
But tell me Ned, in all thy warlike course,
Have thou not seen the usurping King of France.

Pri. Yes my good Lord, and not two owers ago,
With full a hundred thousand fighting men,
Upon the one side with the rivers bank,
And on the other both his multitudes,
I feared he would have cropped our smaller power,
But happily perceiving your approach,
He has with drawn himself to Cressey plains,
Where as it seems by his good araie.
He means to bid us battle presently,

Kin. Ed: He shall be welcome that's the thing we crave.

Enter King John, Dukes of Normanndy and Lorraine, King of Boheme, young
Phillip, and Soldiers. John. Edward know that John the true king of France,
Musing thoust o^ldst incroach upon his land,
And in thy tyranous proceeding slay,
His faithful subjects, and subvert his Towns,
Spits in thy face, and in this manner following,
Obraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion,
First I condeme thee for a fugitive,
A theeuish pyrate, and a needy mate,
One that has either no abiding place,
Or else inhabiting some barraine soil,
Where neither hea^b or f^utfull grain is had,
Do altogether live by pilfering,
Next, insomuch thou have infringed thy faith,
Broke leage and solemn covenant made with me,
I hold thee for a false pernicious wretch,
And last of all, although I scorn to cope
With one such inferior to my self,
Yet in respect thy thirst is all for gold,
They labor rather to be feared then loved,
To satisfy thy lust in either part
Here am I come and with me have I brought,
Exceeding store of treasure, perle, and coin,
Leave therefore now to persecute the weak,
And armed entering conflict with the armd,
Let it be seen mongest other petty thefts,
How thou can win this pillage manfully.

K: Ed: If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,
Then is thy sallutation honey sweet,
But as the one has no such property,
So is the other most satiricall:
Yet wot how I regard thy worthles tants,
If thou have vttred them to foil my fame,
Or dym the reputation of my birth,
Know that thy woluish barking cannot hurt,
If slily to insinuate with the world,
And with a strumpets artifitiall line,
To painte thy vicious and deformed cause,
Be well assured the counterfeit will fade,
And in the end thy foul defects be seen,
But if thou did it to provoke me on,
As who should say I were but timorous,
Or coldly negligent did need a spur,
Bethink thy self how slack I was at sea,
Now since my landing I have wonn no towns,
Entered no further but upon the coast,
And there have ever since securely slept,
But if I have bin other wise imployd,
Imagine Valoys whether I intend
Toskirmish, not for pillage but for the Crown,
Which thou do wear and that I vow to have,
Or one of us shall fall in to this grave,

Pri Ed: Look not for cross inuectiues at our hands,
Or railing execrations of despite,
Let creeping serpents hide in hollow banckes,
Sting with their tongues; we have remorseles swords,
And they shall plead for us and our affairs,
Yet thus much breefly by my fathers leave,
As all the immodest poison of thy throat,
Is scandalous and most notorious lies,
And our pretended quarrel is truly just,
So end the battle when we meet to day,
May either of us prosper and prevail,
Or luckles cursed, receue eternal shame.

Kin Ed: That needs no further question, and I know
His conscience witnesses it is my right,
Therefore Valoys say, will thou yet resign,
Before the sickles thrust into the Corn,
Or that inkindled fury, turn to flame:

Ioh: Edward I know what right thou have in France,
And ere I basely will resign my Crown,
This Champion field shallbe a poole of blood,
And all our prospect as a slaughter house,

Pr Ed: I that approues thee tyrant what thou art,
No father, king, or shepherd of thy realm,
But one that tears her entrails with thy hands,
And like a thirsty tiger suckst her blood.

And: You peers of France, why do you follow him,
That is so prodigal to spend your lives?

Ch: Whom should they follow, aged impotent,
But he that is their true borne sovereign?

Kin: Obraidst thou him, because within his face,
Time has ingraud deep caracters of age:
Know that these grave scholars of experience,
Like stiff grown oaks, will stand unmouable,
When whirle wind quickly turns up younger trees.

Dar. Was ever any of thy fathers house king,
But thy self, before this present time,
Edwards great lineage by the mothers side,
Five hundred years has held the scepter up,
Judge then conspiratours by this descent,
Which is the true borne sovereign this or that.

Pri: Father range your battles, prate no more,
These English fame would spend the time in wodrs,
That night approaching, they might escape unfought.

K Ioh: Lords and my loving Subjects knows the time,
That your intended force must bide the touch,
Therefore my frinds consider this in brief,
He that you fight for is your natural King,
He against whom you fight a forrener:
He that you fight for rules in clemency,
And fames you with a mild and gentle byt,
He against whom you fight if he prevail,
Will straight in throne himself in tyrranie,
Make slaves of you, and with a heavy hand
Curtall and courb your swetest liberty.
Then to protect your Country and your King,
Let but the haughty Courrage of your hearts,
Answer the number of your able hands,
And we shall quickly chase these fugitives,
For what is this Edward but a belly god,
A tender and lascivious wantonness,
That the other day was almost dead for love,
And what I pray you is his goodly guard,
Such as but scant them of their chines of beef,
And take away their downie featherbedes,
And presently they are as resty stiff,
As twere a many over ridden iades,
Then French men scorn that such should be your Lords
And rather bind ye them in captive bands,

All Fra: Viue le Roy, God save King John of France.

Io: Now on this plain of Cressie spread your selves,
And Edward when thou dare, begin the fight:

Ki. Ed: We presently will meet thee John of France,
And English Lords let us resolve the day,
Either to clear us of that scandalous crime,
Or be intombed in our innocence,
And Ned, because this battle is the first,
That ever yet thou foughtest in pitched field,
As ancient custom is of Martialists,
To dub thee with the tipe of chivalry,
In solemn manner we will give thee arms,
Come therefore Heralds, orderly bring forth,
A strong attirement for the prince my son.

Enter four Heraldes bringing in a coat armor, a helmet, a lance, and a
shield. Kin: Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,
As with this armor I impall thy breast,
So be thy noble unrelenting heart,
Wald in with flint of matchless fortitude,
That never base affections enter there,
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comst,
Now follow Lords, and do him honor to.

Dar: Edward Plantagenet prince of Wales,
As I do set this helmet on thy head,
Where with the chamber of this brain is fenst,
So may thy temples with Bellonas hand,
Be still adornd with laurel victory,
Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou comst.

And. Edward Plantagenet prince of Wales,
Receive this lance into thy manly hand,
Use it in fashion of a brazen pen,
To draw forth bloody stratagems in France,
And print thy valiant deeds in honors book,
Fight and be valiant, vanquish where thou comst.

Art: Edward Plantagener prince of Wales,
Hold take this target, wear it on thy arm,
And may the view thereof like Perscus shield,
Astonish and transform thy gazing foes
To senseless images of meger death,
Fight and be valiant, couquer where thou comst.

Ki. Now wants there naught but knighthood, which deferd
We leave till thou have won it in the field,
My gracious father and ye forward peers,
This honor you have done me animates,
And chears my green yet scarce appearing strength,
With comfortable good persaging signs,
No otherwise then did old Iacobes words,
When as he breathed his blessings on his sons,
These hallowed gifts of yours when I profane,
Or use them not to glory of my God,
To patronage the fatherles and poor,
Or for the benefit of Englands peace,
Be numbe my joints, wax feeble both mine arms,
Wither my heart that like a saples tree,
I may remain the map of infamy.

K. Ed: Then this our steelde Battles shall be rainged,
The leading of the vowarde Ned is thine,
To dignifie whose lusty spirit the more
We temper it with Audlys gravity,
That co^^age and experience joined in one,
Your manage may be second unto none,
For the main battles I will guide my self,
And Darby in the rereward march behind,
That orderly disposd and set in ray,
Let us to horse and God grant us the day.
Exeunt:
Alarm. Enter a many French men flying. After them Prince Edward running. Then
enter King John and Duke of Loraine. John. Oh Lorrain say, what mean our men
to fly,
Our number is far greater then our foes,

Lor. The garrison of Genoacs my Lord,
That came from Paris weary with their march,
Grudging to be soddenly imployd,
No sooner in the forefront took their place.
But strait retyring so dismaide the rest,
As likewise they betook themselves to flight
In which for have to make a safe escape,
More in the clustering throng are pressed to death,
Then by the ennimie a thousand fold.

K. Io: O hapless fortune, let us yet assay,
If we can counsel some of them to stay.

Enter King Edward and Audley. Ki, E: Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the
chase,
With draw our powers unto this little hill,
And here a season let us breath our selves,

Au. I will my Lord.
Exit, sound Retreat.
K. Ed. Just dooming heaven, whose secret providence,
To our gross judgment is inscrutable,
How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works,
That have this day given way unto the right,
And made the wicked stumble at them selves.

Enter Artoys. Rescue king Edward, rescue, for thy son,

Kin: Rescue Artoys, what is he prisoner?
Or by violence fell beside his horse.

Ar. Neither my Lord, but narrowly beset,
With turning Frenchmen, whom he did pursue,
As it is impossible that he should escape.
Except your highness presently descend.

Kin: Tut let him fight, we gave him arms to day.
And he is laboring for a knighthood man.

Enter Derby. Da: The Prince my Lord, the Prince, oh succor him,
He Is close incompast with a world of odds.

Ki: Then will he win a world of honor to,
If he by valor can redeem him thence,
If not, what remedy, we have more sons,
Then one to comfort our declyning age.

Enter Audley. Au, Renowned Edward, give me leave I pray,
To lead my soldiers where I may relieve,
Your Graces son, in danger to be slain,
The snares of French, like Emmets on a bank,
Muster about him whilst he Lion like,
Entangled in the net of their assaults,
Frantiquely wrends and byts the wouen toil,
But all in vain, he cannot free him self.

K: Ed: Audley content, I will not have a man,
On pain of death sent forth to succor him:
This is the day, ordaynd by desteny,
To season his courage with those grievous thoughts,
That if he breaks out, Nestors years on earth,
Will make him savor still of this exployt.

Dar: Ah but he shall not live to see those days,

Ki: Why then his Ephitaph, is lasting praise.

An: Yet good my Lord, it is too much wilfulnes,
To let his blood be spilt that may be saude,

Kin. Exclayme no more, for none of you can tell,
Whether a borrowed aid will serve or no,
Perhapps he is already slain or taken:
And dare a Falcon when she is in her flight,
And ever after she will be huggard like:
Let Edward be delivered by our hands,
And still in danger hele expect the like,
But if himself, himself redeem from thence,
He will have vanquished cheerful death and fear,
And ever after dread their force no more,
Then if they were but babes or Captive slaves.

And. O cruel Father, farewell Edward then.

Da: Farewell sweet Prince, the hope of chiualry,

Art: O would my life might ransom him from death.

K. Ed: But soft me thinks I hear,
The dismal charge of Trumpets loud retreat:
All are not slain I hope that went with him,
Some will return with tidings good or bad.

Enter Prince Edward in triumph, bearing in his hand hit shiuered Lance, and
the King of Boheme, borne before, wrapped in the Coullours: They run and
embrace him. And, O joyful sight, victorious Edward lives.

Der: Welcome brave Prince.

Ki: Welcome Plantagenet.

Pr. kneel and kiss his fathers hand First having done my duty as beseemed
Lords I^e greet you all with hearty thanks,
And now behold after my winters toil,
My paynefull voyage on the boystrous sea,
Of wars devouring gulphes and steely rocks,
I bring my fraught unto the wished port,
My Summers hope, my travels sweet reward:
And here with humble duty I present,
This sacrifice, this first fruit of my sword,
Cropped and cut down even at the gate of death:
The king of Boheme father whom I slew,
Whom you said, had intrencht me round about,
And lay as thick upon my battered crest,
As on an Anu^ll with their ponderous glaues,
Yet marble courage, still did underprop,
And when my weary arms with often blows,
Like the continual laboring Wood-mans Axe,
That is enioynd to fell a load of Oaks,
Began to faulter, straight I would recover:
My gifts you gave me, and my zealous vow,
And then new courage made me fresh again,
That in despite I c^a^d my passage forth.
And put the multitude to speedy flight: his Sword borne by a Soldier.
Lo this has Edwards hand filled your request,
And done I hope the duty of a Knight

Ki: I well thou have deserud a knighthood Ned,
And therefore with thy sword, yet reaking warm,
With blood of those that fought to be thy bane,
Arise Prince Edward, trusty knight at arms,
This day thou have confounded me with joy,
And proud thy self fit heir unto a king:

Pr: Here is a note my gracious Lord of those,
That in this conflict of our foes were slain,
Eleven Princes of esteem, Four score Barons,
A hundred and twenty knights, and thirty thousand
Common soldiers, and of our men a thousand.
Our God be praised, Now John of France I hope,
Thou know King Edward for no wantonness,
No love sick cockney nor his soldiers iades,
But which way is the fearful king escapt?

Pr: Toward Poyctiers noble father, and his sons,

King. Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still,
Myself and Derby will to Calice straight;
And there begyrt that Haven town with seege:
Now lies it on an vpshot, therefore strike,
And wistly follow whiles the games on foot.

Ki. What Pictures this.

Pr: A Pelican my Lord,
Wounding her bosom with her crooked beak,
That so her nest of young ones might be fed,
With drops of blood that issue from her heart,
The motto Sic and vos, and so should you,
Exeunt.
Enter Lord Mountford with a Coronet in his hand, with him the Earl of
Salisbury. Mo: My Lord of Salisbury since by our aid,
Mine ennemie Sir Charles of Bloys is slain,
And I again am quietly possessed,
In Btittaines Dukedom, know that I resolve,
For this kind furtherance of your king and you,
To swear allegiance to his majesty:
In figne where of receive this Coronet,
Bear it unto him, and with all mine oath,
Never to be but Edwards faithful friend.

Sa: I take it Mountsort, thus I hope ear long,
The whole Dominions of the Realm of France
Will Be surrendered to his conquering hand: Exit
Now if I knew but safely how to pass,
I would to Calice gladly meet his Grace,
Whether I am by letters certified.
Yet he intends to have his host remooude,
It shall be so, this policy will serve,
Ho whose within? bring Villiers to me.

Enter Villeirs. Villiers, thou know thou art my prisoner,
And that I might for ransom if I would,
Require of thee a hundred thousand Francks,
Or else retain and keep thee captive still:
But so it is, that for a smaller charge,
Thou may be quit and if thou will thy self,
And this it is, procure me but a pasport,
Of Charles the Duke of Normandy, that I,
Without restraint may have recourse to Callis,
Through all the Countries where he has to do.
Which thou may easily obtain I think,
By reason I have often heard thee say,
He and thou were students once together:
And then thou shall be set at liberty,
How say thou, will thou undertake to do it?

Vil. I will my Lord, but I must speak with him.

Sa. Why so thou shall, take Horse and post from hence,
Only before thou go, swear by thy faith,
That if thou can not compass my desire,
Thou will return my prisoner back again,
And that shall be sufficient warrant for me.

Vil: To that condition I agree my Lord,
And will unfeignedly perform the same.
Exit.
Sal: Farewell Villiers,
Thus once I mean to try a French man's faith.
Exit.
Enter King Edward and Derby with Soldiers. Kin: Since they refuse our
proffered league my Lord,
And will not open their gates and let us in,
We will entrench our selves on every side,
That neither vituals, nor supply of men,
May come to succor this accursed town,
Famine shall combat where our swords are stopped.

Enter six poor Frenchmen. Der. The promised aid that made them stand aloof,
Is now retirde and gone an other way:
It will repent them of their stubborn will,
But what are these poor ragged slaves my Lord?

Ki: Edw: Ask what they are, it seems they come from Callis.

Der. You wretched patterns of despair and woe,
What are you living men, er glyding ghosts,
Crept from your graves to walk upon the earth,

Poor: No ghosts my Lord, but men that breath a life,
Far worse then is the quiet sleep of death:
We are distressed poor inhabitants,
That long have been deseased, sick and lame;
And now because we are not fit to serve,
The Captain of the town has thrust us forth,
That so expense of victuals may be saved.

K. Ed. A charitable deed no doubt, and worthy praise:
But how do you imagine then to speed?
We are your enemies in such a case,
We can no less but put ye to the sword,
Since when we proffered truce, it was refusde,

So: And if your grace no otherwise vouchsafe,
As welcome death is unto us as life.

Ki: Poor silly men, much wronged, and more distressed,
Go Derby go, and see they be relieud,
Command that victuals be appointed them,
And give to every one five Crowns a piece:
The Lion scorns to touch the yielding pray,
And Edwards sword must fresh it self in such,
As wilful stubbornnes has made perverse.

Enter Lord Pearsie. Ki: Lord Persie welcome: what is the news in England:

Per: The Queen my Lord comes here to your Grace,
And from her highness, and the Lord vicegerent,
I bring this happy tidings of success,
David of Scotland lately up in arms,
Thinking belike he soonest should prevail,
Your highness being absent from the Realm,
Is by the fruitful service of your peers,
And painful travel of the Queen her self:
That big with child was every day in arms,
Vanquished, subdude, and taken prisoner.

Ki: Thanks Persie for thy news with all my heart,
What was he took him prisoner in the field.

Per. A Esquire my Lord, John Copland is his name:
Who since entreated by her Majesty,
Denies to make surrender of his prize,
To any but unto your grace alone:
Whereat the Queen is greouously displeasd.

Ki: Well then well have a Pursiuaunt dispatch,
To summon Copland hither out of hand,
And with him he shall bring his prisoner king.

Per: The Queen my Lord her self by this at Sea,
And purposes as soon as wind will serve,
To land at Callis, and to visit you,

Ki: She shall be welcome, and to wait her coming,
I Will pitch my tent near to the sandy shore.

Enter a Captain. The Burgesses of Callis mighty king,
Have by a counsel willingly decreed,
To yield the town and Castle to your hands,
Upon condition it will please your grace,
To grant them benefit of life and goods.

K. Ed. They will so: Then belike they may command,
Dispose, elect, and govern as they list,
No sir, tell them since they did refuse,
Our princely clemency at first proclaimed,
They shall not have it now although they would,
Will accept of naught but fire and sword,
Except within these two days six of them
That are the welthiest marchaunts in the town,
Come naked all but for their linen shirts,
With each a halter hanged about his neck,
And prostrate yield themselves upon their knees,
To be afflicted, hanged, or what I please,
And so you may inform their masterships.
Exeunt
Cap. Why this it is to trust a broken staff.
Had we not been persuaded John our King,
Would with his army have releeud the town,
We had not stood upon defiance so:
But nowt's past that no man can recall,
And better some do go to wrack then all.
Exit.
Enter Charles of Normandy and Villiers Ch: I wounder Villiers, thou should
importune me
For one that is our deadly ennemie.

Vil: Not for his sake my gracious Lord so much,
Am I become an earnest advocate,
As that thereby my ransom will be quit,

Ch: Thy ransom man: why need thou talk of that?
Art thou not free? and are not all occasions,
That happen for advantage of our foes,
To be accepted of, and stood upon?

Vil: No good my Lord except the same be just,
For profit must with honor be comixt,
Or else our actions are but scandalous:
But letting pass these intricate objections,
Wilt please your highness to subscribe or no?

Chapter Villiers I will not, nor I cannot do it,
Salisbury shall not have his will so much,
To claim a pasport how it pleases himself,

Vil: Why then I know the extremity my Loid,
I must return to prison whence I came,
Ch Return, I hope thou will not,
What bird that has escapt the fowlers gin,
Will not beware how she is insnard again:
Or what is he so senceles and secure,
That having hardely past a dangerous gulf,
Will put him self in peril there again.

Vil: Ah but it is mine oath my gracious Lord,
Which I in conscience may not violate,
Or else a kingdom should not draw me hence.

Ch: Thine oath, why that does bind thee to abide:
Have thou not sworn obedience to thy Prince?

Vil: In all things that uprightly he commands:
But either to persuade or threaten me,
Not to perform the covenant of my word,
Is lawless, and I need not to obey.

Ch: Why is it lawful for a man to kill,
And not to break a promise with his foe?

Vil: To kill my Lord when war is once proclaymd,
So that our quarrel be for wrongs receaude,
No doubt is lawfully permitted us:
But in an oath we must be well aduisd,
How we do swear, and when we once have sworn,
Not to infringe it though we die therefore:
Therefore my Lord, as willing I return,
As if I were to fly to paradise.

Ch: Stay my Villeirs, thine honorable mind,
Deserves to be eternally admirde,
Thy suit shall be no longer thus deferd:
Give me the paper, I Will subscribe to it,
And wheretofore I loved thee as Villeirs,
Hereafter I Will embrace thee as my felfe,
Stay and be still in favor with thy Lord.

Vil: I humbly thank your grace, I must dispatch,
And send this pasport first unto the Earl,
And then I will attend your highness pleasure.

Chapter Do so Villeirs, and Charles when he has need,
Be such his soldiers, howsoever he speed.
Exit Villeirs.
Enter King John. K. Io: Come Charles and arm thee, Edward is intrapt,
The Prince of Wales is fallen into our hands,
And we have compast him he cannot escape.

Ch: But will your highness fight to day.

Io: What else my son, he is scar^^ eight thousand strong
and we are threescore thousand at the least,

Ch: I have a prophecy my gracious Lord,
Wherein is written what success is like
To happen us in this outrageous war,
It was delivered me at Cresses field,
By one that is an aged Hermyt there,
when fethered soul shall make thine army tremble,
and flint stones rise and break the battle ray:
Then think on him that does not now dissemble
For that shall be the haples dreadful day,
Yet in the end thy foot thou shall advance,
as far in England, as thy foe in France,

Io: By this it seems we shall be fortunate:
For as it is impossible that stones
Should ever rise and break the battle ray,
Or airie foul make men in arms to quake,
So is it like we shall not be subdude:
Or say this might be true, yet in the end,
Since he does promise we shall drive him hence,
And forage their Country as they have don ours
By this revenge, that loss will seem the less,
But all are fryuolous, fancies, toys and dreams,
Once we are sure we have insnard the son,
Catch we the father after how we can.
Exeunt.
Enter Prince Edward, Audley and others. Pr: Audley the arms of death embrace
us round,
And comfort have we none save that to die,
We pay sower earnest for a sweeter life,
At Cressey field our Clouds of Warlike smoke,
chokt up those French mouths, and disseuered them
But now their multitudes of millions hide
Masking as twere the beauteous burning Sun,
Leaving no hope to us but sullen dark,
And eye less terror of all ending night.

Au. This sudden, mighty, and expedient head,
That they have made, fair Prince is wonderful.
Before us in the vallie lies the king,
Vantagd with all that heaven and earth can yield,
His party stronger battaild then our whole:
His son the brauing Duke of Normandy,
Has trimd the Mountain on our right hand up,
In shining plate, that now the aspiring hill,
Shows like a silver quarrie, or an orb
Aloft the which the Banners bannarets,
And new replenisht pendants cuff the air,
And beat the winds, that for their gaudinesse,
Struggles to kiss them on our left handlies,
Phillip the younger issue of the king,
Coting the other hill in such arraie,
That all his gilded upright pikes do seem,
Straight trees of gold, the pendant leaves,
And their device of Antique heraldry,
Quartred in colors seeming sundy fruits,
Makes it the Orchard of the Hesperides,
Behind us two the hill does bear his height,
For like a half Moon opening but one way,
It rounds us in, there at our backs are lodgd,
The fatal Crosbowes, and the battle there,
Is gouernd by the rough Chattillion,
Then thus it stands, the valleie for our flight,
The king binds in, the hills on either hand,
Are proudly royalized by his sons,
And on the Hill behind stands certain death,
In pay and service with Chattillion.

Pr: Deaths name is much more mighty then his deeds,
Thy parcelling this power has made it more,
As many sands as these my hands can hold,
are but my handful of so many sands,
Then all the world, and call it but a power:
Easily taken up and quickly thrown away,
But if I stand to count them sand by sand
The number would confound my memory,
And make a thousand millions of a task,
Which briefly is no more indeed then one,
These quarters, spuadrons, and these regements,
Before, behind us, and on either hand,
Are but a power, when we name a man,
His hand, his foot, his head has several strengthes,
And being al but one self instant strength,
Why all this many, Audely is but one,
And we can call it all but one man's strength:
He that has far to go, tells it by miles,
If he should tell the steps, it kills his heart:
The drops are infinite that make a flood,
And yet thou know we call it but a Rain:
There is but one France, one king of France,
That France has no more kings, and that same king
Has but the puissant legion of one king?
And we have one, then apprehend no ods,
For one to one, is fair equality.

Enter an Herald from king John. Pr: What tidings messenger, be plain and
brief.

He: The king of France my sovereign Lord and master,
Greets by me his fo, the Prince of Walls,
If thou call forth a hundred men of name
Of Lords, Knights, Esquires and English gentlemen,
And with thy self and those kneel at his feet,
He straight will fold his bloody colors up,
And ransom shall redeem lives forfeited:
If not, this day shall drink more English blood,
Then ere was buried in our Bryttish earth,
What is the answer to his proffered mercy?

Pr, This heaven that couers France contains the mercy
That draws from me submissiue orizons,
That such base breath should vanish from my lips
To urge the plea of mercy to a man,
The Lord forbid, return and tell the king,
My tongue is made of steel, and it shall beg
My mercy on his coward burgonet.
Tell him my colors are as red as his,
My men as bold, our English arms as strong,
return him my defiance in his face.

He. I go.

Enter another. Pr: What news with thee?

He. I he Duke of Normandy my Lord and master
Pitying thy youth is so ingirt with peril,
By me has sent a nimble ioynted iennet,
As swift as ever yet thou did bestride,
And therewithal he counsels thee to fly,
Else death himself has sworn that thou shall die.

P: Back with the beast unto the beast that sent him
Tell him I cannot sit a cowards horse,
Bid him to day bestride the jade himself,
For I will stain my horse quite ore with blood,
And double guild my spurs, but I will catch him,
So tell the capring boy, and get thee gone.

Enter another. He: Edward of Wales, Phillip the second son
To the most mighty christian king of France,
Seeing thy bodies living date expird,
All full of charity and christian love,
Commends this book full fraught with prayers,
To thy fair hand, and for thy hour of life,
Entreats thee that thou meditate therein,
And arm thy soul for her long journey toward.
Thus have I done his bidding, and return.

Pr. Herald of Phillip greet thy Lord from me,
All good that he can send I can receive,
But think thou not the unadvised boy,
Has wronged himself in this far tendering me,
Happily he cannot pray without the book,
I think him no divine extemporall,
Then render back this common place of prayer,
To do himself good in adversity,
Besides, he knows not my sins quality,
and therefore knows no prayers for my avail,
Ere night his prayer may be to pray to God,
To put it in my heart to hear his prayer,
So tell the courtly wanton, and be gone.

He. I go.

Pr. How confident their strength and number makes them,
Now Audley sound those silver wings of thine,
And let those milk white messengers of time,
Show thy times learning in this dangerous time,
Thy self art busy, and bit with many broiles,
And stratagems sore past with iron pens,
Are texted in thine honorable face,
Thou art a married man in this distress.
But danger wooes me as a blushing maid,
Teach me an answer to this perilous time.

And. To die is all as common as to live,
The one in choice the other holds in chase,
For from the instant we begin to live,
We do pursue and hunt the time to die,
First bud we, then we blow, and after seed,
Then presently we fall, and as a shade
Follows the body, so we sollow death,
If then we hunt for death, why do we fear it?
If we fear it, why do we follow it?
If we do tear, how can we shun it?
If we do fear, with fear we do but aid
The thing we fear, to seize on us the sooner,
If we fear not, then no resolved proffer,
Can overthrow the limit of our fate,
For whether ripe or rotten, drop we shall,
as we do draw the lotterie of our doom.

Pri. Ah good old man, a thousand thousand armors,
These words of thine have buckled on my back,
Ah what an idiot have thou made of life,
To seek the thing it fears, and how disgrast,
The imperial victory of murdring death,
Since all the lives his conquering arrows strike,
Seek him, and he not them, to shame his glory,
I will not give a penny for a life,
Nor half a half penie to shun grim death,
Since for to live is but to seek to die,
And dying but beginning of new life,
Let come the hour when he that rules it will,
To live or die I hold indifferent.
Exeunt.
Enter king John and Charles. Ioh: A sudden darkness has defast the sky,
The winds are crept into their caves for fear,
the leaves move not, the world is hushed and still,
the birds cease singing, and the wandering brooks,
Murmr no wonted greeting to their shores,
Silence attends some wonder, and expects
That heaven should pronounce some prophecy,
Where or from whom proceeds this silence Charles?

Ch: Our men with open mouths and staring eyes,
Look on each other, as they did attend
Each others words, and yet no creature speaks,
A tongue-tied fear has made a midnight hour,
and speeches sleep through all the waking regions.

Ioh: But now the pompeous Sun in all his pride,
Looked through his golden coach upon the world,
and on a sudden has he hid himself,
that now the under earth is as a grave,
Dark, deadly, silent, and uncomfortable.
A clamor of ravens Hark, what a deadly outcrie do I hear?

Chapter Here comes my brother Phillip.

Ioh. All dismayed. What fearful words are those thy looks presage?

Pr. A flight, a flight.

Ioh: Coward what flight? thou lie there needs no flight.

Pr. A flight.

Kin: Awake thy crauen powers, and tell on
the substance of that very fear in deed,
Which is so ghastly printed in thy face,
What is the matter?

Pr. A flight of ugly ravens
Do croke and houer ore our soldiers heads,
And keep in triangles and cornerd squares,
Right as our forces are imbatteled,
With their approach there came this sudden fog,
Which now has hid the airie flower of heaven,
And made at noone a night unnatural,
Upon the quaking and dismayed world;
In brief, our soldiers have let fall their arms,
and stand like metamorphosd images,
Bloudlesse and pale, one gazing on another.

Io: I now I call to mind the prophecy,
But I must give no enter^ to a fear,
Return and harten up (...) yielding souls,
Tell them the ravens seeing them in arms,
So many fair against a famisht few,
Come but to dine upon their handie work,
and pray upon the carrion that they kill,
For when we see a horse laid down to die,
although not dead, the ravenous birds
Sit watching the departure of his life,
Even so these ravens for the carcases,
Of those poor English that are marked to die,
Houer about, and if they cry to us,
It Is but for meat that we must kill for them,
Away and comfort up my soldiers,
and sound the trumpets, and at once dispatch
This little business of a silly fraud.
Exit Pr.
Another noise, Salisbury brought in by a French Captain. Cap: Behold my
liege, this knight and forty mo,
Of whom the better part are slain and sled,
With all endeavor sought to break our ranks,
And make their wa^e to the incompast prince,
Dispose of him as please your majesty.

Io: Go, and the next bough, soldier, that thou see,
Disgrace it with his body presently,
Eor I do hold a tree in France too good,
To be the gallows of an English thief.

Sa: My Lord of Normandy, I have your pass,
And warrant for my safety through this land.

Chapter Villiers procurd it for thee, did he not?

Sal: He did.

Ch: And it is current, thou shall freely pass.

En: Io: I freely to the gallows to be hanged,
Without denial or impediment.
Away with him.

Vil. I hope your highness will not so disgrace me,
and dash the virtue of my seal at arms,
He has my never broken name to show,
Carectred with this princely hand of mine,
and rather let me leave to be a prince,
Than break the stable verdict of a prince,
I do beseech you let him pass in quiet,

Ki: Thou and thy word lie both in my command,
What can thou promise that I cannot break?
Which of these twain is greater infamy,
To disobey thy father or thy self?
Thy word nor no man's may exceed his power,
Nor that same man does never break his word,
That keeps it to the utmost of his power.
The breach of faith dwells in the souls consent,
Which if thy self without consent do break,
Thou art not charged with the breach of faith,
Go hang him, for thy lisence lies in me,
and my constraint stands the excuse for thee.

Chapter What am I not a soldier in my word?
Then arms adieu, and let them fight that list,
Shall I not give my girdle from my wast,
But with a gardion I shall be controld,
To say I may not give my things away,
Upon my soul, had Edward prince of Wales
Ingagde his word, writ down his noble hand,
For all your knights to pass his fathers land,
The royal king to grace his warlike son,
Would not alone safe conduct give to them*
But with all bounty seasted them and theirs.

Kin: Dwelst thou on presidents, then be it so,
Say Englishman of what degree thou art.

Sa: An Earl in England, though a prisoner here,
And those that know me call me Salisburie.

Kin: Then Salisburie, say whether thou art bound.

Sa. To Callice where my liege king Edward is.

Kin: To Callice Salisburie, then to Callice pack,
and bid the king prepare a noble grave,
To put his princely son black Edward in,
and as thou trauelst westward from this place,
Some two leagues hence there is a lofty hill,
Whose top seems toplesse, for the embracing sky,
Does hide his high head in her a zure bosom,
Upon whose tall top when thy foot attaines,
Look back upon the humble vale beneath,
Humble of late, but now made proud with arms,
and thence behold the wretched prince of Wales,
Hoopt with a bond of iron round about,
After which sight to Callice spur amain,
and say the prince was smoothered, and not slain,
and tell the king this is not all his ill,
For I will greet him ere he thinks I will,
Away be gone, the smoke but of our shot,
Will choke our foes, though bullets hit them not.
Exit.
Allarum. Enter prince Edward and Artoys. Art: How fares your grace, are you
not shot my Lord?

Pri: No dear Artoys, but choakt with dust and smoke,
And stepped aside for breath and fresher air.

Art. Breath then, and too it again, the amazed French
are quite distract with gazing on the crows,
and were our quiuers full of shafts again,
Your grace should see a glorious day of this,
O for more arrows Lord, that's our want.

Pri. Courage Artoys, a fig for feathered shafts,
When feathered fowls do bandie on our side,
What need we fight, and sweat, and keep a coile,
(...) outscolde our adversaries
Up, up Artoys, the ground it self is armd,
Fire containing flint, command our bows
To hurl away their pretty colored Ew,
and to it with stones, away Artoys, away,
My soul does prophecy we win the day.
Exeunt.
Allarum. Enter king John. Our multitudes are in themselves confounded,
Dismayed, and distraught, swift starting fear
Has buzd a cold dismaie through all our army,
and every petty disadvantage promptes
The fear possessed abject soul to fly,
My self whose spirit is steel to their dull lead,
What with recalling of the prophecy,
and that our native stones from English arms
Rebel against us, find my self attainted
With strong surprise of weak and yielding fear.

Enter Charles. Fly father fly, the French do kill the French,
Some that would stand, let drive at some that fly,
Our drums strike nothing but discouragement,
Our trumpets sound dishonor, and retire,
The spirit of fear that fears naught but death,
Cowardly works confusion on it self.

Enter Phillip. Pluck out your eyes, and see not this days shame,
An arm has beat an army, one poor David
Has with a stone foild twenty stout Goliahs,
Some twenty naked staruelings with small flints,
Has driven back a puisant host of men,
Araid and fenst in all accomplements,

Ioh: Mordiu they quait at us, and kill us up,
No less than forty thousand wicked elders,
Have forty lean slaves this day stoned to death.

Ch: O that I were some other countryman,
This day has set derision on the French,
and all the world wilt blurt and scorn at us.

Kin: What is there no hope left?

Pr: No hope but death to bury up our shame,

Ki. Make up once more with me the twentieth part
Of those that live, are men in ow to quail,
The feeble handful on the adverse part.

Chapter Then charge again, if heaven be not opposd
We cannot loose the day.

Kin. On away.
Exeunt
Enter Audley wounded, and rescued by two squirs. Esquire. How fares my Lord;

And. Even as a man may do
That dines at such a bloody feast as this.

Esquire. I hope my Lord that is no mortal scarre,

And. No matter if it be, the count is cast,
and in the worst ends but a mortal man,
Good friends convey me to the princely Edward
That in the crimson bravery of my blood,
I may become him with saluting him,
I Will smile and tell him that this open scarre,
Does end the harvest of his Audleys war.
Ex.
Enter prince Edward, king John, Charles, and all with Ensigns spread. Retreat
sounded. Pri. Now John in France, and lately John of France,
Thy bloody Ensigns are my captive colors,
and you high vanting Charles of Normandy,
That once to day sent me a horse to fly,
are now the subjects of my clemency.
Fie Lords, is it not a shame that English boys,
Whose early days are yet not worth a beard,
Should in the bosom of your kingdom thus,
One against twenty beat you up together.

Kin. Thy fortune, not thy force has conquered us.

Pri. an argument that heaven aides the right,
See, see, Artoys does bring with him along,
the late good counsel giver to my soul,
VVelcome Artoys, and welcome Phillip to,
Who now of you or I have need to pray,
Now is the proverb verefied in you,
Too bright a morning breeds a ^ing day.

Sound Trumpets, enter Audley. But say, what grym discoragement comes here,
Alas what thousand armed men of France,
Have writ that note of death in Audleys face:
Speak thou that wooest death with thy careless smile
and lookst so merrily upon thy grave,
As if thou were enamored on thine end,
What hungry sword has so bereaud thy face,
And lopt a true friend from my loving soul:

Au. O Prince thy sweet bemoning speech to me.
Is as a morneful knell to one dead sick.

Pr: Dear Audley if my tongue ring out thy end:
My arms shall be the grave, what may I do,
To win thy life, or to revenge thy death,
If thou will drink the blood of captyue kings,
Or that it were restoritiue, command
A Heath of kings blood, and I Will drink to thee,
If honor may dispense for thee with death,
The never dying honor of this day,
Share wholly Audley to thy self and live.

And: Victorious Prince, that thou art so, behold
A Caesar's fame in kings captivity;
If I could hold dym death but at a bay,
Till I did see my liege thy loyal father,
My soul should yield this Castle of my flesh,
This mangled tribute with all willingness;
To darkness consummation, dust and Worms.

Pr: Cheerely bold man, thy soul is all to proud,
To yield her City for one little breach,
Should be divorced from her earthly spouse,
By the soft temper of a French man's sword:
Lo, to repair thy life, I give to thee,
Three thousand Marks a year in English land.

Au: I take thy gift to pay the debts I owe:
These two poor Esquires redeemd me from the French
With lusty and deer hazard of their lives;
What thou have given me I give to them,
And as thou love me Prince, lay thy consent.
To this bequeath in my last testament.

Pr: Renowned Audley, live and have from me,
This gift twice doubled to these Esquires and thee
But live or die, what thou have given away,
To these and theirs shall lasting freedom stay,
Come gentlemen, I will see my friend bestowed,
With in an easy Litter, then well martch,
Proudly toward Callis with tryumphant pace,
Unto my royal father, and there bring,
The tribut of my wars, fair France his king.
Ex.
Enter six Citizens in their Shirts, bare foot, with halters about their
necks. Enter King Edward, Queen Phillip, Derby, soldiers. Ed. No more Queen
Phillip, pacify your self,
Copland, except he can excuse his fault,
Shall find displeasure written in our looks,
And now unto this proud resisting town,
Soldiers assault, I will no longer stay,
To be deluded by their false delays,
Put all to sword, and make the spoil your own.

All: Mercy king Edward, mercy gracious Lord.

Ki: Gontemptuous villains, call ye now for truce?
Mine ears are stopped against your bootelesse cries,
Sound drums allarum, draw threatening swords?

All: Ah noble Prince, take pity on this town,
And hear us mighty king:
We claim the promise that your highness made,
The two days respit is not yet expirde,
And we are come with willingness to bear,
What tortering death or punishment you please,
So that the trembling multitude be saved,

Ki: My promise, well I do confess as much;
But I require the cheifest Citizens,
And men of most account that should submit,
You peradventure are but servile grooms,
Or some fellonious robbers on the Sea,
Whom apprehended law would execute,
Albeit severity lay dead in us,
No no ye cannot ouerreach us thus,

Two: The Sun dread Lord that in the western fall,
Beholds us now low brought through misery,
Did in the Orient purple of the morn,
Salute our coming forth when we were known
Or may our portion be with damned fiends,

Ki: If it be so, then let our covenant stand,
We take possession of the town in peace,
But for your selves look you for no remorse,
But as imperial justice has decreed,
Your bodies shall be dragd about these walls,
And after feel the stroke of quartering steel,
This is your dome, go souldiets see it done.

Qu: Ah be more mild unto these yielding men,
It is a glorious thing to stablish peace,
And kings approach the nearest unto God,
By giving life and fafety unto men,
As thou intendest to be king of France,
So let her people live to call thee king,
For what the sword cuts down or fire has spoyld
Is held in reputation none of ours.

Ki: Although experience teach us, this is true,
That peaceful quietness brings most delight,
When most of all abuses are controld,
Yet insomuch, it shall be known that we,
As Well can master our affections,
As conquer other by the dynt of sword,
Phillip prevail, we yield to thy request,
These men shall live to boast of clemency,
And tyranny strike terror to thy self.

Two: long live your highness, happy be your reign

Ki: Go get you hence, return unto the town,
And if this kindness has deserud your love,
Learn then to reverence Edw. as your king. Ex.
Now might we hear of our affairs abroad,
We would till glomy Winter were ore spent,
Dispose our men in garrison a while,
But who comes here?

Enter Copland and King David. De, Copland my Lord, and David King of Scots;

Ki: Is this the proud presumtious Esquire of the North,
That would not yield his prisoner to my Queen,

Cop: I am my liege a Northen Esquire indeed,
But neither proud nor insolent I trust.

Ki: What moude thee then to be so obstinate,
To contradict our royal Queens desire?

Co. No wilful disobedience mighty Lord,
But my desert and public law at arms.
I took the king my self in single fight,
and like a soldier would be loath to loose
The least pre-eminence that I had won.
And Copland straight upon your highness charge,
Is come to France, and with a lowly mind,
Does vale the bonnet of his victory:
Receive dread Lord the custom of my fraught,
The wealthy tribute of my laboring hands,
Which should long since have been surrendered up
Had but your gracious self bin there in place,

Q But Copland thou did scorn the kings command
Neglecting our commission in his name.

Cop. His name I reverence, but his person more,
His name shall keep me in alleagaunce still,
But to his person I will bend my knee.

King. I pray thee Phillip let displeasure pass:
This man does please me, and I like his words,
For what is he that will attmpt great deeds
and loose the glory that ensues the same,
all rivers have recourse unto the Sea,
and Coplands faith relation to his king,
Kneel therefore down, now rise king Edwards knight,
and to maintain thy state I freely give,
Five hundred marks a year to thee and thine
welcomlord Salisburie, what news from Britain

Enter Salsbury. Sa: This mighty king, the Country we have won,
And Charles de Mountford regent of that place,
Presents your highness with this Coronet,
Protesting true allegeaunce to your Grace.

Ki: We thank thee for thy service valient Earl
Challenge our favor for we owe it thee:

Sa: But now my Lord, as this is joyful news,
So must my voice be tragical again,
and I must sing of doleful accidents,

Ki: What have our men the overthrow at Poitiers,
Oris our son beset with too much odds?

Sa. He was my Lord, and as my worthless self,
With forty other serviceable knights,
Under safe conduct of the Dolphins seal,
Did travail that way, finding him distressed,
A troop of Lances met us on the way,
Surprisd and brought us prisoners to the king,
Who proud of this, and eager of revenge,
Commanded straight to cut of all our heads,
And surely we had died but that the Duke,
More full of honor then his angry sire,
Procurd our quick deliverance from thence,
But ere we went, salute your king, quoth he,
Bid him provide a funeral for his son,
To day our sword shall cut his thread of life,
And sooner then he thinks well be with him:
To quittance those displeasures he has done,
This said, we past, not daring to reply,
Our hearts were dead, our looks diffusd and wan,
Wandering at last we clymd unto a hill,
From whence although our grief were much before
Yet now to see the occasion with our eyes,
Did thrice so much increase our heaviness,
For there my Lord, oh there we did descry
Down in a vallie how both armies lay:
The French had cast their trenches like a ring,
And every Barricados open front,
Was thick imbost with brazen ordinance.
Here stood a battle of ten thousand horse,
There twice as many pikes in quadrant wise,
Here Crosbowes and deadly wounding darts,
And in the midst like to a slender point,
Within the compass of the horison,
as twere a rising bubble in the sea.
A Hasle wand a midst a wood of Pynes,
Or as a bear fast chaind unto a stake,
Stood famous Edward still expecting when
Those dogs of France would fasten on his flesh
Anon the death procuring knell begins,
Off go the Cannons that with trembling noise,
Did shake the very Mountain where they stood,
Then sound the Trumpets clangor in the air,
The battles join, and when we could no more,
Discern the difference twixt the friend and so,
So intricate the dark confusion was,
Away we turned our watrie eyes with sighs,
as black as powder fuming into smoke,
And thus I fear, unhappy have I told,
The most untimely tale of Edwards fall.

Qu: Ah me, is this my welcome into France:
Is this the comfort that I looked to have,
When I should meet with my belooued son:
Sweet Ned, I would thy mother in the sea
Had been prevented of this mortal grief.

Ki: Content thee Phillip, it is not tears will serve,
To call him back, if he be taken hence,
Comfort thy self as I do gentle Queen,
With hope of sharp unheard of dyre revenge,
He bids me to provide his funeral.
And so I will, but all the Peers in France,
Shall mourners be, and weep out bloody tears,
Until their empty veins be dry and sere
The pillars of his hearse shall be his bones,
The mould that couers him, their City ashes,
His knell the groaning cries of dying men,
And in the stead of tapers on his tomb,
an hundred fifty towers shall burning blaze,
While we bewail our valiant sons decease.

After a flourish sounded within, enter an herald. He. Rejoice my Lord, ascend
the imperial throne
The mighty and redoubted prince of Wales,
Great seruitor to bloody Mars in arms,
The French man's terror and his countries fame,
Triumphant rides like a Roman peer,
and lowly at his stirop comes a foot
King John of France, together with his son,
In captive bonds, whose diadem he brings
To crown thee with, and to proclaim thee king

Ki. Away with mourning Phillip, wipe thine eyes
Sound Trumpets, welcome in Plantaginet.

Enter Prince Edward, king John, Phillip, Audley, Artoys. Ki: As things long
lost when they are found again,
So does my son rejoice his fathers heart,
For whom even now my soul was much perplexed

Q. Be this a token to express my joy, kiss him.
For inward passions will not let me speak.

Pr. My gracious father, here receive the gift,
This wreath of conquest, and reward of war,
Got with as mickle peril of our lives,
as ere was thing of price before this day,
Install your highness in your proper right,
and here withal I render to your hands
These prisoners, chief occasion of our strife.

Kin: So John of France, I see you keep your word
You promised to be sooner with our self
Then we did think for, and it is so in deed,
But had you done at first as now you do,
How many civil towns had stood untouched,
That now are turned to ragged heaps of stones?
How many peoples lives might thou have saud,
that are untimely sunk into their graves.

Io: Edward, recount not things irreuocable,
Tell me what ransom thou requirest to have?

Kin: Thy ransom John, hereafter shall be known
But first to England thou must cross the seas,
To see what intertainment it affords,
How ere it falls, it cannot be so bad,
as ours has bin since we ariude in France,

Ioh: Accursed man, of this I was fortolde,
But did misconster what the prophet told.

Pri: Now father this petition Edward makes,
To thee whose grace has bin his strongest shield
That as thy pleasure chose me for the man,
To be the instrument to show thy power,
So thou will grant that many princes more,
Bred and brought up within that little Isle,
May still be famous for like victories:
and for my part, the bloody scars I bear,
The weary nights that I have watched in field,
The dangerous conflicts I have often had,
The fearful menaces were proffered me,
The heat and cold, and what else might displease
I wish were now redoubled twenty fold,
So that hereafter ages when they read
The painful traffike of my tender youth
Might thereby be inflamd with such resolve,
as not the territories of France alone,
But likewise Spain, Turkey, and what countries else
That justly would provoke fair Englands ire,
Might at their presence tremble and retire.

Kin: Here English Lords we do proclaim a rest
an intercession of our painful arms,
Sheath up your swords, refresh your weary lims,
Peruse your spoils, and after we have breathd.
a day or two within this haven town,
God willing then for England well be shipped,
Where in a happy hour I trust we shall
Ariue three kings, two princes, and a queen.

FINIS.

