The excellent Comedy of two the most faithfullest Friends, Damon and
Pithias.

Newly Imprinted, as the same was showed before the Queens Majesty, by the
Children of her Graces Chapel, except the Prologue that is somewhat altered
for the proper use of them that hereafter shall have occasion to play it,
either in Private, or open Audience. Made by Master Edward's, then being
Master of the Children. 1571.

Imprinted at London in Fleetelane by Richard Iohnes, and are to be sold at
his shop, joining to the Southwest door of Paul's Church.

THE PROLOGVE.
ON every side, whereas I glaunce my rouyng eye,
Silence in all ears bent I plainly do epsy:
But if your egre looks do long such toys to see,
As heretofore in commycall wi^e, were wont abroad to be:
Your lust is lost, and all the pleasures that you sought,
Is frustrate quite of toying Plays. A soden change is wrought*
For lo, our Aucthors Muse, that masked in delight,
Has forced his Pen against his kind, no more such sportes to write.
Muse he that lust, (right worshipful) for chance has made this change*
For that to some he seemed too much, in young desires to range:
In which, right glad to please: seeing that he did offend,
Of all he humbly pardon tra^es: his Pen that shall amend:
And yet (worwipfull Audience,) thus much I dare aduouche.
In Commedies, the greatest Skyll is this, rightly to touch.
All things to the quick: and eke to frame each person so,
That by his common talk, you may his nature rightly know*
A Royster ought not preach, that were to strange to hear,
But as from virtue he does swerue, so ought his words appear:
The old man is sober, the young man rash, the Lover triumphyng in joys*
The Matron grave* the Harlat wild and full of wanton toys.
Which all in one course they no wise do agree:
So correspondent to their kind their speeches ought to be.
Which speeches well pronoun^e, with action lively framed,
If this offend the lookers on, let H^race then be blamed,
Which has our A^thor taught at S^hole, from whom he does not swerve,
In all such kind of exercise decorum to observe,
Thus much for his defense (he says) as Poets ^arst have done,
Which heretofore in Commodies the self same raze did roune:
But now for to be brief, the matter to express,
Which here we shall present: is this Dimon and Pithias*
A rare ensample of Friendship true, it is no Legend lie,
But a thing once done in deed as Hystories do discrie,
Which done of yor^ in long time past, yet present shall be here,
Even as it were in dooynge now, so lively it shall appear:
Lo h^re in Siracusae thauncient Town, which onceth: Romans w^nne,
Here Dionisius Palace, within whose Cau^^e this thing most strange was done*
Which matter mixed with mirth and care, a just name to apply,
As seems most fit we have it termed, a Tragical Commedie,
Wherein talkyng of Courtly toys, we do protest this flat,
We talk of Dionisius Court, we mean no Court but that,
And that we do so mean, who wisely calls to mind,
The time, the place, the Authors here most plainly shall it find,
Lo this I speak for our defense, lest of others we should be shent:
But worthy Audience, we you pray, take things as they be meant,
Whose upright Judgment we do crave, with heedefull ear and Eye*
To here the cause, and see theffect of this new Tragical Commedie.
EXIT.
The Speakers names.
Aristippus, a pleasant Gentilman. Carisophus, a Parasite. Damon* two gentlemen
of Greece. Pithias, two gentlemen of Greece. Stephano, servant to Damon and
Pithias. Will, Aristippus lackey. Jack, Carisophus lackey. Snap, the Porter.
Dionisius, the King. Eubulus, the Kings counselour. Gronno, the Hangman.
Grimme, the Colyer.
Here enters ARISTIPPVS. TOO strange (perhaps) it seems to some,
That I Aristippus, a Courtier am become:
A Philosopher of late, not of the meanist name,
But now to the Courtly behavior my life I frame,
Muse he that list, to you of good skill,
I say that I am a Philosopher still:
Lovers of Wisdom, are termed Philosophy,
Then who is a Philosopher so rightly as I?
For in loving of wisdom, proof does this try,
That Frustra sapit, qui non sapit sibi:
I am wise for my self, then tell me of troth,
Is not that great Wisdom as the world goth?
Some Philosophers in the street go ragged and torn,
And feeds on vile Roots, whom Boys laugh to scorn:
But I in fine Silks haunt Dionysius Palace,
Wherein with dayntie fare my self I do solace:
I can talk of Philosophy as well as the best,
But the strayte kind of life I leave to the rest:
And I profess now the Courtly Philosophy,
To crouche, to speak fair, my self I apply,
To feed the Kings humor with pleasant devises,
For which I am called Regius Canis:
But wot ye who named me first the Kings Dog?
It was the Roage Diogenes that vile grunting Hog:
Let him roll in his Tubbe to win a vain praise,
In the Court pleasantly I will spend all my days:
Wherein what to do, I am not to learn,
What will serve mine own turn I can quickly discearne:
All my time at School I have not spent vaynly,
I can help one, is not that a good poinct of Philosophy?
Here enters CARISOPHVS. I beshrew your fine ears, since you came from
School,,
In the Court you have made many a wiseman a fool:
And though you paint out your feigned Philosophy,
So God help me, it is but a plain kind of flattery:
Which you use so finely in so pleasant a sort,
That none but Aristppus, now makes the King sport,
Ere you came hither, poor I was sombody,
The King delighted in me, now I am but a noddy.
ARISTIPPVS. In faith Carisophus, you know your self best,
But I will not call you noddie, but only in jest,
And thus I assure you, though I came from school,
To serve in this Court, I came not yet to be the Kings fool,
Or to fill his ears with servile squirilitie,
That office is yours, you know it right perfectly,
Of Parasites and Scicophants you are a grave bencher,
The King feeds you often from his own trencher,
I envy not your state, nor yet your great favor,
Then grudge not at all, if in my behavior:
I make the King merry, with pleasant vrbanitie,
Whom I never abused to any man's injury.

CARISOPHVS. Be cock sir, yet in the Court you do best thrive,
For you get more in on day then I do in five.

ARISTIPPVS. Why man in the Court, do you not see,
Rewards given for virtue, to every degree?
To reward the unworthy that world is done,
The Court is changed, a good thread has bin sponne
Of Dogs woll heretofore, and why? be cause it was liked,
And not for that it was best trimmed and picked:
But now men's ears are finer, such gross toys are not set by,
Therefore to a trimmer kind of mirth my self I apply,
Wherein though I please, it comes not of my desert,
But of the Kings favor.

CARISOPHVS. It may so be, yet in your prosperity,
Despise not an old courtier, Carisophus is he,
Which has long time fed Dionisius humor:
Diligently to please, still at hand, there was never rumor,
^pread in this town of any small thing, but I
Brought it to the King in post by and by,
^et now I crave your friendship, which if I may attain,
^ost sure and unfeigned frindship I promise you again:
^o we two linckt in frindshippe brother and brother,
^ull well in the Court may help one another.

ARISTIPPVS. Bir Lady Carisophus, though you know not Philosophy,
^et surely you are a better Courtier then I,
^^d yet I not so evil a courtier that will seem to despise,
^uch an old courtier as you so expert and so wise,
^ut where as you crave mine and offer your friendship so willingly,
^ith heart I give you thanks for this your great courtesy:
Assuring of friendship both with tooth and nail,
Whiles life lasts never to fail.

CARISOPHVS. A thousand thanks I give you, oh friend Aristippus


ARISTIPPVS. Oh friend Carisophus.


CARISOPHVS. How joyful am I since I have to friend Aristippus now?


ARISTIPPVS. None so glad of Carisophus friendship as I, I make God a vow,
I speak as I think, believe me.

CARISOPHVS. Since we are now so friendly joined, it seems to me,
That one of us help each other in every degree,
Prefer you my cause when you are in presence,
To further your matters to the King let me alone in your absence,

ARISTIPPVS. Friend Carisophus, this shall be done as you would wish,
But I pray you tell me, thus much by the way,
Whither now from this place will you take your iournay?

CARISOPHVS. I will not dissemble, that were against Friendship,
I go into the City some knaves to nip:
For talk with their goods, to increase the kings Treasure,
In such kind of service, I set my chief pleasure,
Farewell friend Aristippus now for a time, EXIT.

ARISTIPPVS. A dew friend Carisophus: In good faith now,
Of force I must laugh at this solemn vow,
Is Aristippus linckt in Friendship with Carisophus?
Quid cum tanto Asino, talis Philosophus?
They say, Morum similitudo consultat amicitias.
Then, how can this Friendship between us two come to pass?
We are as like in conditions, as Jack Fletcher and his Bowlt,
I brought up in learning, but he is a very dolt
As touching good Letters: but otherwise such a crafty knave,
If you seek a whole Region, his like you can not have:
A Uillaine for his life, a Uarlet died in Grain,
You lose Money by him if you sell him for one knave, for he serves for twain:
A flatteryng Parasite, a Sicophant also,
A commen accuser of men: to the good, an open Foe,
Of half a word, he can make a Legend of lies,
Which he will aduouch with such tragical cries,
As though all were true that comes out of his mouth,
Where in deed to be hanged by and by,
He cannot tell one tale but twyse he must lie,
He spares no man's life to get the kings favor,
In which kind of seruis he has got such a savor,
That he will never leave, me think then that I,
Have done very wisely to join in friendship with him, lest perhaps I
Coming in his way might be nipt, for such knaves in presence,
We see often times put honest men to silence:
Yet I have played with his beard in knitting this knot,
I promised friendship, but you love few words: I spoke it, but I meant it not,
Who marks this friendship between us two,
Shall judge of the worldly friendship without any more a do,
It may be a right Patron thereof, but true friendship in deed,
Of naught but of virtue, does truly proseede,
But why do I now enter into Philosophy,
Which do profess the fine kind of courtesy?
I will hence to the Court with all haste I may,
I think the king be stirring, it is now bright day,
To wait at a pinche still in sight I mean,
For wot ye what? a new Broom sweepes clean,
As to hie honor I mind not to clime,
So I mean in the court to lose ne time:
Wherein happy man be his dole, I trust that I,
Shall not speed worst, and that very quickly EXIT.
Here enters DAMON and PITHIAS like Mariners. ONEPTVNE, immortal be thy
praise,
For that so safe from Greece we have past the seas,
To this noble city SIRACVSAE, where we
The ancient raygne of the Romans may see,
Whose force, Greece also here to fore has known,
Whose virtue, the shrill trump of fame so far has blown.

PITHIAS. My Damon, of right high praise we ought to give,
To Neptune and all the Gods, that we safely did arryue,
The Seas I think with contrary winds, never raged so,
I am even yet so Seasicke, that I faint as I go:
Therefore let us get some lodgyng quickly:
But where is Stephano?
Here enters STEPHANO. Not far hence: a Pockes take these Maryner knaves,
Not one would healpe me to carry this stuff, such dronken (...)
I think be accursed of the Gods own mouths.

DAMON. Stephano, leave thy ragyng, and let us enter SIRACVSAE
We will provide lodgyng, and thou shall be eased of thy burden by (...)

STEPHANO. Good master make haste, for I tell you plain,
This heavy burden puts poor Stephano to much pain.

PITHIAS. Come on thy ways, thou shall be eased, and that anon. EXIT*

* Here enters CARISOPHVS. It is a true saying that often has bin spoken,
The pitcher goes so long to the water, that he comes home broken
My own proof this has taught me, for truly since I,
In the City have used to walk very slyly,
Not with one can I meet, that will in talk join with me,
And to creep into men's bosoms some talk for to snatche,
By which into one trip or other, I might trimly them catch
And so accuse them: Now not with one can I meet,
That will join in talk with me, I am shund like a Devil in ye street^*
My credit is crackte where I am known, but yet I hear say,
Certain straingers are arrived, they were a good pray,
If happily I might meet with them, I fear not I,
But in talk I should trippe them, and that very finely,
Which thing, I assure you, I do for mine own gain,
Or else I would not plodde thus up and down, I fell you plain:
Well, I will for a w^yle to the Court to see
What Aristippus does, I would be loath in fauer he should ouerrun me,
He is a subtle child, he flattreth so finely, that I fear me,
He will lick all the fat from my lips, and so outwery me:
Therefore I will not be long absent, but at hand,
That al his fine driftes I may understand. EXIT.
* Here enters WILL and JACK. I wonder what my Master Aristippus means now
a days,
That he leaves Philosophy, and seeks to please
King Dionisius, with such merry toys,
In Dionisius Court now he only joys,
As trim a Courtier as the best,
Ready to answer, quick in tauntes, pleasant to ieste,
^ lusty companion to devise with fine Dames,
Whose humor to feed, his wily wit he frames.

JACK. Be cock as you say, your Master is a Minion,
^ foul coil he keeps in this Court Aristippus alone
^ow rules the coaste with his pleasant devises,
That I fear he will put out of conceit my Master Carisophus.

WILL. Fear not that Jack, for like brother and brother
They are knit in true Friendship the one with the other,
They are fellows you know, and honest men both,
Therefore the one to hinder the other, they will be loathe.

JACK. Yea, but I have heard say, there is falshod in fellowship,
^n the Court sometimes, one geues another finely the slip:
Which when it is spied, it is laughed out with a scoff,
and with sporting and playing, quietly shaken of:
^n which kind of toying, thy master has such a grace,
That he will never blush, he has a wodden face:
But Will, my master has Beees in his head,
^f he find me hear pratinge, I am but dead:
^e is still ^rotting in the City, there is sumwhat in the wind:
His looks bewrayes his inward troubled mind:
Therefore I will be packing, to the Court^ by and by
If he be once angry, Jack shall cry woe the pie.

WILL. Byr Lady, if I tarry long here, of the same sauce shall I taste,
For my master sent me on an errand, and bad me make haste,
Therefore we will depart together. EXEVNT.

Here enters STEPHANO. Often times I have heard, before I came hither,
That no man can serve two masters together:
A sentence so true, as most men do take it,
At any time false, that no man can make it:
And yet by their leave, that first have it spoken,
How that may prove false, even here I will open:
For I Stephano, lo, so named by my father,
At this time serve two masters together:
And love them a like, the one and the other,
I duly obey, I can do no other,
A bondsman I am so nature has wrought me,
One Damon of Greece, a gentleman bought me:
To him I stand bond, yet serve I another,
Whom Damon my Master loves, as his own brother:
A Gentleman too, and Pithias he is named,
Fraught with Virtue, whom vice never defamed:
These two, since at School they fell acquainted,
In mutual friendship, at no time have fainted:
But loved so kindly, and friendly each other,
As though they were Brothers by Father and Mother:
Pi^hagoras learning, these two have embrased,
Which both are in virtue so narrowly laced:
That all their whole doings do fall to this issue,
To have no respect, but only to virtue:
All one in effect: all one in their going,
All one in their study, all one in their doing:
These Gentlemen both, being of one condition,
Both alike of my service have all the fruition:
Pithias is joyful, if Damon be pleased:
If Pithias be served, then Damon is eased:
Serve one, serve both: so near, who would win them?
I think they have but one heart between them:
In trauelyng Countries, we three have contrived,
Full many a year: and this day arrived
At SIRACVSAE in Sicillia that ancient Town,
Where my Masters are lodged: and I up and down,
Go seeking to learn what News here are walkyng,
To hark of what things the people are talking.
I like not this Soil: for as I go ploddynge,
I mark there two, there three, their heads always noddinge,
In close secret wise, still whisperyng together:
If I ask any question, no man does answer:
But shaking their heads, they go their ways speaking,
I mark how with tears, their wet eyes are leakynge:
Some strangeness there is, that breeds this musinge.
Well: I will to my Masters, and tell of their using,
That they may learn, and walk wisely together,
I fear, we shall curse the time we came hither. EXIT.

* Here enters ARISTIPPVS and WILL. Will, did thou hear the Ladies so
talk of me,
What ayleth them? from their nippes shall I never be free?

WILL. Good faith sir, all the Ladies in the Court, do plainl^ report,
That without mention of them, you can make no sport:
They are your Plain song to singe Descant upon,
If they wear not, your mirth were gone,
Therefore master, jest no more with women in any wise,
If you do, by cock your are like to know the price.

ARISTIPPVS. Byr lady Will, this is good counsel, plainly to jest
Of women, proof has taught me it is not best,
I will change my copy, how be it, I care not a quinche,
I know the galde horse will soonest winche:
But learn thou secretly what privily they talk
Of me in the Court, among them slyly walk,
And bring me true news thereof.

WILL. I will sir, master thereof have no doubt, for I
Wheare they talk of you, will inform you perfectly.

ARISTIPPVS. Do so my boy: if thou bring it finely to pass,
For thy good service, thou shall go in thine old coat at Christmas.
Enter Damon, Pithias, Stephano. EXEVNT
Stephano, is all this true that thou have told me.

STEPHANO. Sir, for lies, hitherto ye never controlde me,
Oh that we had never set foot on this land,
Where Dionisius raygnes, with so bloody a hand,
Every day he shows some token of cruelty,
With blood he has filled all the streets in the City:
I tremble to hear the peoples murmuring,
I lament, to see his most cruel dealyng:
I think there is no such tyrant under the Sun,
O my dear masters, this morning what has he done?

DAMON. What is that? tell us quickly.


STEPHANO. As I this morning past in the street,
With a woeful man (going to his death) did I meet,
Many people foldwed, and I of one secretly,
Asked the cause, why he was condemned to die?
Whispered in mine ear, naught has he done but thus,
In his sleep he dreamed he had killed Dionisius,
Which dream told abroad was brought to the king in post,
By whom condemned for suspicion, his life he has lost:
Marcia was his name as the people said.

PITHIAS. My dear friend Damon, I blame not Stephano.
For wishyng we had not come hither, seeing it is so:
That for so small cause, such cruel death does ensue.

DAMON. My Pithias, where Tirantes reign, such cases are not new,
Which fearing their own state for great c^^^ltie,
To sit fast as they think, do execute (...)
All such as any light suspicion have tainted.

STEPHANO. With such quick Kar^ers, I list not be ^^^uainted.


DAMON. So are they never in quiet, but in suspicion still,
When one is made away, they take occasion another to kill:
Ever in fear, having no trusty friend, void of all peoples love,
And in their own conscience, a continual Hell they prove.

PITHIAS. As things by their contraryes are always best proved,
How happy are then merciful Princes of their people beloved?
Having sure friends every wheare, no fear does touch them,
They may safely spend the day pleasantly, at night
(Secure dorm^uatin vtranque aurem
Oh my Damon, if choice were offered me, I would choose to be Pithias
As I am, (Damons friend:) rather then to be king Dionisius.

STEPHANO. And good cause why: for you are entierly beloved of one,
And as far as I hear, Dionisius is beloved of none.

DAMON. That state is most miserable, thrice happy are we,
Whom true love has joined in perfect Amytie:
Which amytie first sprung, without vaunting be it spoken, that is true
Of likelines of manners, took root by company, and now is conserved by virtue
Which virtue always through worldly things do not frame
Yet does she arc^iue to her followers immortal fame:
Whereof if men were careful, for Uertues sake only
They would honor friendship, and not for commodity:
But such as for profit in friendship do lincke,
When storms come, they slide away sooner then a man will think:
My Pithias, the sum of my talk falls to this issue,
To prove no friendship is sure, but that which is grounded on virtue.

PITHIAS. My Damon, of this thing, there needs no proof to me,
The Gods forbid, but that Pithias with Damon in all things should agr^e
For why it is said: Amicus alteripse,
But that tr^^ friends should be two in body: but one in mind,
As it were one transformed into another, which against (...)
Though it seem: yet in good faith, when I am alone,
I forget I am Pithisas, me think I am Damon.

STEP^^NO. That could I never (...), to forget my self, full well I know,
Wheresoever I go, that I am PAVPER STEPHANO:
But I pray you sir, for all your Phylosophie,
See that in this Cour^e you walk very wisely:
You are but newly come hither, being strangers ye know,
Many eyes are bent on you in the streets as ye go:
Many spies are abroad, you can not be too circumspect.

DAMON. Stephano, because thou art careful of me thy master, I do thee
praise,
Yet think this for a suertie, no state to displease:
By talk or otherwise, my friend and I entende, we will here
As men that come to see the soil and manners of al men of every degree,
Pithagoras said, that this world was like a Stage,
Whereon many play their parts: the lookers on the sage
Philosophers are says he, whose part is to learn
The manners of all Nations, and the good from the bad to discern.

STEPHANO. Good faith sir, concerning the people they are not gay,
And as far as I see; they be Mummers, for naught they say,
For the most part what soever you ask them*
The soil is such, that to live hear I can not like.

DAMON. Thou speak according to thy learning, but I say,
Omnis solum fortis patria: A wise man may live every wheare:
Therefore my dear friend Pithias,
Let us view this Town in every place,
And then consider the Peoples manners also.

PITHIAS. As you will my Damon, but how say you Stephano?
As it not best ere we go further, to take some repast?

STEPHANO. * In faith, I like well this question, ^^r: for all your haste,
To eat somewhat I pray you, think it no folly,
It is hie dinner time, I know by my belly.

DAMON. Then let us to our lodging depart, when dinner is done,
We will view this City as we have begone. EXEANT
Here enters CARISOPHVS. Once again in hope of good wynd, I hoyse up my sail,
I go into the city to find some pray for mine avail:
I hunger while I may see these strangers, that lately
Arrived, I were safe if once I might meet them happily,
Let them bark that lust, at this kind of gain,
He is a fool that for his profit will not take pain:
Though it be joined with other men's hurt, I care not at all,
For profit I will accuse any man, hap what shall
But soft syrs, I pray you buysh what are they that comes here,
By their apparel, and countinaunce some strangers they appear,
I will shrowde my self secretly, even here for a while,
To hear all their talk that I may them beguyle.
* Here enters DAMON and STEPHANO. A shorre horse soon curried, my belly
waxes thinner,
I am as hungry now as when I went to dinner:
Your philosophical diet, is so fine and small,
That you may eat your dinner and supper at once, and not surfaite at all.

DAMON. Stephano, much meat breeds heauynes, thin diet maks thee light


STEPHANO. I may be lighter thereby but I shall never run^ the faster.


DAMON. I have had sufficiently discourse of amity,
Which I had at dinner with Pithias and his pleasant company
Has fully satisfied me, it does me good to feed mine eyes on him.

STEPHANO. Course or discourse, your course is very course for all your talk,
You had but one b^re course, and that was Pike, rise and walk,
And surely for all your talk of Philosophy,
I never heard that a man with words could fill his belly,
Feed your eyes (quod you) the reason from my wisdom swarueth,
I stared on you both, and yet my belly starueth*

DAMON. Ah Stephano, small diet makes a fine memory.


STEPHANO. I care not for your crafti^ Sophistry,
You two are fine, let me be fed like a gross knave still,
I pray you license me for a while to have my will:
At home to tarry whiles you take view of this city,
To find some odd victualles in a corner, I am very witty.

DAMON. At your pleasure sir, I will wait on my self this day,
Yet attend upon Pithias, which for a purpose tarieth at home,
So dooyng, you wait upon me also.

STEPHANO. With wings on my feet I go.


DAMON. Not in vain the Poet says Natura furca expe^llas, tamen vsque recurrit.
For train up a bonontan never to so good a behavior,
Yet in some poinct of seruilitie, he will savor:
As this Stephano, trusty to me his Master, loving and kind,
Yet touching his belly, a very bondsman and him find:
He is to be borne withal, being so i^st and true,
I assure you, I would not change him for no new:
But me thinks, this is a pleasant City,
The Seat is good, and yet not strong, and that is great pity.

CARISOPHVS. I am safe, he is mine own.


DAMON. The Air subtle and fine, the people should be witty
That dwell under this Climate in so pure a Region,
A trimmer Plotte I have not seen in my peregrination:
Nothing mislyketh me in this Country,
But that I hear such mutteryng of cruelty:
Fame reports strange things of Dionisius,
But kings matters passing our reach, pertayne not to us.

CARISOPHVS. Dionisius (quoth you) since the world began,
In Cicilia never raygned so cruel a man:
A despightfull Tirant to all men, I maruayle I,
That none makes him away, and that suddenly.

DAMON. My friend, the Gods forbid so cruel a thing:
That any man should lift up his Sword against the king:
Or seek other means by death him to prevent,
Whom to rule on earth, the mighty Gods have sent:
But my friend, leave off this talk of king Dionisius.

CARISOPHVS. Why sir? he can not hear us.


DAMON. What then? An nescis longas Regibus esse manus?
It is no safe talking of them that strykes a far off:
But leauyng kings matters, I pray you show me this courtesy:
To describe in few words, the state of this City?
A trauayler I am, desirous to know
The state of each Country, where ever I go:
Not to the hurt of any state, but to get experience thereby:
It is not for naught that the Poet does cry,
Dic mihi Musa virum, captae post tempore Troyae,
Multorum hominum mores qui vidit and v^bis.
In which verses, as some Writers do scan,
The Poet describes, a perfec^t wise man:
Even so, I being a stranger, addicted to Phylosophie,
To see the state of Countries, my self I apply.

CARISOPHVS. Sir, I like this intent, but may I ask your name without scorn


DAMON. My name is Damon, well known in my Country, a Gentlem^^ borne


CARISOPHVS. You do wisely to search the state of each Country,
To bear intelligence thereof whether you lust: He is a spy,
Sir, I pray you, have patience a while, for I have to do here by:
Uiew this weak part of this City as you stand, and I very quickly
Will return to you again, and then will I show,
The state of all this Country, and of the Court also. EXIT

DAMON. I thank you for your courtesy, this chances well that I
Met with this Gentleman so happily,
Which as it seems, misliketh some thing,
Else he would not talk so boldly of the king,
And that to a stranger, but lo were he comes in haste.
Here enters CARISOPHVS and SNAP. This is he fellow Snap, snap him up: away
with him.

SNAP. Good fellow thou must go with me to the Court.


DAMON. To the Court sir, and why?


CARISOPHVS. Well, we will dispute that before the King, away with him quickl^


DAMON. Is this the courtesy you promised me? and that very lately.


CARISOPHVS. Away with him I say.


DAMON ^ Use no violence, I will go with you quietly. Exiunt omn^s.

Here enters ARISTIPPVS. ^ Ah Sira, ^yr lady, Aristippus lykes Dionisius Court
very well,
^hiche in passing joys and plasures does excel:
^here he has Dapsilae caena^, gemalis lectes, and auro.
^gentii turgmani zonam.
^^ue plied the Harvest, and stroke when the Iron was hot,
^hen I spied my time, I was not squemish to crave God wotte:
^t with some pleasant tyoe, I ^rept into the Kings bosom.
(...) which, Dionisius gave me Aure talentum magnum,
^arge reward, for so simple services,
that then? the Kings praise stands chiefly in bountifulness:
^hiche thing, though I told the king very pleasantly,
^ can I prove it by good Writers of great Antiquity:
^t that shall not need at this time, since that I have abundantly*
^^en I lack hereafter, I will use this poinctt of Phylosophie:
^t now, where as I have felt the kings lyberalytie,
(...) princely as it came, I will sponde it as regallie:
(...) is current men say, and current comes of currendo
^^en will I make money run, as his nature requires I trow,
(...) what becomes a Philosopher best,
^t to despise money above the rest:
(...) yet not so despise it, but to have in store
^^ough to serve his own turn, and somewhat more,
^^th sondrie sports and tauntes, yester night I delighted the king,
^^at with his loud laughter, the whole court did ringe:
(...) I thought he laughed not merier then I, when I got this money,
(...) mumbouget for Carisophus I epsy*
^aste to come hither, I must handle the knave finely:
Carisophus, my dearest frinde, my trusty companyon,
^^at news with you? where have you heen so long?
Here enters CARISOPHVS. ^ My best beloved friend Aristippus, I am come at
last,
^iue not spent all my time in wast,
^^e got a pray, and that a good one I tr^w.

ARISTIPPVS. ^ What pray is that? feign would I know.


CARISOPHVS. (...) a crafty spy I have caught, I dare say,
As never was in Cicilia, before this day,
Such a one as vewed every weak place in the City,
Suruewed the Haven, and each bulwark, in talk very witty:
And yet by some words* him self he did bewray.

ARISTIPPVS. I think so in good faith, as you did handle him.


CARISOPHVS. I handled him clarkly, I joined in talk with him courteously,
But when we were entered, I let him speak his will, and I
Sucked out thus much of his words, that I made him say plainly,
He was come hither to know the state of the City.
And not only this, but that he would understand,
The state of Dionisius Court and of the whole land.
Which words when I heard, I desired him to stay,
Till I had done a little business of the way,
Promising him to return again quickly: And so did conuaye
My self to ye Court for Snap ye Tipstaffe, which came and vpsnatched (...)
Brought him to the Court and in the porters lodge dispatched him:
After I ran to Dionisius as fast as I could,
And bewrayed this matter to him which I have you told:
Which thing when he heard, being very merry before,
He suddenly fell in a dump, and fomyng like a Bore:
At last he swore in a great rage that he should die,
By the sword or the wheel, and that very shortly,
I am too shamefast for my travel and toil,
I crave nothing of Dionisius but only his spoil:
Little has he about him, but a few motheaten crowns of gold
Cha poucht them up all ready, they are sure in hold:
And now I go in to the City to say s^^th*
To see what he has at his lodginge, to make up my mouth.

ARISTIPPVS. My Carisophus, you have don good serui^e, but what is the spiesna^


CARISOPHVS. He is called Damon, borne in Creece, from whence latly he came


ARISTIPPVS. By my troth, I will go see him* and speak with him to if I may


CARISOPHVS. Do so I pray you, but yet by the way:
As occasion serves, commend my service to the King.

ARIRTIPPVS. Dictum sapienti satest: friend Carisophus, shall I forget that
thing,
No, I warrant you, though I say litie to your face,
^ will lay one month for you to Dionisius when I am in place:
(...) I speak one word for such a knave, hang me. EXIT.

CARISOPHVS. ^ur fine Philosopher* out timme learned elfe,
^ gone to see as false a Spy as himself:
^amon sma^ters as well as he of crafty Phylosophie,
and can turn Cat in the pan very pretily:
^ut Carisophus has given him such a mighty check,
^s I think in the end will break his neck:
that care I for that, why would he then pry,
^^d learn the secret estate of our country and city?
(...) is but a stranger, by his fall let others be wise,
^^are not who fall, so that I may rise:
(...) for fine Aristippus, I will keep in with him,
(...) is a shrewde fool to deal withal, he can swym:
^^d yet by my troth, to speak my conscience playnlie,
^ will use his friendship to mine own commodytie:
^hile Dionisius favors him, Aristippus shall be mine,
^ut if the king once trowne on him, then good night Tomaline:
(...) shall be as strange, as though I never saw him before,
^ut I tarry too long, I will prate no more:
^^cke, come away.

JACK. At hand sir.


CARISOPHVS. At Damons lodgyng if that you see,
^y stir to arise, be still at hand by me,
^ather then* I will lose the spoil, I will blade it out.
* Here enters PITHIAS and STEPHANO. What strange News are these, ah my
Stephano?
^ my Damon in Prison, as the v^yce does go?

STEPHANO. It is true, oh cruel hap, he is taken for a Spy,
and as they say, by Dionisius own mouth condemned to die.

PITHIAS. To die? alas to: what caus^?


STEPHANO. A Sicophant fal^ely accused him: other cause there is none,
That oh Jupiter, of all wrongs the Revenger,
^eest thou this injustice, and will thou stay any longer
From heaven to send down, thy hot consumyng fire?
To destroy the workers of wrong, which provoke thy just ire*
Alas master Pithias, what shall we do?
Being in a strange country, void of friends and acquaintance too
Ah poor Stephano, have thou lived to see this day?
To see thy true Master unjustly made away?

PITHIAS. Stephano, seeing the matter is come to this extremytie,
Let us make Virtue our friend, of me are necessytie:
Run thou to the Court and understand secretly,
As much as thou can of Damons cause, and I
Will make some means to entreat Aristippus:
He can do much as I hear with king Dionisius.

STEPHANO. I am gone sir: ah, I would to God, my travail and pain
Might restore my Master to his liberty again.

PITHIAS. Ah woeful Pithias, sith now I am alone,
What way shall I first begin to make my moan?
What words shall I find apt for my complaynte,
Damon my friend, my joy, my life is in peril, of force I must now fain
But oh Music, as in joyful tunes, thy merry notes I did borow,
So now lend me thy yernfull tunes, to utter my sorrow.
Here PITHIAS singes, and the Regalles play. AWake ye woeful Wightes,
That long have wept in woe:
Resign to me your plaintes and tears,
my hapless hap to sho:
My woe no tongue can tell,
ne Pen can well descrie:
O, what a death is this to hear,
DAMON my friend must die*
The loss of worldly wealth,
man's wisdom may restore,
And Physic has provided too,
a Salve for every sore:
But my true Friend once lost,
no Art can well supply:
Then, what a death is this to hear?
DAMON my friend must die.
My mouth refuse the food*
that should my limbs sustain:
Let sorrow sink in to my breast,
and ransacke every vain:
You Furies all at once.
on me your torments try:
Why should I live, since that I hear?
Damon my friend should die?
Gripe me you greedy greefs,
and present pangues of death*
You Systers three, with cruel hands,
with speed now stop my breath:
Shrine me in clay alive,
some good man stop mine eye:
Oh death com now, seeing I hear,
Damon my friend must die.
He speaks this after the song. In daine I call for Death, which hears
not my complaint,
But what wisdom is this, in such extremytie to faint?
Multum iuua in re mala annimas bonus.
I will to the Court my self to make friends, and that presently,
I will never forsake my friend in time of misery:
But do I see Stephano amazed hither to run?
Here enters STEPHANO. O Pithias, Pithias, we are all undone,
Mine own ears have sucked in mine own sorrow:
I heard Dionisius swear, that Damon should die to morrow.

PITHIAS. How came thou so near the presence of the king,
That thou might hear Dionisius speak this thing.

STEPHANO. By friendship I gate into the Court, where in great Audience,
I heard Dionisius with his own mouth give this cruel sentence
By these express words: that Damon the Greek that crafty spy,
Without farther Judgment, to morrow should die:
Believe me Pithias, with these ears I heard it my self*

PITHIAS. Then how near is my death also, ah woe is me.
Ah my Damon, another my self: shall I forgo thee?

STEPHANO. Sir, there is no time of lamentyng now, it behooves us,
To make means to them which can did much with Dionisius:
That he be not made away ere his cause be fully heard, for we see
By evil report, things be made to Princes far worse then they be,
But lo, yonder comes Aristippus, in great favor with king Dionisius
Entreat him to speak a good word to the king for us:
And in the mean season, I will to your lodgyng, to see all things safe there.
EXIT.
PITHIAS. To that I agree but let us slip afide his talk to hear.


Here enters ARISTIPPVS. Here is a sudden change in deed, a strange
Metamorphosis.
This Court is clean altered, who would have thought this?
Dionisius of late so pleasant and merry,
Is quite changed now into such melancoly:
That nothing can please him, he walked up and down,
Fretting and chafyng, on every man he does frown:
In so much that when I in pleasant words began to play,
So sternly he frowned on me, and knit me up so short,
I perceive it is no safe playing with Lions, but when it please them,
If you claw where it itch not, you shall disease them:
And so perhaps get a clap, mine own proof taught me this,
That it is very good to be merry and wise:
The only cause of this hurly burly, is Carisophus that wicked man,
Which lately took Damon for a Spy, a poor Gentleman:
And has incencest the king against him so despightfully,
That Dionisius has judged him to morrow to die:
I have talked with Damon, whom though in words I found very witty
Yet was he more curious then wise in viewyng this City:
But truly for ought I can learn, there is no cause why
So suddenly and cruelly, he should be condemned to die:
How so ever it be, this is the short and long,
I dare not gainsay the king, be it right or wrong:
I am sorry, and that is all I may or can do in this case,
Naught avails persuasion, where froward opinion takes place.
PITHIAS. Sir, if humble suits you would not despise,
Then bow on me your pitiful eyes:
My name is Pithias, in Greece well known,
A perfect friend to that wo^^ll Damon,
Which now a poor captive in this Court does lie,
By the kings own mouth as I here, condemned to die:
For whom I crave your masterships goodness,
To stand his friend in this his great distress:
Naught has he done worthy of Death, but very fondly,
Being a stranger, he vewed this City*
For no evil practices, but to feed his eyes,
But seeing Dionisius is informed otherwise,
My suit is to you, when you see time and place,
To assuage the kings anger, and to purchase his grace,
In which dooyng, you shall not do good to one only,
But you shall further too, and that fully.

ARIRTIPPVS. My friend, in this case I can do you no pleasure.


PITHIAS. Sir, you serve in the Court as Fame does tell.


ARISTIPPVS. I am of the Court in deed, but none of the Counsel.


PITHIAS. As I hear, none is in greater favor with the King then you at this
day,


ARISTIPPVS. The more in favor, the less I dare say.


PITHIAS. It is a Courtiers praise to help straingers in misery.


ARISTIPPVS. To help an other and hurt my self, it is an evil point of
courtes^e.


PITHIAS. You shall not hurt your self to speak for the innocent.


ARISTIPPVS. He is not innocent, whom the king judges nocent.


PITHIAS. Why sir? do you think this matter paste all remedy?


ARISTIPPVS. So fare past that Dionisius has sworn Damon to morrow shall di^


PITHIAS. This word my trembling heart cutteh in two,
Ah sir, in this woeful case, what wist I best to do.

ARISTIPPVS. Best to content your self, when there is no remedy,
He is well reliued that for knows his misery,
Yet if any comfort be, it rests in Eubulus,
The chiefest counselor about king Dionisius:
Which pitieth Damons case in this great extremity,
Perswadyng the king from all kind of cruelty.

PITHIAS. The mighty Gods preserve you for this word of comfort,
Taking my leave of your goodness, I will now resort,
To Eubulus that good Counselor:
But hark, me think I hear a Trompet blow.

ARISTIPPVS. The king is at hand, stand close in the prease, beware: if he know
You are friend to Damon, ^e will take you for a spy also:
Farewell I dare not be seen with you.

Here enters King DYONYSIVS, EVBVLVS the Counselor, and GRONOO the Hangman.
DYONYSIVS. Gronoo, do my commandment, strike off Damons Icons by and by,
Then bring him forth, I my self will see him executed presently.

GRONOO. O mighty King, your commandment will I do speedely.


DIONYS. Eubulus: thou have talked in vain, for sure he shall die.
Shall I suffer my life to stand in peril of every Spy?

EVBVLVS. That he conspired against your person, his Accuser can not say,
He only viewed your City* and will you for that make him away.

DYONYS. What he would have done, the guess is great, he minded me to hurt
That came so flily to search out the secret estate of my Court:
Shall I still live in fear? no, no: I will cut off such Impes betime*
Least that to my further danger, too hie they clime.

EVBVLVS. Yet have the mighty Gods, immortal Fame assigned*
To all worldly Princes, which in mercy be inclined.

DYONYSIVS. Let Fame talk what she list, so I may live in safety.


EVBVLVS. The only mean to that, is to use mercy.


DYONYS. A mild Prince the people despises.


EVBVLVS. A cruel king the people hates.


DYONYSIVS. Let them hate me, so they fear me.


EVBVLVS. That is not the way to live in safety.


DYONYSIVS. My sword and power shall purchase my quietness.


EVBVLVS. That is sooner procured by mercy and gentilnesse.


DYONYS. Dionisius ought to be feared.


EVBVLVS. Better for him to be well-beloved.


DYONYSIVS. Fortune makes all things subject to my power.


EVBVLVS. Believe her not she is a light Goddess, she can laugh and lowre:


DIONYS. A kings praise stands in the revenging of his enemy


EVBVLVS. A greater praise to win him by clemency.


DYONYS. To suffer the wicked live, it is no mercy.


EVBVLVS. To kill the innocent, it is great cruelty,


DYONISYVS. Is Damon innocent, which so craftily vnderminded Carisophus,
^ understand what he could of king Dionisius:
which suruewed the Haven and each Bulwarcke in the City,
^here battrie might be laid, what way best to approach, shall I
^ffer such a one to live, that works me such dispite?
(...), he shall die, then I am safe, a dead dog can not bite.

EVBVLVS. But yet, O mighty, my duty binds me,
(...) give such counsel as with your honor may best agree,
^e strongest pillars of Princely dignity,
^nde this justice, with mercy and prudent liberality,
^e one judges all things by upright equity,
^e other rewards the worthy, flying each extremity:
(...) to spare those, which offend maliciously,
(...) may be called no justice, but extreme injury:
(...) upon suspicion, of each things not well proved,
(...) put to death presently, whom envious flattery accused,
(...) seems of tyranny, and upon what fickle ground al tirants do stand
(...) and Lacedemon, can teach you if it be rightly scande:
(...) not only these Citezens, but who curiously seeks,
(...) whole Histories of all the world, not only of Romans and Greeks
Shall well perceive of all Tirantes the ruinous fall,
Their state uncertain, beloved of none, but hated of all:
Of merciful Princes to set out the passing felycitie
I need not: enough of that, even these days do testify:
They live deuoid of fear, their sleapes are found, they dreed no ene^^
They are feared and loved, and why? they rule with Justice and merc^
Extendyng Justice to such, as wickedly from Justice have swarued,
Mercy unto those, where opinion, simpleness have mercy deserved:
Of liberty naught I say; but only this thing,
Liberty vpholdeth the state of a king:
Whose large bountifulness ought to fall to this issue,
To reward none, but such as deserve it for virtue:
Which merciful Justice, if you would follow, and provident liberalyti^
Neither the Caterpillars of all Courts, Et fruges consumere nati.
Parasites with wealth puffed up, should not look so hie,
Nor yet for this simple fact, poor Damon should die.

DIONYSIVS. With pain mine ears have heard this vain talk of mercy,
I tell thee, fear and terror, defends kings only:
Till he be gone whom I suspect, how shall I live quietly?
Whose memory with chilling horror, fills my breast day and night violentl^
My dreadful dreams of him, bereues my rest: On bed I lie
Shaking and trembling, as one ready to yield his throat to Damon sword*
This quakyng dread, nothing but Damons blood can stay,
Better he die, then I to be tormented with fear always:
He shall die, though Eubulus consent not thereto,
It is lawful for kings as they list all things to do.

Here GRONOO brings in DAMON: and PITHIAS meets him by the way. PITHIAS. Oh
my Damon.


DAMON. Oh my Pithias, seeing Death must part us, farewell for ever.


PITHIAS. Oh Damon, oh my sweet friend.


SNAP. Away from the Prisoner, what a prease have we here.


GRONOO. As you commanded, O mighty King, we have brought Damo^


DIONYS. Then go to, make ready I will not stir out of this place,
Til I see his head stricken off before my face.

GRONOO. It shall be done sir: Because your eyes have made such a do,
(...) will knock down this your Lantern, and shut up your shop window too.

DAMON. O mighty king, where as no truth, my innocent life can save,
But that so greedily you thrust, my giltlesse blood to have:
^lbeit, (even for thought) for ought against your person:
^et now I plead not for life, ne will I crave your pardon:
But seeing in Greece my Country, where well I am known,
(...) have worldly things, fit for mine Aliance when I am gone,
(...) dispose them or I die, if I might obtain leisure,
(...) would account it (O king) for a passing great pleasure:
^ot to prolonge my life thereby, for which I reken not this,
^ut to set my things in a stay: and surely I will not miss,
upon the faith which all gentylmen ought to embrace,
^o return again at your time to appoynte, to yield my body here in this place:
^raunt me (O King (such time to dispatch this injury,
and I will not fail, when you appointed, even here my life to pay.

DIONISIVS. A pleasant request, as though I could trust him absent,
^ ho^ in no wise I can not trust being present:
and yet though I swear the contrary, do that I require,
^eue me a pledge for thy return, and have thine own desire:
(...) is as nere now as he was before.

DAMON. There is no surer nor greater pledge, then the faith of a Gentleman


DIONYS. It was wont to be, but otherwise now the world does stand,
^herfore do as I say, else presently yield thy neck to the sword,
I might with mine honor I would recall my word.

PITHIAS. Stand to your word, O King, for Kings ought nothing say,
(...) that they would perform, in perfect deeds always:
(...) you did require, when Damon his ^ute did meene,
(...) which, with heart and stretched hands, most humble thanks I give,
(...) that you may not say, but Damon has a frinde,
(...) loves him better then his own life, and will do to his end:
^ake me. Oh mighty King, my life I pawn for his,
^rike off my head, if Damon hap at his day to miss.

DIONYS. What art thou, that chargest me with my word so boldly here?


PITHIAS. I am Pithias, a Greek borne, which hold Damon my friend full dear


DIONIS. To dear perhaps, to hazard thy life for him, what fondnes moves thee


PITHIAS. No fondness at all, but perfect amity.


DIONISIVS. A mad kind of amity: advise thy self well, if Damon fail at his
day
Which shall be justly appin^e^, will thou die for him, to me his life ^o pay.

PITHIAS. Most wyllyngly, O mighty king: if Damon fail, let Pithias die.


DIONYSIVS. Thou seem to trust his words, that pawnest thy life so franckly.


PITHIAS. What Damon says, Pithias believes assuredly.


DYONYSIVS. Take heed for life, worldly men break promise in many things.


PITHIAS. Though worldly men do so, it never happes amongst frindes.


DIONISIVS. What call thou friends, are they not men? is not this true?


PITHIAS Men they be, but such men as love one an other only for virtue.


DIONISIVS. For what virtue, doste thou love this spy, this Damon.


PITHIAS. For that virtue, which yet to you is unknown.


DYONYSIVS. Eubulus, what shall I do? I would dispatch this Damon feign,
But this foolish fellow so charge me, that I may not call back my word
again.

EVBVLVS. The reverent maistie of a King, stands chiefly in keeping his promise
What you have, said, this whole Court bears witness:
Save your honor what so ever you do.

DYONYSYVS. For saueing mine honor, I must forbear my will, go to,
Pithias, seeing thou tookest me at my word, take Damon to thee:
For two mounthes he is thine, unbind him, I set him free,
Which time once expired, if he appear not the next day by noone,
With out further delay, thou shall lose thy life, and that full soon.
Whether he di^ by the way, or lie sick in his bead,
If he return not then, thou shall either hang or lose thy head.

PITHIAS. For this O mighty king, I yield immortal thanks, O joyful day


DYONYSIVS. Gronee, take him to thee, bind him, see him kept in safety.
^f he escape assure thy self, for him thou shall die,
^ubulus, let us depart, to talk of this strange thing within,

EVBVLVS, I follow. EXIT.


GRONNO. Damon, thou seruest the Gods well to day, be thou of comfort,
As for you sir, I think you will be hanged in sport,
You heard what the King said? I must keep you safely,
By cock so I will, you shall rather hang then I:
Come on your way,

PITHIAS. My Damon, farewell, the Gods have thee in kepeing.


DAMON. Oh my Pithias, my Pleadge farewell, I part from thee weeping
But joyful at my day appointed I will return again,
When I will deliver thee from all trouble and pain:
Stephano will I leave behind me to wait upon thee in prison alone,
And I whom fortune has reserved to this misery, will walk home,
Ah my Pithias, my Pleadge, my life, my friend, farewell.

PITHIAS. Farewell my Damon.


DAMON. Loath I am to depart, since sobbes my trembling tongue does stay*
Oh Music, sound my doleful playntes when I am gone my way.

GRONNO. I am glad he is gone. I had almost wept to, come Pithias
So God help me, I am sorry for thy foolish case,
Will thou venture thy life for a man, so fondly?

PITHIAS. It is no venture, my friend is just, for whom I desire to die.


GRONNO. Here is a mad man I tell thee, I have a wife whom I love well,
And if iche woald die for her, chould ich wear in Hell:
Wylt thou do more for a man, then I would for a woman.

PITHIAS. Yea, that I will


GRONNO. Then come on your ways, you must to Prison in haste,
(...) repent this folly at last.

PITHIAS. That shall thou never see: but oh Music as my Damon requested thee
Sound out thy doleful tunes, in this time of calamity. EXIT.
Here the Regalles play a mourning song, and Damon comes in, in Mariners
apparel, and Stephano with him. Weep no more Stephano, this is but destiny,
Had not this hapt, yet I know I am borne to die:
Where or in what place, the Gods know alone,
To whose judgment my self I commit, therefore leave of thy moan,
And wait upon Pithias in Prison, till I return again,
In whom my joy, my care and life does only remain.

STEPHANO. Oh my dear Master, let me go with you, for my poor company,
Shall Be some small comfort in this time of misery.

DAMON. Oh Stephano, have thou ben so long with me,
And yet do not know the force of true amity?
I tell thee once again, my friend and I are but one,
Wait upon Pithias, and think thou art with Damon.
Whereof I may not now discourse, the time passes away,
The sooner I am gone, the shorter shall be my iournay:
Therefore farewell Stephano, commend me to my friend Pithias
Whom I trust to deliver in time out of this woeful case.

STEPHANO. Farewell my dear Master, since your pleasure is so,
Oh cruel hap, oh poor Stephano:
O cursed Carisophus, that first moved this Tragidie,
But what a noyes is this? Is all well within trow ye:
I fear all be not well within, I will go see:
Come out you Wesell, are you seekinge Eggs in Damons cheste,
Come out I say, wylt thou be packing? by cock you wear best.

GARISOPH. How durst thou villain to lay hands on me?


STEPHANO. Out sir knave or I will send ye,
Art thou not content to accuse Damon wrongfully,
But will thou rebbe him also, and that openly?

CARISPH. The King gave me the spoil, to take mine own will thou let me?


STEPHANO. Thine own villain: Where is thine authority?


CARYSOPHVS. I am authority of my self, do thou not know?


STEPHANO. Byr lady, that is somewhat, but have you no more to show?


CARYSOPHVS. What if I have not?


STEPHANO. Then for an earnest penie, take this blow.
shall bumbast you, you mocking knave, schil put pro in my purse for this time.

CARYSOPH Jack give me my sword and targat.


JACK. I can not com to you master, this knave does me let. Hold master,


STEPHANO. Away Jack napes, it is I will colpheg you by and by,
(...) slave I will have my penny worthes of thee, therefore if I die,
^oute villayne.

CARYSOPH. O Citezens, help ^o defend me.


STEPHANO. Nay, they will rather help to hang thee.


CARISOPH. Good fellow, let us reason this matter quietly, beat me no more.


STEPHANO. ^f this condition I will stay, if thou swear as thou art an honest
man
^ou wylt say nothing to the King of this when I am gonne.

CARISOPH. I will say nothing, here is my hand, as I am an honest man.


STEPHANO. Then say on thy mind: I have taken a wise oath on him, have I not
trow ye?
^o trust such a false knave upon his honesty,
(...) he is an honest man (quoth you) he may bewray all to the King,
^o break his oath for this never a whit, but my framon I tell you this one
thing*
(...) you di^close this* I will deuyse such a way,
^^at w^ilst thou live thou shall remember this day.

CARYSOPH. You need not devise for that, for this day is printed in my memory,
warrant you, I shall remember this beating till I die:
^ut seeing of courtesy you have granted that we should talk quietly,
^e thinks, in calling me knave, you do me much injury.

STEPHANO. Why so? I pray thee heartily?


CARYSOPHVS. Because I am the Kings man, keeps the king any knaves*


STEPHANO. He should not, but what he does it is evident by thee:
And as far as I can learn or understand,
There is none better able to keep knaves in all the land.

CARISOPHVS. Oh sir, I am a Courtier, when Courtiers shall hear tell,
How you have used me, they will not take it well.

STEPHANO. Nay, all right courtiers will kenne me thank, and wot ye why?
Because I handled a counterfeit Courtier in his kind so finely,
What sir: all are not Courtiers that have a counterfeit show,
In a trope of honest men, some knaves may stand ye know:
Such as by stelth creep in, under the color of honesty,
Which sort under that cloak, do all kind of villainy:
A right courtier is virtuous, gentill, and full of vrbanitie,
Hurting no man, good to all, deuoid of all villainy:
But such as thou act, fountains of squirilitie, and vain delights,
Though you hang by the courts, you are b^t flatring Parasites,
As well deserving the right name of courtesy,
As the coward Knight, the true praise of cheualrie:
I could say more, but I will not, for that I am your well willer,
In faith Carisophus, you are no Courtier but a catterpiller,
A Sicophant, a Parasite, a flatterer, and a knave?
Whether I will or no, these names you must have:
How well you deserne this, by your deeds it is known,
For that so unjustly thou have accused poor Damon,
Whose woeful case the Gods help alone.

CARYSOPH. Sir, are you his servant that you pity his case so?


STEPHANO. No bum troth, good man Grumbe, his name is Stephano.
I am called Onaphets, if needs you will know,
The knave begins to sift me, but I turn my name in and out,
Cretiso cum cretense, to make him a loute.

CARYSOPH. What mumble you with your self Master Onaphets.


STEPHANO. I am reckening with my self, how I may pay my debtes.


CARYSOPH. You have paid me more then you did owe me.


STEPHANO. Nay, upon a farther reckoning, I will pay you more if I know
Either you talk of that is done, or by your Sicophanticall envy,
You prick forth Dionisius the sooner, that Damon may die:
I will so pay thee, that t^y bones shall rattell in thy skin,
Remember what I have said, Onaphets is my name. EXIT

CARYSOPH. The sturdie knave is gone, the Devil him take,
He has made my head, shoulders, arms, sides, and all to ache:
Thou horson villain boy, why did thou wait no better?
As he paid me, so will I not die thy debtor.

JACK. Master, why do you fight with me? I am not your match you see,
You durst not fight with him yt is gone, and will you wreke your anger on me

CARYSOPHVS. Thou villain, by thee I have lost mine honor,
Betten with a codgell like a Slave, a Uacaboun, or a la^^e Lubber,
And not given one blow again, have thou handled me well?

JACK. Master I handled you not, but who did handle you very handsomely you
can tell.


CARYSOPHVS. Handsomely thou crake rope.


JACK. Yea sir, very handsomely I hold you a grote,
He handled you so handsomely, that he left not one more in your cote.

CARISOPH. O I had firck^ him trimly thou villain, if thou had given me my
Sword


JACK. It is better as it is, Master believe me at a word:
If he had seen your weapon, he would have been fierser,
And so perhaps beat you worse, I speak it with my heart,
^ou were never yet at the dealing of fence blows, bu^ you had four away for
your part
^t is but your luck, you are man good enough,
But the Wealche Onaphets, was a vengeance knave and rough,
Master you were best go home and rest in your bed,
Ye thinks your cappe wa^eth to little for your head.

CARISOPH. What? does my head swell?


JACK. Yea as big as a ^odshed, and bleades too.


CARYSOPH. I am as^amed to show my face with this hew.


JACK. No shame at all, men have bin beaten far better then you,


CARISOPHVS. I must go to the Chirurgians, what shall I say when I am a
dreslyng*


JACK. You may say truly, you met with a knaves blessing. EXEVNT


Here enters ARISTIPPVS. By mine own experience, I prove true that many men
tell,
To live in Court not beloved, better be in Hell:
What criyng out? what cursyng is there within of Carisophus,
Because he accused Damon to King Dionisius:
Even now, he came whining and criyng into the Court for the nonce*
Shewinge that one Onaphets had broke his knaves sc^nce:
Which strange name when they heard, every man laughed heartily,
And I by my self scand his name secretly,
For well I knew it was some madheded child
That invented this name, that the logheaded knave might be begilde:
In tossing it often with my self to and fro,
I found out that Onaphets, backward spelled Stephano:
I smiled in my sleue, how to see by tournyng his name, he dressed him,
And how for Damo^ his Masters sake, with a wodden congell he blessed hi^
None pitied ye knave, no man nor woman, but all laughed him to scorn^
To be thus hated of all better unborn:
Far better Aristippus has provided I trow,
For in all the Court, I am beloved both of hie and low:
I offend none, in so much that women singe this to my great praise*
Omnis Aristippum docuit color, and locus and res.
But in all this ioylitie, one thing maseth me,
The strangest thing that ever was hard or known
Is now happened in this Court by that Damon:
Whom Carisophus accused, Damon is now at liberty,
For whose return Pithias his friend lies in prison, alas in great ieopard^
To morrow is ye day, which day by noone if Damon return not, ernestly
The king has sworn that Pithias should die,
Whereof Pithias has intelligence very secretly,
Wishing that Damon may not return, till he have paid
His life for his friend: has it ben hear to fore ever said,
That any man for his friend would die so wyllyngly?
O noble friendship, O perfect amity,
Thy force is hear seen, and that very perfectly:
The king him self museth here at, yet is he far out of square,
That he trusts none, to come nere him not his own daughters wit he have
^nsercht to enter his chamber, which he has made harbars his beard to shave:
Not with Knife or ^afour, for all edge tools he fears,
But with hot burning Nutshales, they senge of his hears.
Was there ever man that lived in such miserye?
Well, I will go in with a heavy and ^ens^ue heart too,
To think how Pithias this poor gentleman to morrow shall die EXIT
Here enters JACK and WILL. Will, by my honesty, I will mar your monckes
face if you so fondly prate
WILL. Jack, by my troth, seeing you are without the Court ga^e,
^f you play Jack napes, in mocking my master, and dispising my face,
^uen here with a Pantacle, I will you disgrace:
and though you have a far better ^ace then I,
^et, who is better man of us two, these sistes shall try,
^nlesse you leave your taunting.

JACK. Thou beganst first, did thou not say even now,
that Carisophus my Master was no man but a cow,
(...) taking so many blows, and gave never a blow again?

WILL. I said so in deed, he is but a tame Ruffian,
that can swear by his flaske and twiche hor and Gods precious lady:
and yet be will be beaten with a faggot stick:
^he^e barking whe^pes were never good biters,
^e yet great crakers were ever great fighters:
^ut seeinge you eg me so much ^ will somewhat more resight,
^ay Cari^op^us thy master is a flattring Parisite:
^lening away the sweet from the worthy in all the Court,
that tragi^ie has he moved of late? ye deuell take him he does much hurt.

JACK. I pray you what is Aristippus thy master, is not he a Parisite to,
that with scoffing and testing in the Court makes so much a do?

WILL. He is no Parisi^e, but a pleasant Gentlman, full of courtesy,
^hy master is a chu^l^th loute the heir of a doung forke, as void of
honesty,
(...) thou art of honor.

JACK. Nay if you will needs be prating of my master still,
(...) faith, I must cool you my frinde Dapper Will.
^ake this at the beginning.

WILL. I Praise well your winning, my Pantacle is as ready as yours.


JACK. By the Mass I will box you.


WILL. By cock I will Fox you


JACK. Will, was I with you.


WILL. Jack, did I fly?


JACK. Alas pretty cockerell, you are to weak.


WILL. In faith Dutting Duttell, you will cry creake,

Here enters SNAP. Away you crack ropes, are you fighting at the Court gate?
And I take you hear again, I will swindge you both, what? EXIT
JACK. I beshrew Snap the Tipstaffe that great knaves heart, y^ hither di^^com^
Had he not ben, you had cried ere this Victus, victa, victum,
But seeing we have breathed our selves, if ye list,
Let us agree like friends, and shake each other by the fist.

WILL. Content am I, for I am not malicious, but on this condition,
That you talk no more so broad of my master as here you have done,
But who have we here, is Cobex epi coming yonder.

JACK. Will, let us slipp aside and vewe him well.


Here enters GRIMME the Coliar whistling. What Deuell, iche ween ye Porters
are drunk, will they not ^uy the gate tooday
Take in Coals for ye Kings own mouth, will no body stur I say?
Ich might have layne tway bowers longer in my b^dde,
Cha tarried so long here, that my teeth chatter in my head.
JACK. Will, after our fallinge out, will thou laugh merrily*


WILL. I mary Jack, I pray thee heartily.


JACK. Then follow me, and hemme in a word now and then:
What braulynge knave is there at the Court gate so early?

WILL. It is some brainsicke Uillaine, I durst lay a penny.


JACK. It was you sir that cried so loud, I trow,
And bid us take in Coals for the Kings mouth, even now.

GRIMME It Was I indeed.


JACK. Why sir? how dare you speak such petie treason?
Does the King eat Coals at any season?

GRIMME. Here is a gaye world, Boys now settes old men to scool^,
I said well enough, what Jack sauce, think chain a fool*
It Bake house, Buttrie hatch, Ritchin, and Seller;
Do they not say for the Kings mouth?

WILL. What then good man Coliar?


GRIMME. What then? seeing without coals they cannot finely dress ye kings meat,
May I not say, take in coals for ye kings mouth, though coals he do not eat?

JACK. James Christ, came ever from a Colier an answer so trim?
You are learned, are you not Father Grimme?

GRIMME. Grimme is my name in deed, cham not learned, and yet ye Kings colier
This vortie winter cha bin to the King a seruiler,
Though I be not learned, yet cha mother wit enough whole and some

WILL. So it seems, you have so much mother wit, that you lack your fathers
wisdom.


GRIMME. Mass, cham well be set: here is is a trim cast of Murleons
What be you my pretty cockerels, that ask me these questions.

JACK. Good faith master Grimme, if such Marlines on your pouch may light
They are so quick of winge yt quickly they can carry it out of your sight
And though we are cockerels now, we shall have spurs one day,
And shall be able perhaps to make you a Capon:
But to tell you troth: we are the Porters m^n, which early and late,
Wait on such Gentlemen as you to open the Caurtegate.

GRIMME. Are ye servants then?


WILL. Yea sir, are we not pretty men?


GRIMME. Pretty men (quod you) nay, you are strong men, else you could not
bear these bri^ches.


WILL. Are these great hose? in faith goodman Colier you see with your nose
By mine honesty, I have but for one lining in one hose, but vij else of Rug*

GRIMME. That is but a little, yet it makes thee seem a great Bugge.


JACK. How say you good man Colier, can you find any fault here?


GRIMME. ^ay you should find fault, mary here is trim gear,
^as little knave, do not sweat, thou go with great pain,
These are no hose, but watter bougets, I tell thee plain:
Good for none, but such as have no buttockes.
Did you ever see two such little Robin ruddockes,
So laden with breeches? chill say no more, lest I offend,
Who invented these monsters first, did it to a gostly end:
To have a male, ready to put in other folks stuff,
We see this evident by daily prooffe:
One preached of late not far hence, in no Pulpet, but in Waayne carte,
That spoke enough of this, but for my part,
Chil say no more, your own necessity,
In the end will force you to find some remedy.

JACK. Well, hold this raylynge knave with a talk when I am gone,
I will fetch him his filling ale for his good sermon.

WILL. Go thy way: father Grimme, gayly well you do say,
It is but youngmens folly that list to play:
And mask a while in the net of their own devise,
When they come to your age, they will be wise.

GRIMME. Bum troth, but few such roysters come to my years at this day,
They be cut off be times, or they have gone half their journey:
I will not tell why, let them guess that can, I mean somewhat thereb^
Enter JACK. with a pot of wine, and a cup to drink on. Father Grimme,
because you are sturring so early,
I have brought you a boule of wine to make you merry.

GRIMME. Wine, mary, that is welcome to Colliers, chyl swapt of by and by
Chwas sturringe so early that my very soul is dry.

JACK. This is stoutely done, will you have it warmed father Grimme.


GRIMME. No, it is warm enough: it is very loustous and trim,
It Is Musselden ich ween, of fellowship let me have an other spurt,
Ich can drink as easly now, as if I sat in my shurte.

JACK. By cock and you shall have it, but I will begin and that anon^
It bit avow mon companion.

GRIMME. Ihar vow pleadge pety Zawne,

JACK. Can you speak French? here is a trim colier by this day.


GRIMME. What man? iche learned this when ich was a Soldier,
When ich was a lusty fellow, and could yarke a whip trimly,
Better then these boy Coliers that come to the Court daily:
When there were not so many captious fellows as now,
That would toruppe men for every trifell. I wot not how:
As there was one Damon, not long since, taken for a Spy,
How justly I know not, but he was condemned to die.

WILL. This Wine has warmed him, this comes well to pas,
We shall know all now, for in VINO VERITAS,
Father Grimme, who accused this Damon to King Dionisius?

GRIMME. A vengaunce take him, it was a gentleman, one Master Crowsphus.


WILL. Crowsphus, you clippe the Kings language, you would have said
Carisophus
But I perceue now, either the wind is at the South,
Or else your tongue cleaneth to the roof of your mouth.

GRIMME. A murian take thik Wine, it so int^^icate my brain,
That to be hanged by and by, I cannot speak plain.

JACK. You speak knauishly plain, saying my master you do mock,
In faith ere you go, I will make you a lobbe cecke:
Father Grimme, what say they of this Damon abroad?

GRIMME. All men are sorry for him, so help me God.
They say a false knave cused him to the King wrongfully,
And he is gone, and should be here to morrow to die,
Or else his fellow which is in prison, his rowme shall supply:
Chil not be his half for vortie shillinges, I tell you plain,
I think Damon be to w^^e to return again.

WILL. Will no man speak for them in this woeful case.


GRIMME. No chill warrant you, one master Stippus is in place,
Where he may do good, but he frames him self so,
Whatsoever Dionisius wylleth to that he will not say no:
It Is a suttell Uor, he will not tread on thorns for none,
A merry Harecop^e it is and a pleasant companion,
A right courtier, and can provide for one.

JACK. Will, how like you this gear* your master Aristippus also,
At this Coliers hand has had a bl^e:
But in faith father Grimme cannot ye Coliers,
Provide for your selves far better then Courtiers.

GRIMME. Yes I trow, black Coliers go in threade bare cotes,
Yet so provide they, that they have the fair white groates:
Ich may say in counsel, though all day I moyle in dourte,
Chill not change lives with any in Dionisius Court:
For though their apparel be never so fine,
Yet sure their credit is far worse then mine:
And by cock I may say, for all their hie looks,
I know some sticks full deep in Merchants books:
And deeper will fall in, as fame me tells,
As long as in steed of Money, they take up Hawks hoods and Belles:
Whereby they fall into a swelling disease, which Coliers do not know
Tath a mad name, it is called ich ween, Centum pro cento.
Some other in Courts, make others laugh merrily,
When they wayle and lament their own estate secretly:
Friendship is dead in Court, Hypocrisy does reign,
Who is in favor now, to morrow is out again:
The state is so uncertain, that I by my will,
Will never be courtier, but a Colier still.

WILL. It seems that Coliers have a very trim life.


GRIMME. Coliers get money still: Tell me of troth,
Is not that a trim life now as the world goes?
All day, though I toil with main and might,
With money in my pouche, I come home merry at night,
And sit down in my chair by my wife fair Alison,
And turn a Crabbe in the fire, as merry as Pope John.

JACK. That Pope was a merry fellow, of whom folk talk so much.


GRIMME Had to be merry withal, had goulde enough in his hutch:

JACK. Can goulde make men merry? they say who can singe so merry a note,
As he that is not able to change a grote?

GRIMME. Who singes in that case singes never in tune I know for my part
That a heavy pouch with goulde makes a light heart:
Of which I have provided for a dear year good store,
And these Benters I trow, shall anon get me more.

WILL. By serving the Court with coals you gaynde all this money.


GRIMME. By the Court only I assure ye.


JACK. After what sort I pray thee tell me?


GRIMME. Nay, there bate me an ace (quod Boulon) I can wear a horn and blow it
not

JACK. Byr lady the wiser man.


GRIMME. Shall I tell you by what ^lite I got all this money
Then ich wear a noddy in deed: no, no, I warrant ye,
Yet in few words I tell you this one thing,
He is a very fool that can not gain by the King.

WILL. Well said father Grimme, you are a wily Colier and a brave,
I see now there is no knave to the old knave.

GRIMME. Such knaves have money, when courtiers have none,
But tell me, is it true that a broad is blown?

JACK. What is that?


GRIMME. Has the King made those fair Damsels his daughters,
To be come now fine and trim Barbers.

JACK. Yea truly to his own person.


GRIMME. Good fellows believe me, as the case now stands,
I would give one sack of Coals, to be washed at their hands:
If ich came so near them, for my wit chould not give three chippes,
If ich could not steal one swap at their lips.

JACK. Will, this knave is drunk, let us dress him,
Let us riffell him so that he have not one penny to bless him,
And steal away his Debenters too.

WILL. Content, invent the way, and I am ready.


^ACKE. Faith, and I will make him a noddie:
Father Grimme, if you pray me well, I will wash you and shave you too
Even after the same fashion as the Kings daughters do:
In all points as they handle Dionisius, I will dress you trim and fine

GRIMME Chuld vain learn y^: come on then, chil give thee a whole pint of win^
At Tavern for thy labor, when cha money for my Be^nters hear.

Here Will fetches a Barbers basin, a pot with water, a Raysour, and Clothes
and a pair of Spectacles. JACK. Com mine own Father Grimme, sit down.


GRIMME Mas to begin withal, hear is a trim chair*


JACK. What man I will use you like a prince: sir boy, fetch me my gear.


WILL. Here sir.


JACK. Hold up father Grimme.


GRIMME. Me seem my head does swim.


JACK. My Costly perfumes make that, away with this sir Bay: ^e quick*
Aloyse, aloyse, how how pretty it is, is not here a good face?
A fine Oules eyes, a mouth like an Oven,
Father you have good Butter teeth, full seen,
You wear weaued, else you would have been a great Calfe*
Ah trim lips to sweep a Manger, here is a chinne,
As soft as the hoose of an horse.

GRIMME. Does the Kings daughters rub so hard?


JACK. Hold your head strait man, else all will be marde,
Byr lady, you are of a good complexion,
A right Croyden sanguine, beshrew me,
Hold up father Grimme, Will can you besturre ye?

GRIMME Me thinks after a marvelous fashion you do^ besmoure me.


JACK. It is with VNGVENTVM of Daucus Maucus, that is very costly,
I give not this washinge ball to every body:
After you have been dressed so finely at my hand,
You may kiss any Ladies lips within this land:
A, you are trimly washed, how say you, is not this trimm water?

GRIMME. It may be wholesome, but it is vengeance sower.


JACK. It scours the better, sir boy, give me my rays^ur,

WILL. Here at hand sir.


GRIMME. Gods aims, it is a chopping knyfe, it is no Raysour.


JACK. It is a Raysour and that a very good one,
It came lately from Palarrime, it cost me.xx. crowns alone
Your eyes dassell after your washing, these spectacles put on?
Now view this Raysour, tell me, is it not a good one?

GRIMME* They be gay Barnikels, yet I see never the better.


JACK. In deed, they be a young sight, and that is the matter,
But I warrant you, this Raysour is very easy.

GRIMME. Go too then, since you begone, do as please ye.


JACK. Hold up father Grimme.


GRIMME. O your Raysour does hurt my lip.


JACK. No, it scrapeth of a pimpell, to ease you of the Pippe,
I have done now, how say you? are you not well?

GRIMME. Cham lighter then ich was, the truth to tell.


JACK. Will you singe after your shauinge?


GRIMME. Mas content, but chill be polde first or I singe.


JACK. Nay that shall not need, you are pould near enough for this time.


GRIMME. Go to then lustyly, I will singe in my man's voice,
Chaue a troublinge base busse.

JACK. You are like to bear the bobbe, for we will give it,
Set out your bussyng base, and we will quiddell upon it.

GRIMME sings Busse. JACK Singes, Too nidden, and too nidden.
WILL. singes. Too nidden, and ^oodle toadle do n^dden,
Is not Grimme the Colier most finely shaven.
GRIMME. Why my fellows think iche am a cow, that you make such tooyin

JACK. Nay byr lady, you are no cow by your singing,
Yet your wife told me you were an Ox.

GRIMME. Did she so? it is a peslens queen she is full of such mockes*
But go to, let us singe out our song merely.
The Song at the shauing of the Colier.

JACK. Such Barbers God send you at all times of need.


WILL. That can dress you finely, and make such quick speed.


JACK. Your face like an Incorne, now shines so gay,

WILL. That I with your Nostrels of force must needs play,
With too nidden, and too nidden.

JACK. With too nidden, and todle todle do nidden,
Is not Grimme the Colier most finely shaven.

WILL. With shauing you shine like a pestle of Porke:

JACK. Here is the trimmest Hogs flesh from London to Yor^^*


WILL. It would be trim Baken to hang up a while,

JACK. To play with this Hogline, of force I must smyle,
With too nidden, and too nidden

WILL. With too nidden, and todle etc.


GRIMME. Your shauing does please me, I am now your debtor.


WILL, Your wife now will busse you, because you are sweate^*


GRIMME. Near would I be poled, as near as cham shaven.


WILL. Then out of your Ierkin needs must you be shaken*
With too nidden, and too nidden, etc.

GRIMME. It is a trim thing to be washed in the Court.


WILL. Their hands are so fine that they never do hurt.


GRIMME. Me think ich am lighter then ever ich was.


WILL. Our shaueinge in the Court has brought this to pass.
With too nidden, and too nidden.

JACK. With too nidden and todle todle do nidden.
(...) not Grimme the Col^er most finely shaven.

Finis.
GRIMME. THis is trimly done, now chill pitche my coals not far hense,
And then at the Tavern chil bestow whole tway pence.

JACK. Farewell cock, before the Colier again do us seek,
^^t us into the Court to part the spoil, share and share like. EXIT

^VYLL Away then.
Here enters GRIMME. Out alas, where shall I make my moan?
^y Pouche, my Benters and all is gone,
^her is that villayne that did me shave?
^ath robbed me alas of all that I have.
Here enters Snap. Who cries so at the Court gate.

GRIMME. I, the poor Colier, that was robbed of late.


^^AP Who robbed thee?


GRIMME. Two of the Porters men that did shave me.


SNAP. Why? the Porters men are no Barbers?


GRIMME. A vengance take them they are quick carners.


^^AP. What stature wear they of?


GRIMME. As little dapper knaves as they trimly could scoff.


SNAP. They were Lackeyes, as near as I can guess them.


GRIMME. Such Lackies make me lack, an halter beswenge them,
^am undone they have my Benters too.

SNAP. Do thou know them if thou see them?


GRIMME. Yea that I do?


SNAP. Then come with me, we will find them out and that quickly.


GRIMME. I follow mast Tipslafe, they be in the Court it is likely.


SNAP. Then cry no more, come away. EXEVNT.
Here enters Carisophus, and Aristippus. If ever you will show your
friendship, now is the time,
Seeing the king is displeased with me, of my part without any crime

ARISTIP. It should appear it comes of some evil behavior,
That you so suddenly are cast out of favor.

CARISOPH. Nothing have I done but this in talk I ouerthwarted Eubulus*
When he lamented Pithias case to King Dionisius,
Which to morrow shall die, but for that false knave Damon:
He has left his friend in the briers and now is gone.
We grew so hot in talk, that Eubulus protested plainly,
Which held his care open to parasiticall fla^tery.
And now in the Kings ear like a bell he ringes,
Criyng that ^latterers have been the destroyers of kings:
Which talk in Dionisius heart has made so deep impression,
That he ^ruste^s me not as heretofore in no condition:
And some words brake from him as though that he,
Began to suspect my troth and honesty:
Which you of friendship I know will defend, how so ever the world goes*
My frind for my honesty, will you not take an oath?

ARISTIP. To swear for your honesty, I should lose mine own.


CARISOPH Should you so in deed? I would that were known,
Is your void friendship come thus to pass.

ARISTIP. I follow the proverb: Amicus Vsque ad auras.


CARISOPHVS. Where can you say, I ever lost mine honesty.


ARISTIPPVS. You never lost it, for you never had it, as far as I know.


CARISOPH. Say you so friend Aristippus whom I trust so well?


ARISTIPPVS. Because you trust me, to you the truth I tell.


CARISOPH. Will you not stretche one point? to bring me in favor again*


ARISTIP. I love no stretching, so may I breed mine own pain.


CARISOPH A friend ought to shonne no pain, to stand his friend in stead.


ARISTIP. Where true friendship is, it is so in very deed.


CARISOPH. Why sir? has not the chain of true friendship, linked us two
together*


ARISTIP. The chiefest link lacked thereof, it must needs deseuer.


CARISOPH. What link is that? feign would I know.


ARISTIP. Honesty.


CARISOPH. Does honesty knit the perfect knot in true friendship,

ARISTIP. Yea truly, and that knot so knit will never slip.


CARISOPH. Belike then there is no frindship but between honest men.


ARISTIP. Between the honest only, for Amicitia inter bonus: says a learned
man

CARISOPH. ^et evil men use frindship in things dishonest, where fancy does
serve

ARISTIP. That is no frindship, but a lewd likeing, it lastes but a while.


CARISOPH. What is the perfectst frindship among men that ever grew?


ARISTIP. Where men loved one another, not for profit but for virtue.


CARISOPH. Are such frindes both a like in joy and also in smarte?


ARISTIP. They must needs, for in two bodies they have but one heart.


CARISOPH. Friend Aristippus, deceive me not with Sophistry,
(...) there no perfect frindship, but where is virtue and honesty?

ARISTIPPVS What a Deuell then meant Carisophus,
To join in frindship with fine Aristippus?
In whom is as much virtue, truth and honesty,
As there are true feathers in the three Craines of the ventrie:
Yet these feathers have the shadow of lively feathers the truth to s^a^
But Carisophus, has not the shadow of an honest man,
To be plain, because I know thy villainy:
In abusinge Dionisius, to many men's injury:
Under the cloak of frindship, I played with his head,
And sought means how thou with thine own fancy might be lead,
My frindship thou soughtest for thine own commodity,
As worldly men do by profit measuring amity:
Which I perceauing, to the like my self I framed,
Wherein I know of the wise I shall not be blamed:
If you ask me Qua^e. I answer, Quia prudentis est multu^ dis^imul^^*
To speak more playner, as the proverb does go,
In faith Carisophus, Cum cretence cretiso:
Yet a perfect frinde I show my self to thee in one thing,
I do not dessemble, now I say I will not speak for thee to the King,
Therefore sink in thy sorrow, I do not deceive thee,
A false knave I found thee, a false knave I leave thee. EXIT

CARISOPHVS. He is gone? is this frindship to leave his friend in the plain
fields*
Well I see now, I my self have beguylde,
In matching with that false for in amity:
Which has me used to his own commodity.
Which seeing me in distress, unfeignedly goes his ways,
Lo this is the perfect frindship among men now a days:
Which kind of frindship toward him I used secretly:
And be with me the like, has requited me craftly.
It is the Gods judgment, I see it plainly,
For all the world may know, Incide in fo^eam quam fed.
Well I must content my self none other help I know*
Until a merier gale of wind may hap to blow: EXIT

EVBVLVS. Who deals with Kings in matters of great weight,
When froward will, does bear the chefest swa^:
Must yield of force, their need no subtle ^^eight:
Ne painted speech the matter to convey,
No prayer can move, when kindled is the ire,
The more ye quench, the more increased is the fire.
This thing I prove in Pithias woeful case,
Whose hauuy hap with tears I do lament:
The day is come when he in Damons place,
Must lose his life the time is fully spent:
Naught can my words now with the King prevail,
Against the wind and striuinge stream I sail:
For die thou must alas thou sely Greek,
Ah Pithias, now come is thy doleful hour:
A perfect friend none such a world to seek.
Though bitter death shall give thee sauce full sower:
Yet for thy faith enrold shall be thy name,
Among the Gods within the book of fame:
Who knows his case, and will not melt in tears?
His giltles blood shall trickle down anon.

Then the Muses singe. Alas what hap have thou poor Pithias now to die,
Woe worth the which man for his death has given us cause to cry.

EVBVLVS. ME think I hear with yelow rented hears,
The Muses frame their notes my state to moan:
Among which sort as one that morneth with heart,
In doleful tunes, my self will bear a part.

MUSES. Who worth the man which for his death. etc.


EVBVLVS. With yelow rented hears come on you Muses nine,
Fill now my breast with heavy tunes, to me your plaints resign*
For Pithias I bewail which presently must die,
Woe worth the man which for his death has given us cause. etc.

MUSES. Woe worth the man which for his. etc.


EVBVLVS. Was ever such a man that would die for his friend,
I think even from the heavens above, the Gods did him down sen^
To show true friendshipps power, which forced thee now to die,
Woe worth the man which for thy death, etc.

MUSES. Who worth the man, etc.


EVBVLVS. What Tigars whelp was he, that Damon did accuse?
What faith have thou, which for thy friend, thy death does not refuse
O heavy hap had thou to play this Tragidie,
Woe worth the man which for thy death, etc.

MUSES. Woe worth the man, etc.


EVBVLVS. Thou young and worthy Greek, that showest such perfect love,
The Gods receive thy simple ghost, into the heavens above:
Thy death we shall lament with many a weepinge eye,
Woe worth the man which for his death, etc.

MUSES. Woe worth the man which for thy death,
has given us cause to cry.

FINIS.
EVBVLVS. Eternal be your fame ye Muses, for that in misery,
Ye did vouchsafe to strain your notes to walk:
My heart is rent in two, with this miserable case,
Yet am I charged by Dionisius mouth, to se this place,
At all points ready for the execution of Pithias.
Need has no law: will I or nil I, it must be done,
But lo the bloody minister, is even here at hand.
Gronno, I came hither now to understand,
If all things are well appointed for the execution of Pithias,
The King him self will se it done here in this place.

GRONNO. Sir, all things are ready, here is the place, here is ye hand, here
is the sword*
Here lacks non but Pithias, whose head at a word,
If he were present* I could finely strike of,
You may report that all things are ready.

EVBVLVS. I go with an heavy heart to report it, ah woeful Pithias*
Full near now is thy misery.

GRONO. I m^ruell very much, under what constilation,
All hangmen are borne, for they are hated of all, beloved of none*
Which hatred is showed by this point evidently,
The Hangman always dwelles in the vilest place of the City:
That such spite should be, I know no cause why,
Unless it be for their offices sake, which is cruel and blondye*
Yet some men must do it to execute laws?
Me think they hate me without any just cause:
But I must lo^ke to my toil, Pithias must lose his head at one ^low,
Else the Boys will stone me to death in the streat as I go:
But hark, the prisoner comes, and the King also,
I see there is no help, Pithias his life must forgo.
Here enters Dionisius and Eubulus. Bring forth Pithias that pleasant
companion,
Which took me at my word and became pleadge for Damon:
It pricketh fast upon noone, I do him no injury,
If now he lose his head for so he requested me.
If Damon return not, which now in Greece is full merry:
Therefore shall Pithias pay his death, and that by and by,
He thought belike, if Damon were out of the City,
I would not put him to death, for some foolish pity:
But seeing it was his request, I will not be mocked he shall di^*
Bring him forth.
Here enters Snap. Give place, let the prisoner come by, give place.

DIONISIVS. How say you sir? where is Damon your trusty friend?
You have played a wise part I make God a vow,
You know what time a day it is, make you ready.

PITHIAS. Most ready I am mighty king and most ready also,
For my true frinde Damon this life to forgo,
Even at your pleasure.

DIONISIVS. A true friend, a false Traitor that so breaks his o^h,
Thou shall lose thy life, though thou be never so loath.

PITHIAS. I am not loath to do what so ever I said,
Ne at this present pinch of death am I dismayde:
The Gods now I know, have heard my fervent prayer,
That they have reserved me to this passing great honor,
To die for my frind, whose faith, even now, I do not mistruste:
My frinde Damon is no false traitor, he is true and just:
But fith he is no God but a man, he must do as he may,
The wind may be contrary, sickness may let him, or some misadue^ture by the way,
Which the eternal Gods turn al to my glory,
That Fame may resound how Pithias for Damon did die:
^e breaks no o^h, which does as much as he can,
His mind is hear, he has some let, he is but a man.
That he might not return, of all the Gods I did require,
Which now to my joy, does grant my desire:
But why do^ I stay any longer, seeing that one man's death,
May suffice O king, to pacify thy wrath?
O thou minister of justice, do thine office by and by,
Let not thy hand tremble, for I remble not to die:
Stephano the right patron, of true fidelity,
Commend me to thy master my sweet Damon, and of him crave liberty
When I am dead in my name, for thy trusty services,
Has well deserved a gift far better then this,
Oh my Damon farewell now for ever, a true friend to me most dear
Whiles life does last, my mouth shall still talk of thee,
And when I am dead my simple ghost true witness of amity:
Shall hoouer about the place wheresoever thou be,

DIONISIVS. Eubulus, This gear is strange, and yet because,
Damon has falst his faith, Pithias shall have the law:
Gronnoo, dispoyle him, and eke dispatch him quickly.

GRONNO. It shall be done: since you came into this place,
I might have stricken of seven heads in this space:
Ber lady here are good garments, these are mine by the roode,
It is an evil wind that blows no man good:
Now Pithias kneel down, ask me blessyng like a pretty boy,
And with a trise thy head from thy shoulders I will convey.
Here enters Damon running and stays the sword. Stay, stay, stay, for the
kings advantage stay,
O mighty king, mine appointed time is not yet fully past,
Within the compass of mine hour lo, here, I come at last:
A life I owe, a life I will you pay:
Oh my Pithias, my noble pledge, my constant friend,
Ah w^ is me for Damons sake, how near were thou to thy end:
Give place to me, this rowme is mine, on this stage must I play,
Damon is the man, none ought but he to Dionisius his blood to pay.

GRONNO. Are you come sir? you might have tarried if you had been wise,
For your hasty coming you are like to know the prise.

PITHIAS. O thou cruel minnister, why did not thou thine office,
Did not I bid thee make have in any wise?
Have thou spared to kill me once that I may die twyse:
Not to die for my friend, is present death to me, and alas,
Shall I see my sweet Damon, slain before my face:
that double death is this? but O mighty Dionis^us,
(...) true justice now, way this aright, thou noble Eubulus:
(...) me have no wrong, as now s^andes the case,
^^mon ought not to die, but Pithias:
(...) misaduenture, not by his will, his hour is past, therefore I
because he came not at his just time, ought justly to die:
(...) was my promise, so was thy promise O King,
(...) this Court can bear witness of this thing.

DAMON. Not so, O mighty King, to Justice it is contrary,
that for an other man's fault, the Inno^ent should die:
(...) yet is my time plainly expirde, it is not fully noone,
^f this my day appointed, by all the Clockes in the Town.

PITHIAS. Believe no Clock, the hour is past by the Son.


DAMON. Ah my Pithias, shall we now break the bonds of Amity?
Till you now overthwart me, which heretofore so well did agree.

PITHIAS. My Damon, the Gods forbid, but we should agree,
^herfore agree to this, let me perform the promise I made for thee
^et me die for thee, do me not that injury,
^oth to break my promise, and to suffer me too see thee di^
^ho^e so dearly I love: this small request grant me,
(...) shall never ask thee more, my desire is but frindly:
^oo me this honor, that fame may report triumphantly,
that Pithias for his friend Damon was contented to die.

DAMON. That you were contented for me to die, fame cannot deny,
^et fame shall never touch me with such a villainy:
^o report that Damon did suffer his friend Pithias, for him giltles to die,
^herfore content thy self, the Gods requi^e thy constant faith,
^one but Damons blood can appease Dionisius wrath:
and now O mighty King, to you my talk I convey,
because you gave me leave, my worldly things to stay:
^o requite that good turn ere I die, for your behalf this I say,
^lthough your Regal state, dame Fortune decketh so,
that like a king in worldly wealth, ab^ndantly ye fl^e:
^^et fickle is the ground whereon all Tirrants tread,
^ thousand sundry cares and fears, do haunt their restles head:
^o trusty band; no faithful f^iendes d^d guard thy hateful state,
and why? whom men obey for deadly fear, sure them they deadly hate
That you may safely reign, by love get friends, whose constant fait^
Will never fail, this counsel geues poor Tam^n at his death:
Friends are the surest guard, for Kings golden time do wear away
And other precious things do fade, frindship will never decay:
Have friends in store therefore, so shall you safely sleep,
Have friends at home of foreign foes, so need you take no keep:
Abandon flatring tounges, whose clackes truth never tells,
Abase the ill, advance the good, in whom dame virtue dwells:
Let them your play fellows be, but O you earthly kings,
Your sure defense and strongest guard, s^andes chifely in faithful friend
Then get you friends by liberal deeds, and here I make an end,
Accept this counsel mighty King of Damon Pithias friend:
Oh my Pithias, now farewell for ever, let me kiss thee or I die,
My soul shall honor thee, thy constant faith above the heavens shall fli^
Come Gronno do thine office now, why is thy color so dead?
My neck is so is short, that thou wylt never have honesty in striking o^ this
hea^

DIONISIVS. Eubulus, my spirits are suddenly appauled, my limes wax weak
This strange friendship amaseth me so, that I can scarce speak.

PITHIAS. O mighty king, let some pity your noble heart meene,
You require but one man's death, take Pithias, let Damon live.

EVBVLVS. O unspeakable frindship.


DAMON. Not so, he has not offended, there is no cause why?
My constant frind my Pithias, for Damons sake should die*
Alas he is but young, he may do good to many,
Thou coward^ minister, why do thou not let me die?

GRONNO. My hand with soden fear quiuereth.


PITHIAS. O noble king, show mercy on Damon, let pithias die,


DIONISIVS. Stay Gronno, my flesh trembles, Eubulus, what shall I do*
Were there ever such frindes on earth as were these two?
What heart is so cruel that would divide them asunder?
O noble friendship, I must yield, at thy force I wonder:
My heart, this rare frindship has pearst to the root,
And quenched all my fury, this sight has brought this about:
Which thy grave counsel Eubulus, and learned persuasion could never do:
(...) noble gentlemen, the immortal Gods above,
^ath made you play this Tragidie, I think for my behoue:
before this day I never knew what perfect friendship meant,
^y cruel mind to blouddy deeds, was full and wholly bente:
^y fearful life, I thought with terror to defend,
^ut now I see there is no guard unto a faithful ^riend:
Which will not spare his life at time of present need,
(...) happy kings within your courts have two such frinds in deed:
(...) honor friendship now, which that you may plainly see,
^amon, have thou thy life, from death I pardon thee:
^or which good turn, I crave this honor do me lend?
Oh frindly heart? let me link with you, to you make me ye third frie^de
^y court is yours, dwell here with me, by my commission large,
^y self, my realm, my wealth, my health, I commit to your charge:
^ake me a third friend, more shall I joy in that thing,
Then to be called as I am, Dionisius the mighty king.

DAMON. O mighty king, first for my life most humble thanks I give,
and ne^t, I praise the immortal Gods, that did your heart so meu^
That you would have respect to friendships heavenly lore,
^orseing well, he need not fear which has true friends in store
^or my part, most noble king, as a third frind, welcome to our friendly society
But you must forget you ar a king, for frindship stands in true equality

DIONISIVS. Unequal though I be in great possessions,
^et full equal shall you find me in my changed conditions:
^irranie, flattery, oppression, lo, hear I cast away?
^usti^e, truth, love, frindship shall be my joy:
True friendship* will I honor unto my lives end,
My greatest glory shall be, to be counted a perfect friend.

PITHIAS. For this your deed most noble King, the Gods advance your name
and ^ince to friendships lore, you list your Princely heart to frame:
With joyful heart, O King, most welcome now to me,
With you will I knit the perfect knot of amity:
Wherein I shall enstruct you so, and Damon here your friend,
That you may know of amity the mighty force and eke the joyful end:
and how that kings do stand upon a fickle ground,
Within whose Realm at time of need, no faithful friends are found

DIONISIVS. Your instruction will I follow, to you my self I do commite,
Eubulus, make haste to fet new apparel fit:
For my new frindes.

EVBVLVS. I go with a joyful heart, O happy day. EXIT


GRONNO. I am glad to hear this word, though their lives they do not leese,
It is no reason the Hangman should lose his fees:
These are mine, I am gone with a trise. EXIT

Here enters EVBVLVS with new garments. DIONISIVS. Put on these Garments
now, go in with me the Iewelles of my Court.


DAMON and PITHIAS. We go with joyful hearts.


STEPHANO. Oh Damon my dear master, in all this joy remember me.


DIONISIVS. My friend Damon he asks reason? Dam. Pithias.


DAMON. Stephano, for thy good service, be thou free. EXEVNT. DION


STEPHANO. O most happy, pleasant, joyful, and triumphant day,
Poor Stephano, now shall live in contintinuall joy:
VIVE LE ROY with Damon and pithias in perfect amity,
VIVE TV STEPHANO, in thy pleasant liberality:
Wherein I joy as much as he that has a conquest won,
I am a free man, none so merry as I now under the Son:
Farewell my Lords, now ye Gods grant you al ye some of perfect amity
And me long to enjoy my long dea^red liberty. EXIT.
Hear enters EVBVLVS beatyng CARISOPHVS. Away villain, away you flatringe
Parasite,
Away the plague of this Court, thy filed tongue that forged lies,
No more here shall do hurt, away false Sicophant, will thou not?

CARISOPHVS. I am gone sir, seeing it is the kings pleasure,
Why whyp ye me alone? a plague take Damon and Pithias since they came hither
I am driven to seek relee abrod alas I know not whither,
Yet Eubulus, though I begone, here after time shall try,
There shall be found even in this Court as great flatterers as I:
Well for a while I will forgo the Court, though to my great pain,
I doubt not but to spy a time when I may creep in again. EXIT.

EVBVLVS. The Serpent that eats men alive, Flattery with all her brood,
Is whipte away in Princes Courts which yet did never good,
What force* what mighty power, true Friendship may possess?
To all the world Dionisius Court now plainly does express,
W^o since to faithful Friends he gave his willing ear,
Most sa^e^y sits in his Seat and sleeps deuoid of fear,
Pourged is the Court of vice, since Friendship entered in,
Tirrannie quails, he studieth now with love each heart to win,
Virtue is had in price, and has his just reward:
And painted speech that gloseth for gain, from gifts is quite debard,
One loves another now for virtue, not for gain,
Where Virtue does not knit the knot, there Friendship cannot reign,
Without the which, no house, no land, ne kingdom can endure,
As necessary for man's life, as Water, Air, and Fire,
Which frames the mind of man, all honest things to do,
Unhonest things Friendship ne craves, ne yet consents thertoo,
In wealth a double joy, in woe a present stay,
A sweet compagnion in each state true Friendship is always:
A sure defense for Kings, a perfect trusty band,
A force to assail, a Shield to defend the enemies cruel hand,
A rare, and yet the greatest Gift, that God can give to man:
^o rare, y^ scarce four couple of faithful friends have been since ye world
began
A Gift so strange, and of such price, I wish all Kings to have,
But chiefly yet as duty binds I humbly crave,
True friendship, and true friends full fraught with constant faith,
The geuer of friends, the Lord grant her most noble Queen Elizabeth.

FINIS.
The last song.
THe strongest guard that Kings can have,
Are constant friends their state to save:
True friends are constant, both in word and deed,
True friends are present, and help at each need:
True friends talk truly, they gloss for no gain,
When treasure consumes, true frindes will remain,
True frindes for their true Prince, refuses not their death
The Lord grant her such frindes most noble Queen Elizabeth*
Long may she govern in honor and wealth,
Uoyde of all sickness, in most perfect health:
Which health to prolonge, as true friends require,
God grant she may have her own hearts desire:
Which friends will defend with most steadfast faith,
The Lord grant her such friends most noble Queen Elizabeth*
FINIS.

