Sermons very fruitful, godly, and learned, preached and set forth by
Master Roger Edgeworth, doctoure of divinity, Canon of the Cathedral
churches of Sarisburie, Wells and Bristow, residentiary in the Cathedral
church of Wells, and Chancellor of the same church: With a repertorie or
table, directinge to many notable matters expressed in the same sermons.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Roberti Caly, Tipographi. Mense September. Anno. 1557.

Eccles. v. Esto mansuetus ad audiendum verbum dei, vt intelligas, and cum
sapientia proferes responsum verum. The preface of the aucthor to them that
shall read these sermons folowinge.
IT is honorable and worthy praise, to confess and declare the works of
almighty GOD, as the blessed Angel said unto holy Thoby. And therefore they
that saw the miracle done by our savior Christ upon the man that was both
deaf and do^me, and was restored unto his sight, and also to his speech,
although they were bid to make no words thereof, yet they consideringe the
excellency of the miracle, and perceiuinge the humility of the doer of the
same, as intendinge more the occultation of his fact, for the auoidinge of
worldly praise, to give us example of like humility, then to hide his
gracious cure, as thinkinge they should not have done well to let such a
marvelous work vanish to oblivion, were the busier to diuulge and publishe,
not only that miracle, but others withal, saying: Been omnia fecit, and
surdus fecit audire, and mutos loqui. This man has done all things well, he
has made the deaf to hear, and the do^me to speak. So I considering that it
has pleased almighty God of his plentuous mercy and goodness, to open my
mouth, and to make me occupied in preachinge his holy word now by the space
of forty years and more, I thought it not good to permit such matters as I
have (through Gods help) set forth in my sermons, utterly to rotte and
perish, and lest (as the moral Poet says) Deferar in uicum, uendente^
thus, and arhoma, I have therefore perusing, yea rather superficially runninge
over such sermons as I have preached in times past, found much good matter in
them, right worthy to be had in memory, and so compact and set together, that
now in my old age I rejoice in God that gave me his gracious gift, so to
travail in such study while I was young and lusty. These my long labors
has be in the most troubleous time, and most cumbarde with errors and
heresies, change of minds and scismes that ever was in this realm for so
long time together, that any man can read of. While I was a young student in
divinity, Luthers heresies rose and were scattered here in this realm, which
in less space then a man would think, had so sore infected the christen
flock, first the youth, and consequently the elders, where the children
could set the fathers to scole, that the kings majesty, and all the
catholic clerks in the realm had much a do to extinguishe them, which yet
they could not so perfitlie quench, but that ever still when they might have
any maintenance by men or women of great power, they burste out a fresh,
even like fire hid under chafe, which sometimes among will flame out and
do hurt if it be not looked to. Against such errors with their appe^deceis I
have inuehied earnestly and often in my sermons in disputations and reasoninge
with the protestauntes, until I have be put to silence, either by general
prohibitions to preach, or by name, or by captivity and imprisonment, of all
which (I thank God) I have had my part. And yet ever when I might have any
clear time, I have returned to the same exercise more vehemently then before,
and so will do while I may have strength to speak. And because these sermons
were made in English, and touches sometimes among, such heresies as has
troubled English folk, I thought it best to set them forth in such language
as might presently best edify the multitude. Moreover pleases you to be
advertised, that when I should preach in any sole^pne and learned audience, I
ever fearinge the labilitie of my remembrance, used to pen my sermons much
like as I intended to utter them to the audience: others I scribled up not so
perfitlie, yet sufficiently for me to perceive my matter and my process. And
of these two sorts I have kept (as grace was) a great multitude, which now
helps me in this my enterprise of imprintinge a book of my said
exhortations. Moreover I have made innumerable exhortations at my cures, and in
other places where I have dwelled, and in the countries there about, and in my
iourneis, where it has chanced me to be on sondaies, or other holy days, of
which I have no signs remaininge in writing, although I think verelie some
of them were as fruitful, as others in which I took more labors, I pray God
they may be written and registered in the book of life everlasting. And when I
should preach oftentimes in one place, I used not to take every day a
distinct epistle or gospel, or other text, but to take some process of
scripture, and to prosecute the same, part one day and part another day, and
so you shall perceive by my declaration of the.vii. gifts of the holy Gooste,
which I preached at Redcliffe cross, in the good and worshipful city of
Bristow, in sundry sermons, although I was interrupted many years by the
confederacy of Hughe Lathamer, then aspiringe to a bisshopriche, and after
being bishop of worceter, and ordinary of the greatest part of the said
Bristow, and infecting the whole. And so by the exposition of the first epistle
of S. Peter, which I preached also in many sermons at the cathedral Church
there, where I am one of the Canons, in this also I was many times and long
disco^tinued by the odious scisme that was now lately, and by the doers of the
same. And in like manner in the Cathedral Church of wells, on the first and
second sondaies of Aduent, on Axe wednisdaye, and others, and there I lacked no
trouble by bishop Barlowe and his officers, of which such as be not
performed, I intend (if it shall please God) to perform and finishe
hereafter.

Of all my said sermons you shall now receive in this book, as hereafter
follows.
A Declaration of the seven gifts of the holy ghost in six sermons. An homily
of the articles of our Christen faith. An homily of Ceremonies, and of man's
laws. A parfite exposition of S. Peter's first epistle, in twenty treatises or
sermons.
I have beside these many sermons, made in very solemn audiences on the
dominicall epistles and gospelles, some in the university of Oxforde, some at
Paul's cross in London: some in the court before my most honorable Lord
and Master king Henry the eighte: some in the cathedral church of wells,
where has been ever since I knew it a solemn and a well learned audience,
which I purpose (God willinge) to set forth hereafter, as I may have
opportunity.

A repertorie or table, directinge to many notable matters expressed in this
book folowinge.
A.
ABraham is dead, and Abraham is alive, Fol. xxii. d Abraham, Iepthe, and
others, what they did for love to their country. fol. lii. a Abstain from
their wives men must because of prayers. fol. ccvii. c Acts of parliament in
our time has pretended godliness, but in effect turued to private lucre, with
the impouerishinge and undoing of many others, fol. cccix. b. Adam by his life
time had separate the issue of Cayn from the issue of Seth. fol, lix. c Adam,
though he had not offended, yet Christ would have been incarnate, and how.
fol. cxxxvii. c. d. Adulteringe women's hear with strange colors, etc. is
co^trolinge of Gods handy work. fol. cc, b. c. Affections of man's will. fol.
lv. c. Affections about good and godly things be laudable. lviii. b Age
crepeth upon us many ways, and specially by study, fol. ccxxxviii. b c
Almightines of God gives us a great light and comfort to believe all the
articles of our faith, fol. lxxv, a. Alms given against a man's will, is
nigardelye given. fol. ccxii. a b Alms given to the students of the
universities is best be stowed. Eodem. c. Anaxagoras felicity. fol. xlv. a An
Ape or counterfetter against every virtue, fol. xliii. a, Andrews prerogative
and his charity. fol. ci. c Angels ever sees the glory of God, and ever
desires to se it, and so shall we do. fol, cxxix. a. b Apostle, is the name of
an office. fol. c.ii, d Apostles be of iiii. manners. fol. ciii. b Arrius
heresy. fol, ii. c. Arrius heresy how it rose. fol. xix. c. Articles of our
faith be.xii. according to the number of the Apostles, and why they be called
articles. fo. lxxiii. b. Asia the less is full of pleasures. fo. lvi. d Asia,
Afric, and Europ, how they be divided. fo, cviii, c. As, imports not ever
equality. fo. cxxxii, d. Auctors of the Stoikes, and their opinion of
the.iiii. affections. fol. lv. d Aulus Gellius story concerning the.iiii.
affections. fol. lvi. c Authority of prelates, successors to the apostles.
fol. xcvi. b Avarice wexeth young in age. fol. clxvii. c Authority of the
master, gives the scoler a courage to learn in all faculties. fol. cclxxix.
c. d. Aulters pulled down, and birds put up for the communion with much
mutabilite about the same. fol, cccxii. d. Aulters pulled down by heretics of
Arrius sect, in saint Basilles time. fol. cccxiii. d
B.
Babylon was build.cxxxi. year after Noes flud by Nembroth. fo. cccxiiii. d
Baptism of infantes, contrary to the Anabaptists. cxlii. a Baptism cleanses
all sins, fol. cxix, b. Bezeleel had the spirit of science. fo. xlii. c to
Believe there is one god, or to believe god, is not sufficient, but we must
believe on one god. fol, lxxiii. d, Believe on the holy church, may be said.
fo. lxxxv. a Believe the resurrection. etc. is necessary to take away the
fear of death. fol. lxxxvi, b. c Bithinia lies over ye streictes against
Constantinople. cx. c Better it is to shine with labor, then to rouste for
idleness. fol. clxxiiii. c. Bearing one with another eases the burden, and so
does compassion in infirmities of the soul. fol ccx. a Beutie of face must not
be used as an instrumente of mischief. fol. cclxvii. c Bilders bad and good.
fol. clvi. c. d. Bishops must not be to easy or rasshe in orderinge preistes,
and their peril in so doing. fo. clxx. d Bishops and preistes were al one in
old time. fo. cclxxxvi. c Bishops may command, and compel, when? clxxii. a,
b, Blood of Abell cried for vengeance, the blood of Christ cried for mercy.
fo. cxiiii. a Blessinge is diuersely understand and ta^en. fol. cxvi. b,
Blessinge and well saying by our neighbors, shall be requited with blessinge
everlasting. fo. ccxvi. a Blessed be they that suffers for justices sake.
fol. ccxix. b Blessed be they that god corrects, and why? fol. cclxxv. c
Bodily members applied to the soul. fol cxxx. a Bondage came other by iniquite
or by adversity. clxxxiiii. a Body of sin. fol lxxxii. c d Bristow was full
of diversity of errors. fo. ccix, c d Brotherhed is to be loved, and not only
the brothers ccx. c Brotherhead of heretics and scismatikes is but a can^ell
or patche of the very true brotherheade, and like a rotten bow broken of from
the tree. Eodem. c
C.
CAre and solicitude we must cast upon god. fo. cccvii. b Calling, or
election, of two manners, fol. cxii c. d. Cain for lack of Gods fear, was
punished with fear. folio. lix. b. Calis Malis is called in latin Calpe, and
why it is called ill Calis. fol cvii. b, c. Capadotia, situation. fol. cx. c.
Carnal in living, and carnal in knowledge. fo. cli. c. d Carnal and wanton
company must be left, though it be to thy pain. fol. ccxxxii. d Ceremonies
were laid on the Jews, to keep them from Idolatry. fol. xxxi c. Cephas, and
his interpretation. fol. cii. a Ceremony has his name, whereof, and what they
be. folio. lxxxviii. c. d Ceremonies have been used from the beginning.
folio. lxxxix. a b Ceremonies which seems to be of small reason and profitte,
why they were commanded. fol. lxxxxii. b Ceremonies of the old time, were of
four manners. folio, lxxxx. c. Ceremonies of the Jews were.vi. c. or more,
and very painful and chargeable. fol. lxxxxii. b c. Ceremonies of Christ's
church be of, iiii. manners, sacrifices, Sacraments, hallowed things, and
obseruaunces, fol. lxxxxiii. c Christ hid the glory of his godhead, and why?
fol. i. b c Christ might have given to the apostles as great comfort as the
holy ghost did, and why Christ reserved the best part of learning for to be
taught by him. fol. ii. a b c Christen men varieth from the Philosophers in
certain conclusions of fortitude. fol. xxvii. b c Children be no mete hearers
of divinity, and why. fo. xxxiii. a Christ had the true gift of piety. fol.
xlvi. b Christ first heard the doctors read and teach, and afterward asked
questions of them. Eodem, c Christ reasoned not with the ignorant (as many
does) but with the very best of the doctors, Eodem. d. At Christ's supper s.
Peter begone to understand Christ's words, except ye eat the flesh of a man.
etc. fol, xxxviii. c Christ feared to comfort them that fea^eth, fol. lxv, c.
Chaste spouses to christ how they may be known. fo. lxviii b Christ signifies
an office, as a king, a preiste, or such like. fol lxxvi. c Christ, why he
chose the death on the cross. fol lxxix. a Christ was of most pure complexion,
therefore his wounds were most painful. fol lxxix. b. Christ descended into
hell in soul, and why he descended. lxxx. c Charity is compared to a garment.
fol ccliii. c. d Christ is a stombling stone, to whom? fol, clviii, a b Christ
is called a stone, why? fo clv. a. Church of christ builded on ye xii apostles
equally. clxiiii. b Christ suffered his pains with joy and gladness in the
higher part of his soul, but by the lower portion he was in greatest pain.
fol, clxxxxiiii a. Christ's faith was first set forth by homly and rude
fishers, and was reproved and pursued by the mightiest people of the world, and
yet it prevailed. fol. ccxx. b Christ preached in spirit to the spirits that
were hard of belief in Noes time, is understand.ii ways. fo. ccxxiiii. d
Circuit or compass about, the devil uses. fol. clxii, d. Cleanes of life is
necessary for receiving of grace. fo, cxxx. a Codrus king of Athenis died for
his countries sake. fo. xlix. a Covetous men be like molles. fol. vi, c Counsel
or policy worldly many times lacks the spirit of counsel. fol xv. d
Counsel of Gamaliel. fol. xviii, c the gift of Counsel was in Iethro, which
Moises lacked. fol. xxiiii. c d Christen man wins when he is thought to
lose, falshead loses when he is glad of his winninge. fol. cxxxiii. b
Consubstantiall, that word is not found in scripture, yet it must needs be
used. fol. xx. d Conception of Christ in the virgins body, is somewhat like
the generation of a worm of the moist earth by the heat of the son. fol.
lxxviii a. and.ccxxi. c Communion, much mutabilitie in ministering the communion
amongst the heretics, fol cccxii. d Communion of saints, is conformite to
the company of holy men and women, as well quick as dead, fol. lxxxv. c ^
Commandments of God be moral laws, and ought to be red in churches on
sondaies and holydaies, lxxxx. a Coueringe of sins is of two manners. fol
cclii. a Correction begins at the church. fol. cclxxvi c Colchis, where it
is said the golden flece was, is in Ponto. fol. cx. b. Counsel Nicene was kept
in Bithinia. Eodem. d. Coming to Christ is by faith. fol. cliiii. c Corner
stone, the Hebrews tale of that stone. fo clv, c. d new Conuerses to Christ
suffers much woe, and persisteth in goodness. fol. ccxxxviii. d. the Company in
Bristowe brought the common gains into the hands of a few. fol. ccxi. b
Co^messatio^s, be al extraordinary banketings, fo. ccxxxiiii c Crime is
described, fol. cclxxxv. c in Crooked things the middle swarneth from the
extremities. fol. cccviii. d Creation, what manner a thing it is. fol. lxxv. a.
Crosses by the high ways deuoutlye erecte, maliciouselye cast down. fo
lxxxxv. a. Cure we have every one of his neighbor. fol. cclxv. d. Curiosity
about new knackes and new learning is reproved with remedy against the same.
fol. clxxv. b. c Cuthbert, Saint Cuthberte received an anngell for his gest.
fol. cclxi. b. c
D.
Dark sayings of Christ made many to err even in Christ's time. fol.
xxxvii. d Dampened bodies how they shall ever endure. fol. lxxxvii a the Devils
sin is irremissible, why? fol. lx. a Desire of the holy fathers to se Christ.
fol. cxxvii. a b Death, of a fair death, and of a foul death. fo. ccxli. b
Divine productions. fol. ix. c Difference betwixt the mind of a fool and of a
wise man, about the affections. fol. lvii. c. Division of tongues was the
greatest stroke that ever man was stricken withal, after the loss of original
justice. lx. d Differ not to believe, why? by example. fol. lxxi. c Die to
sin. fol. lxxxii. b. Discretion of spirits, is necessary for him that shall
study scriptures. fol. xcix. b. c. Dowries or gifts of a glorified body. fo.
lxxxvi. c Dowries or gifts of a glorious body declared. fo. cclxxxi. a
Detraction, and a remedy against detractours. fol. cxlvii. b Desire to have is
covetousness, and so is desire to save. folio. cclxviii. b. c, Dukes, Captains,
and officers duties under the king. folio. clxxxi. b the Devil killinge the
latter Adam lost the first Adam, and all his posterity. fol. ccxxvii, a the
Devil medleth not with some, walks through some, and compasses about some.
fol. cccix. d
E.
EArth is diversely understand. folio. lxv. d Election of two manners. fol. cxii.
c Elia the new city of Jerusalem. fol. cxxviii. b Embringe days fasted, with
prayers for orderinge of preistes. fol. cclxxxiiii. b Envy is described, and is
mete for no place but for hell cxlvii d Envy comes of vain glory. fol. cc.
lxiiii. d. Envy how it may be put away by sufferinge in the flesh, folio.
ccxxxiii. a. d Envied and disdained, is al new conversion, as when Saul
prophesied. fol. ccxxxvi. c d Epicures felicity. fol. xlv. c Epictetus
determination of the affections fo. lvii. d Ephesus is a city in the country
of Asia the less. fo. cxi. a Eve the first woman was made for two uses, and in
both she was excedingely punished. fol. xcvi. c Extremities of fortitude. fol.
xxvii. a Examples of the gospels to forsake our parents, for to follow Christ
in religion. fo. lii. d Exhortation to servants, and to their masters fol,
xliii.v. Example of Christ's pains in his most tender body should be our armor
and defense. fo. ccxxx. c Example of concord betwixt man and wife, the lampraye
with the veuemous viper gives. fo. ccv. c. Examples declares and eases our
faith. fo. ccxxi. b.
F.
FAbles pleasauntly covers truths. fol. lxi. d Faith is diffined, and that
it is necessary for man's salvation. fol. lxxi. a b Faith, hope, and charity,
be presupposed to the.vii. gifts of the holy ghost. fol, v, b Faith helps
intelligence, and contrary wise. fol x. d Faith at rest and unexercised anon
decays. fo. lxxii c Faith is the instrumente by which God preserves us in
goodness. fol. cxxii. a Faith overcomes all worldlines, and sin, is declared
generally. Eodem, b Fear is necessary, fol. lviii, d Fear is divided into six
members after Damascen. lxiiii. d Fear is divided into mundane, servile,
filial, or chaste. Eode^ Fear presupposes a love. fol, lxiiii, d Fear
servile, of god though it be not sufficient, yet it does good. fol, lxvi c
Fear servile, and chaste fear, be like the fear of an adulteres wife, and of
a chaste wife. fol. lxvii, c, d Fear servile, is like the hear or bristel that
leads and brings in the threde. fol, lxix, b Fear that is one of the seven
gift of the holy ghost, is humility. fol, lxx, b the rule of our Faith, is
the whole book of holy scripture. fol. lxxiii. a the Father in trinity is
neither elder, nor more of power then the son or the holy Ghost. fol.
lxxiiii. d Flatterers of their lords, believe not on one God properlye. Eodem.
c Flateringe proves a man. fol. cx^iiii. ^. c Flattering hosts and tapsters
that will let us in our journey to heaven. fol. clxxiiii. b Flesh desires
ease, new inventions, and swetenes of tasting and touching. Eodem. c Flesh
desires against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, is improperly
spoken. fol. clxxvii. a Feebleness of our wits to understand the holy
scriptures. fol. lxxxxix. a Fellows to Christ. fol. ciiii. c. Fortitude or
manlines, wherein it stands, and what it works in us. fol. xxviii. b.
Foundation of our goostly buildinge is above in heaven, and therefore thither we
must build upward. fol. clxiiii. c. d Fomes peccati, the nourse or breader of
sin, is captain of the wars with the devil. fol. ccxxx. d. Fautes be.vii.
yt makes a ma^s co^uersatio^ odious, clxxviii d Fraternal love is declared,
and his beginning, and his perfection. fol. cxl. a b* Fear of mind extended
into the body is tremor. fo. clxxxiiii c Fasting in Lent, and on Fridayes, and
in the rogation weke is vmbrayded and mocked of noughty lyuers. fo. cclxxiii b
G.
GAlatia, situation. fol. cx. d Gaminers be al churles without liberality.
cclxxxix. a b Galilean Christ was called for despite. fo. cclxxiii. a b Gentle
birth requires gentle manners, bodily and morallye. fol. cxl. d Gifts of the
holy ghost may be had, one without another. xxiii d the.vii. Gifts of the holy
ghost be coupled, why? fol. ix. b the Gift of understanding is never taken from
good men, in things necessary to be known. fol. xi. a vii. Gifts of the holy
ghost be compared to other virtues, after diverse opinions. fol. v. a b Gile and
sutteltie counterfeteth science and coninge. xliii, a Giuers over before the^d,
be like an ape with a grene nut. cxxii a Gile is described. fol, cxlvi, a Gile
that is good. Eodem, c Give and you shall have given to you, is declared at
large. folio. ccxii, a Giuers of their own shale be rich, scratchers of other
men's be ever at beggars state, fol. cclxi, c Glory of carnal kindred is poor
and vile. Eodem. a, b Glad we ought to be, bearinge part of Christ's passions.
folio, cclxxi, c Godly wisdom is declared fol, viii, b God will not suffer a
good man finallye to waver in errors, fo, xxxix, c Good women how they should
trim them selves. liii, c God repented, is understood, fol, lix, d Good
spirit speaks in catholic expounders of scriptures, and in heretics the
bad spirit, fol, xcix, b, c Gloton, the rich gloton buried in hell. would not
that his brothers should come thither, why? fo, clxxviii, a A Goyde is
necessary to save a man from maskinge, moraliter. fol. cxc, a Good and ill be
common as well to il men as to good, and why? fol fi ccxli. b. c. Godmen to be
troubled with shrewes is no news. cclxx c Go about is the devils use.
fol-cccviii. a Grace is diversely distributed, and there, of full of grace,
with a distinction. fol. iiii, a b, Great sinners require great mercy. fol.
cxvii. b. Grow to salvation. fo. cliii. d Graves, spoylers of men's graves of
the brazen epitaphes be churles, and works for shameful gains. cclxxxix. b
H.
Hardness of scripture is occasion of al heresies, xxxvii. d when Heretics be
separate gods mind in the scriptures is known. fo, xxxvii, a Heresy of
Nouatus. Eodem, b, Herod the second was banished to Lions in France, xvi c
Heaven is diversely spoken of in scripture, and of the doctors. fol. lxxv, b
without Heaven (after Aristotle) be things leadinge a most blessed and most
sufficient life. fol. lxxv. b. Hellespont the streict, and his breadth. fol.
cix. a Heavenly joys be declared, yea rather dreamed by negatiues. fol.
lxxxvii. c Hearers of ill tales have itchinge ears, and what hurt they do.
fol. cxlix. a b Heat of te^ptatio^ requires a tree to shadow us. clxxxviii. b
Heaven is a wilderness to many, fol. cxcii. a, Heresies has no strength but
when they mete with a weak faith. fol. cccx. d Heretics ever wavering and
inconstant. fo cccxii c Honor to our parents wherein it stands fo. lii. b
Holy ghost showed his godhead specially reueling things to come. fol. iii. a b
Hope lively and dead. fol. cxix. c Honors be like the foam on a runninge water
like smoke, like sleep. fol. cxxii. d Honor of a king. fol. c.xci. d Honor
has diverse significations. fo. ccvi. c Honor due to the wife by the husband.
Eodem, d Hospitality is of two manners. fol. cclxii. d Hospitality lokinge to
be quit again with the like, is a spice of avarice. fol. cclvii. a
Hospitality is rewarded aboundauntlye as appears by the scriptures. fol.
cclviii. c Hospitality is used of very poor men, and requires no multitude
of dishes. fo. cclxii. a Humility has two offices* after one he was in
Christ, after the other it is in us. fol. ccciii. d.
I.
Jacob was loved, and Esau reproved without parcialitie. folio. cxxvi. a.
Idleness and sloth is most to be fered in the nobility. clxxv b Idolatry
follows of riotouse feastinge and bankettinge. folio. ccxxxiiii. d Idols men
make their wives, children, and their goods. folio. ccxxxv. b Idols be
nothing. fol. xli. a Idolatry begone by Ninus king of Babylon* and greatly
auaunced by Semi^amis his queen. fo. cccxv. a Iezabelles shameful end and
death, notwithstanding her payntinge and trimminge. fol. cci. b. c Jews to
obstinately leaned to Moses law in Christ's time. fol. xxx. d Jesus was ever
a savior. fol. lxvi. b Jesus and Christ signifies one person, with a
difference fol. lxxvi. c Jonas shipwreck signifies Christ's temptation and
trouble. fo. cxxxviii. d John Baptist doubted nothing of Christ, wherefore
his question was for his disciples learning, and not for his. folio. clxi. c
Iosue his shilde, signifies the arms of Christ's passion. folio. ccxxxi. b.
Infirmity makes virtue stronger. fo. ccxl. c. Judas was both proditor and
traditor. fo. cxci. d Judgment of god be of.ii, manners, secret and manifest.
cclxxv. a Judas was chosen to be apostle, not ignorantly, cclxxxiii. a Judas
Galileus error and destruction. fol. xviii. b. Judas Galileus when he set forth
his heresye, and how long it continued. fol. clxxxi. d Judgment general is
greatly to be feared. fol. lxxxiii. d Judicial laws be described. fol. xc. a
Judicial laws as given by Moises binds us not, but the same enacted and
stablished by Christian princes binds their subjects. fol xciii. a Judicial
laws Christ left none. fol. xcv. c
K.
King Henry the.viii. encouraged great clerks to try out the mere truths of
the scriptures. fo. xix. b. King Henry the.viii. by his foundations of
cathedral churches, conserueth divine service to the honor of god. cxx d Kings
spiritually they be that rules their affections. folio. clxviii. a Kings
precellencie. fo. clxxx. c Kissinges of diverse manners, good and bad. fo. cccxv.
a Kissinge one another in the church at the mass time, was used in the
primitive church. fol. cccxvi. d Kissinge the pax at Mass, and the reason
why. fo. cccxvii a Knowledge of things to come hereafter men most desire.
fol, iii, b
L,
LAzarus slepeth, is understood, fol, xxii, d Lack of fear was a great cause
of Noes flood lix. b Laws positive made by man, which bind under pain of
deadly sin, and which do not so bind, xcvii, a. b Lechery is cold without
meat or drink, fol, ccxxxiiii, c, Leuaunt sea stays at the bay of Issus
Eastward, cvii, d. Leuaunt and myddle earth sea is described, and his courses,
fol. Eodem, Little sins must be killed ccxxxi, c Liberty of the Gospel fo,
xix. d, Live to sin, fol, lxxxii, c Life of a good christen man is desire.
fol, clxxiiii, a Liberty not to be used as a cloak for malice or my sliuinge.
folio. clxxx, d Love the man, hate the vice, fol, ccxv, c, d Loins of our
mind what they be, and that they must be tucked up, fol, cxxx, a Liberal men
be best beloved, fol* ccxli, d,
M,
MAnda remanda. etc. Esa, xxviii, is expounded, clxii, a Maniche is heresy,
fol, lxxiii, a Married we be to Christ by faith. fol. lxviii, a Mary was full of
grace, how, fol, iiii, b Mary's prerogative, fol, lxxviii. c. Mary was
delivered without any aperture of her body, Ibid Man's traditions or man's laws
which bind under pain of deadly sin, and which not, fo. xcvi, d Makers of
laws be Gods helpers, and must beware of certain faults, fol. xcvii, c Make
not our bodies more precious then Christ made his body. fol* ccxxix, Malice,
fol, cxlv, d, Married men must lay away their swellinge and poison when they
company with their wives, that is ever, ccvi a Make a diner meritoriously, fo.
cclvii, b, Messiah, Christus, vnctus, be all one, fo, ci d Men be princes, and
greatest in their own houses, fo, cxcvi b Mercy of three manners. fol. cccxi. c
Mithridates king of Ponius kept open war with the Romans.xlvi. years. fo.
c.x. b Milk signifies plain doctrine, and of the plenty of milk folio. cl.
a. b. Milk sour and crudded fo. c.liii. a. b Modesty is described. fol.
ccxiii. b Moses had fortitude performing the counsel of Iethro folio. xxvi.
b. Moses wyshed to be stricken out of gods book, is under stand. fol. li. b.
a Mother and her.vii. sons manfully suffered death. folio. xxviii. d.
Mourning indiscreet, is taken away, believing on the article of resurrection of
the body. fol. lxxxvi. c. Morale laws what they be. fol. lxxxix. c. Moral laws
byndeth all men. fo. lxxxx. a Murmuringe and grudginge, is the propertye of a
swyne. folio. cclxiiii. c
N.
NArrations if they be sobre does good to the audience. folio. lxi d.
Narration of.ii. crafts men, of which the better witted thriued worse. fo.
lxii. a. b. Name, a good name is a treasure highlye to be regarded, and he that
takes it away cannot be forgiven without restitucion and that the restitucio^
is very hard. fo. cxlvii. c Number of prisoners taken in the siege of
Jerusalem, and of them that were slain and died by mortyn. fol. xvii. a.
O.
OBey our rulers not tyrannes. fol. cccv. c. d. Obedience not coact but with
charity is required. fol. cxl. a. Obsecracion signifies a veheme^cy in desire
for an others sake. fol. clxxi. d. Obedience of Sara, is an example to all
wives. fo. cciii. c Obseruaunces of the old law. fol. lxxxxi. b Obseruauncee
in Christ's church. fo. lxxxxiiii. d Offer thy self to die rather then renege
god or his faith folio. cccvi a. Offended men be by Gods longa^imite and
long suffraunce, and so it was in old time. fo. clx^. d Oil signifies the
holy ghost. fo. iii. d Old man signifies our old living. fol. lxxxii. b.
Original justice is declared. fo. cxvii. c. d. Original sin. fol. cxviii*
a. Orders of Angels were all subject to Christ. fo. ccxxvii. d Orderinge of
priests, and the ceremonies about the same folio. cli. d. and. clii. a. b Our
lord, why Christ is so called and that our lord agrees to God, better then
the Lord. fo. lxvii. a Ore dunge to stone the slewthfull is understand.
clxxiiii. d
P.
PArcialite, when it is used. fo cxxxiiii. a Paul wyshed to be separate from
Christ, for love to his country men, is understand. fol. li. c Paul was very
obstinate at the first in kepinge Moses law. fol. xxxi. b Passions many
Christ suffered. fo. cxxviii. c Paul and the world were crucified one to an
other. folio. ccxxxii. b. Pain that christ suffered for us, we must take as our
own by compassion. fo cxc. a. b Payntinge thy here with red or bright colors
is a prophecienge of the flaminge fire of Hell, which thou shalt come to.
fol. cc. d. Penance is the most paynfull Sacrament of Christ's church with
comfort to ease the same. fo. lxxxxiiii. b. Penance is necessary is
declared. fol. cxix. a Penal laws, how they bind fo. xcxvii. b. c Peter was
bishop of Antioche, and how long he tarried there, and that he came from thens
to Rome. fo. cv. c. d Penance, the Nini^ites shall condemn them that will not
do penance. fo. clx. c. d Peace must be sought and run after else the world
will have it away. fo. ccxvii. b. Pilate how he dyed. fo. xvi. c. d Piete or
pity is diversely taken in latin and also in English. fo. xliiii b Pietas, is
diffined after lactance and after Saint Aug. folio. xlv. c Pietas is called
latria in greek, and in Latin Religio. folio. ^odem Piete or reverend worship
we owe to God, to our country and to our parents, and the order of these.
folio. xlviii. b. c. Pietas signifies mercy pity and compassyon. fo. lv. a b
Pity on students of the universities is best bestowed. folio. liiii. c. d
Pilgreme what it signifies, and how that vocable has been used. fo. clxxii. d.
Pylgrems must observe.vi. things in their journey. folio. clxxiii. a. b Plato
and Aristotels scole, that the.iiii. affections must be moderate. fol. lvi. a.
Preachers must have sapience, and the hears intelligence. folio. xi. d.
Prosperity and aduersytie, good and ill, be common to good and ill, and why.
fo. ccxli. b Preachers may not cease perceyuinge that their audience
profitteth not. fo. xii. c. Preachinge profeicteth many manner of ways. fo.
xiii. b Priests raiment different from lay men's raiment is a necessary
ceremony. fo. lxxxxiiii. c Precipitacion of sentence, is contrary to the gift
of counsel. fol. xxiii. a. Prophecye necessary at the ordering of Pryestes.
folio. cclxxxv. a Priesthoddes excellency. fo cliiii. d. Prelates and Priests
must not be lordly nor lowringe. folio. clvii. a Proof of man by trouble and
by flatteryng. fol. cxxiiii. b. Praise the judge shall give us for the works
of Justice and honesty, like as for the works of mercy. folio. cxxv c. d
Preaching of the Gospel, is called a smell or a sauo^r folio. cxxx. b.
Precious is the stone our savior Christ and laid in the foundation. fo.
clxiiii a. b. Priests and kings, we be all men and women how, with a
distinction of priesthod. fol. clxvii. a. b. Priests spiritually be they, that
offreth to God acceptable sacrifice. fo. clxviii. d. Priesthod the Sacrament,
and of his excellency. fo. clxix. c. Prophecy in the orderinge of a priest,
what it signifies. fol. clxx. b. c. Precellent is a higher term then
excellent, fo. clxxx. c. d Precelencie and hie aucthorite of a king. fo. eod.
Priests has such power and aucthorite, as was never given to any other
creature. fol. cclxxxxii. c. d Priests be more necessari for us then our
carnal parents. fol. clvi b. Priests must not be proud. fo. cc.lxxx^iii. b
Pretors office among the Romans, and there note agraue check that one gave
to an other of them. fol. ccxiii. c. d. Prophets and apostles and preachers,
had harm for well speaking and doing. fol. ccxviii^^ b. c* Prudence is
declared, and of how many manners it is. cc^liii. d Provision we be taught by
example of.iiii. little dea^^es. folio. ccxlvi. c. d. Prudence we be taught by
example of the serpent. ccl. b. c Purgatory the vocable. fo. xx. c. d denial of
Purgatory, brings me^ to carnal lyberty. xxi. a Purgatory has be reproved
by the words of the canon of the mass. fol. xxi. c. Purgation is not the best
remedy against a sclaunder, but to avoyde the occasion. fo. clxxxi. c
R.
REligion of our time was not like the religion in S. Iheroms time. fo. liii b
Regale sacerdotium is expounded. fol. clxv. b. ^ Rich men have their goods as
prisoners have their featters. fo. vii. a. b. Riches that will abide by us, is
the riches of the soul. folio. ccii^ c. the Rich glotton died in his soft
bed, and went to Hell, poor Lazarus died in his maungie clouies, and went to
Abraham's bosom. fol ccxlii. b, Rich proud men, profecteth not so much as the
pore, having a good heart, fo. cclxii b Rome was called Babylon. fol, cv b,
and, cccxiiii d Rodes the isle, where it stands. fo. cix, c Roboam the young
king by the wylfull counsel of young men, lost ten parts of his kingdom.
fol. ccci, a. Rules to expound scriptures- fol, clxvi, a
S.
Salvation of our souls is thend of our faith. fo cxxvi, d Saul and Judas how
they were chosen. fo. cxii. c Sapience or wisdom is of four manners. fo. vi.
b Sacraments of the old law. fol, xc. d Sacrifices. Eodem c. Sacred or
hallowed things. fol. xciiii. d, Sacrifices of Christ's church be many. fo.
xciii. c Sacraments of Christ's church be seven. fol. xciiii a Sactus, holy,
signifies firm, fast and sure in goodness, cxxxii d Saba, where it lies. fol.
clxi. b Samaritanes were as it were half Jews, why? fo. cxc, c Sara called
her husband lord, yet husbands must not be lordly toward their wives. fo,
cciiii, a Sacrament of baptism was signified by the water that in Noes time
saved eight persons in the ship. ccxxvi b Sacrament of the altar is
signified by the steene of meal and the gear of oil, and is likewise
preserved and continued. fol, cclix, a, b Science of scripture is in worse case
then any other faculty. fol. xxxvi. a Science the gift of ye holy ghost
exte^deth to ha^dy crafts, xlii b Scripture, he that follows not holy
scriptures knows not Christ, Eodem, c Scripture sometimes speaks that of
the whole, that is verified only in the part. fo, clxvi, a, Search the
Scriptures, why? Eodem, c Seven times a day falls a just man, is expounded.
cclxxxv d Sermons, the queen of Saba shall condemn the^ that will not take
labors to come to hear sermons. fo, clxi, a Servants must obey although
their masters be unreasonable hard. fol, cxci, c Servants must have a
louinge fear toward their masters, example of Joseph. fo. clxxxvi. d
Servants many times become better then their masters and bieth their
masters childrens inheritance. fo. cxciiii. a. Sickness brings ill tidinges
to the sensual appetite, but to reason they should be welcome. fol. ccxl. b.
c Shipwreck or peril on the sea, will make a merchant to know God more then
sermons. fol. lxiiii b Semiramis queen of Babylon reigned there victoriousely
by the space of.xlii. years. fo. cccxv. b Sign of the cross, saves us from
the deuel. fol. lxxix. a. Sit, or stand in heaven, is understand. fol.
lxxxiii. b Simon the son of Jonas, is expounded morally. fo, cij. b Simon
Magus was driven from Antioche, and afterward from Rome by S. Peter. fol. cv. c
Socrates learned sufferaunce by his froward wives. folio. cciiii. d Sobriety
is temperaunce the cardinal virtue. fo cccvii. a Solicitude that is to be
exchued. fol, cccvi, c, Spirit is diversely taken in scripture. fo. cxiii. b
Sprinklinge of the blood of Christ and of Abel, have contrary effects. fol
cxiiii. a Spiritual in living, and spiritual in knowledge. fol. cli d
Spiritual who be called. fol. ccxxix, a Study in divinity brings small
profit worldly fo. xliii. c Stoici and Peripathetici agree in substance of
the.iiii affections, and varieth only in words. fol. lvi. c Stoop they must
that will be saved. fol. ccci. d. Stouped Pharao, Achab, Nabuchodonoser. etc.
fo, cccii. c. Study of scripture without the holy ghost, shall not escape
heresies. fol. lxxxvi. d Strokes that Christ suffered were more painful to
him, then such like could be to any other man fo. lxxix. b Stone, some
falls on the stumbling stone, and on some the stone falls. fo. clviii. b
Strangers we would take our selves in this world. folio. clxxii. b Stuardes
we be every man in gods household. cclxv. d. Stuardes and the diversity of
them, is declared by the parable of the talentes. cclxviii. d. example of
Sufferaunce, we must take of the brotherhead. folio. cccxi. c. d to Suffer
pain wrongfully is a special gift of grace. folio. clxxxv. d Sufferinge for
well doing shall be rewarded. fo. ccxxii. b Some suffers and be never the
better, like the thief on Christ's lift hand. Eodem. c. d Suffering in the
flesh makes a man to cease from sin, declaratur discurrendo. fo. ccxxxii.
c. d Some Stuardes boroweth much and never pays. cclxvi. d
T.
Taste that God is sweet. fol. cliii. c Thoughts that be good, causes a good
tongue. ccxvi. c Think well and thou shall speak well. Ibidem. Trinity, the
works of the whole trinity be all one outforth fol. ii. b Trinitas, that
word is not found in scripture. fol. xx. d. The whole Trinity wroughte the
incarnation of Christ fol. lxxvii. d Trial of our faith. fol. cxxiiii. c.
Tryinge of the stumblinge stone. fol. clxiiii. a Turpe lucrum, foul gaynes.
fol cclxxxix. a Tongues burns up all if they be ill. fo. ccxvii. a.
V.
VAsthi the Emperisse wife to Assuerus, was deposed for disobedience. fol.
cxcvi. c Water with the word concurring with faith purges the soul. folio.
ccxxvi. a Watch with prayer. fol. ccli. a Ve, is a commination of pain
everlasting. fol. vi. d. Virtue is the craft to live well. fol. lv. d Uertues
infused confirms virtues acquisite. fol. xi. a Well doing shall stop men's
mouths that rayleth against us. fo. clxxxi. a Uengeaunce, let god alone with
the vengeance. fo. cxci. a. Uertuous exercise is mocked and rayled at.
cclxxiii. c Uianders be aboundauntly rewarded. fol. cclxi. b wives fear of
their husbands must be joined with love. cxciiii d The Wives by their faith and
good conversation may convert the husband. folio. cccvii. d Wife must be first
taken and afterward proved, otherwise then any other marchaundise. fol, cc, b
Wicliffes heresies when they troubled this realm, xix a Vix saluabitur iustus,
is expounded. fol. cclxxviii. a Women when they would be seen to care least
for their hear or locks, then they care most. fol. ccxviii, d Women's hear
is many times disgised, fol. cxcix. a Women whose honesty is light chepe, be
most curiouse in disgisinge them selves. Eodem. c Woman is the weaker vessel,
is declared. fol. ccvi. b. Women of Rome in old time knew not the use of wine.
folio. ccxxxiiii. b. Worm of riches is pride. fo. cccv. b Women be no meet
hearers of moral philosophy. xxxiii. a Women how they should learn for their
soul health. xxxiiii. a Woman was last made and first in fault, Eodem. b. Women
have taught men wit. fo. xxxv. b Worm and not a man, why Christ was so
called. lxxviii. b Worldly inheritance has.iii. noughtye properties. cxx. c
Wrongs when we ought to remitte them, and when we may redress them. fol.
xcvi. a Wrong there is none, when the thing comes of mere grace. fol. lxxv.
d Wives deserving to be beaten, reneige their wives state, and turn to the
servants state again. fo. cciiii. b
X.
XAntippa. Socrates wife cast a chamber vessel on his head, and what he said
then. fol. cciiii. c. d
Y.
Young men be no mete hearers of moral philosophye. folio. xxxiii. a. b. Young
in age, and young in manners. Eodem, and clviii. b Young men must gentilly do
after their elders. fo* clvii. d
Finis.
The first sermon, containing an introduction
THe blessed evangelist sanct John in the first chapter of his gospel, after
he had somewhat touched the ineffable coeternitie of the second person in
trinity, the son of God, with God verbum caro factum est et habitauit in
nobis, That word of God the second person in trinity was content to come
allow and to take our mortal nature upon him, and to dwell among us not with any
diminutio^ or decay of the godhead, for the infinite glory of God suffers
neither augmentacion or increase, neither decreasyng or decay. It is ever one
and after one manner, though it pleased him to hyde the glory of his godhead for
a season, as condescending to the infirmity of them that he should be
conuersaunt withal, and to teach us the way of humility: and that is it
semetipsum exinaniuit formam seruiaccipiens, He withdrewe his mighty power
from his operacion, for if he had showed it in his own lykenes, all the world
had not been able to have received him. He kept a lower port, ever using
humility and lowlynes, and sufferyng the pains of our mortality, with all
the despites that the Jews did to him, till in conclusion he came to his
pains on the cross in his painful passion. And that he withdrewe his power
from his operacion in the time of his bodily presence hear on yerth appears
evidently by this, that if it had pleased him, he might as well have endued his
disciples with the comfort of the holy ghost while he bodily tarried among
them, as to have differred it till the coming of the holy ghost by sensible
signs at this holy time of whytsontide. In a long sermon that he made to
Expedit vobis vt ego vada^ etc. It is for your profit that I go from you, for
if I go not from you the holy ghost will not come to comfort you. I have yet
many things to teach you, but as yet ye can not bear them away, but when the
spirit of truth the holy ghost comes, he shall teach you all truths
necessary for you to know. But good lord what say thou? Now we can not
understand such things as we be to be taught, and than we shall understand:
How may this be? Is he greater of power then thou art? Can he do more in
teching us then thou can do thy self good master? Christ to avoid this
scruple and doubt a^swereth saying: Omnia quae habet pater mea sunt, propterea
dixi de meo accipiet and annunciabit vobis. All things that my father has, be
mine: all power, all knowledge, all connyng be equally, and as well in the son
as in the father, and in the son from the father, like as he has his
generation, production, and being of the father: therefore says Christ, the
holy ghost shall take of mine and shall show it you and teach it you, for when
he shall sensibly come among you he shall show you my fathers pleasure, which
is all one with my pleasure. All that he shall teach you he shall take and
learn of my father and of Apostles in fiery tongues, giving them such
instruction Quaecun quod audiet ^^quetur. All that he shall hear, he shall
speak to you. As who should say, tho the gifts that he shall inspire you
withal shall be wondrous, yet like as he has his being of my father and of
me, so al cunning, knowledge and other gifts he has of us and equally with
us, like as he is equal and one in substance with us. And in sign and token
of his godhead and godly power, it follows there Et quae ve^tura sunt
annunciabit vobis. In this he shall specially show his godhead, because it
accords Annunciate quae ventura sunt in futuru^, and sciemus quia dij estis
vos. Tell us what things shall come after, and so we shall surely know that
you be gods. This quickened their spirits that our savior Christ told
them, that the holy ghost should instruct them of things to come after, for
there is nothing that man's mind desires more then to know what world shall be
hereafter, and what shall fall after our days. And the Apostles were very
inquisitiue in such things, therefore many times they asked of Christ whether
he went, and which was the way, and when he would come to the judgment, and
when Jerusalem should be destroyed Psalmo.xliiii. Vnxit te deus, deus tuus oleo
letitiae prae consortibus tuis. Kings and preistes which bore the figure of
Christ were anointed with material and corruptible oil, but Christ was
anointed of god the father with the oil of gladness, that is to say, with the
holy ghost, which was figured and signified by the said material oil. With
this oil of gladness he was enbrued above al his fellows more excellently then
any man which he is content to take and use as his fellows coinheritors and
copartners of the joys of heaven. They have graces distributed to them
severally by parts, Stephanus plenus gratia. Act. vi. But how? He had as much
grace as was sufficient for him to preach Christ, and to suffer persecution
and martyrdom patiently for Christ's sake. And so is every good man and woman
full of grace after a certain sufficiency, according to their need, and plena
gratia, full of grace, by a special prerogative or before others, in as much as
it pleased him of who^ comes all grace and goodness, to take her in so
gracious favor as to take his flesh and blood of her most pure virginal
body. But the ma^hode of Christ had all the gifts of grace after a certain
excellency and superaboundance, by which he might derive and distribute grace
to all faithful people, even like as the head in us gives influence to al
parts of the body in the use and exercise of all sensible mouinges as
appears, for when the head is a sleep or mortified with Palseies or such
diseases, all other parts of the body be astonished and can do little or nothing.
And contrary, when the head is of good temperature There shall a slyppe or rod
spryng out of the rote of Iesse and a flower shall ascend out of his rote, and
on him shall rest the spirit of God, the spirit of sapience and of
understanding, the spirit of counsel and of fortitude, the spirit of science
and of piety, and the By this slyppe or rod is understand the humble virgin
Mary very flexible and plyant by humility. The flower ascending out of that
rote signifies the sweet flower of our redemption, our savior Jesus Christ
which rose and sprung out of the stock and root of Iesse otherwise called
Isai, king David's father by the said slyppe or rod Mary disce^ding lyneally
of Iesse by David and by other holy patriarchs, And on this flower shall the
holy ghost rest, with the seven gifts of grace which be there called seven
spirits, because they be the gifts of the holy spirit by appropriation
though they come of the whole trinity as is before said. Of these vii. gifts
of grace that were so excellently in our savior Christ, and by him Matthew. v.
And to the fruits of the spirit spoken of, Gala. v. So that by many divisions
and subdiuisions they reduce al these seven gifts of the Sco. iii. di.
xxxiiii. and xxxv.
that Faith, Hope, and Charity be presupposed to all these seven gifts, as
the rote in a tree or in a plant is presupposed if the tree shall bring forth
leaves, blossons or fruits. And as we see that the Carpenters axe or tole can
do no work except it be handled of the workman, and joined to him by
que^admodum sapiens architectus, like a wise master of the works, I should
first entreat of them, as to lay the foundation a fore I begin to garnish the
over and hier part of our spiritual building. But because I dout not but ye
have often and many times heard of them at large, omitting them as presupposing
the fou^dacion to be already sufficiently laid, I will descend to my principal
purpose, aduertising you, that who so ever lacks the said graces of faith
hope, and charity, and will not dispose him self by prayer to obtain them:
he shall unprofitably hear any preaching of the foresaid seven gifts spirit
of sapience, or the gift of sapie^ce. And because that (after the mind of the
Logicions) where is any equivocation, first we must make a distinction before
we give definitions, therefore it is to be noted that sapience or wisdom is
taken four manner of ways, as appears Jacob.iii. where the apostle asks
this question: Is there any one among you wise or wellearned? If ye will say
yea, then says the apostle, let him show that by his works, In mansuetudine
sapientiae, curteisly, tractably, or gentlely ordering his wisdom. Where
contrary if ye have bitter zeal and envy in your hearts with striving and
brawling, you need not to be proud, deceive not your selves, for though you
think your self never so wise and iolye fellows, and wisdom that comes
from heaven of Gods gift, and three other wisdoms that comes of our gostly
enemies. Let us exclude these three, and we shall the sooner perceive,
understand, and bear away what the godly wisdom is. One of these three
noughtie wisdoms S. James calls earthlye wisdom, and that is it that
covetous men be Luc. xvi. when Christ said No man can serve two masters, and ye
cannot serve it follows, the Phariseis that were rich, heard al these
things, and laughed Christ to scorn. So if a man do preach or exhort the
covetous men not to put to much affiaunce and confidence in the uncertainty of
their riches a man shall have a mock or a shrewd word. But let the^ beware of
the comminacion that is writ. Luke vi Ve vobis diuitibus qui habetis hic
co^solationem vestram. Woe be to you rich men, which have your consolation and
comfort here in this world. Ve, is a comminacion of pain everlasting, which
shall fall upon them, beside the temporal woe and pain that they have in
keeping their goods* for they be rather possessed and holden of their goods,
then possedeth and holds them. And they have their goods, as we say a man
has a.i. Timo. vi. diuitibus huius saeculi precipe no^ sublime, sapere, neque
sperare in incerto diuitiarum, sed diuites fieri operibus bonis facile
tribuere. etc. Command the rich men of this world not to be proud in their
own conceiptes, neither to trust in the uncertainty of their riches, but to be
rich in good works and good deeds, to give gentlely without frowardnes.
etc. The other wisdom called beastly wisdom they have, that be over much
given to the pleasure of their bellies, and consequently to the pleasure of the
flesh and lechery. For of glotony follows lecherye, and this is the wisdom
of them that studieth nothing so much, as how they may please their bellies,
as where to get a Hi sunt (inquit) in epulis macule conuiuantes sine timore
seipsos pasce^tes. Against al these speaks our savior Christ. Luc. vi. Ve
qui saturati estis, quia esurietis. Woe be to you that be farced, stuffed, and
full fed, for you shall be a hungered at your judgment, when ye shall beg
refreshing, and none shall be given you, and this pain with which Christ does
threaten voluptuous persons is inflict and laid on men's necks, sometimes here
in this world as we have Gene. xxv. et Contempsit quod vendidisset: And he
little esteemed, yea rather despised that he had so sold them. So these young
ruflers be not sorry, but rather does malign and freate and chafe, and be
ready to fight when a man would vmbrayde them for so mispendynge all their
substance, worse then the prodigal and wastefull son that is spoke of in the
gospel, which after that he had scattered and wasted by his lose living, all
the goods that his father left him, yet at the last he took remorse and
repentance, and returned home to his father again. diuellishe wisdom, which
they have that be wise and wittye enough to do mischief, but good they ca^ do
none: They be wylye to circumuent men, and to deceive them in all busynes,
exchaunges, bargayning, bying and selling, and such other exercise. And such be
they also that by oppression leapeth upon men's shoulders like Apes as much as
in them is, keeping them down that they shall never come up a lofte to any
thrifte or riches, and that will be glad to wait men a shreud turn, so that
no man shall espy them, or know that they do it, and many times when they
have done a man a shreude turn will make a man believe that they be their best
friends. All these be carnal wysedomes and worldly wysedomes, Romans viii.
prudentia carnis mors est, And it is counted very folyshenes before God. Of
such wisdom speaks Christ. Luc. xvi. The children of this wicked world
all set in malignitie and myschiefe be wyser then the children of light, the
children of grace, the children of God. And he gives laud and praise to the
father, because he has hid the mysteries and secrets of the true faith of
Christ from them that be worldly wise and far casting, and has reveled,
vttred, and declared them to such as be children, that is to say small and
little in malice, humble and lowlye in heart and spirit. For on such the
holy ghost will spredde his gifts. and on none of them that thyncke them
selves so worldly wise, which be very fools before God. The apostle capit.
iii. declares what is this godly sapience or wisdom coming from almightye
GOD above, by the effects and properties of it. First (says he) it is
chaste in deeds and in exterior behavior, for where the filthynesse of
lecherye is, there is no virtue that can please God, and this is contrary to
beastlye wisdom. Then it makes peace, as well within a man's self, or in a
man's own conscience, as outward to others, dyrectlye against dyuellysh
wisdom, that is ever quarelyng and waytyng shrewd tournes. It keeps a
measure and good manner in word and deeds. Easy to be counseled or
entreated, where earthly wisdom (according to the properties of the earth) is
hard to be persuaded against his lucre or advantage. Agreing with good men,
as none of the other three wisdoms does. And full of mercy in heart and deed,
And full of good fruits, that is to say, good works, whereas of the other
wisdoms comes no goodness but it be colorable and vainglorious, or for
some sinistre purpose, Judging without simulacion, or faining. Not showing
justice and indifferencye outward, bearing indignacion and parciality in heart
inward. Such an humble heart had Solomon when he made his supplicacion and
peticion to God in Gabaon.iii. Regum.iii. where he offered to God a thousand
hosts or beasts to be said to him: I have done as thou have said. Dedi tibi
cor sapiens and intellige^s in tantu^ vt nullus ante te I have given thee a
heart endued with Sapience and intelligence, in so much that among all the
kings of Israel that have been before thee, or that shall come after thee,
there was never none like thee. Here ye have express mention of the two first
gifts of the holy ghost, Sapience and Intelligence, wittines or fine and clear
understanding. Of the which, Sapience properly serves for judgment in
speculatiue causes, chiefly concerning almighty God, and celestial creatures
and verities or truths about the same, iudgyng and determining that to them a
man should surely adhere and leyne, and to refuse the contraries, as false and
repugnant to the truth. And I must now speak vnitely or jointly of the gift
of sapie^ce and of ye gift of intelligence or understanding, as the prophet
begins at some of our five exterior or can not fall, but continuallye
remains in the glorious fruition, sight, and love of God, ever Hebr. i.
These and such high mysteries of heavenly matters to perceive, and as it were
by the sharpenes of man's wit to pearce into the^, (as man may here in this
gross and corruptible body) perteyneth properly to the gift of
understanding, Ad donum intellectus. And the more perfectly that this gift is
inspired into man, by the holy ghost: the more distinctly and plainly he shall
perceive such hie secrets, though perceue the^ as he shall do hereafter in
glory, we can not yet. And by mature and wise judgment to discern these
verities from their contraries, perteyneth properly to the gift of Sapience,
or godly wisdom. Ad donum sapientiae. As to discern one God from the false
Gods: To know that the.iii Arrius said. To know that there is but one maker of
all things, and no more, and not to put two creatours, one of good things, an
other of evil things, as Manicheus said. And to judge when the angels of God
does truly Gods message. And to discern them from the angels of darkness,
which many times disguise them selves into the fashion of the angels of light.
These and such other hye judgments in heavenly causes, pertains properly to
the gift of sapience or godly wisdom. For this supernatural gift of Sapience
the wise man prayed. Sapi. ix. Da mihi sedium Give me the wisdom from above
that is ever assistent by thy seat of glory, and from thence is derived and
infused or send down to men. Because that, Si quis erit consummatus inter
filios hominu^, si ab illo fugerit sapientia tua in nihilum computabitur. If a
man be never so profound and excellent in man's wisdom, if he lack this godly
wisdom (good Lord) he shall not be esteemed wise, but rather a fool, in as much
as worldly wisdom is counted but folishnes before God.i. Corin. iii. And the
prophet David prayed that he might obtain this supernatural gift called Donum
intellectus, the gift of intelligence, wittiness, or fine and clear
understanding, saying: Psalm. cxviii. Da mihi intellectum vt discam mandata tua.
Give me intelligence Esaias. vii. Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis. As saint
Augustine and others redeth that letter. Except ye believe, ye shall not
understand. For many things there be which except ye believe, ye can not
understand, as the articles of our fayeth, with other like. And many truths
To. x Fides ex auditu auditus autem per verbum Christi. And this is acquisite
faith gotten by labor, study, or hearing: and so is understanding
proporcionablye to the same, which both be made more firm, fast, and
certain, by faith infused, and by Intelligence or understanding infused and
given from above of the holy ghost. And this gift of Intelligence is never
withdrawn from good men, specially about such things as be necessary for
man's salvation to be known, although some men have it in a higher degree
the^ some other have: but about other things not i. Ioh. ii. Vnctio eius
docebit vos de omnibus. The ointment, infusion, or inspiration of the holy
ghost will teach you in all things necessary to be learned, although very good
men having the grace that makes the^ acceptable and in the favor of God, may
be dull and little or naught perceive of other truths, without whose knowledge
a man may come to heaven well enough. Chrysostom in a sermon De spiritu scto^,
uses a more familier and playner distinction of these two gifts, Sapience,
and Intelligence, saying: When it besemeth a doctor Reuela oculos meos and
co^siderabo mirabilia de lege tua. says the Prophet. Reuele or uncover mine
eyes, draw the curtayne from before the eyes of my soul by this gift of
intelligence, and I shall consider marvelous things of thy law. The spirit of
Sapience (says Chrysostom) is given to the teachers, and the spirit of
Intelligence and understanding is given to the hearers. I preach, thou
understand, and take the mind of my sayings having the gift of
Intelligence, although thou can not teach. As of the heart. Therefore says
the Prophet. Os meum loquetur sapientiam and meditatio cordis My mouth shall
speak Sapience or wisdom, and the recordyng of my heart shall show prudence,
intelligence, or understanding, perceiuyng the thing yt I am taught. Yet here
you must diligently note, that perfect Sapience is not so much to know Gods
eloquence, as for to live accordynglye to Gods eloquence and to his holy word:
And Intelligence is little worth, where a man works not according to that he
has learned. But what shall I say of them, that hearing Gods eloquence daily
declared unto them, yet having their minds occupied about other business,
regards not to bear away that they hear, and will not learn and
understand to do well according to that permit. Yet one thing I would feign
discuss by ye Ezech. iii. saying: that if the watch of Israel, the curate, or
preacher se his flock do noughtielye, and will not tell them of their fault,
nor rebuke them that they may amend, he will require and ask their blood of
him. He shall answer for them at the day of dome, Natural examples we have
to encourage and comfort the preachers in this behalf, that he be not dismayed
but take patience. For we se by experience that the veins of waters flows
and runs, although no man come to water his cattle at them: and wells
although no man draw up water at them, yet they sprinkleth, boileth and
welleth up. And brooks, although neither Hieremy the prophet, when he saw no
profitte or increase of virtue come by his prophecienge and preaching, but
rather persecution and trouble, mockinge, laughinge, and scornynge, by which
he was once minded to surceasse and leave of, preaching, Yet he says: that
sermo domini factus est in cord meo, quasi ignis exestua^s claususque in
ossibus meis, et defeciferre non sustinens. cap. xx. The word of God was like
flaming fire in my heart (says this prophet) holy word, will be more ashamed
when he goes verecundia, bashfulnes or shamefastnes, it is timor ex
expectatione connicij, a fear of reproach or rebuke, least any man would
chide or check him, or say ill by him. This is a very good affection, therefore,
if by our preaching yet at the least wise such an affection may be strike^ into
the heart of any one of our audience, we may be glad of it. An other utility
and profit is, although by my preaching I make not all men better, yet some men
be the better therefore, and they that be good, be more modest and virtuous by
my sayings. And although I have not set up them that be sick, yet them that be
whole I have made stronger to stand in their goodness, and more steadfast. The
third profit, although Bristowe and all good trade of marchaundyse One of you
shall betray me, I speak not of you al, for I know whom I have chosen: One of
you is the dyuell. He cast them al in an anguish, lest he should publish and
utter the traitor, ii. Tim. ii. Gods servant must be no wrangler, but
gentle toward al men, teaching them that resyste the truth, if peradventure
God will give them penance toward the knowledge of truth. And thus I trust
this doubt is solued, which I now moved, and that we must do our duty, still
preaching and teaching, and let God alone with the profit and increase to grow
thereof. And here for this time I must surceasse, because I have long protract
the time, perceiving your attentive ears and diligent audience, not doubting
but that you will keep in remembrance that I have said of the introductio^ and
entering

The second sermon of the gift of Counsel.
Worshipful audience, when I preached last in this place, I promised to
declare unto you the seven gifts of the holy ghost, which (as the prophet Esaye
says) rested on the humanity of our savior Christ most abundantly. And
entering that matter, I spoke of the coeternitie, and of the equal power of the
holy ghost, with the father and the son. And how the ma^hood of our savior
Christ had all graces after a higher manner then ever had any other creature.
And then how all these seven gifts presuppo^eth faith, hope, and charity, in
him that shall receive them. And then I declared what sapience is, and how
many ways it is taken. And then jointly of the gift of intelligence or
understanding, and why I should so vnitelye or ioyntlye gift of counsel ye
shall understand that this gift of the holy ghost like as all the seven gifts be
given to man to help all other virtues that man has, whether they be natural,
or gotten by assuefaction, exercise, use, or custom, and also to make man more
Quicumque enim spiritu dei aguntur, hij sunc filij dei. Romans viii. God is ever
ready to move us to goodness, though we of our self be full dull to go forward,
having all the study of our hearts set to ill at all times, rather then to
goodness. Gene. vi. Yet where the light of reason overcomes sensuality, some
intellectual and moral virtues springs forth, as it was in the paygnim
Philosophers, of which some were taken for excellent in the virtue of
temperaunce, some in liberality or other virtues, which yet for all their
good qualities and virtues gotten by their great pains and labors, lacked the
grace that should make them goodmen and acceptable in the sight of God,
because they lacked faith, the foundation and ground of all sure the gift of
counsel, which is a supernatural gift of deliberacio^ or aduisement
superadded to that natural gift of reason, of which the philosopher speaks.
vi. Eth. oportet prudentem esse been consiliatiuu^. A prudent man, a well
practiced man (says he) must be far casting and a good counselor. But this
property of reason called counceling, or forecasting, or worldly policy that
the philosopher speaks of* may be without this supernatural gift of
counsel that we now speak of, for a man may compass, cast, and contriue
always (^e they never so many) to bring his purpose or his friends purpose
Psalm. ii. Populi meditati su^t inania: Astiterunt reges terrae and principes
conuenerunt in vnum aduersus dominum, et aduersus Christum eius, Which to the
letter was writ by prophecy of the conspiracy of the chief rulers among the
Jews with Herod and Pilate against our savior Christ. For they had
contryued by their counsel how to destroy Christ (as appears by the
Eua^gelistes) as it were by destroying of him to save them selves that they
should not lose their place and the people. Ioh. xi. Lest if the Romans
should hear of such a man to be in their country that had so great a retinew
of disciples as Christ Caius the emperor, and was banished perpetually to
Lions in France, and with him Herodias his incestious concubine, by whose
means blessed S. John baptist was beheaded. As Josephus antiquitatum. lib.
xviii. ca. xiiii. writes. And Pilate after he had ruled in Iewrye ten years,
was driven home to Rome by Vittellius general governor of Siria, to answer to
such injuries and tirannye as he had done in the country: As Josephus writes
Antiquitatum. lib. eodem. cap. vii. And at Rome (because he was an unjust Judge
against Christ) he was vexed and put to so much trouble, sorrow, and mischief:
that desperatlye he beat him self to death with his own hands, Eusebius
writes in the ecclesiastical storye, the second book and.vii. chapter. And
the city of Jerusalem, and the people of the Jews for their iniquity against
Christ, were by the Emperor Vespasian and Titus his son subdued and
destroyed, even in the time of their P^sch^l feast, at which time they had done
their malice against Christ, because the time of vengeance might answer and
agree to the time of the muse of the same. At the paschal time they s^ed the
most innocent blood of Christ, and even then the vengeance for his blood fell
upon them and upon their children and issue, according to their own desire,
saying: Sanguis eius super nos. and super filios nostros. Let the vengeance
for his blood (said they) lie Vespasian, and his son Titus, after they had
destroyed the chief Towns and strongest fortalicies and holds of the Realm,
came to besiege that city, and in the whole time of that battle took
prisoners.lxxxxvii. thousand. And at the same siege were slain, and that dyed
by famine and moreyne, coming chiefly of the stinche of the dead corpses
liyng unburied to the number of a.xi.C. thousand, as Josephus writes in the
seventh book of the Jews battle, and.xvii. Chapter. Therefore it follows in
the psalm rehearsed. Qui habitat in coelis, irridebit eos. Almightye God that
dwells in heaven will laugh the^ to scorn, as he did in deed when he rose
from death to life again, notwithstanding y^ they thought him sure enough
being once dead, and notwithstanding Et du^s subsannabit eos. Our Lord will
wring the nose at the^, which words imports a greater indignation and anger
then derision does, and was put in execution at this most horrible, strage,
and destruction of that city, and at the taking away of the said prisoners,
which they feared, when they said, that if they let Christ escape their hands,
the Romans would come and take their city, and carye away the people. Here
you may see what it is to take counsel against god. The wise man says. Pro.
xxi. Non est sapientia, non est prudentia, non est consiliu^ There is no
sapie^ce, there is no wittines, there is no counsel against our lord God.
Sapience is the cognition and judgment of divine and high causes, which is not
among heretics that sows cocle and ill seeds among the corn, setting forth
sects and divisions Such wisdom how well learned so ever it seems to be, is
not the true sapience, because it is against our lord God, which is the god of
peace and not of dissension. Also be thy capacite never so quick to perceive
and understand the lessons of holy scripture. Yet if thou have amaru^ zelum,
a bitter affection, trustyng by thy learning to check and rebuke other men, or
to allure other to thy sect, faction, or opinion, as some me^ have done,
reasoning against Purgatory because they would by that destroy prayers for the
dead, and so consequently put down abbeys, and chauntries which were founded
for such prayers, or if thou glory to much contra dominum, against God, and is
not the true understanding or wittines, that is the gift of the holy ghost.
And likewise of the third gift (of which we now entreat) Donum cosilii,
As long as thy cast leans over much to man's imagination, and sets not
God before, but rather works against God, as ye heard of these that
compassed and counsayled for the death of Christ, so to save them selves, it
is not the counsel that is the gift of the holy Gooste, for it is against
our Lord GOD. It leaves to much to worldliness, and to man's cast,
grounded on malice and evil will, therefore Gamaliell, and gave the^ better
counsel, aduertisyng the^ to beware how they ordered these men (meaning) the
apostles of Christ, and not suddenly to precipitate their judgment against
the^ (for this precipitacion of sentence sodaynelye without mature deliberation
or aduisement, is the contrary to the gift of counsel that we now speak of,
that is, the third gift of the holy ghost.) This he persuaded by two
examples, first of one Theudas, which (after Josephus) using superstitious
crafts, took upon him to be a great Prophet and so deluded the people, that he
made many Theudas head, and destroyed and scattered all his sect and
retinue. After him came an other, Judas Galileus which brought up among the
people a pernicious error, that it Theudas, or of Judas Galileus did. But if
it come of God ye can not break it, it will stand, it will prospere and go
forward, ye can not let it, except ye will repugne against God, which no
therefore they have not continued nor holden, but ever have been dissolved and
broken. Arrius and his co^federacy, Pelagius, Manes otherwise called Cubricus
or Manicheus, Sabellius, and such like: And here in our realm of Wicliffe,
whose heresies sore troubled this realm in the time of King Edward the
third, and worse afterward in the time of king Henry the fifth, when a great
multitude of that faction conspired against the king. But because this
counsel came of man and not of god, it would not hold, their counsel was
detecte, and the captains taken, hanged, and burned. Likewise now in our
time, Luther in Saxony has taken to his counsel and confederacy, many of our
English men beside them that he has infected within this our realm, their
counsel and confederacy has no part of this gift of the holy King Henry the
eight set forth a book against Luther, in defense of the popes aucthority.
And by the diligent and studious labors of our sovereign and most gracious
Prince king Henry the eight, and his encouragyng of great clerks to
inuestigate, try, and search out the mere and sure truths of the
scriptures, they be so manifestlye impugned, that no man can be inuegled or
deceived with them, but such a one as Arius heresy rose by occasion that he
could not be promoted to the bishopprick of Alexandria, where he was priest and
reader. Inimicitia, Enmitye that he had then against Alexander, which was then
promoted and made Bisshoppe, and also his own pride, ambicion, and avarice,
these be called Opera carnis. Gala. v. They comes of carnal man. Likewise
Wicliff, because he was disappoynted of the promotion that he would have had to
be head of a house in Oxforde. And Luther disdayning at other men's exaltation,
advantage, and profits, and others has maligned here to fore for like
occasions and suscitate and set furthe their heresies for like Gala. v. Vos
in libertatem vocati estis fratres, tantum ne libertatem in occasionem detis
carnis sed per charitatem spiritus seruite inuicem. Ye be called to a liberty
by the faith of Christ, but beware that by your liberty ye take no occasion of
carnalitie or sensual lust i Pet. ii. Quasi liberi and non quasi velamen
habentes maliciae libertatem sed quasi serui dei. I would (says saint Peter)
ye should order your selves as free men and as men at liberty, but not to
take your liberty as a clooke for malice or evil living, as these that call
them selves evangelical brothers does now adays, which counts them
selves by their faith at liberty to eat when they will, and what they will,
without any delect choice or exception of days or times, without any
exception, choice, or diversity puttyng, betwyxt any kinds of meats, fisshe,
or flesh, indifferentlye at all times. Yea, and that is more horrible and
shameful to Trinitas, or this word Consubstancialis, yet God forbid that we
should deny the blessed Trinity in the Godhed, the son to be
consubstanciall and of one substance with the father, or the holy ghost to be
of one substance with the father and the son, Arrius that pernicious heretic
when he was convinced and compelled by aucthorities and reasonynge to grant
that all three persons in trinity were of one and equal substance, had none
other refuge, but to stick in homousion, that we call in latin
consubstantialis, or vnius substantiae, and in English, of one substance,
because that word is not used in scripture, he would none thereof, although he
could not deny the thing: a poor cloak of defense (God knows) to grant
the thing, and to varye in the name. Therefore so that I might agree with this
audience, and they with me, that there is such a stay and a mean place of
punishment after this life, I would not care though I never called it
Purgatory, but let A. be his name. To deny the said A. and to say yt there
is no such thing, brings a man to a carnal liberty, and gives man occasion
boldly to continue in sin to his lives end, trusting then to cry God mercy
for his misliuynge, and then to go through (as they speak) I trow they such
alonge misliuer for one word of repentance Consilia impiorum fraudulenta,
the disceiptful counsayles and conuenticles of wicked men, rather provoke,
and gives men comfort to continue in sin. I was once in a soleme
audience, where I heard a famous preacher labor sore to impugn the said
mean place, saiynge, that if it Qui nos precesserunt cum signo fidei and
dormiunt in somno pacis Where we pray for them that begone before us with the
caracter, printe, and sign of christ's faith, and sleapeth in the sleep of
peace. These men like as they take the words of the Mass, and of the
service of the church when they seems to make for their purpose, would GOD
they could be so content to allow and admit the same in other times and
places. It follows there right. Ipsis domine and omnibus in Christo
quiescentibus locum refrigeri^ Where we pray our Lord God, favorably and with
cheryshing to give them a place of cooling and refreshing contrary to heat, a
place of light contrary to darkness, a place of peace contrary to trouble and
unquietness, either by perplexity and confusion of mind, or by terrible
visio^s or otherwise. Now if their new purgatory be a place of tranquillity, a
place of light, and a place of rest and peace, it should be but all labor lost
for us so besyly to pray that they may come to such a place, seeing that they
have it already. Then to their allegacion, Dormiunt in somno pacis, you must
understand these words by a like saying of our savior Christ Ioh. xi. After
that he had a messager sent to him from Martha and Mary, that Lazar their
brother was sore sick, he tarried in the place where he was then beyond
Iordaine, for Lazarus amicus noster dormit, Lazar our friend sleeps. I will
go into Ieurye where he dwells and wake him of his sleep. Then said his
disciples: Sir if he sleep, he will be safe anon, when he has slept inoughe.
They were as wise then, as our new purgatory men be now. They thought
Christ had spoken of that rest that man and beast must needs have after their
labors, or else shall fail and dye, which we call commonly sleep.

But Christ meaned of the sleep of death. Dixerat autem Jesus de morte eius,
As he expressed by and by plainly, saiynge: Lazarus mortuus est, Lazarus is
dead. And this is it that holy church in that place of the mass calls
sleapynge in the sleep of peace, as Christ spoke in like case. And as the
Prophet speaks in his person. Psalm. xv. Caro mea requiescet in spe. My
body shall rest in hope to rise again. Then considering that holy church after
the manner of holy scripture, uses to call death by the name of sleep, we
must be wise and well ware to what things, what words may agree, and by
reason whereof they do agree, or else by our words we may deceive our audience,
as well as our selves. If we think that this sleep or death comes to man by
reason of the soul, we err very sore, for the soul never dies, but is
immortal, Deus Abraham, deus Isaac, and deus Jacob. Exodus iii. Non est aute^
deus mortuoru^ sed viuentium. Mat. xxii Abraham slepeth, and Abraham is wakyng,
Abraham is dead, and Abraham is alive. The one part you will grant for it is
true, the other is the saiynge of Christ which can not be false. The first
is true by reason of the body. The second is true, by reason of the soul.
The soul is departed from the body, the body lacks his life, therefore we
say the manne is dead. The soul is immortal, and cannot dye, therefore by
that reason Christ said Abraham is alive. So now because the bodies be out of
pain, we say the men rest or sleep in the sleep of peace. precipitatio headlong
shofyng out men's sentence without judgment, is contrary to this gift of the
holy ghost, that we now entreat of the gift of counsel, as I touched before.
This was the Iud. xi. which when he should proceed to battle against the
Ammonites, he made his vow to God precipita^ter headlong and rashly, without
counsel or aduiseme^t, yt what so ever came first against him to meet him at
his door, after his coming home, he would kill it and offer it up to be burned
in sacrifice to almyghtye God. So it chanced that when he came home after his
victory, his own daughter (which he had and no mo children) met him with
timbers and such instruments of melody as she had to welcome him home. When
he saw her, he tore his clothes and cried: alas my daughter, thou have deceived
me, and art deceived thy self. This precipitation hurt king David,
notwithstanding his great wisdom and manyfolde virtues, when he fled Seba
that was servant to Miphiboseth (Ionathas son, neuew to Saul the king) came
to king David, and brought him presents of such dainties as might do him
pleasure, and to his servants in that distres and trouble. As Asses for them
to ride on, bread and wine and fruits to refresh them in their iourny, fleyng
from the host of Absolon. King David asked him, where is thy master
Miphiboseth? He made a lie on his master, saying: he tarieth behind in
Jerusalem, trusting now to be restored to ye kingdom of Saul his graundfather.
King David by and by rashly without judgment or further aduisement (the party
neither called nor heard) precipitate this sentence, Tua sint omnia que fuerunt
Miphiboseth. Take thee all that Miphiboseth had. And so he gave away to a lying
knave all that good gentleman's goods, which he was sorye for afterward when
he knew the truth. He should not a neded to have be sorry if he had avoided this
precipitacion by the gift of counsel, which the holy ghost for then, withdrew
from him, he had it not. For such causes says Ecclesiasticus: Sine consilio
nihil facias, et post factum non penitebis xxxii. Without counsel and
aduisement do nothing, and after thy deed thou shall not repent or be sorye*
These gifts of the holy ghost be not so coherent or linked together, that who
so ever has one of them must neades have all the other. The Prophet Esaias
says, that our savior Christ had them all, and so he had superabundantly. Et
de and of his plentye all we take our gifts. Of others we read not that had
them all continually, but we find that some that were excellent in sapience,
or judgment in Godly causes and heavenly matters, and could instruct and
teach noblely well, lacked the gift of counsel to direct and order him self
and others accordyngly, and had need of other men's counsel. And contrary
he that is excellent in geuyng counsel may be weak in the speculation or
judgment of heavenly or Godly matters. Exo. xviii. It is writ of Moses which
had received of God the spirit of sapience, by which he was able to give unto
the people the laws of God, and to teach Iethro his father in law considering
how that labor was to great for any one manne to sustain, and also how the
people were combred, tariynge so long for decision of their causes, while they
might have been sooner sped, that so they might have departed every man to his
own, and have been better occupied at home said playnelye to him. Stulto
labor consumeris. etc. Both thou and this people spend and waste your selves
in a foolyshe labor, for this business is above thy power and might, thou
art not able alone to sustain all this busy this stranger Iethro an alien,
and not of the people Iethro his father in law, geuyng him that good counsel.
Therefore I shall most intierly desire you to pray to God for this gracious
gift of counsel, and according to the same to proceed in all your assembles,
consultacions, deuisinges, in all things that you shall go about, ever avoiding
precipitacion and rash settinge on in any of your doings, and so you shall
not afterward repent your doings or your sayings through the help of God, to

The third sermon, treating of the fourth gift of the holy ghost called the
spirit of fortitude.
GOod and worshipful audience, because it is long since I preached among you of
the gifts of the holy ghost which heretofore I promised to declare unto you,
as opportunity would serve. Now I trust you remember that in my last sermon
that I preached of that matter I spoke chiefly of the gift of godly counsel,

By this it is most euydentlye true that the wyseman says: Non est
sapientia, non est prudentia, non est consilium, contra dominum. Proverb. xxi.
There is no sapience, there is no wyttines, there is no counsel against our
Lord God. As long as thy cast leans over much to man's imagination, and
sets not god before, but rather works against God: this is not the counsel
that is the gift of the goly ghost. No more is the counsel or confederacy of
heretics, for they be ever grounded on carnal lusts enmity, malice, or some
other carnalitie, and nothing godly, but inducing men to carnal liberty, as I
declared of diverse heresies, and specyallye of the heresye that denies
purgatory, setting Iethro by the holy spirit of counsel (which he then
had) advised him to constitute and set vnderofficers to bear part of his
pains and labors. And then Moses without any disdayning, without any
obstinacye or sturdynesse, lowlye and obedientlye did thereafter, and
constantlye by the spirit of Fortitude brought that to effect that Iethro
had counseled him. And like as this counsailler Iethro had the spirit of
GOD, the spirit of counsel, so had Moses the spirit of fortitude, strength
or manlynesse, to set this order among the people, as his father in law
had counseled him.

It was no small enterprise among so unruly, wilful and sturdye a multitude as
that people Fortitudo (after Aristotle iii. Eth.) Est virtus secundum qua^
fortis sustinet timet and audet que oportet, cuius gratia oportet, vt oportet,
and quando oportet. Fortitude Quasi pannus menstruatae omnes iustitiae nostrae,
be filthy and very vile in the sight of God. All virtues consists in the
mean and middle betwixt inpauidus without fear, is one extremity of this
virtue fortitude, such a one is he that nothing fears, neither earthquakes,
fire, nor water, but such a one seems rather insensate and mad, the^ bold.
Likewise in boldness or venturousnes, he that will adventure where is no
likelyhoode to escape, is in this extremity of fortitude, and is called
folishehardye, and seems to be proud and presumptuous rather then bold, a
fainer or cou^terfaiter of boldness, rather then truly bold or manly. For
commonly such men has a certain fear of heart inwardly annexed to their
boldness, beginning boldly, and at the last will run away with timidus, a
cowarde, afraid of his shadow, or where is no cause why he should fear. Such
be they that in all perils despayreth, their heart fails them, clean contrary
to fortitude or manlynes, which has ever good hope to overcome, where by the
judgment of reason is any likelihood to overcome. So that generallye fortitude
is exercised about fears and boldness or hardynes, as it were to suppress and
correct fear, and to moderate and measure hardines or boldness. Certain
conclusions the Philosopher puts in which we Christen men vary from him.
One is Melius est nos mori in bello quam videre mala gentis nostrae et
sanctoru^.i. Match. iii. It is better for us to dye in battle, then to se the
trouble and pains of our nation and of holy me^. Where he preferred death
temporal to experience of misery and chosed rather to dye, then to sustain the
calamity, wretchedness and shame, that they should come to, if their enemies
should have the ouerhand over them, and yet the true fortitude and manlines in
Judas Machabeus passed the ma^lines of all the paignim co^querours that
Aristotle could recite. Aristotle says also: fortis quanto est virtuosior and
felicior, tanto fit in morte tristior* A manly man the more that he has of
that virtue, fortis quanto est. etc. his faith was no better, but we by our
faith know that the life to come, is much more excellent then this present
life, full of misery and wretchedness, ever mutable and unconstant.
Notwythstandyng for the natural amity betwixt the soul and the body, they be
full loathe to depart asundre, and naturally conuented before the king and the
judges, they Deus aspiciet veritatem and consolabitur in nobis. God will look
upon the truth, and will have comfort among us. The second was likewise
served, sauinge that his tongue was not cut Tu quidem scelestissime. etc. O thou
most mischeuous manne, thou destroyest us in this present life, but the king
of all the world will raise us up again in the resurrection of life
everlasting, that dies for his laws. The third showed forth his hands and
his tongue, and said I have the possession and use of these things from heaven
above, but now I despise them for the law of God, because I hope and trust to
receive them of him again. And even so all the brothers were arrayed, until
they came to the seventh. And that marvelous mother comforted them every one,
saiynge: I can not tell how you did appear them by Moses. And after a sharp
lesson and co^mination Heb. xi. says. Alii distenti su^t non suscipientes
redemptione^ vt meliorem inuenire^t resurrectionem, alii ludibria and verbera
experti. etc. Some were racked and drawn in pieces, not loking for any
ransom, that so they might find a better resurrection, some suffered mocks and
stripes, and more over fetters and prisones, and were stoned to timiditie and
cowardnes was far away and this gift of the holy ghost, fortitude, manlines and
strong heart lacked not, by which they were so constant in suffryng adversity
for Christ's sake, in hope of reward everlasting. Amen.

The fourth sermon, treatyng of the fifth gift of the holy ghost, called the
spirit of Science.
THe fifte of these gifts of the holy ghost, is the spirit of science, or the
gift of science or cunninge, for which you shall understand the science is
not so precisely taken here as ye logitions speaking of science calling it the
knowledge Faith works by love, And so does all the whole holy scripture more
consistyng in practice and exercise then in speculation. This gift of science
or cunnyng as we now speak of it, extends also to hand crafts, and
occupations as I shall declare hereafter. And it presupposes the gift of
counsel (that I spoke of lately) by which we may with study, deliberacion,
and aduisement, attain to the knowledge of man's acts, and to the knowledge of
creatures. But because that many times men's wits in their study and in
their singular thought no way to salvation, but by observing Testimonium
perhibeo illis quod emulationem dei habent sed non secundum scientiam. Roma.x.
I bear them witness that they have a zeal and love to follow the learning that
God has given them by Moses, but they lack science and cunnyng, they follow
not good understanding, in that in which they think them selves cunnyng, for
the said ceremonies were no more but Iustitiae carnis Certain obseruances
laid on their necks, carnallye to be observed and kept, to occupy them and
hold the^ under obedience, and to keep them from the rites and vsages that
the gentyles used in their ydolatrye, till the time of correction, the time of
reformacion (which is the time of Christ's coming) at which time they should
surceasse and be used no more. Such a zeal and love to learning has many
now adays: And of their learning and knoweledge (which they think they
have) they will make as great glory and boast as did the Jews of their
learning. And yet their zeal and learning shall be without that science that
is this gift of the holy ghost. In this case be they that so arrogantly glories
in their learning had by study in the englysh bible, forth of Gods glory
not without profounde and great mysteries and causes reasonable. i. Ethi.
Declares who be mete and convenient hearers of the science of moral
philosophy. And there he excludes from the study of that learning all young
men and women, whether they be young in age, or young in manners and
conditions, they that be young in years, be no conueniente hearers of Moral
philosophye, because they lack experience of things that be taught in that
facultye, which be Acts of virtue, and vertuousse living, principallye
intended in Moral Philosophye, be as they were at twelve year old, and much
worse. They be so headstrong, and so obstinately worse spent the^ ye time while
they be hearing the Mat. xiii. reciting ye propheci of Esai: Auribus grauiter
audierunt, It grieved the^ to hear the word of God, et oculos suos
clauserunt, they shut fast their eyes. Nequa^do oculis videant. Lest they might
se with their eyes ye works of Christ, and the right way to heaven. And least
they should hear with their ears, and with good will understand the liueli
word of god that might save their souls, and might be converted from their
misliuing that so I might heal them (says Christ) from the sores of their
souls that be their sins. For in all such manner of sayings you must
understand yt the impossibility, yea rather the difficulty to do well, is of
our self only, and not of god. vain labor to teach children, neither to the^
that i. Corinth. xiiii. would that a woman if she would learn any thing for
her soul health, she should Mulier in silencio discat cum omni subiectione:
docere aute^ mulieri no^ permitto i. Tim. ii. Let a woman learn in silence
without many words, and without clattering, with all obedience and subjection.
For I will not suffer a woman to be a teacher, least peradventure taking upon
her to be a maistres she may wexe proud and malaperte. She must consider her
creation, that a woman was last made, and first in fault and in sin. subdue
their affections and lusts, and by that they were the more mete to receive the
gift of Tit. ii. saying that aged women among other virtues, must be, been
docentes, vt ad castitatem erudiant adolescentulas, well teaching, that they
may inform their young women to chastity, and to love their husbands, and to
love their children, benignas et subditas viris suis, boner and boughsome to
their husbands. So far blessed Saint Paul gives women liberty to teach,
but not to teach men. All beit saint Jerome in the preamble of his exposition
of the psalm: Eructauit cor meu^ verbu^ bonu^ notes that Ruth, Judith, and
Hester have books intyteled to their names, and that they taught men wit, and
so did the wise woman of Techua conclude king David with her wise questions
that she asked him, and taught him by the subtyle riddles that she proposed to
him, and mitigate his anger with the pretye example that she brought in.ii.
Reg. xiiii. but in deed much of her Aquila and his wife Pryscilla when they
had heard Apollo preach Christ, they called him aside and better taught
him in the faith of Christ in some points then he was taught before Act.
xviii But here the scripture expresses not whether the man Aquila, or the wife
Priscilla taught Apollo. And it may well be that they both instructed him.
For the holy spirit of God breaths and inspireth his gifts where it
pleases him, and by them that it pleases him, whether it be men or women.
Therefore it may so be that it pleased GOD to illuminate the souls of women,
and by them for the time to teach men. Sometime for the reproach and
Iudicum. iiii. that Delbora the Prophetess judged the people of Israel, and
advanced them to war against Sisara captain of the wars of Iabin king of
Canaan, in so much that Barach a noble manne among the people durst not go to
the battle against Sisara except this good woman Delbora would go with him.
And sometime women have instructed men for other secret causes, such as GOD
only knows.

But this is not to be taken for an argument because it is rare and syldome,
but of Sola scripturarum ars est quam sibi omnes passim vendicant, hanc garrula
anus, hanc delirus senex, hanc sophista verbosus, hanc vniuersi presumunt
lacerant docent antequam discant, as Saint Hierome says in his epistle ad
Paulinum.

The faculty of Scripture only, is the knowledge that all men and women
chalengeth and claymeth to them self and for their own, here and there, the
chatterynge old wife, the dotynge old manne, the babbling Sophister, and all
other presumes upon this facultye, and teareth it, and teaches it before they
learn it. Of all such green Divines as I have spoken of it appears full well
what learning they have, by this, that when they teach any of their
Disciples, and when they give any of their books to other men to read the
first suggestion why he should labor such books, is because by this (say
they) thou shall be able to Scientia inflat, charitas edificat, Such science
makes a man proud, but charity edifieth and does good. If a man think he
knows any thing by such science without charity, he knows not yet how he
ought to know it.i. Corin. viii. he considers not that he ought to use his
science with humility, and with charity toward his neighbor, and that is
the science that God aloweth. For lack of this charity, vain is thy study,
thy science vanishes away to vainglory, which agrees not with the holy ghost.
And when the holy ghost is absent, then beware of study in Psa. liiii.
Contaminauerunt testamentum eius. Where he speaks of them that without
charity treats the scriptures, and have defouled them, leaving the unity of
charity, and taking every one away by them self in their own confederacy,
refusing the unity and concord of good and faithful people. But what has
come of them? It follows diuisi sunt ab ira: They have been divided by the
anger of Gods face. What better mark can we have to mark heretics? Arrius
was divided with his confederacy, Pelagius with his faction, Nouatus,
Manicheus, wycliffe and such other which have been divided from the
congregation of good and faithful people by excommunication here in this
world, and it is to be feared least they be excommunicate from the celestial
congregation, and be perished for evermore, except peradventure some of them
did penance at the last cast, but whether over late penance be sufficient,
it is doubt. What profit came by the division and seperacion of such heretics?
It follows there appropinquauit cor illius, the heart and mind of Arrius
barked and rayled against it, as was known afterward. The sacrament of
penance had never be so well known as it is, if Nouatus that heretic had not
taught his faction to despise the second table or raffe after shypwracke,
that is penance, the second help and remedy to save men souls. Baptism is
the first that riddeth Nouatus would none thereof, but that if a man sinned
after he was baptized, he was remediles and could not be saved. He gloried to
much in his own sincerity and clerenes of his living. And so of the syngle
living of priests, of the invocation of Saints, and of their prayers for us,
of purgatory, of ceremonies of the church, of images, which you without
science call idols. In all Christendom were scarce so many that could exactly
and profoundly and so redely declare and reason the truth of these matters and
defend them from barkers and from Molliti sunt sermones eius super oleum, et
ipsi sunt iacula. The words of God in scripture which before were hard, by the
exercise and labor of catholic clerks be made very soft, yea more soft,
easy, and soople then oil, and be made harnes and darts, or weapons for the
preachers. Of the hardness of scriptures (in which our new divines find no
hardness) rises al heresies. And so they did even at the beginning Io. vi
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis et biberitis eius sanguinem, no^
habebitis vitam in vobis: Except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. Many of his disciples hearing
these words said: This is a hard saying, and who can abide to hear him say
thus? And after that time many of his disciples gave back, and walked not with
him, they kept him no company: the^ said our savior Christ unto the.xii. yt he
had chosen apostles: will you begone also? Peter answered: good master to who^
shall we go? Thou have the words of everlasting life. I pray you take heed,
and learn here of S. Peter meekely to read and take the

So did not Peter but tarried his time, and so by Nisi manducaueritis. etc
except you eat the flesh of a man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life
in you. etc. and so did other of the apostles there present then first
understand the word. And even then Christ spoke certain words that might
have given them light to understand him, saying: Si ergo videritis filium
hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius: If you shall se the son of man ascend to
heaven where he was before, as who should say, when you shall see him ascend with
a whole body, then you shall full reuerentlye and lovingly, as it were, saying:
verba vitae aeterne habes, thou have the words of life everlasting. As yet he
did not understand Christ's words, but full louinglye he believed that the
words that he understood not, were very good. Would GOD you would when you
read ye scriptures, use such a modesty and such charity, that if the sentence
be hard and strange, then not to determine your self to an understanding after
your own fancy, but abide a time with longanimitie and easy sufferaunce. Et
iacta super dominum curam tuam, and ipse te enutriet. Refer thy mind to Gods
pleasure, cast thy care upon GOD, and he will nourishe thee, he will send thee
light, providing for the some man Domine verba vitae eternae habes. O Lord GOD
thou have the words of everlasting life. The words be good, because they be
the words of GOD, although I do not understand them. Thus ordering your
selves in the study of holy scriptue, you do like Et non dabit ineternum
fluctuationem iusto. And will not suffer you finallye for ever to fleet and
waver inconstantlye, runnyng from one opinion to an other, from one illusion to
an other, thou shall stay thy self by the ancour of faith, and that shall
keep thee from the rocks, that be perelous heretics. For if thou fleet and
waver till thou fall on one of them, thou shall have such a crash of false
doctrine and leude understanding that thou shall not avoid shypwracke, thou
shalt not come to the port of safe knowledge, ne to the port of ease,
quietness, and caulmenes everlasting in heaven, if thou be made by such false
doctrine to err in the essential and necessary points of thy belefe.

Therefore in your learning see that you use a degreee of science. And because
I spoke even

Imago signifies an Idol, and so these new translations of the english bibles
has it in all places, where the translatours would bring men to believe that to
set up Images, or to have Images is idolatrye. And therefore where the
scriptures abhors idols, they make it Images, as though to have imagerie,
were idolatry, that God so greatly abhors. But you must understand and
know that an Image is a thing kerued, or painted, or cast in a moulde, that
represents and signyfyeth a thing that is in deed, or that has be or shall
Cuius est Imago hec et superscriptio Mat. xxii. Whose is this Image and the
scripture about? They answered: the emporours. Note here (good friends) that
Christ asked not cuius est idolum hoc? Whose is this idol for he knew it was
none, but that it was an image, as is the Image of our sovereign Lord the king
upon his money coined in London, in i. Cor. viii. Scimus quia nihil est Idolu^
in mundo, and quod nullus est deus nisi vnus. We know that an ydole is
nothing in the world, and that there is no God but one. Where the blessed
Apostle refers much unto science in this matter of ydoles, and of meat
offered unto them, and spoke to them that were learned, and should have
conning to discern in this matter: saying in the beginning of that. viii.
Chapter. Scimus quoniam omnes scientiam habemus. We know, for all we have
science and conninge to judge of these meats that be offered to Idols, what
know we? Scimus quia nihil est Idolu^ in mu^ do and quod nullus est deus nisi
vnus. We have this science, and this we know, that an Idol is nothing There
is no God but one: As the Image of Jupiter set up to signify the god Jupiter,
is a false signifier, and signifies a thing of nothing, for there is no God
Jupiter. And the Image of Venus to signifye the gods Venus is nothing, for
that is signified by it, is nothing, for there is no she gods Venus: As in a
like speaking we say Chimera is nothing, because the voice is sometime put
to signify a monster, having a head like a Lion, with fire flamynge out of
his mouth, and the body of a goat, and the hinder part like a serpente or a
dragon, there is no such thing, although the poets feign such a monster,
therefore the voice Chimera is a false signifier, and that is false is
nothing, therefore we say Chimera is nothing but Chimera signifiynge a
certain mountain in the country of Licia, flaminge fire out of the top of
it, bredynge and having Lions nyghe about the hier part or top of the same
hyl, and downewarde about the mydle part, having pastures where breadeth
goats or such other beasts, and at the foot of it marshes or moist ground
breadynge serpents: such an hyl there is in the said country, and of the
diverse disposition of the parts of the said hill, the fiction of the foresaid
monster is ymagened, which is nothing, and therefore so we say that Chimera
is nothing, but the same vocable put to signify the hyl in Licia aforesaid is
somewhat, and a true signifier, for it signifies a thing that is in deed. as
appears by Pomponius Mela. lib. i. and Soline with their expositours, and
even so it is true that Paul says that an Idol is nothing, for there is none
such thing as is signified by it, there is no God Saturn, there is no God
Jupiter, there is no Gods Venus, but I say more, that if a man could carue
or paynte an Image of Jupiters soul burning in the fire of hell, or likewise
an Image of Venus soul there burning. If Saint Paul had seen such a
pycture or image, he would never have called it an ydole, or a thing of
nothing, for it should signify a thing that is in deed, for Jupiters soul
is in hell in deed, and so is Venus soul, and other like taken for Gods made
of mortal men. After this manner good friends, you must by science Exo. xxxi.
when the holy tabernacle should be made in deserte, almighty God provided an
artificer and workman for the same nonce called Beseleel son of Huri, son
of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. I have filled him (says God) with the spirit of
God. Sapientia, intelligentia, and scie^tia in omni opere. I have given him
sapience, by which he might well discern and judge of the things that god
would have made, in so much that he was able to teach others the things that
he knew by gods revelation and instruction. And this properly perteyneth to
the gift of Sapience, as I have said before. I have filled him with the spyryt
of intelligence or wyttines, and fine and clear perceyuinge and understanding,
by which he may more perfitly pearce and enter with his wit into the things
that be taught him, then he should have done if he had lacked the said gift of
intelligence. I have also (says God) fulfilled Beseleel with the gift of
science. Of which speaks Chrisost. in a sermon of the holy ghost after this
manner. Moses made the tabernacle in wyldernes, he had need then not only of
doctrine and learning, but also of the gift of a master crafts man, to
know how he should sew together fine clothes and sylkes of precious colors,
and how to weaue them, plat them, and shape them together. And how he should
cast gold and other metalles necessary for the ceremonies there to be used,
and how to polyshe precious stones, and also to frame the timber for the same
tabernacle. For these and such other purposes almighty God gave him and to his
workman Beseleel, the spirit of science, that they might frame all such
things accordingely. And even so in your occupations and handy crafts, when
you exercise Cicero ex platone.i. offic. Sciencia que est remota a iusticia
calliditas potius quam scie^tia est appellanda. Science removed from justice is
rather to be called wylynes then science. And to this purpose, it is necessary
that you servants do your duty to your masters obedientlye with fear and
quakynge, in simplicity and playnes of heart, as unto Christ, not seruinge
to the eye, as to please man, but like the servants of Christ, doing the
will of God with heart and all. Ephe. vi. not deceauing your masters by your
idleness, or else being occupied about your own business, when your master
thinks that you be a true instructour, not infected with wylful and

The fyfte sermon, intreatynge of the spirit of Piety.
Now right worshipful audience I must answer to your expectation, not
doubtinge but that ye look I should perform the promise that I have made you
in times paste, when I took upon me to declare unto you the vii. gifts of the
holy ghost, which as the prophet Esaias. xi. says, rested on our savior
Christ, and by him be derived to his faithful people, to every one as it does
please his goodness to distribute them, to some more of them, to some fewer, and
not so many. And to them that receive the gifts of one kind and manner, yet
some persons has them more intensly, more fullye, and more perfitly, and some
more remysly, more faintlye, and not after so perfect facion or manner, as I have
heretofore declared at large, which I trust in God is not all forgotten. Five
of the said gifts I have stripped and passed over after the capacity of my
poor wit now consequentlye succedeth the.vi. of the said gifts, called
Spiritus pietatis, or donum pietatis, the gift of Piety. This word pietas or
piety, the latin term is so ambiguose, and so diversely used, both in the
scriptures pietas godliness, and his contrary impietas ungodliness. But thus
speaking of Piety, it seems to common and large to be one of these.vii. gifts
distinct from the other, because that thus speakinge of it, it agreith to the
other vi. gifts that I have spoken of. For the gift of godly counsel is a
certain godliness: the gift of Fortitude also is a certain godliness: The gift
also of the dread of God is a godly gift, and a certain godliness, as
hereafter shall appear. And if I should english it and call it pity, yet
there I should fall into an other equivocation: for this word pity is not ever
taken after one manner in the english tongue: sometime it is taken for mercy
pieras sometime taken as I shall show hereafter and sometime otherwise, as when
we say to an unthrift or a common malefactor, it is pity to do the good. Here
it signifies rather an offense, a fault or an il thing, and so speking, I
think this english may come of pio, a verb, or piaculu^ taken in malam
parte^, for a crime or a sin, as we take sacer, or such other, sometime to
signify that is holy and good, and sometime that is cursed and naught. But
we have not yet the principal signification of pietas that we now speak of.
Therefore more specially to speak of piety, ye shall understand yt the
paygnims in their writings used ye same term and (as they thought) in the
same signification as we use it. Cicero.ii. officioru^. Deos placatos pietas
They were deceived by error and worshipped many Gods, yet this they thought
good to pacify, content, and please their gods by piety and holiness. Albeit
their piety, holiness and integrity or clearenesse of living in the^, were but
counterfeit and unprofitable for their soul health, and for salvation of
their souls, in as much as it lacked the foundation of faith which as I
said in the first Sermon that I made here of these seven gifts, is
presupposed necessarilye to all these seven gifts of the holy Ghost.
Lactancius firm^anus diuinarum institutionum, Li. iii. ca. ix. inueighing
against the error of the old Philosophers, which said that man's felicity
stood in the knowledge of corporal things as Anaxagoras did, which when he
was asked wherefore, or for what cause he was Solis ac celi videndi causa. I was
borne and brought into this world (says he) for to see the sun, and the
heaven or the bodies above, as meaning that in the beholding of the^ with our
bodily eyes had stand all our perfection, where he ought rather to have
confessed and magnified the power of him that made the Heaven, and in
contemplation of his majesty, that is to say, in the interior sight of our
minds, occupied about his highness, and in love corespondente, to have
constitute our felicity stedfastlye, continuynge in the same, while we be
here in this corruptible body, till at the last we Lactancius. is called
Pietas. Dei parentis agnitio* The knowledge of God our father and maker not
speaking of bare and naked knowledge of GOD as they had. Qui cum cognouissent
deum, non sicut deum glorificauerunt. Roma.i. Which when they knew GOD did
not honor him as GOD, another thanked him for his gifts, but played the
fools, falling to Idolatrye, making Gods of men, birds, and beasts.
Therefore says.s. Augustine.iiii. ciui. ca. xxiii. Pietas vera est verax very
dei cultus. And as he says.x. ci. ca. i. it is called by the Greek word
Latria, which is properly that service that pertains to the worshippyng of
God, and may be called also by an other latin word, Religio, Religion which
properly signifies the worshippyng of God, and takes his name ( secundu^
Lactanciu^ li.iiii ca. xxviii. A religando* because that by the bond of the
service and worship that we owe to God, GOD has bound manne to him to do
him service, as to our Lord and master, and to do him worship, pietas, that
is to say: the true worshippynge of GOD, or the inward habit, quality or
gift of the soul, by the holy Ghost given to man or woman, by which a man
or a woman having it, is inclined to goodness, and made well disposed, well
minded, prompte and Luke ii. when he was twelve year old and able to take some
labors, he went with his mother and with his foster father to Jerusalem.
They casting no perils, went homewarde after the solemnity of the feast,
thinking that Christ had been in the company of the neighbors that the^
went together homwarde from Jerusalem after the manner as Pilgrims, used to go
in flocks together. Thus they passed post tridium, after three days they found
him in the temple sittynge among the doctors, hearing them, and asking
questions of them. He first heard them read and teach, and then asked
questions, and opposed them. Would GOD our Bible clerks would so do now
adays, that they would first hear and learn, and afterward to oppose, for
so they should profit them selves, and them that they do oppose. Where now
when they do oppose, it is without any learned manner, and more for a vain and
care have sought you. And Christ said unto them, why sought you me? Know ye
not that piety, (that I now speak of) to be in him, and that by this gift,
he was inclined so to do, and so to occupy him self in the service of his
father, and in the worshippyng of almighty God. And after when.s. John Baptiste
was cast in prison, then came our savior Christ abroad, and preached his
holy doctrine in Galilee and other places. Luke. iiii. and in his progress he
came to Nazareth ca. lxi. Spiritus domini super me propter quod vnxit me,
eua^gelizare pauperibus misit me. etc. After he had read it, he clasped up the
book, and delivered it to the clerk or minister that had the keeping of it,
and sat down like a doctor* or a reader in his chair, or on his stole and
expounded and declared the same scripture, appliyng it to him self as the true
litterall sense of that scripture did pretend, saiynge: Hodie impleta est hec
scriptura in oculis vestris. Now this scripture is fulfilled before your eyes.
The holy Ioh. xiiii. The sermon that you have heard, is not mine, but it is
my fathers that send me. Also, Ioh. xv. In this my father is glorified, that
you may bring furthe much fruit, and may be made my scholars. He did not
attribute or give it to his own glory or praise that his disciples increased
in knowledge, and in the fruit of good works coming of the same, but to the
glory and praise of his father. Likewise that his disciples and we by them be
Christ's disciples, he wills us to give lauds and Ego non quero gloriam meam
est qui querat and iudicet. Ioh. viii. which is the very exercise and practice
of this sixth gift of the holy ghost called in latin pietas in english the
worshipping of God, or the gift of grace by which we be prompte and ready,
and glad to worship God. And when we be so disposed, taking example at our
Savior Christ, coming to his holy Temple or church dedicate to Gods
honor, where his holy word is read and song, pietas, and is as saint Ambrose.
i offi. xxvii. says, the first and principal part of our justice, and the
beginnynge of wisdom, to know of whom we have our wit and al other goodness and
to do him service according to his benefit. Albeit if we should extend and
enlarge the name of pietas, of reverend worship, we shall find that we owe
service or reverend worship to our country, and also to our parents that
brought pietas, seems now to have.iii. significations, to which he agrees,
secundum analogiam quandam, as the Logition speaks. After a certain order
likewise, as there is an order betwixt the things signified, we owe a
reverend service and worship to almighty GOD, as to our maker, mainteyner,
and redemer, as I have said. We owe also a reverend service and worship to
our country. We also owe a reverend honor and worship to our fathers and
mothers, and to the^ that be to us next of kindred. But we be not so bound to
serve our country as we be to serve God, nor so straightly bound to our
pare^tes and kindred as to To. viii. Second, we be more bound to our country
then to our parents or kynred, in so much that if there would any foreine
Potentate, or alien power, attempt to invade the Realm where thou art
inhabitant, and of the nation, yea: though thine own father, uncle, brother,
and all thy kindred that thou have were on that party, so irrupting into thy
country, thou ought to forsake the^ al, and to fight against the^ al for the
defense and sauegard of thy country, yea and (that goes nere to the then so)
to forsake thy self and thine own life and health, and to put thy self in
ieopardy for in Catalago sanctorum, in the roll and number of saints did so
likewise. Codrus king of Athens in a battle against the Peloponensis,
perceived by an answer that the devil had made speakinge in an ydole to the
said Peloponensis, that they should have the victory, if they killed not the
captain of the contrary part: Wherefore the whole host was commanded to
save Codrus the king of the Athenensis in any case. This was not so
secretelye done, but it came to Codrus ear, which for the piety and love that
he had to his country, disgised him self like a poor labourer with his since
on his back, and so came among the host of his enemies, and what with shrowde
words and misbehauiour, and with his sith he displeased Act. ii. Et parts
Libie que est circa Cyrenem,) it lies eastward from Carthage, now I trow
called Tuneis toward Egypt, both in Affricke. In a contrauersie (I say)
betwixt those two parties for the meyres or bounds of their territoryes and
dominions, Phileni called, but so it was that these brothers were come a great
way further then the other party thought they should. And so the Cyrenensis
pretended some fraud to be in the setting forth of these me^. But they for
their countries sake, and for the auoydaunce of further trouble of the same,
for to assure the contrary party that the thing was done without collusion
Genesis xiiii. That ye holy patriarch Abraham, being but a stranger in the land
of Canaan, Loath his brothers son, he assembled together all his retinue,
Expeditos vernaculos trecentos dece^ and octo, and followed the chase, and
ouertoke these kings, and beset the^ about in the night season, and slew them,
and recovered all their pray, and brought home again Loath with all his
substance, He might have sit still at home, if the love that he had to his
country in which he was the^ sustained for the time, as Deniso^, had not
pricked him forward, Iud. xi, It is red of Iepthe which i^ deed his brothers
had banished out of his country, yet afterward it chanced that Galaad. where
this Iepthe was born. The people of Israel were sore discoraged and their
enmies so enhau^ced yt the la^d was almost destroyed, then came messagers to
this Iepthe where he was in his exile, de^iri^g his aid and succor. He
vmbraided the^ of their unkindness, saying: Be not you they that hate me and
driued me out of my fathers family? and now ye be compelled by very need to
come to me for help. Notwtstanding he was moved with that natural and loving
reverence yt he had to his country, and said to ye messagers yt if they would
make hi^ their captain he would put him self in ieopardie for them, and.i.
Reg. xxiii. When he was driven out of his country by the furye and madness of
king Saul, he heard that the Philisties invaded and destroyed Ceila, a
certain town in the dominion of Saul, and prepared him self to battle
against them, all his friends and kinsfolk that were then with him entreatynge
him to the contrary. Where Pietas erga patriam, the love that he had to his
country wrought more in him then all the carnal love to his friends and
kinsfolks, and also then the unkindness of Saul that had driven him out of
his country, where he for ill repaid good again, he fought with the
Philisties, he took all their cattle and provision for vittailes. Percussit
eos plaga magna, and saluauit habitatores Ceile. He if any malefactors,
sedicious, and rebellious tanquam Apin Egiptiorum deum, prayed to almighty God
for mercy and pardon for their offense, saiynge: Aut dimitte eis hanc noxam,
aut si non facis dele me de libro tuo que^ scripsisti. Exo. xxxij. A vehement
piety and love that he had to his country men, that he prayed, Roma. ix.
Optabam ego anathema esse a christo pro fratribus meis qui su^t cognati mei
secundum carnem qui sunt Israelite. I have desired and wished to be separate
and divided from Christ for the love that I have to my brethren, that be my
carnal kinsmen the Israelites. How Origene. Not by preuarication or
transgressynge of Christ's laws or commandments. He would do no sin for
their sakes. For that could not healpe them, that could do them no good. Also
there was no vyolence or force that could pull him from Christ, as he says him
self. But like as Christ being by reason of his Godheade, in the form and
nature of GOD, yet he did so humiliate him self, hidynge his Godly power,
that he become manne, and suffered death for our redemption, and so seemed for
the time to forsake the father, and was made as a thing accursed, to take
away our malediction. Gala. iii. Christus And so saint Paul by example of
our master Christ wished to have done that thing in which he might seem to
be separate from Christ by devotion, and not by preuarication or sin, so
that he might save his country men, and so he did, when he was of all sorts
to all men, that he might win all manner of men to Christ. Sometimes
using the Ceremonies of the Jews to allure them, in which the Gentyles
thought he did naught, and so to be divided from Christ. And among the
Gentylles he used such meat as they did, and kept company with them to win them to Christ, where the Jews that were converted to Christ, thought
he did naught, and so they took him as divided pietas in parents, the
worshipful love and honor that we owe to our fathers and mothers, nature
teaches us and the commandments of God, as an exposition or declaration of
the law of nature teaches us the same. This honor consists not only in cap
and knee, for ^hi parents might sterue for defaut, for all thy curtesy: but it
stands i^ ministratio^ of necessary help and comfort in their need. But this
kind of piety or love due to our parents does Etiam in operibus superero
gatio^is, in things yt we be not bound to do, but take them of devotion,
which be now ralled will works, As saint Hierome declares in diverse places,
and specially in his first pistle Ad heliodorum, exhortinge him to solitarye
life, and religion, to leave the young babies his nephews, collinge him and
hanginge on his neck, to leave his mother, though she would with weeping eyes
show him the breasts that gave him suck in his childehode, though his father
would lie prostrate overthwart the door to stop him the way, he should not
stick for all such, for Solum pietatis genus est in hac re esse crudele^. It
is a kind of reverend honor of God by it self in this thing to be cruel. He
says likewise, ad rusticu^ Monachum, in like case. Crudelitas ista pietas
est. ad Marcella^, de egrotatio^e blesille, He bri^geth in examples of the
gospel. John and James left their father Zebede in the boat patchyng his
nets and followed Christ. Mathewe ye customer left his countynge board whereby
he was wont to get his living, and his wives living, and his childrens, and
followed Christ. An other, Luke.ix. was bid follow Christ, Christ so bade
him, he answered, Sir I pray you let me first go home and burye my father.
Christ bade him, let other men alone with buriynge the dead. Come thou with
me, and learn to preach the word of GOD. Tu autem vade, and annuncia regnum
dei. Another said he would follow Christ, but he would first bestow his riches
that he had at home upon Pie^atis genus est impiu^ esse pro domino. It is a
kind or one manner of Gods worship, impium esse, to be cruel, sore or
vnlouinge for Christ's sake, as he meaned, perswadinge to religion or solitarye
life. Of the same in an epistle Ad fabiola^ de vestitu sacerdotu^, upon these
words, Superpatre suo, et matre sua no^ inquinabitur, S. Hierome says. Multa
no^ facere cogit affectus, and du^ propinquitate^ respicimus corporu^, and
corporis, and anime offendimus creatore^. Qui amat patrem aut matrem super
Christum non est Christo dignus, discipulus ad sepulturam patris ire desiderans
saluatoris prohibetur imperio. Quanti monachorum dum patris matrisque
miserentur suas But masters, if in Saint Hieroms time religion had been like
to religions as they be now a days, trow ye that Saint Hierome would so
earnestly have exhorted men to them, no, no, our religiouse men they be but
parietes dealbati, very counterfect appearing, and not being religious, no
more like the religion in Saint Hieromes time, then an apple like an oyster, as
is plain by his writings, and by the Ecclesiastical stories of Eusebius, and
the Tripartite story, and such other. Yet one word more de pietate. Another
way it is taken for benignity mercy and pity or compassion on our indigent
poor, and nedy neighbors, and thus taking it, we.i. Tim. ii. takes it, when
he teaches good and honest women how they should array and trim them self
without golden rich and costly abilimentes, fruntlets, or bracelettes, without
pearls or precious stones, not platting or setting abroad their locks, like
stales or baits to take the devil withal, but rather in their apparel to
use a certain bashfulnes and sobernes, not like commen women that studieth how
gloriously and disgysedly they may make a show, and set forth their flesh to
sale and to be uttered, but rather as good women should array them self, vt
decet mulieres promittentes pietatem per opera bona, as besemeth women
promising or shewinge pity by good works. Therefore in the same epistle he
exhorts Timothe to the same, Exerce teipsum ad pietatem. Exercise thy self to
pity, to do men good. For that is profitable for all things, and has promise
of the life that is now present, and of the life to come. That mercy and pity
is rewarded in this world, it is said. Proverb.iii. Da pauperibus and
implebuntur horrea tua saturitate and vino torcularia redundabunt. Give unto
the pore people, and thy barnes and store houses, or ware houses shall be made
full, and thy wine presses shall ouerflowe with wine. And.ii. Corin. ix. it is
said, Qui administrat semen seminanti, et pauem ad manducandum prestabit and
multiplicabit semen vestrum, and angebit incrementa frugum iustitie vestre, vt
in omnibus locupletati habundetis in omnem simplicitatem. He that sends Math.
xxv. when the son of man shall come in his majesty and all his angels with
him, then he shall sit on the seat of his majesty, and all nations shall be
gathered before him, and he shall divide them aparte, even as the shepehearde
parts the sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep on his right
hand, and the rank and stinckinge goats on the lift hand. And then that
king will say to them that be upon his right hand, O ye children of my
father, come take possession of the and so forth of other works of mercy, for
which he will give to the merciful man or woman life everlasting.

And here (because we speak of the works of piety, or pity) very pity
moves me to exhort you to mercy and pity on the poor students in the
universities Oxforde and Cambridge, which were never fewer in number, and yet
they that be left, be ready to run abroad into the world and to leave their
study for very need. Iniquity Math. x. Qui recipit propheta^ in noie prophet
mercede^ prophet accipiet. He yt receueth, cherishes, or maintains a
prophet in ye name of a prophet, or as a prophet, he shall receive the reward
of a prophet. All true preachers be prophets, therefore he that cherishes and
maynteyneth a preacher, because he is a preacher, more then for any other
carnal occasion, shall have the reward of a preacher, which is a wondrous
reward. Dan. xij Qui ad iustitiam erudiunt multos fulgebunt quasi stelle in
perpetuas eternitates. They that instructs and teaches many to justice and
virtue, shall comfort that you receive by this my labor. S he or she that
brings up any students to any Piety, which after the mind mercy. And
that the holy gooste by this his gift rested upon our Savior Christ, it is
plain by the cures that he did on them that were sick of diseases incurable,
and also by feeding the hungry sometimes five thousand at once. And also it
appears that he used to give alms to the poor, and had purses for the same
intent, which Judas had the keeping of, in so much that when Christ said unto
him: Quod facis, fac citius. That thou do do it spedely: some of the Apostles
thought that Christ had bid him prepare for the feast coming, or else egenis vt
aliquid daret. John.xii. that he should give some thing to the poor people,
on which Christ was wont to have mercy and pity and to bestow somewhat upon
them. And thus

The sixth sermon entreating of the fear of God.
THe seventh gift of the holy ghost is ye gift of the fear of God, which
rested in our Savior Christ, as well as the other.vi. that I have spoken of.
There be in the appetite or will of man.iiii. affections, or perturbations, or
passions that moves and draws the will of man hither and thither, and rather
to ill then to good cupidite or desire to have, and joy or gladness for the
having of the thing that thou have desired. The other.ii. be fear of hurt
or displeasure, and sorrow for the thing that thou were afraid Stoici, whose
auctors were Zeno, Chrisippus, Epictetus, and certain other, and they put the
hieste felicite, perfection, and goodness of man to be, to live according to
virtue and to natural reason. So that they put nothing good in man but virtue,
which they call the very craft and way to live well, other things (they said)
were commoda, profitable for man as life, health, and strength, but none clearly
good save only Justice or virtue. And because they saw these.iiii. affections
or passions sore trouble ma^s reason, and bring a man to many enormities, they
said that they came of the corruption of the body and were very naught, and
should be clean reiecte and cast away, and never perceived or seen in any Nam
perfectus Stoicus nihil mali patitur. A perfect Stoike suffers no il or harm,
how so ever the world go, therefore they were called stupidi Stoici, styffe or
stubborn Stoikes. Platonici and also Peripatherici of Aristotle's scole, for
Aristotle was scoler to Plato they were al of one opinion, and thought likewise
that al these.iiii. affections were very naught, but yet they would not have
them clean extinct and destroyed, because they be natural to man: as it is
natural for a heart to be fearful, and to an addre to be venomous, to a spaniel
to be gentle and familiar, so it is natural for man to desire, and to be glad
vberras queda^ animoru^, a certain batilnes or frutfulnes of ye soul which
should not be destroyed, but rather well husba^ded and bated, as if a ground or a
garden be to rank, it is not best clean to destroy yt ra^knes, but rather to
bate it with sand or grauel, or such like, or else the herbs, the graffes and
trees that be there set, will ca^ker and be naught. So it is of these iiii.
affections after these Philosophers that they must not be clean destroyed, but
moderate and kept subject to reason, and measured yt they ru^ne not to fast at
large, nor pass their bo^des, and that they pervert not the judgment of
reason, but be ruled by reason. But surely here is not al, for they be not
utterly vituperable and vicious: for if they were very naught, the^ no
measuring could make the^ good. Pride can not be good, though ye keep him as
S. Augustine, ix. de ciui. dei. Cap. iiii. as to combind and agree these two
opinions, declares that they agree in substance, and varieth but only in
words. For declaration of which he rehearses a propre story of Aulus
Gellius.li. xix. noctium atticarum. It chanced this Aulus Gellius to be on the
sea in a perilouse storm, and very rough seas, so that their ship seemed to
be in extreme peril of drowninge. In the same ship there was a fatherly
ancient Philosopher, and of the sect of the Stoikes, which saying the rage of
the storm and how the sees were ever still ready to swalow them up, begone to
wax pale as ashes for fear. Galaciam otherwise called Gallogrecia, which now
we call Galathians, and other countries adjoining, Rome was never good, but
gave them selves to ease and pleasure, by which their manlines and hardness in
war decayed gretlye, and was turned into childishnes and we^chlines. This I
tell you because of Aulus Gellius word luxuriosus asiaticus. To my purpose,
many of the^ that were in the foresaid ship (although they were then at
deaths door) took heed and watched very curiouselye, whether the said
philosopher were any thing troubled in mind or no, then at the last when the
storm was past and when they were safe and had leisure to talk and giest, the
voluptuous man of Asia aforesaid spoke to the said Philosopher mocking him
because he was afraid and pale as death, seeing that he himself (said he) was
without fear, nothing regarding that peril. The philosopher answered as one
Aristippus answered to a like question demanded of him by a like person saying,
that he did well inoughe, nothing to care nor to be afraid Aulus Gellius then
asked of this Philosopher, not entendynge to anger him or displease him, but
for his learning, what was the reason of his fear? The Philosopher because he
would teach him, that was so earnestlye and wiselye minded to learn, drue
forth out of his fardell a book of Epictetus a Philosopher of the sect of the
said Stoikes. In the same book Aulus Gellius says, he red that the said
Stoikes mind was that the things that man's mind sees, which they call
fantasies that be not in man's power Epictetus writes, there is either no
dyfference, or almost no dyfference betwixt the opinion of the said Stoikes,
and of other Philosophers about these passions, or perturbations of men's mind,
for both sects defends the mind and reason of a wise man from the dominion
and rule of them, and therefore paraduenture they say that they fall not into
the mind of a wise Stoike philosopher because they do not cloud and darken
the wisdom of him, But when he said Concupiuit anima mea desiderare: My soul
has coue^ed and desired vehemently to desire to know thy laws, this is a good
affection, a good mocio^ of ye mind. And likewise of mirth or gladness when men
be glad in our Lord, and reioyseth in the things that pleases him, this
gladness is good and gracious, where as if one be merye and glad when he has
done naught, and rejoice in things that be very ill, this gladness is damnable.
And even like it is of the third affection or passion which is fear, of
which my principal purpose is now to speak. Bestow him well, and he shall be
good and laudable, where as if it be otherwise bestowed, naught he will be as
other affections be. How necessary and good fear is, the wyseman Prouer.
xxviii. shows Beatus homo qui semper est pauidus, qui vero me^tis est durae
corruet in malum. Blessed is the man that is ever afraid, specially of Gods
displeasure, and consequentlye of all other offenses and excesses. For he that
is so hard and stiff hearted, that he nothing fears, shall be sure to fall to
mischief of sins and of pains for the same. And Ecclesiasticus cap. i.
Timor domini expellit peccatu^, and qui sine timore est non poterit
iustificari. Fear of God month a man to penance, and so puts a way
sins past and already committed, and it stops a man from doing a mysse. Et
qui sine timore est, non poterit iustificari: He that lacks fear can not be
justified, can not be made a good manne acceptable to God, for he that will be
justified must be subject to God that shall justify him as to his superior
Iracundia animositatis subuersio illius est. The anger of pride and presumption
is a man's own destruction. Cain had great knowledge of God, and by that he
knew his duty was to honor God with the increase of the fruits that God had
sent him, and had sometime familiar communicacio^ with God. As when God bad him
beware of the rage and passion that he was in against his brother Abell, seeing
his brothers oblacions accepted, and his own rejected, but iracundia
animositatis illius the passion and rage of his boldness contrary to fear, made
him to kill his brother Abell to his own subversion and destruction, he got
Gods curse for his labor. Gene. iiii. God said to him: thou shalt be non
continebit in ira sua misericordias suas, in his punyshing he will use mercy
with correction. He said Non permanebit spiritus meus in homine ineternum, quia
caro est. Genesis. vi. My indignation and displeasure shall not abide for ever
in manne quia caro est, because he is flesh, that is to say frail and weak
by the infirmity of the flesh, which was not in the devil, he had none such
nourishynge of sin as is in our flesh, he sinned by his own wylfulnes only,
without any intisement or temptacion, and therefore his sin is irremissyble,
his pains shall be perpetual, they shall never have end. But because man was
tempted by the concupiscence of the eye and of the flesh, which will not be
overcome without great conflict and battle, therefore GOD gave unto man a
hundred and twentye years of repentance, from the first warning given to Noe
to make his ship unto the time that the water came in deed. In the which
time many a one mended their Genesis.xi. rejected the fear of GOD, and
contemptuousely builded a City and a tower of brick, for the stones, and
such pytche for the mortar that would abide all weathers, they purposed to
make their Tower so hie that it should reach up to the sky, because they
would get them a gaye name, and a parpetuall memory.

together, and change their places together. But Nemroth, brought us to this
calamity and wretchedness. If I would run through the holy scriptures,
declaryng what mischief has fallen to men, for lack of the fear of GOD, I
should sooner lack time than matter. And yet (good and worshipful audience)
let us consider the manner of our neighbors here in this city. And I fear me
we them selves in the fear and awe of God, another Qui timet deum faciet bona.
He that fears God will do good deeds, and will eschew the contraries, and his
thrifte shall come accordinglye, for example hereof, I read a narration of two
crafts men. But yet because (I hear) that some young men be dangerous and
will peradventure contemn or despise such narrations as well as some other
things which they can not aamende, somewhat to comfort them that would
hear examples for their learning, you shall note what the Apostle says.
Ephe. iiii. Omnis sermo malus ex ore vestro non procedat sed si quis bonus ad
edificationem fidei vt det gratiam Let no ill speech or talkinge pass out of
your mouth, but if you have any good talking to edify and healpe our fayeth
that it may give a grace to the audience. Saint Ambrose expoundinge the same
words says. Bonae enim and sobriae fabulae dant gratum exemplum audientibus.
Good and sober tales gives pleasant examples to the hearers. Sober tales (he
says) such as be neither wild another wanton. But such as a man may take
good and pleasant examples of, as Esopes fables and such other. Quid est enim
aliud scira fabula quam amena veritatis inuolucio ad hominum vsum atque
oblectationem comparata? A feet or proper tale is no more but a merry wrappyng
in or coueryng of some truth have learned to love GOD, hear I have learned to
fear God. Hear I have learned to serve Psalm. xxxiii. Non est inopia
timentibus eum. They that fear God have no poverty, for either they be rich*
or at the least wise be very well pleased wy^^ that little that they have,
which passes all go^d, and precious stoones, Est autem questus magnus pietas
cum sufficientia. i Timo. vi. i. est Anim^ sua sort contento. Piety or mercy
with a heart content with that a man has, is a great gaynes and winnynge.
Et psalm* Beatus vir quitimet dominum in mandatis eius volet nimis* Gloria
Blessed is the manne that fears God, his will shall be very much in his
commaundmentes. Royalty, wealth, and riches shall be in his house. Dispersit
dedit pauperibus. He shall be able to distribute and give to the poor people,
where he that lacks such fear of GGD shall be ready to beg and borowe of
his neighbors. Saint Ambrose. Li. ii. devocatione gentium. ca. ix. shows
that the grace of God by the means of fear prepares and makes ready the
will of man to receive the gifts of God, making our wills to consent to
the inclinacion of grace, mouinge us to goodness, for there is no virtue in
him that will not consent to take virtue. There must be a consent of the
will, or else virtue will not be there, no more then thou canste make a horse
to drink of the water if his appetite be not to drink. This Peccaui etiam
nunc Dominus iustus est, ego and populus meus impij. Exodus ix. I have offended
and done naught now again, Our LORD is righteous, I and my people be
wicked. Fear whers as for lack of fear of GOD, they little Inicium
sapientiae ^imor domini. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, what
virtue can make a man so blessed as this fear, for it is the begynner and
getter of Godly wisdom, and also the master or teacher of Godly wisdom.
And even like as by such fear, the soul of man obteyneth wisdom so by the
same it proceadeth and profits more and more in wisdom, so that it does
conserve and keep wisdom, and concurreth with wisdom so necessarily, that
if fear of GOD once go away Godly wisdom will not tarry, Damascen.
orthodoxe fidei. Libro. ii ca. xv. deuideth fear into six members. In
cunctationem, verecundiam, erubesce^tiam, stuporem, terrorem, and agonia^.
which should be to long particularlye to declare, but this I shall advertise
you that every one of them may be mundane, seruyle, or filial. Mundane or
worldelye fear, which is called humane fear, or man's fear, that commonly
troubles the mind of worldly men, comes of worldelye love, and of carnal
love. For all fear presupposes a love to the thing that he fears to lack
or to lose, if a man loved it not, he would not fear to lack it, or loose it.
August. lxxxiii. questi. Now because that worldly Si dimittimus eum sic. etc.
If we let him escape thus, then all the people will believe upon him, and then
the Romans will come and take our place, and our people into captivity. And
Adam our first father, for over much love that he had to his new wife, and
for fear of discomfortynge her if he should not have eaten with her of the
said forbidden fruit, brought us all to the calamity, miserye, and
wretchedness that we be in. And how many have we heard of, that for fear least
they should lose promotion, favor, or frendshippe that they have looked for,
has fallen to preach and teach pernicious heresies, and many others to
speak against reason, and to talk that with their mouth that they have not
thought with their hearts. This carnal and worldly fear, if it be Marc.
xiiii. he begone to be afraid of the death that he should to, and to be weary
of the trouble that the Jews put him to, and that he knew they would put him
to more greuouslye afterward, and this fear vexed him so sore, that for very
agony and pain, his sweet of his body was like blood trikeling down to the
ground. A merueilous parturbation of mind that he was in for that space, but
it did not long continue. And therefore the Evangelist Mark said: Cepit
pauere and tedere, He begone to be afraid and to be werye. It begone with him,
but it did not continue, for anon reason checked this sensuality, and ruled
it, directing all his will to the timor initialis, and it is the mean and next
way to the filial fear, the chaste and holy fear that begins here, and
shall remain and continue in heaven for evermore, as the prophet says. Timor
domini sanctus permanet in seculum seculi. Psalm. xviii. The holy fear of God
abides for evermore, it comes of charity which never fails. The
foresaid seruyle fear of Gods justice and of his punishment of sinners,
prepares a way to the filial and charitable fear, but when charity and
louinge fear is once gotten, the former fear of punishment vanysheth and
goes away, for the more that the love is, the less is the fear of
punishment. The good that a man does for love, has no spyce of the bondage i.
Ioh. iiii. Timor non est in charitate sed perfecta charitas for as mittit
timorem, quoniam timor penam habe^, qui autem timet non est perfectus in
charitate. In charity there is no fear, but perfyt charity dryueth out
fear, for fear has pain annexte, and he that fears is not perfyt in
charity. Now these words of S. John seems contrary to the words of the
Prophet, Timor domini sanctus. etc. The holy fear of God abides for ever.
To this I answer first bringing in this example, that like as one blaste of
wind of the belowes blows and fylleth two organ pipes or moo, so may one
breath or inspiration of the holy spyryte fyl two hearts, and stir two
tongues, Sanctus or castus, he calls it holy fear or chaste fear, the
Evangelist Saint John does not add these words, therefore let us put
difference betwixt two fears, and so shall we understand the consonaunce and
concord of these two organ pipes, the holy Prophet, and the blessed
Euangeliste. There be men that fears hell pains, least they burn there with
the devils, this fear brings in charity, but when he has brought in
charity, this fear auoydeth and charity remains. If a man fear only for
punishment, then a man loves not him that he such fear of pain and
punishment. But because my sermon is not only to married men, and to married
desponsaui vos vni viro virginem castam exhibere Christo. I have married you to
one man, that ye keep your self as a chaste virgin unto Christ, the
beutifullest spouse that ever was. Speciosus forma pre filijs hominum. The
great love and charity that he had to us, dyenge for us being his enemies, is
a very great cause why we should love him again. Then let all us, and every
one of us as his spouse and wife, examine our self and our consciences,
whether we be chaste wives will thou have thy husband to come to the as yet or
no, but that he shall yet longer tarry? Now I have knocked at the doors of your
hearts, but what the conscience of every one of you says inwardly to your
self I can not hear, it comes not to mine ears, I am a mortal man and know
not the secrets of your heart, but he y^ is absent bodily, and present by the
strength of his majesty, has heard you what you think. If a man would say unto
you, lo Christ is here now, tomorow shall be the day of judgment: you wuld not
say (I fear me) wuld god Christ were come, would God to morrow were the day
of dome. For they that so would say loves God vehemently, and if it were said
unto the^, he will yet tarry le^ger, they would be afraid least he would tarry
away Cupio dissolui and esse cum Christo. I would feign have my soul losed
from my body and to be with Christ. Yet again I ask you another question* If
God him self would come and speak unto you in his own voice (although he
cease not to speak unto us by his holy scripture) and would say unto a
man, will thou sin? then sin. Do what soever thing deliteth the or please
the: what soever thing thou love on earth let it be thine own: whosoever
thou art angry with all let him die: whosoever thou wylt beat, let him be
beaten: whosoever thou will judge let him be judged, whosoever thou wylt
condemn, let him be condemned, weep and wayle, and would say, I had lever
O Lord God of powers, convert us and show thy face, and we shall be safe.
One thing I have asked of our Lord, and that I shall require: that I may
dwell in the house of our Lord, that I may see the will of our God, and
visit his holy temple. Now good friends, if every one of us will examine our
own Consciences after this manner as I have now spoken, how many of us shall
we find that has this chaste fear, this loving fear of the chaste wife,
the holy fear that continues for evermore? I pray God there.i. Corin. xii.
Not decked nor garnished with charity, which is the fashion and beautye of
all other gifts of grace. And the said seruyle fear is the very way to
bring in cha^itie, like as when a man sows in cloothe the nedle goes before
and makes the way for the threde to come after, not because Initium
sapienciae timor domini. Timor inicialis, and this is the next mean to the
chaste fear or holy fear that remains for evermore. But now finallye to
speak of the seventh gift of the holy Ghost, which as the Prophet Esaias
says, rested on our savior Christ. It is not mundane, humane, nor carnal
fear, another the servile fear, or the bondmannes fear. His good and gracious
works that he did on earth, he did not for fear of the pains of Hell, or
for fear of any other punishments. It was the holy fear that remains
Honorifico patrem. etc. Thus he did lowlye and reverently magnify his father,
by reason of his manhood by which he was inferior and lower, and subject to
his father. And in his manhood he had these seven gifts of the holy Gooste,
resting on him as Esai said, and as I have declared in times paste. And this
gift of dread or fear of GOD after scolasticall doctors, is Humility,
which was most excellently in our savior Christ Phili. ii. Humiliauit
semetipsu^ dominus noster Jesus Christus. etc. Our Lord Jesus Christ did
humiliate him self, keeping obedience even to his death on the cross, for
which God the father exalted him, and gave him a name above al names,

An homily or sermon of the articles of our christian faith.
Faith (as saint Paul says to Hebre. xi. We must not diffarre nor refuse to
believe so long, till we can declare or prove by reason the articles or
points that we be bound to believe, for if we would be so dangerous it
might chance that by the difficilitye of the scriptures, and of the things
that we should believe we might be withdrawn and kept back from the merit and
reward of our faith for ever. He that would so differ to believe, should be
like a man almost dead for honger, which having bread and meat offered
him, would not open his mouth to eat thereof, till he knew who made the
bread, and dressed the meat, and how and with what instruments or tools it
was made and dressed. He were be to the end of the same, but by his belief on
Gods reward, provided for his faithful people, by the merit of our savior
Christ, as by the mediatoure and mean to come thereto. The holy men and
women that were before Christ's incarnation by the space of five thousand i.
Pet. iii. To declare I say but not to prove by reason the verity of them.
They must also be able to replye and convince them that frowardely would
repugne and countersaye any article of our faith. They have ever been
impugned and persecuted by heritykes, wilfully and grosselye, leaning to their
carnal imaginations. And yet God of his goodness turns all to the best
against their expectation. It is very profitable and necessary that our
faith should be set to work, for as saint Ambrose says. Fides
inexcercitata cito languescit, and crebris ociosa tentatur incommodis. super.
illud. psalm, cxviii. Iniqui* persecuti su^t me adiuua me. Our faith when it is
unexercised, anon waxes sick Remissas excubias callidus insidiator irrumpit.
As we see that he that wililye and craftelye lies in wait will sone break in
to an Hold or Fortress, where the watches be slack and sleapye, even so
when our faith the watch of our Soul, lay idle and was not exercised and
tempted by contrary heresies, spying how to break into the fortress of our
souls, it was easy to sow the seeds of errors in our souls, to destroy our
faith and our souls. Fortye or fifty years before this present year of
Christ.M.D.xlvi. the common faith of the church was at rest and in manner idle
without trouble. And by that, when the pax fidei corruptele materia est.
Ambrosius. The peace and rest of faith is the matter and cause of corruption of
faith. Men's wits were unexercised and not cu^bred with such news, and could
not forthwith by learning spy the falsitie of them, therefore they were taken
for truths of all carnal and wilful people, and so believed to the utter
confusion of many a one. The true rule of our belief is the whole book of
holy scripture, but because it is to much for every parson to learn all
that, and to bear it way, therefore the holy ghost has otherwise instruct
his holy church to gather the most necessary things for Christen people to
believe into.xii. articles, according to the number of the.xii. Apostles, which
as the holy fathers writes,

THe first article saint Peter laid to this collation and shot or
gatheringe, and it is this: I believe in God the father almighty, maker of
heaven and earth. In which article ye must note the order of the words. First
it is said I believe to declare that it is no point of our charge to discuss
and reason the high judgment and secrets of God, nor to require and ask
these busye questions, when, how, or why, but plainelye is the good and parfit
faith, adorned and decked Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Sun, Moon, or any element,
must needs be false. And the heresy of Maniche making two first causes, or
two Gods, one of The father almightye, in which is expressed the first parson
in trinity, the original fou^tain of the whole trinity, by whose fruitful
memory the second parson in Godhed the son of God is gotten, ask not the
manner how, for the angels cannot tell. The Prophets were ignorant thereof: Esaias
says: his generation who can declare? as who should say no creature. We must
believe it, and reason no farther in it. Not that the father is elder then the
son, neither of greater power, but that like as the fire is not without
heat, neither the sun in the fyrmament without brightness: so was the father
never without the son, neither had any power to do any thing but yt the son
had ye same power to do the same like him, and so has the holy ghost Maker of
heaven and earth, maker by creation, that is to say, without any matter or
stuff to make it of. That a man makes, he makes of somewhat, or of some
stuff, therefore he can be no creator: but almighty god made heaven and
Heaven, there be two opinions, for which ye shall first understand that heaven
is called one manner of wise: the empiriall heaven above the starrye sky, and
above all the orbs that moves there, in which is neither place nor vacuitie,
neither time, but only things leading a most blessed life. This far
Aristotle dreamed and discussed primo de celo and mundo, and it agrees with
holy scriptures, and with holy doctors, there putting the felicitye of Angels
and men that shall be saved in the fruition, that is to say in the clear sight
and love of Thy kingdom is the kingdom of all worlds, as who should say,
whatsoever number of years can be thought or spoken of, this kingdom passes
it, for this king almighty God was never without a kingdom, by which it seems
to be eternal and everlasting, for it is the very clerenes of God, coeternal
with him, and not created with other visible creatures, and to this were
admitted and received the holy angels after their creation, for so long space
and such durance as God knows best, before that he made heaven and earth that
Moses spoke of. And of this mind is Saint Basile as appears in the first
homilye of his exameron. Heaven is taken an other way, for the bodies above,
as Sun, Moon, Sterres, Heaven when he says that in the beginning God made
heaven and earth. And by the Earth there is to be understand the water and
earth together, which as then were not dysseuered and divided till the third
day when the earth first appeared dry. The second opinion which is more
common takes this word Heaven for the empiriall heaven replenished and
fulfilled with the glorious company of Angels, which was made together with
the earth, understanding by the Earth the first vnfacioned matter or
stuff, of which almighty God made, disposed, and garnyshed al other kinds of
creatures that may be seen, or feled as well in the firmament above, as under
it, to his own glory and to do service unto man. Therefore we have great need
to take heed that using Gods creatures for our profit or pleasure, we in no
case dyshonoure God, using the^ contrary to his honor, and contrary to his
pleasure and intent that he made them for

THe second article saint John Evangelist laid to this shot or gathering,
which is this: And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, ever repeting
this word, And I believe, so that this is the sentence: And I believe on Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. The second Jesus is as much to sai as a
savior, the^ this name was his for ever, it is ye name that ye father gave him
by productio^ in his godhed and was newly diuulged and published by the angel
to our blessed Lady his mother, and afterward to his foster father Joseph with
ye interpretacion of yt name saying: Ipse eni saluu^ faci. po. s. a pec. eoru^
For he shall save the people from their sins, Jesus and Christ signifies one
person that was borne of the virgin Mary, yet there is some difference
betwixt the names. Jesus is his proper name, as we say Henry, Thomas, Roger,
or such like. Christ is the name of a sacrament as saint Austine speaks, or
of an office super epist. Io. tract. iii. as we say a king, a prophet, a
priest. Christ is as much to say as anointed, and he was anointed before all
other men, by the chiefest ointment which is the holy ghost, one God with him
and with his father, of which ointment the anointyng with oil is the sacrament
and sign. It follows, his only son Pet. i. Christ took of God the father
honor and glory by a voice coming down to him from the great doing glory
after this manner: this is my well-beloved son in whom I have pleasure, give
ear unto him. And Christ in many places of the gospels calls God his
father, and him him self the son of God, he is true and very Not two Gods
but one God, and one light, and of one substance with the father. By whom as
by his wisdom and craft the father made all creatures, as saint John says:
al things were made by him, he is our Lord, which ye must here understand by
his humanity and manhod, for by reason of the Godhed we may sai so of the
father and of the holy ghost, although it be not so expressed in the Apostles
Creed. For God is our Lord, and so we should call him by reason of his
universal dominion over al mankind, and over al other creatures. The Lord
imports a vage dominion and uncertain power, but there is no power, dominion
or authority so certain as the power that the Lord. And moreover we use to
say the Lord, speaking of such Lords as have nothing to do with us, as the
lord of Dale, the lord of Kilmayn and such like, whereas if we were their
tenauntes, or otherwise held of the^ we would say my lord of Dale, or our Lord
of Dale, and so of others. Wherefore professing our due subjection to almightye
God, we should in common speech call him our Lord, not dimissing our selves
from our allegeaunce to his highness. And I have known very honest me^ that in
co^municatio^ long before the new translations the Lord, no more intending or
meaning to swear by God, then by any Lord in the isles of Orchadie, so
thynking to swear by, they could not tell what, or by nothing, albeit lest
they should offend them that be addict to the new gise: I have advertised them
to leave such sayings, till men may be better informed. But to my purpose
now, because all power in heaven and earth was given to Christ, and all thing
was subject under his fete, and he in his manhood taught his Apostles and all
us by them, and in his manhood redeemed us, and in the same shall judge us,
therefore we may iustlye by that reason call him our lord and master, as it is
expressed in this article.

That was conceived by the holy ghost, and borne of the virgin Marie, the
authoure and doer of this conception was the whole trinity, the father, and
the son, and the holy ghost, for the works of the trinity outward among
creatures be vndyuided, so that what so ever one person does, the same thing
does all three persons. But in as much as this blessed incarnation of Christ
came of the mere goodness, grace, mercy, and love of God, which is appropriate
to the holy ghost, as power to the father, and wisdom to the son. Though all
these agrees to all three persons, therefore the scripture says (as very true
it is) that the holy ghost was the deer he was a worm and not a man, because he
was not conceived as other men be. In this marvelous conception the Borne of
Mary the virgin he that came to renew the nature of man cankered with sin,
chose a new manner to be borne of a maid, and not of a corrupt woman. And when
the God of majesty took his body, and was borne of a vyrgine, he was no
more polluted, nor defowled then when he made manne of the earth, as when the
Sun or fire woorketh on the claye, he amendeth and hardens that he touches
and fyleth not it self. And it is as possible, credyble, and lykelye, that he

SAint Andrewe laid his portion to this shot or gathering by these words
of the fourth article: That suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead,
and buried. This Ponce Pilate was president and ruler of the country, and
highest judge there, set in his authority by Tiberius the Emperor of Rome, to
whom the most part of the world was then subject, he Luke.iiii. where he was
brought up in youth, neither to be stoned to death, as the Jews would have
killed him, when he hid him self and went out of the temple. John.viii. And al
was for our health, and for to save us, for (as saint Austine says) we can not
ever bear with us rocks, stones, or swerds to defend us from the devil, but
the sign of the cross is soon made with a little moving of our hand to save
us from his falsehed. This is the sign by which with his mighty word is
consecrate the body of Christ, the Fount is hallowed, priests and other
degrees of the church take Roma. v. From this danger we were reconsiled to God
by the blood of his son, for he washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and so delivered us out of the devils danger which had none other
hold upon us, but by the ropes and bonds of sin. He was burled that so he
might bless the burial and gra^es his grave shall be glorious. Esaias. xi. as
in deed it was, hewed out of a new stone intended for a worshipful man that
provided it for himself, but he was very glad to bestow it on a better man.
He was wrapped in fine ^lothes and powdered with costlye spyces. The grave was
honored with the presence of Angels, visited of holy women and of the
disciples, and afterward deuoutely sought of noble Emperors, and of other
great men, and we Christen people in the remembrance of the same use a
laudable ceremony, garnishynge after the best manner that we can in our
churches every good

COnsequentlye follows the fifth article added by saint Phillip, He descended
into hell, not his body, for it remained in the sepulcher till his
resurrection, but in his soul with the Godhead, for the pryncipall parts of
Christ's mannehoode which the Godheade once took to him, he never left.

His Godhead was with the body in the grave, zacha. ix. Thou in the blood of
thy testament, have let fourth out of the lake or dongeon, in which there was no
water or refreshing, them that And the blessed Apostle saint Peter confirms
the same in his first epistle and third chapter, saying that Christ came in
spirit and preached to them that were in prison, which some time were hard of
belief when they looked for Gods patience in the days of Noe, while the ship
was a making, in which a few, that is to say eighte lives were saved by the
water. He came in spirit in his soul, for his body remained in the grave (as
I said) and preached, declaryng that the mystery of his incarnation and
passion was performed, by which hell should be spoiled, and the way to heaven
should be opened to all good men and women, whose souls were in captivity,
among Dirupisti vincula mea, Thou have broken my bonds, because thou have set
us at liberty from the bondage of sin, and descendinge into hell, have losed
from death mankind, there being captive, and holden in the inevitable
custodye of hell. So it was verified that was said in his name to sin and to
hell. Osee. xiii* O death I will be thy death, O hell I will bite the. He that
eats, occupies all that he eats, he that byteth, takes part and leaves
part: so did the soul of Christ take that part of the prisoners

Saint Thomas put the syxt article of our faith, saying: The third day he
rose again from death. For on Sunday earlye in the breaking of the day,
while it was somewhat dark, he joined his soul unto his body, and rose from
death to life, and came forth of his chest or grave, and out of the monument
or cave in the which the grave was, being fast shut, with a great stone
rouled to it for a door* and told Peter and John what she had seen the
beginning and first begotten among dead men. Col. i. The beginner and cause
of his own resurrection, which was by his own power, and also of our
resurrection,

THen follows the seventh article, which S. Barthelomew put to this
gathering, and it is this. He ascended into heaven, and sit^eth on the right
hand of GOD the father almighty. That is to say, the condition of our nature
which he took of the virgin his mother, he took up with him, and set it on the
right hand of his father, above the sky, and above all the orders of angels,
and above al thing that is named not only in this world, but also in the world
openinge the way for us. Mich. ii. For like as he rose from death to life to
make us likewise to rise, so he ascended to make us to ascend. For which
purpose we must well know and remember, that with Christ ascends not pride,
nether couetousenes, lechery, or any other sin, he was our physician, he
cured us and made us once hole, but he took with him none of our mala^ders,
therefore if we come after him, we must leave all these and cast them of, least
they press us down, that

THe eight article saint Matthew the Apostle and Evangelist said: From thence he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead. In the same body he will come to
the judgment, in which he ascended into heaven, to judge all christen and
hethen, for all we that be, has be, and shall be, shall stand before Christ's
seat of judgment, that every man may receive the duty of.ii. Cor. v. And so
Christ said, that when he should come in his glory with his angels, then he
shall pay every one according to his deeds. These words are greatly to be
feared: for he says not, that then he will give after his mercy to every one,
but after their own deeds, here he is merciful, there he will be all
rightuous: therefore the longer that he looks for our amendment here, so
much more greuouselye he will do vengeance if we will not amend. This
judgment is greatelye to be feared, for the high wisdom of the judge, and
for the clear knowledge that he has, for all things be naked, bare and opened
to his eyes, as well the secret thoughts of mind, as open deeds, there
shall need no wytnes to accuse the sinners, for their Roma, ii. His first
coming to take our nature upon him, was in infyrmitie, weakness, and
poverty, but his second coming, that shall be to this merueilous
judgment, shall be in mighty power and majesty. His power is almightye in
it self, and beside that, all the world will take his part, and fight with
him against lewd sinners, there shall be no man to speak or to entreat for
them, and then he will be very terrible and angrye to reproved sinners, in so
much that they shall wysshe the mountains and hills to fall upon them, and

THe nynth article of our faith, is of the third person in Trinity, the
holy Gooste, expressed by Saint James the son of Alphey, called James the
less, because he came later to be CHRIST'S scholar, then the other James, the
Son of Zebede, of whom I spoke in the third Article.

This is the article, I believe in the holy Ghost. Like

OF the first grace Simon the Apostle, called Chananeus and Zelotes, puts
the tenth article of our creed saying. The holy catholic Church, the
communion of saints. After the minds of some holy doctors, we may not say
properlye that we believe in the holy Church, or on the holy Church, for the
Church is not God on whom we believe, as is aforesaid, it is the house of God.
Albeit if we say so, it may be allowed: as S. Paul praised the Collossen. i.
for the faith and charity that they had in Deo, and in omnes sanctos, on God
and on all holy persons, because that by their faith and charity, they
extended them selves to God and all good men. I hate the church of imaginers
of mischief, dissension, and debate. For such Churches be not holy, but
rather ill and very naught. It is also called holy, because the people and
company of the same be washed from the uncleanness of sin by the holy
Sacraments of the church, taking their efficacitie and strength at the blood
of our Savior The communion of saints, or of holy persons, that is to say,
like as I believe the holy church to be one and holy, and that if I will be
saved I must conform my self to that unity, not swaruinge from it by
heresies or dissension, so I must in perfection of life conform my self to
the fellowship and company of holy persons, as well of them that be now alive,
as of them that be departed to God before us. For if we will have communion or
fellowship with the saints or holy men in everlasting life, we must study
to follow them in living, for they must perceive in us somewhat of their
virtues, that so they may vouchesafe to saying. I am partaker of al them that
fear And therefore every true lymme of the said Church is partaker of all
the good that is done thoroughe all the world, and he that is excommunicate
and cast out of this unity, loses his part of all the said good works.

THen follows the eleventh article, expressed by Jude, otherwise called
Thadeus, the brother of James the less aforesaid. The forgiveness of sins. It
concerns the amotion and puttinge away the thing that is ill and most
noisome to man, that is sin, which by the authority that Christ gave to
the Apostles, and by them to their successors ministers

THen follows the twelfth and last article of the Creed, laid to this shot
or gatheringe by S. Mathy, that was chosen to make up the perfect number of
the.xii. Apostles, after that Judas the traiter was gone from them, and had
hanged him self, it is this. The resurrection of the body, and life
everlasting, that is to say, glory, rialtie, and joy everlasting of body
and soul. It is very necessary for us steadfastly to believe this article, to
take from us impassibilitie, neither fire, weapon, syckenes, neither any other
thing can hurt him. Likewise in this life man's body is dymme and dark, and
gives no light, but it shall rise in glory, clearenes, and brightness, by the
gift of clearnes. Man's body is now dull Agilitie: Our body is now gross,
and no more able to be present with an other body, then the body of a brute
beast, but it shall rise so spiritual, fine and pearsing, that it may goo
thorough an other body, and be present in one place with an other body, by the
gift of Subtilitie: even like as I said before, that the body of our Savior
Christ came from the womb of the vyrgyn Marye, and as he came among his
disciples life everlasting of body and soul in heaven, what tongue is able to
tell, or what wit can compass how great the joys of that high city be? to
be among the companies of blessed spirits and holy angels, and to behold
the countenance of the Godheade, ever present with them, and not to be
dismayde with fear of death, and to rejoice of the gift of everlasting
incorruption, without disease or

An homily or sermon,
GOod Christen people, forasmuch as now of late many me^ has so little favored
the Ceremonies of Christ's church, and also man's traditions, And
consequentlye somewhat I shall man's traditions and laws, and of the strength
that they have to bind men that be subject to the same laws, to keep them. For
the first ye shall understand, that this vocable or latin word Ceremony (as
Valerius Maximus writes in the first book of his stories) has his name of a
town in Italy called Cerete, into which town (when the city of Rome was
taken by the frenchmen) the priest of Quirinus, and the professed maidens
called Vestales virgins with their Idolles, and other sacred things (after
their manner) that they could convey out of the city, were carried in a wayne
and there received, and had in very great veneration. And thereof it was
ordained, that things perteyninge to the service of their Gods, should be
called Ceremonies, because the Ceretanes worshipped them in that decay, and
Ceremonies. They be external or outward protestations, and declarations of
the inward worshippinge of GOD, which is by faith, hope, and charity, and
has been used in the time when the law of nature had his course, and afterward
in the time of the law written, unto Christ's time, and finallye in the time of
grace from the first public and open ceremonies, and my laws* Gene. xxvi.
What ceremonies kept Abraham for which he was worthy thus to be commended?
Uerely some special devout fashions or behavior that he used about the
sacrifices or services of God as he had learned of his anceters, which I think
verily were sons, his wife, and his sons wives, and all all the world in
that time, and as I fear Before a white head thou shalt rise up and do thy
duty. And this, Honod^ the person of an old man, with many others like. And
of the said moral commandments depends both the Judicial precepts,
and the ceremonial. The Judicial laws be as it were yokes or bonds to bind
the people, to keep and do that reason would to be done in an order to God and
to their neighbor, determinynge the pains and punyshemente for
transgressors, quietynge and ending strife, plees, and controversies, having
their strength to bind, not of Thou shall not kill auye man, woman, or
child. Then if a man break this law by prepensed malice, killynge a man,
the Judicial law says the he shall dye for it, where as if he did it by
chance medley, without any such intended mischief, he might save him self
by some sanctuarye. Thou shalt honor thy father and mother, is a moral
commandment. To punish them that do contrary the judicial Hebr. x.

Sacraments they had among them as circumcision, and the paschal lamb, and
order of the priests ministering in the tabernacle or temple, and the water of
expiation made of the asshen of the red Hefer and running water, to cleanse
folk from their irregularitie by touchi^g of a dead corpse or of any other
unclean thing. Saint Paul calls them neady and pore principles, for they
another give grace to the users, another gives to the ministers any spiritual
power to remit sin. Heb. ix. Even like as when a prelate dispe^seth with a
bastard or with a man that has but one eye, that he may be made priest, by
this dispensation, he gives him not any grace, but only takes away the
irregularitie and makes him able to be ordered, where before he was not so.

Of the third manner of ceremonies were sacred or hallowed things to gods
service. As ye tabernacle and temple, ye parts of the^, the courts about them,
the implementes and vtensils, as cruets, cups, morters, caudrons, and
kettles. And so were certain days and solemn feasts as the vii. day of the
weke, the seventh year, the Iubily year, with a great multitude more, which
should be to long here to be rehearsed.

The obseruances were certain religious manners of liuinges that the people of
Israel, and the holy fathers their progenitors as the elect and chosen
people of GOD used, to show them selves distinct and differente from all
Idolaters, of his wives vow, she was discharged, and he with Act. xv. They were
very many to Thou shall not kill, if they held their hands they thought it
none offense to be angry with their neighbor. To imagine mischefe against him.
This imperfection of their gross understanding our savior Christ clearly
takes away, forbiddyng us to be angry with our neighbor inwardly in our heart
or by exterior signs in word, hand, or in cou^tenau^ce. Mat. v. taking away
the very rote of homicide. The iudicialles of Moises law as given by him,
plain false and dampnable to be believed. Notwithstanding cross the most
acceptable sacrifice unto him, and

Sacraments we have also seven in number, taking their efficacitie and
strength at our savior Christ, and left in the church as holesom medicines
against the manyfold infirmities and diseases of our souls* These be the very
few and manifest sacraments, in which the mercy of god But to mitigate this
confusion or shame, we obseruances of holy days, as sondayes and other
solemn feasts by course succedynge after the reuolucion of the year. We
observe also certain solemn times of fasting, as the fast of Lent, and the
Embre days, and in the remembrance of Christ's passion we punish our bodies
with abstine^ce and fasting every fridai. The devout ceremonies on Palm
sondayes in processions and on good fridaies about the laying of the cross and
sacrament into the sepulcher, gloriouslye arrayed, be so necessary to succor
the labilitie of man's remembrance, that if they were not used once every year,

And finally to speak of the judicial laws the Jews were never yoked nor
troubled with half so many given to them, as we be pressed withal, what with
ecclesiastical laws and other statutes and acts above number. So that (as
Saint Austine in the book of the customs of the church says) the condition
of the Jews seems Come unto me all ye that labor and be ouerburdened and I
shall refreshe you, and make you bear lighter, for my yoke is sweet, and my
burden but light. For this ye shall understand, that comparing the old law unto
the new law of Christ, we may consider Christ's law one way, as given of
Christ, and so very true it is that Christ's law is much more easy then
Moses law. For the judicial laws be none left us by Christ, but he bids
us to leave all plees and actions, in somuche that he wylleth us not to require
eye for eye, nor toothe for toothe as Moses law would, that it was a great
fault among them that they had such judicial causes among them: why do not ye
rather (says he) take wrong? why do Gods holy day, thou shall be confessed to
a priest way because the maker of the laws would have Math. xv. And that they
do not bind such heavy and vnportable burdens upon their subjects backs,
as they will not set one finger to, to help men to bear Math. xxiii. as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, which then had the authority both temporal and
spiritual under the Romans. And that they have no malicious eye toward any
party diuisyng laws for their neighbors destruction, or excogitating Psa.
lvii. O ye children of men, if ye speak truly of justice and righteousness,
then se that ye judge straightly, neither declining on the right hand by
affection to your self, or to your friend, neither on the leaft hand by
malice or displeasure to your foes, or to them that you favor not. Considering
that the just judgment of God shall be against them that measures the power
that they have received of God after their own wickedness, and not according to
Gods


THe great wise man king Salomo^, yt by his wit searched out the natures and
kinds of all creatures on earth as far as any man might, and dysputed and
Ecclesiastes. i. Cuncte res difficiles et non potest ea homo explicare sermon
All things be hard to be known, and no man can perfitely express them by
mouth. For (as the Logition.i. Corin. xii. Discretio spirituum, where he says,
that to some man is given the spirit of sapience, to judge and reason of
celestial matters, to other the gift of science in lower exercise: to some is
given faith by the same spirit. To some power Lingua mea calamus scribe (says
the Prophet.) In the holy scriptures (I say) when a text may have diverse
expositions, and may be diversely taken, and every way good and catholic, yet
to attain to the very prescise and Discretion, of spirits, or of putting
difference betwixt spirits. And without this gift no man shall be able to pas
fafely through the scriptures without a foil. Now who shall have this gift,
and who shall lack it, it stands chiefly in Gods hands, and not in our
merits and deserving. For these considerations it is no merueil that it be
perilous to speak of almighty God, and of heavenly or godly causes, far above
our reach. In so much that many wise and well learned men have rather chosen
silence, and to hold their tongues then to take labors in expou^dinge or
preching ye scriptures. But this is not enough for the^, to whom the office of
teaching is committed. As to bishops to who^ is committed the whole cure of
their dioceses. To Archdeacons, persons, vicars and al other having cure of
souls, to al such.i. Corin. ix. Ve mihi est si non euangelizauero I am sure of
woe everlasting if I do not preach. Christ bids scruramini scripturas: search
and labor in ye scriptures: he bids us also, seek and we shall find.
Therefore we must search and seek least we hear the reproach that Christ gave
the malicious Jews. Erratis nescie^tes scripturas neque virtute^ dei: You er,
you go out of the way, for ignorance of the scriptures, and because you know
not the virtue and power of god. S. Paul calls our savior Christ the virtue
and power, and the wisdom of God. Christu^ dei virtute^ et dei sapientia^ i.
Cor i. The^ considering

Petrus Apostolus Jesus Christi electis aduenis dispersionis Ponti Galatiae,
Cappadociae, Asiae, and Bithiniae* secundum prescientiam Deipatris.

Petre Apostle of Jesus Christ, unto the strangers dispersed in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, elect according to the foresyghte of
God the father, to have your spirit sanctified, to have obedience, and to have
the blood of Christ sprinkeled upon you: Grace and peace to you be
multiplied.

This is the salutation that this blessed Apostle Saint Peter begins his
letter with all. As the manner is when one friend writes to an other, first he
begins with recommendatio^s (that be salutations) and consequentlye
proceeds to his purpose. According to the same manner, I will first declare
these recommendations unto you, which done, when I shall come to his process,
Ioh. i. Blessed S. Andrew, one of S. John Baptists disciples, after he had
diverse times heard his master give excellent testimonye and commendations of
Christ, and on a time S. John and two of his disciples, of which S. Andrew Lo
the lamb of God, the said disciples made no more tarienge, but left their
old master (supposinge he was content they should do so) and followed Christ,
and tarried with him, where he abode all that day undoubted with most heavenly
lessons, and godly learning, although the scriptures express not what they
were. In this appears the excellent prerogative of this blessed Apostle S.
Andrew, in as much as he was the first taken to acquaintance with Christ of
all the disciples, and also his aboundaunt charity, in as much as he did not
keep to him self the treasure that he had found, but would not rest till he
had made his Messiah, which is as much to say in English as anointed. We call
him Christ after the greek word, for Messiah in the Hebrew* Christus in the
greek, vnctus in the latin, anointed in the englysh, is all one. Saint Andrewe
as I said brought him to Christ, which looked upon him and said. Tu es
Simon filius Iona, tu vocaberis Cephas: Thou art Simon the son of Iona, thou
shalt be called Cephas in the Hebrewe, which is as much to say in the Greek
and in the latin as Petra. Hieronimus super epistolam ad Galath, capit. ii. Non
quo aliud significet Petrus, aliud Cephas, sed quod quam nos Latinae and Grecae
Petram nominemus, hanc Hebraei and syri propter lingue inter se viciniam Cepham
nuncupent. And by this (now by the way) is confounded Tu es Simon, tu
vocaberis Cephas, which they interpretate caput, a head, as though Christ
said, thou shalt be called the head, concludynge of that, him to be the head
of the Apostles, and consequently his successors the popes of Rome to be head
of all the church of all countries, which though it be very true, yet this
text proves not so much: for in the text it is said expresselye, Cephas
quod interpretatur Petrus: Cephas by interpretation is as much to say as a
stone, or of stone (if it be an adjective.) Here such summalistes would
plainlye stone, or of stone. Christ that is the true and sure stone upon
which the Church is builded, gave him a name derived from him self, that
like as he is the fyrme and fast stone, so should Simon be all one with him,
and of stone with him, as all we of the name of Christ be called Christians,
and should be all one with him. And morallye Simon the son of Jonas was
called Peter. Simon by quod est filii tonitrui. Marc. iii. the children of
thondre. It follows in the text. Apostle of Jesus Christ. Apostolos in the
Greek is as much to say as one that is send: it is the name of an office,
according to them that Christ chose to be send forth thorough all the
world, to preach the good tydinges of remission of sins by Christ, and of
life everlasting. But this name Exo. iii. where he excused his vnhablenes*
desiring God to provide an other to be sent thither. And it is written. Esai.
vi, Quem mittam and quis ibit nobis? Whom shall I send (said the voice of
almyghtye GOD) and who shall go for us to this people, Esaye answered. Ecce
ego, mitte me, Lo, here I am, send me. Saint John Baptist fuit homo missus a
deo, was sent from God, and by that he was Apostle, he was also a prophet,
and more then a prophet. And Saint Paul calls Christ Apostle. Heb. iii.
Considerate Apostolum et pontificem In as much as God the father sent him to
be incarnate for our redemption. Saint Hierome on the beginning of the
Epistle to the Galathians, puts a distinction of.iiii. manners of Apostles.
One ki^nde of Apostles be they that be sent, not from man, or by man, but by
Jesus Christ, and GOD the father, as Moses, Esaye, John Baptiste, Peter,
Paul, with their company. Of the second manner be they that be sent of GOD
by man, as by a mean betwyxte GOD and them, as Iosue was made the guide and
instructoure of the people of Israel by Gods will, declared Nu, xxvii. And
so I doubt not but S. Augustine Anglorum Apostolus, was sent of God by the
ministerye and settinge forth of S. Gregory, one of the best bishops of Rome
that ever was after S. Peter) into this realm, to co^uerte the people to
Christ's faith, and so he did spedely, God assisting and helping forth his
godly purpose. And likewise when the kings majesty, or the prelates under
him, send forth catholic preachers among the people, sincerelye to instruct
them to virtue, it is to be supposed that they be Apostles send of God by man.
The third manner is of them that by man's favor and affection, more then for
learning or any good condition in them, be sent or set forth to take upon.ii.
Cor. xi. Such pseude Apostles, or false Apostles, be subtle and disceitfull
workmen, disguisynge them selves into the Apostles of Christ, and no marueil,
for Satan as self disgiseth him self into an Aungel of light, therefore it is
no marvel though his ministers and servants do so likewise: They speak in
Gods name as though God sent them, and yet God says Jesus, is as much to say
as a savior, and therefore in as much as Christ by reason of his godhead,
was ever a Savior of the world, he had that name from the beginning of the
world, and also before the world was made, because that he ever intended to save
the world, after that it should perisshe. And for this cause the Angel
Gabriell, when he had Joseph that he should not put away Mary his wife, but
cherysshe her, declaringe that the child that she went with all was begotten,
not by any misorderinge of her filius Iosedech Eccl. xlix. and Jesus filius
Syrach. Eccl. l. but none of them could save the people from their sins, but
only our Jesus the son of Mary ye virgin.

Christ, is as much to say as anointed, and so was our savior Christ with
the oil of gladness, that is to say: with the grace of the holy gooste,
signified by the gentle supplenes of oil* pre co^sortibus tuis, better, and
above his fellows. By pre consortibus tuis, above al other men, which was
perfitly declared, performed, and fulfilled, when he was baptized in Jordan
water, and the holy ghost descended like a dove, and light upon him, and abode
in him. Ioh. i. Now I must (according to my promise) declare, unto whom
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadotia, Asia, and Bithinia, chosen by the prescience and
foreknowledge of God the father. Aduenae strangers were called among the Jews
such as were gentiles or paignims borne, and for devotion to one God, were
converted to the rites and laws of the Jews, and were circumcised, and kept
their ceremonies as the Jews did, and these by the Greek word were called
proseliti. Many such there were in old time, and even in Christ's time, of
which very many were converted to Christ's faith by the preaching of the
Apostles, and by the wondrous miracles that they saw wrought every day by
the power of Christ's Alphei, bishop of Jerusalem, they thought it necessary to
go abroad among other nations to publish Ioppe, upon which he went to Cornelius
captain in Cesaria, and to him and to his family and company preached Christ as
it is plain. Act. x. And many sure and ancient auctours write that after
thordination of.s. James bishop of Jerusalem, S. Peter came to Antioche one of
the chief cities of Syria, and there tarried a while preaching Christ and
proceaded further into the countries that be here spoken of, in the Salutation
at the beginning of this Epistle. pontus, Galatiae, Capadotia* and other, and
occupied the Simon Magus, and detected his errors. And afterward heard that
the said Simon magus was come to Rome, and had there divine honors done to
him as to a GOD, and had Images erected in his honor, and that he made all the
City to dote upon him like mad me^, for this occasion he came to Rome as
Eusebius says. Li. ii. ecclesiastice history. ca. xiiii. and there within a
while quenched the blindness of Simon Magus, and of that deuillysh womanne that
he Pontus, Galatia, capadotia, etc. by occasion of persecution, as to all
others inhabitants of the same countries among which he had preached in his
long and paynefull progress, and had converted the^ to Christ's fayeth,
which all he counted as strangers to the world. And so in the second
chapter of this epistle, he prays them to take them selves, saying: Obsecro
vos tanquam aduenas and peregrinos. Even like as we have in the acts of the
apostles xv. That saint Paul after he had planted Christ's Gospel in the
countries where he had labored preaching, he used to take an opportunity
and to live according to his doctrine that he Damascus (the chief city of
Siria. Esaias. vii. Caput Syrie Damascus.) And then after three years of his
conversion, he came to Jerusalem to see Peter, and tarried there with him. xv.
days, and there he saw none other of the apostles at that time, but only
saint Peter and James the less called Christ's brother, which then was made
bishop and ouerseer of Christ's church in Jerusalem: For all the residue of
the apostles were then dispersed abroad to preach the word of GOD. After this
Saint Paul (as he says) went abroad Siria and Celicia, where he was brought
up in youth. For he says of him self. Act.xxii. Ego su^ vir Iudeus, natus in
Tharso Ciliciae. I am a Jew by kindred born in Tharsus, a city in Cilicia, which
is a country in main Asia. For ye Jews were not al born in Jury, but as their
parents were dis^abper;sed into al countries, so they had their children in
diverse countries. And the^ after.xiiii years, s. Paul came again to Jerusalem
to confer the gospel that he preached, with the apostles yt were the pillars of
the Church, Peter, James, and John, which he found then at Jerusalem. Now
good friends take heed. Hear we have of saint Paul which in the place
alleged swore, and took god to witness, that he lied not, we may well believe
him, and must needs so do, the holy Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, etc? And when
Anthiochia? To this I say that as for the three first years that Saint
Paul spoke of, Saint Peter tarried very much at Jerusalem with James, there
to order the Primatyue and first church of Christ in all the world. Their
presence because they were of high reputation, was very necessary for that
purpose, so that in all that time I think he went very little among the
Gentyles, except it were by some chance, or by revelation, as he came to
Cornelius at Caesaria. His most labor was about the conversion of Jews, to
convert them to Christ.

Pontus Galatiae. etc. Countries of main Asia, of which some of them be almost
as far north east from Jerusalem, as we be northwest, and to them preached
Antiochia, where he tarried and ruled Christ's flock as bishop there by the
space of seven years or more. Saint Hierome says. Super Gal. ii. Primum
episcopum Antiochene ecclesiae Petrum fuisse accepimus, and Romam exinde
translatum. From Antiochia he went to Rome to convince Simon Magus (as I said
before.) And from Rome came back again unto Jerusalem to a counsel in the
eyghtenth year after Christ's ascension, at which time.s. Paul was warned by
revelation to ascend also to Jerusalem to confer his Gospel with the other
Apostles, and there met with Peter, James, and John, as he says in the second
chapter to the Galathians. And then saint Peter took his leave and returned to
Rome again, where he continued, and in Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, and so
forth. Therefore if they shall not be somewhat set furthe and declared, whereto
be they written here? If they shall not be described unto them that hear or
read this epistle, let them be stricken out of the book, why should they
cumber any more paper? To hear of them shall be pleasant to al men that
deliteth in natural histories of Geography, or Cosmographye, Mare
mediterraneum, the middely earth sea, which our merchants calls the Leuant
comes out of the maine occean sea, runnyng into the land at a very narrow
entrye, called the straightes, betwixt two mountains or rocks, one called
Calpe in Granado, on the south part of Spain, and the other called Abila, in
Mauritania, where yt Mores inhabit. And the said mountain called Calpe, our
marcauntes calls Calis, adding to it for the evil and dangerous passage by
the same Malis ill, after the language of the country, there Calys Ill Calys,
because of a great multitude of ragged rocks liynge in the thresholde or
bottom of the said gate, so that when any ship shall pass in or out at the
said streicte, the mariners must be sure of an high water, and a measurable
wind, else they shall find it an ill passage and perilous. The said two
rocks, cleues, or promo^tories, be called Gades and Column Hercules.
Hercules posts, and stands one on the one side of the said enter, and the
other on the other side and makes like a gate into the Leuaunt. And as Pliny
writes, In prohemio terc^i naturalis historiae. It is but five miles broad,
where it is strayghtest, and passes not ten miles over where it is broadest.
pomponius Mela agrees, saiynge: Libro primo. Non amplius december milibus
passimum patens. A wondrous work of GOD, by so narrow a passage to bring
into Celiciae, in maygne Asya, and there stays in a certain bay called Sinus
issicus, the baye where the river of Issus opens into the same sea, and it
goes no further Eastward: enuironnyng and conteinyng within it self a great
multitude of the most fertiysles that we can read of, and specially the
excellent Isle of Cyprus, Notwythstandynge before the said Leuaunt become so
far Eastwarde, it turns Northwarde, long and many a mile. First it runs
together and enters into a narow streict called Hellespontus, much narower
Oceane into the Leuaunt that I now spoke of, for this streicte passes not
much three quarters of a mile over, and when it is past that streicte, it
spreads abroad again like a sea, and is called Propontis. Then yet more
Northwarde it runs together into a narower streict then any of the two that
I have spoken of, this streict is called Thratius Bosphorus. The country of
Thracia, where Bizantium, now called Constantinople, is chief city, is on
the West part of it, and the said Constantinople lies nigh to the same
streict. This streicte is so narowe, that in caulme wether men may hear
birds singe from the one point to the other, and men's voices also from
Europe into Asia, and contrarywyse, out of Asia into Europe. When the sea
passes that streict, then it spreads abroad into a marvelous great sea
called Pontus Euxinus, And yet again gathers it self together into as narow
a streicte as this that I spoke of last, and it is called Cymmerius bosphorus,
and beyond him it spreads abroad again into a huge meare or standing water
called Meotis, into which runs the fierce and swifte river of Tanais
coming out of the mountains of the North, and is drowned in the said
Meotis. Here have you heard (more shortly then the matter requires) the
course and ways of the middle earth, sea, or leuaunt, which you may more
sensiblye perceive, if you will confer my Pomp. Mela reconeth about.C.xl. of
which some be the most excellentes of the world, specially in the
forthright course betwixt Calis Malis, and Cilicia, there is Corsica, where the
Romans have their vine cors. There is Sardinia, Sicilia, and Creta, which we
call Candy, there is the most fertyle and fruitful Island of Cyprus. And
toward the mouth of the return Northwarde, called Hellespontus (that I spoke
of) is the well known I Will of the Rhodes, latelye inhabited with Christen men,
now by the rage of the Turk, perverted to miserable subjection and bondage.

Now for the text you shall understand, that Asia, which is the third
part of the world, divided from Affrike by the river of Nylus, that runs
thoroughe Egipte, down unto the said myddle earth Sea, or leuaunt, and
divided from Europe, by the seas runnynge Northwarde into the standing water
called Meotis, and by the swyfte river of Tanais, runnynge out of the
mountains, in the North part of the world, and descendinge into the said
Meotis. And the said Asia conteyneth in quantity more ground, then both
Affricke and Europe does. And the said countries that Saint Peter preached
in, and to which he wrote his lettre or Epistle, lies not so in order as
Saint Peter, rehearses them, but Saint Peter rehearses them out Galath.
iii. Non est Iudeus, neq, Graecus, non est seruus, neque liber, non est
masculus, neque femina, omnes enim vos vnum estis in CHRISTO IESV. Furtheste of
from Jerusalem, and most Northwarde lies Pontus, on the East side of that
broad sea called Pontus Euxinus, that I spoke of even now. Pomponius Mela,
capite de summa Asiae descriptione. Circa pontum aliquot populi alio alioque
fine omnes vno nomine pontici dicuntur. Hieronimus It conteyneth diverse
countries, and of diverse languages. There is Colchis, where Jason had the
Golden fleice, as Poets feign. Mithridates that noble king, that kept open
war with the Romans by the space of six and fortye years, was king there
in Ponto first, and afterward of Armenia, Capadotia, and of the most part
of all maygne, and great Asia: And I think verelye it is two thousand mile
about by land from Jerusalem, where Sayncte Peter begone to preach. In
which all Bysshoppes, and all they that have taken upon them cure of souls,
or the office of preachinge, Capadocia, where S. George the martyr was borne,
as appears by his legend, and this Capadocia has on his North coaste the
said sea Pontus Euxinus, and it runs a long on the same sea, and has on
his east side both Armenyes the less and the more, and is divided from the
greater Armenye, by the river of Euphrates, and extends southwarde as far
as Cilicia that I spoke of, and has on the Weste side Bithinia, Galacia,
Paphlagonia. Then by the sea coaste Bithinia lies next, and it lies against
Constantinoble, sometime called Bizancium, in so much that the East point of
the land, making the streict called Thracius Bosphorus, is in Bithinia,
Bithinia lies on the sea that is on the South part of that streat called
Propontis, and part of it on the North part of that streict on pontus
Euxinus. And in the said Bithinia is the city called Nicea, where the gracious
Emperor Constantine, with.CCC. and.xviii. bishops, kept the most autenticall
and blessed counsel, called concilium Nicenum, in which Arrius heresies were
condemned, and many blessed statutes made. Then comes Galacia, sometime
called Gallogrecia, it lies without the streicte called Hellespontus,
southward, super mare Egeum, and in this country S. Paul had labored as well
as S. Peter, and had instruct them very perfitlye in Christ's faith.
Notwithstanding by pseudapostles, and false preachers, they were Galathies, or
Galathians. Then comes Asia the less, which is but a part of maigne Asia,
that (as I told you) is the third part, and greatest part of the world, and
in this country stands the noble city of Ephesus, in which sometime was the
famous temple of Diana, that is spoken of. Act. xix. And to the people of this
city. S. Paul wrote his epistle, entitled, the epistle to the Ephesies, or
Ephesians, The country is exceadinge welthy and fruiteful, and the people
excedingely given to carnal pleasures, therefore S. Paul called them beasts.
i. Cor. xv. Si ad bestias pugnaui Ephesi quid mihi prodest. etc. elect and
elect and chosen by the knoweledge of GOD the father, We must not think that
all they that were converted to CHRIST'S faith, in the said countries to
which Saint Peter wrote, were elect by such election as Christ speaks of
in the parable. Math. xxii. Multi sunt vocati, pauci vero electi. Nonne ego vos
duodecim elegi, and vnus ex vobis Diabolus est? Ioh. vi. Did not I chose you
twelve, and one of you is the Deuylles bird. And also, Ioh. xv. Non vos me
elegistis, sed ego elegi vos. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you:
Where we must understand by this election, the vocation and calling to the
faith, and to believe on Christ: for neither they that this was spoken to, nor
any other were chosen, because CHRIST, but because CHRIST chose them,
therefore they believed on him, so that GODS eternal election was the cause
of our vocation to faith. And therefore Saint Paul says, Ephesians. i. Elegit
nos in ipso ante mundi constitutionem. GOD the father chose us in CHRIST,
before the world was made, he chose us to be saved by the faith of CHRIST,
which is the only and very necessary way to salvation. Now to my
purpose, all these people of these countries to which Saint Peter writ, were
elect and chosen by the prescience and foreknowledge of GOD, to be called, and
to come to Christ's faith, and to continue in the same as GOD knew. GOD knew
who were his, that would finallye continue in CHRIST'S faith, and be saved,
and who would fall from the same to infidelity again, or by sin and
misliuinge deface and defoule their faith, and be dampened.

But here yet rises a doubt, for Saint Paul says. Roman. vii, Quos
presciuit and predestinauit hos and vocauit. etc. Them that he before knew and
did predestinate, he called: and them that he called, he justified: and them
that he justified, he magnified, and glorified, and appointed finallye to
glory everlasting. Therefore it should seem, that if they were called, they
were justified, and if they were justified, then must it needs follow that
they were gloryfyed.

Here you must understand that there is two secundum presentem iustitiam,
according to a certain just manner of living that men be of for the time of
their calling, and as they appear in the face of the world, as the scripture
speaks of Saul. i. Reg. ix. Erat Saul electus and bonus, and non erat vi^ de
filiis Israel melior illo, Saul was chosen, and good, and of all the issue of
Israel there was not one better then he. Then he was good, after he was
naught. So Judas when he was chosen was good enough, although he afterward
betrayed his master and ours. For this kind of calling does not so confirm
men in goodness, but that they may fall and be naught, and so was Saul, and so
was Judas, and so were many of them that S. Peter writ unto, although they
were called and chosen to Christ's faith by the ministry and labor of S.
Peter, S. Paul, or secundum dei propositum, according to Gods determinate
purpose. Of this S. Paul speaks. Romans viii. Scimus autem quoniam
diligentibus deum omnia cooperantur in bonum his qui secundum propositu^ vocati
sunt sancti. To them that by Gods determinate purpose be called, all things
works for the best, yea, sins that they do makes the^ to repent their
doing, and to arise by penance, and to be better ware of such sins
thereafter, and to do no more so. Therefore I say (to the letter of S. Peter's
epistle) they were elect and chosen, as God knew that all should come to the
In sanctificationem spiritus to be sanctified in spirit by baptism, and to
have their souls in the way of salvation in sanctificationem spiritus says
the vulgate and common text, per sanctificationem spiritus in obedientiam. etc.
says the new translation and they come all to one purpose. For by that, that
we have our spirit sanctified and made holy by Gods holy spirit the holy ghost,
we come to obedience and be made obedient to the faith of Christ, and be ready
to fulfill, perform, and do the works of the spirit, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit, which be charitas, gaudium, pax, patientia. etc. Gala.
v. And S. Paul prayed almighty GOD for his disciples, and by them for us
all.i. Thessa. v. Ipse autem deus pacis sanctificet vos per omnia vt integer
spiritus vester, et anima, and corpus, fine querela in aduentu domini nostri
Ie^u Christi conseruetur. The God of peace make you all holy in every point
that your spirit sometime signifies the whole soul of man, and so it is
taken in the prophets words in the psalm, In manus tuas commendo spiritum
meum, which Christ spoke upon the cross. And it follows there: Inclinato
capite tradidit spiritum, he bowed his head and yielded bp his spirit, that is
his soul. But when we find in the scriptures such a distinction of the parts
of man, as the Apostle puts in Mente seruio legi dei carne autem legi
peccati. Roman. vii. With my mind I serve the law of GOD, but by my flesh I
serve and incline to sin. And likewise Galathians. v. Caro concupiscit
aduersus spiritum, spiritus autem aduersus carnem, so that he called before the
mind, here he calls it the spirit. We use not to call the mind any
thing else, but the reasonable portion and part of the soul. And sometime the
Apostle joins them both together. Ephesians. iiii. Renoua mini spiritu
mentis vestre, in the spirit of your mind, which is naught else but your
mind, as in an other place he uses like manner of speakinge, Collossians.
ii. In expoliatione ^dip oris carnis. The body of our flesh, that is to say,
the flesh, and such manner of speakinge we use in the Englysh tongue, the
city of Brystowe, which is no more to say but Bristowe. The City of London,
is but London. The town of Wells, is no more but Wells. And now to my purpose
I think that Saint Peter in this present salutacion takes the spirit for
the whole soul of man, comprisynge reason and the sensible powers, will, and
sensuality, which all together is sanctified by the holy Ghost, infusinge
and pouring faith and charity into our souls, when we came to Et aspersionem
^anguinis Jesus Ch^isti. And you be elect according to Gods knowledge, to
have the blood of Jesus. Christ sprinckeled and cast upon you. The blood of
Abell the first Martyr, was shed and sprinckeled on the ground, when Cain
his brother killed him, but this blood sprinckelinge cried for vengeance.
Genesis. iiii. Vox sanguinis fratris tui clamat ad me de terra, says almighty
GOD, the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground, as
though GOD said: Thy deed is so manifest, Nunc igitur maledictus eris super
terram que aperuit os suum, and suscepit sanguinem fratris tui de manu tua.
Therefore (says almyghtye GOD) thou shalt be cursed upon the ground,
which has opened her mouth, and has received the blood of thy Brother
from thy hand. The blood of Christ cried for mercy and forgyuenes, yea for
them that crucified him. Pater ignosce illis quia nesciunt quid faciunt.
Father forgive them (says Christ) for they know not what they do. Therefore
Saint Paul comparynge these two aspersions together, says: Accessistis ad
sanguinis aspersionem melius loquente^ qua^ Abel. Heb. xii. ye become to the
sprinckling of blood, that speaks Gratia vobis and pax multiplicetur. This is
the conclusion of Saint Peter's salutacion or recommendacion, in which he
gives them his blessing of grace and peace. Origene unto, was no less then
the said blessings, for he had in him self the holy spirit, and in the Si
fuerit ibi filius pacis pax vestra^ veniet super eum, sin autem pax vestra ad
vos reuertetur: If there be the child of peace, your peace shall fall upon
him, and if no, your peace shall return to you again. And that is writ of
peace, is likewise to be understand of grace, for Saint Peter joins
together grace and peace, for peace is never without a special grace of GOD,
nor grace without peace. Therefore where is lack of grace, there can be no
peace, and where we Aduena egosum apud te and peregrinus sicut omnes patres
mei. Psalm* xxxviii. I am as a stranger with thee good Lord, and a Pilgrame
or wayfaring man as all my forefathers have been, he writ his letter to
such strangers, therefore if we count our self as such strangers, not
setlyng our minds to much in the world, but countynge our selves not to have
any city or steadfast abiding here but stretching and settinge fourth our
selves to the ever lasting city of heaven, and to the glory to come. Then let
us take heed to his blessed doctrine in this Epistle, and take it said unto
us, as well as unto them, that al we may

The second sermon
BEnedictus deus et pater dn^i nostri Jesus Christi. etc. After his salutacion
here the apostle proceeds to his matter and process in this Epistle or
letter, remembering his pastoral office and duty, as well to them that he writ
unto, as to us and all Christen people that shall come after us, specially if
we take our selves as blessed has diverse significations according to the
thing that it is joined withal. When we say bless God, or say blessed be
GOD, it is a word of thanks, and is as much to say as laud, praise, and
thanks be to GOD. For by our blessing GOD we cannot increase his glory,
neither make him any thing the better by our thanks although so doing we
accomplish and do our bounde^ Sacrificium laudis honorificabit The sacrifice of
laud and praysinge, shall do me honor says almighty God. And like as he
that will do bodily sacrifice to God, must do it by the hands of a Priest,
or of a Bishop. So this sacrifice of laud Saint Peter offers to GOD the
father by the hands of the great Priest and Bishop our Savior Jesus
Christ, making mention of him saying: pater domini nostri Jesus Christi, The
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And by this Saint Peter gives us good
example to begin all our works with thanks and praise to him for his own
glory, and with desyringe and praying for his grace to prevent us and to set
us forward at the beginning of our works, and to be concurrent and workynge
with us in Qui secundum misericordiam suam magnam regenerauit nos in spem viua^
per resurrectione^ Jesus christi ex mortuis. Which according to his great
mercy by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead, has begotten
us again into a liuelye hope. According to the rate of man's offense
almighty GOD multiplieth his mercy. And though all sins compared to
almightye God against whom they be committed be infinite, yet considering the
frowardenes of the heart, and will of the sinner, some sins be more grievous
then other be, and require proporcionablye greater abundance of mercy in i.
Timo. i. But king David could not pretend ignorance in his taking of an
other man's wife, neither in causyng Urye the same womannes husband (that
never offended him) to be slain unjustly. These sins were great and
horrible, and therefore he cried and called for great mercy. Miserere mei deus
secundu^ magnam miam tuam. And for manifold mercy according to his manifold
sins. Then let us according to this consider the miserable case that mankind
was in before we were regenerate by Christ, and we shall perceive that our
regeneration by baptism taking his strength at Christ's passion came of mercy,
all his posterity. And therefore like as God original sin, which makes
all the Issue and children of Adam, the children of Gods indignation and
anger. And so we by that be left free from Justice and bond to sin and to
dampnation. A miserable case that we be in sin, and be made the children of
anger and of dampnation before we have the use of Reason, and before we can

All these miseries and wretchedness considered, almightye God by his great
mercy regenerate us, and got us again to life, against al these mortal and
deadly miseries. The regeneration and new begettyng, is by the water of
baptism, with ye words and the cooperation and working of the holy spirit
without which, no man may see the kingdom and glory of God. By this the
duty or debt of original justice is washed away, so that GOD will require it
no more of us, but he gives us in the stead of the said original Justice, an
other gift equivalent, and as good to help us to heaven as it was, which is
the grace that makes baptism, so the grace of baptism after it is lost by
actual sin, is recompensed by grace given us with remission of our sin by
penance. And so He has begotten us again (says saint Peter) into a liuelye
hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. By which the Apostle means, that
like as there be two manner of fayethes, a dead faith, and a liuelye fayeth, so
there be two manners of hope, a dead hope, and a lyuelye hope: Hope is the
expectation and lokynge for everlasting beatitude and joy, through grace and
our merits. Then the hope of him that will hope and look to come to heaven,
and will do no good thing to bring him thither, is a dead hope, and a
presumption rather then hope. This considered the blessed manne Job, whose hope
on God was so firm and sure that he said. Etiam si occiderit me, in ipso
sperabo. Job. xiii. Although he will kill me, yet I will hope and trust
upon him. Yet he says Veruntamen vias meas in conspectu eius arguam and ipse
erit saluator meus. Non enim veniet in conspectu eius omnis ypocrita. I will
discuss my life and accuse mine offenses before his face. And then he will be
my Savior. For there is no Hypocrite, none that will show out ward more
hope, devotion, or holiness, then they have in deed, that shall come in his
sight. Therefore like as we have powered into us at our regeneration or Baptism
a liuelye fayeth, so we have a living or liuelye Hoope, that like as Christ
rysse from death to a life immortal, so shall we do, for the father of
heaven so disposed and ordained for us that his son should dye for us, that
when he had destroyed Into an inheritance that is incorruptible, vndefowled,
and never fading, conserved and kept in store in heaven. The inheritance of
Heaven (as the Apostle says here) has three excellent properties, which
we may ymagine by three contrary properties, which no purchaser will have
in any Patrimony, manor, or Lordshippe that he should bye or purchase for
him self to inhabit or dwell in. First if it be a rotten ground where all
thing anon moulleth, the tenauntes, and mortises of timber building rotteth
out and loses their pynnes. The walls or and decays in process of time,
so that corruption Math. xiii. Oh good Lord what beutie and brightness shall our
souls have This joyful inheritance is (says saint Peter) for you that by
virtue and power of god be kept by faith unto salvation, which is ready to be
showed in the last time at the general judgment. Here he says that this
inheritance is kept in store, not for all men that be regenerate by baptism,
but only for such as persevere and continue in goodness to the end by Gods
special preservation. For perseverance comes principallye of God, and of our
self but secundarelye, and is necessary for all them that will be saved. Nam
in cassum bonum agitur si ante terminum vite deseratur says saint Gregory.
Good works be done but all in vain, if they be left and given over before the
end of a man's life. For he that gives over and ceasseth to do well before he
have proved the uttermost of it, or be come to the end, is like Luke. xi. Si
perseuerauerit pulsans etc. If he continue still knockyng, if his friend will
not give it him because he is his friend, yet for his importunity and
continual crauynge he will rise and give him as many as he has need of. And
he tells us what is the instrument or mean by which God does preserve us,
and make us to persevere and continue in grace and good living. It is faith
and God has regenerate us by his great mercy into a lyuelye hope, and so the
faith by which GOD keeps us, is a lyuelye faith adorned with Charity and
with good works accordinglye. By faith Christ abides in our hearts, by
whose presence we overcome all assaults of our gostlye enemies. Faith makes
us to understand the fylthe and uncleanness of sin, that so we may
abhor sin, and flee from it. Hec est victoria que vincit mundum fides
nostra, i. John. v. This is the victory that overcomes the world, our
faith (says Saint John) it overcomes the pleasures of the flesh,
telling us that the flesh is like a fellon giltye and most worthly condemned
to mortality and death, and ever still resisting and Si secundum carnem
vixeritis. moriemini, if ye live after the pleasures of the flesh, ye shall
die, wherefore if ye have followed your carnal pleasures, eating and drinking,
revealing and rioting in this holy time of Christmas lately past, which ye
should have spent in devotion and holiness, ye must repent your fault, and do
penance therefore. Faith makes us to contemn and despise worldly wealth and
riches as the dyuels mowse snatch, and snare, that makes a man to catch and
hold others men's goods so long till the devil has caught them and hold them
in his danger. Saint Paul says: i. Tim. vi Qui volunt diuites fieri, incidunt
in tentationes et in laqueum diaboli. etc. They that will be made rich but yet
holow it is without any stuff in it, and for nothing good at length. So honor
and

To whom be glory honor and praise for ever. Amen.
The third sermon.
IN quo exultabitis modicum nunc si oportet contristari in variis
tentationibus. In which you shall rejoice and be merry, although now alitle you
must be sorry in diverse temptacio^s, persecutions, and troubles. In which
(says Saint Peter) referring to that he spoke of immediatelye in tempore
nouissimo, In the last time or last day, where he said that the joyful
inherytance that shall never fade nor decay, is conserved and kept in store
in heaven, for you that by the virtue and power of God be kept by says unto
salvation, which is ready to be showed in the last time, that is to say, at the
general judgment, In which you shall rejoice and be merry (says S. Peter
here.) And meruel not (good friends) and specially you that be learned, that I
made a point betwixt the antecedent and the relative: For the grave sentences
of the Apostle here in this epistle be so long, and so coherent one part to an
other, and so full of good matter, that if when I have entered on the
declaration of the one part, I should needs proceed and declare the whole
sentence, I should be to long in most part of my sermons, and to tedious for
the audience, which I would be as he had said before now, he moves us to joy
and gladness, because a weak person in ye faith would say peradventure, in
as much as S. Peter says we Eccle. xxvii. Vasa figuli probat fornax et ho^ines
iustos te^tatio tribulatio^s The furnace proves ye crockers pots or pitchers
Pro. xxvii. Quo modo probatur in conflatorio arge^tu^ et in furnace auru^ sic
probatur homo ore lauda^tis: eue^ as silver is proved in ye blowing place and
gold in ye furnace, so a man is proved by ye mouth of a prayser whither he be
truli virtuous. The trial of your faith more precious then gold that is
tried by the fire, may be found worthy to have praise, laud and glory and
honor, when Jesus Christ shall show himself. There is no artificer that has
so great pleasure to work in fine gold neither any man having jewels of pure
gold tried to the uttermost, as almighty God the high workman, maker and
owner of all thing will rejoice to see our faith tried by temptacion and
trouble and vexation, for by that proof it shall appear to God and man much
more firm, fast and sure, then if there had be none such assay or other man's
wife, that is delectable to the eye, to have his concupiscence and desire of
her, or This is the victory that overcomes the world, our faith, for our
faith on God, and on his holy word, tells us that no man shall desire to
have an other man's wife, neither any woman to have an other woman's husband,
nether any man beside her own husband. Likewise if thou se another man's good
lie by the negligentlye, so that thou may convey it away and no man to se
the if thou take it away, or consent thereto, Statera iusta and equa sint
po^dera. Leuit. xvii. Let thy balance be just, and thy weightes equal. And.
Ezech. xlv. Statera iusta and ephi iustum, and also byddinge the do none
otherwise to an other man, then thou would an other man should do to the.
And contrary wise, when thou art tempted to such unlawful Lecherye as I spoke
of, or to false pyckinge, stealing, or praise, glory, and honor, when Christ
shall show him self in his glory at the general judgment, then he will give
to the blessed children of his father, which then shall be set upon his right
hand, disseuered from the refuse, deputed to dampnation on the lift hand: to
all them I say, that has their faith tried by temptation, and proved sound
and pure as gold* Christ laud and praise, saying to you. I was an hungered
and you gave me meat: I was a thirste and ye gave me drink: I lacked clothes
and ye gave me clothes, and so he will say, I had need of such ware as you
occupied, and you served me faithfully and trustely, and my wife was in thy
sight, and in thy company, where thou might have had occasion to tempte her
to ill, and yet thou dyddeste not. And to the honest wife, wydowe, or maid, he
will give like laud and praise, saying: that where they were sore tempted to
incontinencie, yet they did strongely and steadfastly resist and withstand
for Gods sake, and for his holy words sake, for such works of justice and
honestye the judge will praise us, as well as for the works of mercy, which
be namelye expressed in the Gospel, because we shall by them think likewise
to be praised for glory, when the judge shall say to us: Venite benedicti
patris mei possidete paratum vobis regnum. Math. xxv. Come you blessed children
of my father, and take possession of that glorious kyngedome, that was prepared
for you from the beginning of the world, in which we shall be no more
servants, but coparteners and coinheritours with our savior Christ, and
with all the glorious Aungelles, and glorious company of heaven, where we
shall have the gra^e that GOD gave us here, consummate, performed, and in his
hygheste perfectyon, which we call glory, which honor we shall have (as
Saint Peter says) when we shall be set a lofte and in high estate, which
Esa. xxvi. says. Tollatur impius ne videat gloriam Dei. Take away the wicked
sinner, that he se not the glory of GOD: And also Christ says. Go from me
you wicked persons into fire everlasting, when the dampened men and women,
wepinge and waylinge, and cryinge out, when they se the exaltation of good
men, shall say. Nos autem insensati. etc. Sap. v. we dastardes esteemed and
counted their lives but folishnes or madness, lo now how they be counted
among the children of God. All this shall redounde to the honor of them that
shall be saved. This said praise, glory, and honor, we shall be endued with
all by Christ, when he shall show him self in his glory. Therefore, though you
do not now se him, yet ye love For (as Saint Augustyne says) we may love
things that we se not, so that we have knoweledge of them, for no man can
love that, that he has no knowledge of. We know Christ by hear say, by
readinge, and hearing his holy gospelles declaringe his gracious goodness, for
which we must needs love him. And although you se him not, yet you do believe
upon him, for which belief you shall be merye, and have such joy as no
tongue can tell, for it shall be the joy of the glory of heaven, when you
shall receive for your reward, the end and perfection of your faith, which
is the health of your souls. Now here you know by Saint Peter's words, what
is the end of your faith, it is the health of your souls, which health shall
exclude al sickness, De qua salute exquisierunt atque scrutati sunt Prophetae.
Here Saint Peter styrreth up our devotion, and love that we should have to
our soul health, that we shall obtain and get by the trial and proof of
our faith, as he said before. He takes an argument of the old fathers holy
prophets, that in old time prophesied of the grace that should fall upon us
Math. xiii. Multi prophet et iusti cupierunt videre quae vos videtis et non
viderunt, et audire quae auditis et non audierunt. Esaias. lxiiii. prayed and
wysshed, Vtinam dirumperes coelos, et descenderes. Would God thou would
break the heavens, and would come down to be incarnate. And the Prophet
David Psalm. lxxix. Excita potentiam tuam, et veni vt saluos facias nos. Wake,
raise and stir up thy old power, which thou were wont to show by
wondrous miracles showed in old time, in Quousque irasceris super orationem
serui tui: in which he declares the vehemencye of his earnest love and desire
to see Christ, and said: Show thy face, and we shall be safe. And yet not
doubting but that he would come, he says in an other Psalm. Inclinauit coelos
and descendit and caligo sub pedibus eius. Where for the certentie and surenes
of his Prophecy, he uses the preterte^ce for the future tense, speaking of
the time to come, as though it were past in deed, because he was He has
inclined the heavens, and came down and trod darkness, that is to say, sin,
down under his feet. Damasc. li. iii. Cap. i. Hoc est inhumiliabilem eius
altitudinem in humilitate humiliauit, and descendit ad seruos suos. The highness
of his Godhead, which can not be made low by nature, he brought a low by
his humility and gentleness, which is the newest, the straungest, and most
wondrous work that ever was wroughte. Of which says Jeremy. Cap. xxxi.
Creauit Dominus nouum super terram, foemina circundabit virum. Our Lord has
wrought a new thing, or a strange thing upon the earth, a woman shall
enuyron or compass about a man, that is to say, the Vir desideriorum, a man
full of desires, because he was so desirous to know of the return of his
people of Israel, from the captivity of the Medes and Persies, and of the
coming of Messiah, and what should betide his people, at the later end he
was asserteyned by an angel sent from GOD, not only of the return of the
people from captivity, but also of the mystery of Christ's incarnation, and of
his passion, and at the last, of the final desolation, and Elius Hadrianus,
which of the ruynes of the old city, destroyed by Titus, made a town there,
and called it Elia, after his own name. Of these blessed prophets that
labored and searched so diligently for to know of the time of grace, that the
spirit of Christ, proceading from the son, and from the father (and
therefore he is called the spyryte of Christ, as he is called the spirit of
the father) that inspyred the said holy Prophets, and spoke in them, would
tell them when it should be, within how many years after them, and in quale
tempus, into what manner of time it should be differred, as whether till time
Et conslabu^t gladios suos in vomeres et lanceas suas in falces ca. ij. It
should be in time of peace, when all the world lived in rest and peace, and had
no war, but lived quietlye under the rule of the Romans, so that all men
might blow their swords into plowe yrons, and their spear heads and moris
pikes, into sithes, hokes, and sickles to cut their hay or corn. Then Christ
should come (says S. Peter) and suffer pains and passions, prenuncians eas
quae in Christo sunt passiones, speakinge in the plurell number, for he suffered
in soul, and in his futuras glorias, two special glories he had after his
passion, that is to say, the glory of his resurrection, and the glory of his
assention. All they (says S. Peter) had knowledge by revelation, that they
labored not for them self but for us, not to have the^ performed in their
time, nor upon them selves, but upon us, according as they be now taught you
by the ministers of the word of God, yt have preached to you continually, since
the holy gooste was sent from heaven upon the Apostles in sensible signs as
fierye tongues with diversity of languages, On whom the blessed Angels in
heaven desire to behold and look on: Not that they lack that glorious sight
at any time, but Saint Peter uses this manner of speaking, because the
joyful contemplation and sight of the Godheade, ever being present with
them, does saciate them, and perfectly content them, and yet so that they be
never wearye of it, but ever desire to continue in that contemplation. For
Christ says. Math. xviii. Angeli eorum in celis semper vident faciem patris
mei qui in coelis est. The angels see, and desire to see, desiereth to see, and
sees: For lest there should be any doubt in their desire, they be saciate,
and content, and assured while they desires. And lest state in which we
shall be like the angels, and then

The fourth treatise or Sermon.
PRopter quod succincti lu^bos mentis v^e. etc. Wherefore tucke up the Loins
of your mind, and be sober, and perfect, and trust on the grace that is
offered you by the revelation of Jesus Now in contemplation that all that the
Prophets labored and desiered to hear and to see, they were instructed by
the holy Ghost, that they should be performed, not for their times, but on us
in our times, that have heard the preachers of the Gospel ever since the
sensible coming of the holy Gooste in fierye tongues from heaven. Therefore
the blessed apostle Saint Peter exhorts us so to dispose our selves, that we
may be able and apt to receive this grace so that by our own fault we be
not frustrate and disapointed of it. And to that purpose Tucke up the loins of
your mind, and be sober and perfect, He uses a manner of speakinge often used
in the scriptures, which speaking of the soul of man applies to it bodily
members or limbs, and the operations and works of the body. As the eyes of
the soul. Ad te leuaui oculos meos* and Leuaui oculos meos in montes. I have
lift up mine eyes to the mountains, not the bodily eyes which some men lack,
but the sight of the mind, which serves as well by night as by day. And
the Apostle* Ephe. i. Det vobis illuminatos oculos cordis vestri, vt sciatis
que sit spes vocationis eius He prays that God would give them the eyes of
their heart, ii. Cor. ii. He calls the preachinge of the Gospel a smell or
sauoure, because that like as the thing that is not seen is perceived by the
savor, so the invisible GOD is smelled out and perceived among the people by
the preachers. And then as (you know) they that be used to stinking savors can
not live in Bucklersbury, or in the poticaries shop. So to some the true
preaching is a smell or savor that infecteth and kills them, as to them that
maligneth, grudgeth and abhors true doctrine, which be worse, and more sick
for the word, where to other it is a savor of life, and brings them to life
everlasting. Gustate and videte quonia^ suauis est dominus. Taste and see that
our Lord is sweet. And Esaias speaks as though the soul had womb or bealy
to conceive child. Esa. xxvi A faciae tua domine concepimus and quasi
parturiuimus and peperimus spiritum salutis. He speaks to almighty God as one
longing to se the glorious and most delectable face of God, which is so
delectable that the angels of heaven desiereth to behold it, and has
inestimable pleasure in the contemplacion of it, as I said a little rather, and
as saint Peter says here in this Chapter. By the beauty of thy face (says
the Prophet) we have conceived, and have in manner traueilled, Securam
fiduciam, sure trust to come to the thing that we desire to see. He uses
this metaphore and similitude of conceiuinge and laboring of child, because
that like as the mother has pain in traueilynge, and joy when the child is
borne, so that the former pain is anon forgotten for joy of the child. Ioh.
xvi. so the desire to see the face of God, to see the Godhead, has now pain
annexed, for the dilation and differringe of it, we can not have it when we
will, and as the wise man says, pro. xiii. Spes que differtur affligit
animam* The hope that is deferred, prolo^ged, and put of, vexes the mind. But
yet the sure trust to come to that glorious sight, does somewhat comfort us
for the time, but when we have perfectly obtained Gala. iiii. calling them his
little children, because they were so childishely turned by pseudapostles and
false Preachers, from the sincerity of the true doctrine of the Gospel that
he had instructed them in. My babes (says he) of which I travail now
again until Christ be new fourmed in you. I traueled once to bring you
from Infidelity to the true faith of Christ, as earnestly in mind as the
mother does bodily for her child. And now that you be thus inuegled, I must
labor and travail for you again to bring you to the right trade again.
Even such manner of speech Sint lumbi vestri precincti. That your loins be
girde up with the girdle of chastity, that they fly not abroad to unlawful
lusts of the flesh, and because the exterior acts of the body rises of
the inward concupiscence of the mind, Saint Peter would have the loins of
our mind girde up, that they vage not rouing abroad by the lewd thoughts and
unclean meditations. The loins of the mind be the wit and will, when the
wit is gird in and kept close, and exercised in honest study, and the will
desiereth nothing but that is comfortable to honesty, the^ the loins of your
mind be tucked up as Saint Peter would have them Loath, when he was dronken
defowled his own daughters which he would never have done, if he had kept
sobernes. Soberness is conseruer of friendship and amity and of peace, where
dronkennes breaks the^. Spes iubet esse ratas Ad prelia trudit inermem.
Horac. It makes all thing sure yt a man would have. If the dronken man would
kill the devil, surely he will think he ca^ do it while his cups be in. He will
fight though he lack both weapon and harne^s, and will break a loueday and
fall to variaunce with his best friend, yea, though it be his own brother,
Where contrary Quasi filij obedientie non co^figurati prioribus ignorantiae
vestre desiderijs. As children of obedience, or obedient children unto the
Sanctus, firm, fast, and sure in goodness, that is holy in all your
conversation and dealyng, like as he that called you is holy. To confirm that
Saint Peter alleges the saiynge of almighty GOD in the.xix. Chapter of
Leuiticus, co^maundynge the people of Israel, and by them all us faithful and
true Israelites christian people. Sancti estote, quoniam ego sanctus sum
dominus deus vester. Be you holy for I your Lord GOD am holy. And our
Savior Christ in the Gospel has a like saiynge. Mat. v. Estote and vos
perfectisicut and pater vester celestis perfectus est. Be you perfect as your
heavenly father is perfect. Where this word ( sicut) As, imports not
equality, but a certain imitation or folowinge, as Saint Paul bids:
Estote imitatores dei, follow God as nigh as man's fragilitie will permit Et
si patrem inuocatis eum quae sine personarum acceptione iudicat. etc. In these
words the Apostle persuades, and reasons, that we ought to be of clean
life, sobre and perfect, that we may obediently, and reverently hope and look
for glory at the revelation and coming of Christ in his glory, saying: If
you call him your father that judges without parcialitie according to every
persons work, see that you be conuersaunt in fear (and in your conversation
have fear) for the time that you be here abidinge in this world. In which
words he wills us to considre almighty God as our father, and also as our
judge. In that he is our Malachi. i. Si pater ego sum vbi est honor meus, si
dominus ego sum vbi est timor meus. If I be your father as you call me, Pater
noster qui es in coelis, where is the honor that you owe to me? If I be your
lord, where is the fear that you owe to me. Saint Peter joins them both
together, meaning that we owe unto almighty God love, as to our father, and
fear, as to our lord and judge, and specially because he judges without
parcialitie Nonne frater erat Esau Jacob, dicit dominus and dilexi Jacob, Esau
autem odio habui. They had done another good nor ill, as S. Paul says. Roman.
ix. therefore not for any thing of their part God said, I loved Jacob, and I
hated Esau, and then in very deed, for that that God loved Jacob, Jacob proved
a good man, and for that he hated Esau, Esau proved naught, and all his
posterity for the most part. And Jacob for his goodness, and for good works
folowinge of the same was saved, where Esau, or they of his issue, for their
noughtie living, were reproved or else the apparaunte goodness in it, is the
cause Math. xx. of them that were hired to work in the vineyarde, of which
some came to work primo mane, earlye in the morning, and some at five of the
clock at night, and yet they had equal wages, they that came last, as much
as they that came first. And when some that had labored all day grudged
thereat, and complained to the master and owner of the vineyarde, because they
had labored all day* and borne the burden and the heat of the day, and had
no more wages then they that had labored Amice non facio ribi iniuriam, toll
quod tuum est et vade. He had no wrong, that the other that came last, was
made as far forth as he that came first, because it stood in the mere
liberty and grace of the master, to bestow his monye as it pleased him, as
he said: An non licet mihi quod volo facere? May not I do with mine own as it
pleases me. As S. Paul says. Romans ix. An non habet potestatem figulus. etc.
Has not the pitcher maker of cley, power to make of one piece of cley, one
vessel to do honest service at the boorde, and an other to do vile offices? so
in our purpose, in as much as it stood in Gods mere liberty, to mind or
will to Jacob and to Esau as it pleased him, Esau had no wrong by that that
Jacob was elect, neither almighty God secundum vniuscuiusque opus. And this
is playnelie against them that regard not works, trusting so much to their
faith, that little they care what work they do. Here Saint Peter says that
we shall be judged after our works: And Christ in the Gospel declares the
same, Esuriui, and dedistis mihi manducare. etc. I was hungry and ye gave me
meat, I was thyrstye, and ye gave me drink. etc. Therefore Saint Peter
bids us use a certain fear in all our conversation And a little before
Saint Peter willed us to be holy in all our conversation and dealinge,
byinge and sellinge, eatinge and drinkinge, workinge and resting, speakinge
and talkinge, all these be works and deeds after which we shall be judged,
therefore in them we have need to use fear of God, and surely, all the
sinful living of people comes for lack of fear. Why does one neighbor
deceive an other now in this fair time, by false weightes or measures, by
false lyghtes, by false oothes? because they fear not God that has forbid us
so to do. Likewise of adultry, why does a wedded man take an other ma^s wife, or
a wife another woman's husband? It is for lack of fear of God, that forbids
us to desire in mind to have an other man's wife. Likewise generally to Non
mechaberis, Thou shall do no lechery. Men speak franckly and freely when they
sclaunder their neighbor, as though there were no hurt in so doing, and all
for lack of fear, men fear not God that bids us by the prophet, Refrain
thy tongue from ill, and thy lips that they speak no gile. Psalm. xxxiii And
fear is so necessary, that without fear no man can be justified, or made good
in the syghte of GOD. Eccles. i. and if he can not be justified, then he can
not be saved. It follows in the text Scientes quod non corruptibilibus auro
vel argento redempti estis de vana vestra conuersatione pattern traditionis sed
precioso sanguine quasi agni incontaminati and immaculati Christi. Here Saint
Peter sufferinge no more then the lamb does, when he Mat, xv. the Gentilles
were brought up as their fathers.i. Cor. viij. and.x. Now to our purpose, they
were taught by their fathers and bringers up, to worship that for a god, and
to give it divine honor that was no God, were brought up in a folishe trade,
and in vain conversation, by their fathers lore, tradicions, and teaching:
from such vain conversation, we were redeemed, not by money, but by the
precious blud of the lamb our Savior Christ, most immaculate, and vndefowled
from all sin, original and actual. He was known (says saint Peter) and
appointed of God that he should redeem us, And he was declared and known
plainly now in the latter days, And toward the end of the world for our
sakes, and to save us, that by his instruction published and spredde abroad
among us by the preachers of his Gospel be made faithful beleuers on
almightye God, which raised our said savior Christ from death to life
again, and gave him glory at his resurrection, and also at his glorious
ascension, because you should trust to to have like glory by him. And all this was not for any indigence or neade that he had to be so exalted, but
for our sake, that so (says Saint Peter) your fayeth might be on God, and
your whole hope and trust in GOD that you may receive like glory of GOD.
Because saint Peter says that the misterye of Christ's Sieve ingrederetur sieve
egre deretur pascua inueneret. Whether he should come in by his wit, or did go
forth by exterior senses he should every way find pasture, feadynge and
refresshynge pasture within by knowledge or the touching in felyng, the ear is
in hearing. Ephe. i. Benedixit nos in Christo Jesus sicut elegit nos in ipso
ante mundi constitutionem. God the father has blessed us in Christ, as his
lymmes or members, like as he has chose^ us in him before the making of the
world, so that the choosing of Christ GOD and man in one person was
presupposed, and went before the chosing of us his members to be incorporate,
unite, and joined to him by faith and grace as one body with him. Like as the
builder first intends a house of this fashion or that fashion, and then
intends to provide timber, lyme, and stone, and workemenne Dilexisti eos
sicur and me dilexisti. Ioh. xvii. Thou haste loved them as thou haste loved
me. Aug. Because that he loved us in him, like as he chose us in him before the
making of the world, for he yt loved his only begotten son, surely must
neades with all Tollite me, and mittite in mare, and cessabit mare a vobis.
Scio enim ego quoniam propter me tempestas hec grandis est super vos. Ionae. i.
Take me (says this blessed prophet) and cast me into the sea, and the sea will
cease his rage, for I know that this In eo enim in quo passus est ipse and
tentatus, potens est and eis qui tenta^tur auxiliari. Heb. ii. In that that he
suffered and was tempted, he is able to help them that be tempted or troubled.
For he will not suffer us to be tempted above our power, but will get us
advantage to resist temptation, and a way to escape from it, that we shall be
able to abide it, and not to be overthrown by it. i. Cor x. Now further to
the saying of Jonas. For I know that this storm is a sign that even so it was
in Gods foreknowledge showed him self for our sakes (as, s. Peter says here)
now at the last cast of the world, in a mortal body made of a woman, made
under the law, that he might deliver the^ that were subject to the law, that so
by Christ our faith and our hope should be in god. that by him we may be bold
to trust for like grace of him, as I said before. It follows in the text.
Animas vestras castificantes in obedie^tia charitatis in fraternitatis amore.
etc. Chastifiyng your souls in the obedience of charity. Pull down your
souls and keep the^ under obedience, yea and in charitable obedience. For
obedience i. Io. iii. My children let us not love in word and tongue alone, but
in deed and in truth, specially considering whosoever has the substance of
this world, and sees his brother have need and closes his heart from him, how
does the love of god abide in him? In as much as he co^temneth ye infirmity and
poverty of his even christene. For this is the beginnynge of fraternall
charity, to have pitye on our neighbors infirmitye. And to dye for our
brethren is the perfection of charity, the highest point of Charity and of
fraternall love that is there spoken of, In that we know the charity of GOD
that he laid away his life for us, and we must ley aside our souls for our
brothers. And our savior Christ in the gospel says. Maiorem charitatem. etc.
Greater charity no man has then to lose his life for his friends. And so we
here the perfection of charity, but yet let us more inwardlye consider the
beginning of the same Fraternall love. If thou be not meet and ready to dye
for thy brother, yet give thou of thy goods to healpe and to save thy neadye
brother, and do it not of pride or boastynge, but of thy most entier and
inward sweetness of mercy toward him. Peradventure thou will say, why
should I give my money to save him from harm? He is none of mine, let him
perish in his own iniquity and noughtines, I have nothing to do with him. If
thou answer or think after this manner the love of our father of heaven abides
not in thee. And if the love of our father abides not in thee, thou art not
borne or gotten of God, then how can thou glory or be glad Renati no^
exsemine corruptibili sed incorruptibili. etc Borne again not by any
corruptible sede, but by an i^corruptible sede by the word of the living god
and that abides for ever. Here ye blessed apostle. s. Peter reasons and
swadeth us to cleannes of life and to chastise our souls in obedient charity,
and in fraternal love, by reason of our spiritual birthe. There is no natural
gentleman of birthe but if it so chance that for the time he be moved to
do a myscheuous deed, if a discrete man would move him to the contrary,
recitynge his Progenye and Auncestoures, saiynge: beware what ye do, remember
your blood, distayn Esa. xl. Omnis caro vt fenum, and omnis gloria eius tanquam
flos agri, exaruit fenum, et flos eius decidit, verbum autem domini manet
ineternum All flesh is like grass of the medowe, and his glory (that is to
sai) carnal lust or pleasure, is like the flower of the meadow that makes a
pleasant show for the time, and so does carnal delectacion content and please
for a while, but even as the flower within awhile withers and falls a way,
so does carnal joy fade and fall: it abides not, but many times turns to
repentance, but the word of God, that is the seed by which you were gotten
and made the children of God by regeneration by your second getting, abides
for Roma. v. Si vnius delicto multi mortui sunt, multo magis gratia dei and
donum vnius hominis Jesus Christi in plures homines abundauit. Where the Apostle
compares the offense of Adam to the grace of Christ, for the grace of Christ
is much John. iii. Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua et spiritu sancto non
potest introire in regnum dei. Except a man be borne again by water and the
holy spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. And even like as
they that were circumcised in their infansye, knew not what it meaned that
they suffered with great pain, neither perceived any thing of the promysse
that God made to them that suffered it. In like manner baptysme saves our
children infauntes, although they perceive nothing what is done unto them,
neither the reason thereof. But Christ that said: Sinite paruulos venire ad
me. Mathewe. xix. Let babes or children come to me, has provided arms to
bear them to him, which be the arms of our mother holy church, by O mulier
magna est fides tua fiat tibi sicut vis: Math. xv. fides tua (inquit) non fides
filie. And also Centurio a captain in Capharnaum came to Christ, praying him to
help his servant that was ill vexed with a paulsy, Christ offered to come him
self to the man's house, and to heal Quorum fidem vt vidit, dixit, homo
remittuntur tibi peccata tua, et ait paralitico tibi dico, surge, toll lectum
tuum and vade in domum tuam. Luke. v. and. Mark. ii. He saw the faith of them
that Math xviii. Qui crederit and baptisatus fuerit, saluus erit. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved: and he that believes not shall be
dampened. Of this they take that it is necessary for him that shall be baptized,
that he believe. Now say they, infantes lacking the use of reason cannot
believe, therefore they be and in deed. Example, a Physician though he be fast a
sleep, he has the science of physic, but yet if you put an vrinall in his
hand, he cannot attentius more earnestly then we have don, and more diligently


The second chapter.
DEponentes igitur omnem malitiam et omnem dolu^ and simulationes et inuidias,
et omnes detractiones, sicut modo geniti infantes rationabiles sine dolo lac
concupiscite. In the first chapter of this epistle (which I have passed over
and expounded as God put into my mind) the blessed Apostle saint Peter
chiefelye magnifyeth our regeneration and second birth, by which we be borne
to life everlasting, where through our carnal parents we were borne to dye.
First he gives thanks to God that has done so much for us as so to get us
again to the inheritance of heaven, that will never be corrupt, that never will
judge in whom is no partiality. And knowing should do to him which is
contrary to the law of Gen xxxiii. When Dina daughter to Jacob, and sister to
the.xii. Patriarchs sons of Israel, would walk abroad to see the women of
the country, and to be seen, as the manner of maidens is, spec^tatu^ veniunt,
veniunt spectentur vt ipse, she came to the town where Emor was Lord, and a
great Dina he was enamored and would needs have her, and so had his pleasure
of her whyther she would or not. And yet his love swaged not but ever still he
loved her more and more. In so much that he prayed and required his father to
be suter to Jacob, father to the damsel and to be woer for him that he might
have her to wife and mary with her, and so did Emor this young man's father, but
Jacob would make no grant til his sons came to the co^municacion. When they
herd that Dina their sister was deflowred and ravished by force, they chafed
and took the matter very angerlye. Notwithstanding after large offers and
fair promises made to them by this good gentleman Emor, and by the young
man Sichem his son. Responderunt filij Jacob, Sichem The sons of Jacob made
answer to Sichem and to his father, in gyle, for they were in a rage for the
raueshing of their sister. Mark their answer and their intent, and you shall
perceive the gile, and what gile is. This was their answer: It is unlawful
and a great offense for us to mary our sister to a man that is uncircumcised,
but if ye will come to our religion and be circumcised as we be, then it shall
be lawful for us to mary together, your men with our women, and our men with
your women, and so we may dwell together, and live like friends, and if you will
not then let us have our sister away, and we will be Emor and his son Sichem
very well. Sichem made no tarying, but did as they desired, and forthwith was
circumcised, for the fervent love that he had to Dina, and then the father and
the son came into the town and persuaded all the people to agree, and so they
did agree and circumcised all the men of the town, what age so ever they were of.
But then followed the subtle and false intent of Dinays brothers so^s of Jacob.
For on ye third day after the circu^cising of the people, when their wou^des
were sorest yt they might not well stir: in came to the town with their swerdes in
their hands Symeon and Leui, brothers to Dina by father and mother, for Lya was
their mother. Genesis xxx. and they slew all the^ that were circumcised and Emor
lord of the town and Sichem his son with all, and took away their sister with
the^. And then came in the rest of Jacobs sons with dolus, gile. If there
have been any such gyle used by fair promises and large offers to train
any man or woman to be of sinister or false opinion or heresy to kill his
soul, under the pretense or color of evangelical truth or liberty, this
must be left and laid down as saint Peter says here: The sutteltie and gile
that is used in uttering of your wares by such wiles as you use, for the
colorable setting forth of the^, must be left and laid down, and no more
used. There is an other gile, which in comparison of this is called bonus dolus
good gile, such as men of war feighting in a just cause uses to circumuent and
deceive their enemies. Such gile Iosue* viii. used against the town of Hay,
where his host were before Iosue. vii. At the second saute he set a strong bend
of men to the number of five thousand in a stale at the West side of the town
of Hay. And then the captain with his army showed freshlye against the town,
as though they would have fought with them. The king there encouraged by the
victory at the former skirmige, advanced forth boldly against Iosue the
captain. And Iosue reculed back and ran away, as the other company had
done before, and when by his reculing he had slocked the king of Hay a great
wai out of the town, he gave a sign to them that lay in the stale, which rose
up and got into the town bonus dolus a laudable gile, to vanquish and overcome
Gods enemies, which had discomforted them before. You must also lay away and put
from you all simulacion or faining, showing one thing for an other, having one
thing in the mouth and an other thing closed within the heart, as Ioab did to
Amasa. ii. Reg. xx. suspecting that Amasa would have put him out of favor
with the king David when he met with him, he came lovingly to him and said.
Salve mi frater, God speed you or God save you my brother, and with his i. Reg.
xxi. when he fled to Achis king of Geth, when the kings servants saw
David, they Stultitiam simulare loco prudentia summa est, To feign foolishness
in some case, is very high wisdom. This is not other, every man shall
rejoice of an other man's glory, as much as of his own. In hell this vice
shall be at rest, for there he shall see nothing detraction, or backbitynge, by
which secretelye behind a man's back, a man's fame or good name is defaced and
defowled. Such backbiters that depraueth and missayeth men behind their
backs destroying their good name, Saint Paul reherseth among them that God
has let run in reprobum sensum into such madness as to think nothing good,
but that is naught in deed, and to do as is inconvenient for men to do,
Susurrones detractores, deo odibiles, they be such as God hates or as the
other translation has dei osores, such as hates God, for they hate their
neighbors who^ God would have them to love, and so they love neither God nor
his pleasure and commandment. Ecclesiast. xli. bids us, Curam habe de bono
nomine, hoc enim magis permanebit tibi quam mill thesauri preciosi et magni:
thou must care and take heed and provide for thy good name, for that will stick
by the better then a thousand rich and great treasures, and Solomon says. Pro.
xxii. Melius est bonu^ nomen, quam diuitie multe. Better is a good name then
great riches. Therefore he that diminishes thy good name, does worse then if
he pyked thy purse, or stole all thy riches, and can never have his offense
forgiven, till he have made restitucio^, and then considering how hard it is
to pull out of men's heads that opinion that thou have once brought into their
heads by thy railing and backbiting tongue. By this you may consider the danger
sinner, except the fact be euidente and plain, or the signs so evident, that
they can not be countersaid, Epistola ad Nepocianu^ de vita clericoru^) we
must beware that we have another itchinge tongues, nor itchinge ears: itching
tongues, busy clatering and raylinge, itching ears, ever open and glad to be
clawed with news and noughty tales. But few there be that forsake this vice
of detraction, and a man shall seldom find one so clear and blameles, that he
will not be glad to reprove and blame other folks living. And men have so
great pleasure in this vice, that they yt be not poluted or spotted with other
vices, yet they fall to this vice, as into the extremeste and last snare of the
devil, and the lightness of the hearer gives occasion, authority, and
courage to this detraction and backbiting, for if there were no hearers, there
would be no tale bearers, therefore should make an hedge of thorns before our
ears, lest we should here any wicked tongues, Eccle. xxviii. Let the terrible
sentence of damnation at the general judgment prick our ears, as it were
thorns, and then we shall be afraid to hear shreud tales. And the prophet
rehearsyng the virtues that makes a man mete to dwell in the tabernacle of our
lord, reckneth this for one: opprobrium non accepit aduersus proximos, that
has not taken or believed ill saying against his neighbors, such a one is mete
to dwell in heaven, then he that is of contrary appetite, must dwell in hell.
Peradventure you will say, I should do Proverb. xxiiii. Cum detractoribus non
commiscearis quoniam repent consurget perditio eorum, and ruinam vtriusque
quis nouit. Meddle not with backbiters, for their destruction shall rise suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of the^ both: of the backbiter, and of him that
gives him the hearing? as who should say, no man but God alone. All these
vices rehearsed, and such others, must be laid away and purged out of the
stomachs of your souls, which done, you shall even like reasonable infantes
lately borne, covet and desire to be fed with that milk that is without gile
or deceit, the milk of the soul, and not of the body, by which you may grow,
and wax big toward salvation, specially if you have tasted (says S. Peter)
that God is sweet, good, and infantes rationabiles, an other says, rationa
bile and sine dolo lac, the third redeth it, Lac illud non corporis sed animi,
and this last agrees with the second, meaning that the milk that we must
desire to be nursed with all, is not the milk of the body, as nether cow
milk, nor the milk of woman's breasts that fedeth the body, but it is the
milk of reason by which the reasonable soul is noursed and fed, and that is
holy doctrine, as I shall say anon. The first translation saying infantes
rationabiles, says so not without a cause, for infantes and babes have some
properties not laudable, as ignorance, oblivion, insolency, and wantones,
which S. Paul taxes. i. cor. xiiii Be you not children lacking discretion, but
as a child bears no malice, so must we beware that we bear no malice: this is
a good property in which we must follow the child, and withal we must use
reason to discern the good from the il, that no persuasion or reasoning
peruerte us from the true and wholesome doctrine, to any error or heresy, for
the true milk, the true doctrine that shall make us to grow to health and
salvation, is without gile, and without deceit, it begileth no man. Blessed S.
Peter calls by the name of milk, the first principles of our faith, and
necessary rules that every man and woman must believe, if they shall come to God
and be saved, as the mystery of Christ's incarnation of his passion and
resurrection, and such like as be comenly preached and taught in the church,
these must be vttred Heb. vi. gives to the Hebrews plentye of such milk, as
first for them that comes to Christ, repentance, abrenunciation, and
forsaking the devil with all his pomp, and of their old manner of sinful
living, either by them selves or by the church in their names, because of
infantes that I spoke of heretofore. Another is faith on God: the third is
baptism and the effect thereof, the.iiii. is Confirmation by imposition or
setting the bishops hands on him or her that is confyrmed: the fyft is the
resurrection of our bodies: the syxt, is the eternal judgment and reward
that God shall give us, according to our works. These be the beginnings of
christian doctrine, with which they that newly comes Heb. v. Solidus cibus,
sad meat, or fast meat, that shall rather hurt a beginner, then feed him or
do him good, it may turn his stomach, and make him to give up all, as things
impossible for him to digest, to attain or learn, and to exercise and to
perform in deed. And this meat agrees well with them that be perfect,
perfectoru^ autem est solidus cibus, eorum qui pro co^fuetudine excercitatos
habe^t sensus ad discretionem boni et mali, that by use have their wits
exercised to discern the good doctrine, from the bad and corrupt doctrine, the
truth from i. Cor. iii. and yet afterward hearing of their dissentions, and
debate about their baptistes, Cum quis dicat ego sum Pauli, alius aute^ ego
Apollo, where as one said, I am Pawles Christen man, carnal folks, that he
calls there animalis homo, whose senses and appetites be depressed and kept
down to sensual pleasures, not submittinge them selves to the rule of reason,
directed by the holy gooste, and these be carnal, fleshely or beastly in
living. Carnal, fleshly or beastlye in knowledge be they, that of almighty
God and heavenly things, imageneth and judges by corporal fantasies, as of
God, that he is a fair old man with a white beard, in them the feruencie and
heat of the spirit ad Hedibia^, And they be spiritual in knowledge, that
considers of almighty God above all things, that his excellency and glory
passes all things that may be seen or imagined by man's wits, and
digested. They that Saint Peter writ unto, Pontus, Galatia, Capadotia. etc.
Therefore specially he aduertiseth them ever to desire that milk of plain
doctrine, concerning the first principles and necessary articles of our faith,
in which he had instructed them. This is milk without gile or deceit, there
is no falsehead admi^te or mingled with it (says Saint Peter) meaning that
there is an other milk that is mixed with gile or falsehead, as the milk that
is spoken of. Prou. i. Fili misi te lactauerint peccatores ne acquiescas eis,
My child, if sinners and noughtye lyuers give the suck of milk, consent not to
them, as if they say, come, let us take a standinge for a purse, we shall get
good enough to make merry withal, or else let us be avenged on this man or that
man, Proverb. xvi. Vir iniquus lactat amicum suum and ducit eum per viam non
bonam. A wicked man gives milk to his companion, and brings him in a
shreude trade, and into an ill way: As he that is a baudy fellow, given to
horehuntinge, will make many more such, and bring them to ill company, and
to naught with him, so will dycers, so will carders, and so will all
unthrifts, first to pleasures, and consequently afterward to the very botome
of Coagulatum est sicut lac cor eorum, their heart is crudded like Milk.
Ambrose upon the same. Vt enim lac natura sua Even like as milk by his own
kind is pure, fair and clear, but it waxes sour by corruption, so man's
heart is pure, clear, and indifferente to all doctrine, but when the teacher is
sour and corrupt, it is no maruayle if he do sone corrupt his scholar,
specially if the scholar have not his wit well exercised, to put difference
betwyxte good and ill. And how many have we known so fed with this sour
crudded milk that they have been made strong and sturdie fellows, paste
correction or reformation, growinge toward makes a man to grow to salvation
(as S. Peter says here) specially if you have tasted (says he) that our
Lord God is sweet and good: As who should say, some there be that for all
the teachinge and preachinge that they have, yet they be never the better,
neither have any swetenes in God nor in his holy word, and it is no maruayle
if they never cease to defyle him, and his holy word with earthlye desires and
pleasures. And as we see that he that has no pleasure in his meat, but eats
it against heart, and against his stomach, shall not profyt by his meat, so
he that feleth no swetenes in Christ and in his holy word, how can he grow
to salvation by it? it will not be. Then we taste that and wrongs done to us,
and when we can be content for our soul health to pray, to fast,

The syxt treatise or sermon.
AD quem accedentes lapidem viuum ab hominibus quide^ reprobatu^ a deo autem
electum and honorificatum. etc. To whom ye come (says S. Peter) as to the
living stone that me^ have reproved and set naught by, but God has in
sacerdotiu^ sanctu^, and to a holy preisthod, offering spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Now presupposing that we have tasted that
god is sweet and plesau^t to our souls, in these words rehearsed, the blessed
Apostle S. Peter begins to auau^ce us, and set us forward to higher
perfection, willing us (in as much as we be come to Christ, as to the fyrme,
fast, and sure stone, and foundation of the church and of al godly religion)
that we should be edified and builded on him as spiritual houses builded on
the fast rock, and that we should be as holy preistes, offeringe Pontus,
Galatia, Capadotia* etc. that Saint Peter writes this letter unto, by faith
and charity came to well set on the hard rock, stands fast and shrynketh
not for any violence. For this property Psalm. Cxvii. Lapidem quem
reprobauerunt edificantes hic factus est in caput anguli. And also to the
saying of the Prophet Esaye. Ecce ponam in Sion lapidem summum angularem
probatum electum preciosum. And because Saint Peter touches and speaks
first of the reproach of this stone, according to the words of the Psalm,
and afterward of his exaltation and honor, according to the words of Esaias, I
will Lapidem quem reprobauerunt edificantes, hic factus est in caput anguli. The
stone which the buylders reproved and cast by, it was made the head stone in
a corner of the building. Was there any such stone in deed so set at naught,
and cast by Lapide^ que^ reprobauerunt edificantes, hic factus est in caput an
guli. But because this narratio^ has no evidence of scripture, it is not best
to ground any scripture Lapidem quem repro. etc. spoken originally, and to
the lettre of our Savior Christ self, and so he alleges the same words.
Mat. xxi. as spoken by him self after the parable of the good man that made a
vineyard, and set it to laborers to dress it, and keep it, and when time came
to gather the fruytes, he sent his servants to gather the fruits, first one
company, and after an other company, and these rude fellows the laborers in
the vyneyarde took some of them that were sent to them and beat them, and
^lewe some of of the psalm, making for his purpose, saying: anointed, that
was so long before promised of almighty God, by the mouths of his holy
Prophets, for they saw all things that were spoken of before, to be performed
in the anointed that they looked for, performed in Christ in very deed. They saw
the time that Jacob in ye blessing of his son Judas appointed, and also Daniel
the prophet spoke of to agree, and the^ put in effect and come in deed, that
when yt holy one of al holy ones should come, there should be no more kings
anointed of ye lineage of Jude. For yt time yt christ came, Herod was their
king an alien, an Idumey, desce^ding of Esau, and not of They saw also his
wondrous works and miracles timber or stuff to make up their audience, and
away the bindinge stone our Savior Christ, that he may not join together
all people in the In quo and positi sunt, in whom we live and move, and be
(as Saint Paul speaks) God has made us and set us, and ordained us to
believe upon him. And beside that offends in words against Christ, and
against his blessed Sacraments after the manner aforesaid, our Savior
Christ is Lapis offensionis, and petra scandali. As saint Peter says here,
he is a stumblyng Stone, such a one as men take harm of, and be agreued
withal, not for occasion given of him, but by the pride Quia super quem
ceciderit lapis iste conteret enim. Math. xxi. Qui non credit iam iudicatus
est. He that believes not is judged already. The sentence is given and past in
the mind and foreknowledge of the judge our Savior Christ. Because that
saint Peter says here that Christ was Lapis offensio^is and Petra scandali.
The stone that men should take hurt by, and that by him men should take
occasion to fall even as the prophets had said of him before. And as the
Gospels reherseth of him likewise. I think Luke. ii. It is written that when
Christ's foster father, and Mary his mother presented him in the temple, as the
law was. The holy and well disposed man Symeon took him in his arms with
great joy, because he knew it was he that should be the consolation and
comfort of Israel. And he knew the time was then come, or very near hand,
when Christ should come. He knew it also by revelation of the holy Gooste
that then moved him to go to the Temple, as it is there said. Et venit in
spiritu in templum. Where after great joy of that he had seen, he then Ecce
positus est hic in ruinam and in resurrectionem multorum in Israel, and
insignum cui contradiceretur, Et tuam ipsius animam pertransibit gladius. Lo
(says he.) This child is set to make men fall, and to make many men to rise
among the people of Israel. And he is set as a sign or a mark that folk will
cou^tersay and speak against. And as for your part (said he) to Marie his
mother, the sword of sorrow shall pearce your heart, which yet shall redound
and turn to the comfort of many others. Here you see that this blessed man
said that Christ should be the ruin of many a one, and such a one as
should be countersaid and spoken against Mat. xi. When saint John Baptist
sent two of his disciples to Christ to ask him a question for their
learning, whether it was he that they looked for, that about that time they
knew should come to save mankind, or whether they should look for another?
Because they should not say as the Jews were ever ready and wont to say.
Tu de te ipso testimonium dicis, testimonium tuum non est veru^. Thou bear
witness of thy self, thy witness is not true. Christ referred them to his
works that by them he might allure them to believe upon him, knowing that the
blind were made to see: The lame were made to go: The leprouse be made
clean, the deaf to hear* The dead were raised to life again, and that the
poor were taught the Gospel and good tidings Beatus est qui non fuerit
scandalizatus in me. Blessed is he that by me takes none occasion to fall, or
to offend. In which words Christ touched the messengers and many others by
them. They saw him a mortal man as other were, they could scarce believe any
Godhed in him, yet saying that Christ knew their wan and fainte believe, and
the secrets of their hearts, this made them to have more affiance and believe
upon him, for it is above ye knowledge of a pure man to know ye secrets of an
other man's mind. They knew he spoke by the^, and he knew they were offended by
yt they saw in him And not only these messengers of saint John, but also
many a thousand others be offended by ordained to remitte sins by penance,
which Mat. xii. Viri Niniuite surge^t in iudicio cum generatione ista and
conde^nabunt eam quia penitentiam egerunt in predicatione Ione. The people of
the great City of Niniue were greatly given to carnal pleasures, and to
vicious living. Wherefore they were threatened that within forty days their
city should be ouerturned and destroyed, yet by the preaching of Jonas the
prophet they did penance in sackclothe, in clothe of hear and ashes, and
fasted by and by, nor cast them into the fire before their queen of Saba in the
south part of the world shall rise in judgment and shall condemn you. Math
xii. For she came even from the fardest and best part of luckye and fruitful
Arabie, liynge hear Solomon. Therefore at the terrible day of Blessed is he
that is not offended by me. By which they perceived that Christ meaned by
them that they were offended by him, not beleuyng any Godheade or Godly power
to be in him, because they considered no more but the infirmity of the flesh,
which they saw in him as in other men, but then perceiuinge that he knew
their thoughts, this made them the more inwardely and earnestlye to consider
the miracles and marvelous works to which he referred them, and by that to
take him as one far above a pure man according to saint John Baptistes
prophets which were their prechers, because they Ma^da remanda, manda rema^da,
expecta reexpecta, expecta, reexpecta, modicu^ ibi, modicu^ ibi. Esa. xxviii.
For declaration whereof you must understand that when the holy Prophets would
wythdrawe the people from vice and Sin, they used the word of Commandment
(as saying) God sends you word and commands you, thus to do, and thus to
say, and thus to live. And when they preached or prophesied of Gods benefits
that God would do for the people if they lived well, and according to his
pleasure, they used the word of Expectation and lokyng for, as saying, if you
keep his laws and commandments, you may surely look for plentye of corn
and cattle, Modicu^ ibi modicu^ ibi, of your threatenings yt you would have us
to fear, and of your fair promises yt we should look for, we se little here, we
se little there. Therefore because you thus order your self to the word of god
and to his prechers (says the pro. Esai there) eue^ as you said in your
ray^i^g and mocki^g of Gods word so it shall fall upon you, you shall Propter
hocaudite verbum domini viri illusores. Hear the word of God you mocking men
that make so light of the word of GOD in the preachers mouths, or in the
divine service of the church, which is none other but the word of God.
Dixistis nos percussimus fedus cum morte and cum inferno fecimus pactum
flagellum inundans cum transierit non veniet super nos quia posuimus mendacium,
spem nostram and mendatio protecti sumus. You have said or you order your
selves to gods word Flagellum inundans cum transierit non veniet supernos. When
the scourge of GOD that over runs all like as a flod runs over a whole
country (as the vengeance of God does) it shall not fall on us nor hurt us,
all that these common preachers says, threateninge us be but lies, we trust
upon lies, and by liers and false flatteryng preachers that gives us sweet
words, and sets us at liberty to live as we list, and promises fair to
us, we be defended and safe inoughe. I think the prophet Esaias saw our time in
spirit, Ecce ego mitta^ in fundame^tis Sio^ lapidem angulare^, lapidem probatu^
preciosum infundamento fundatu^, qui crediderit non festinet. S. Paul. To. x.
and.s. Peter here reads. non co^fundetur. I will set in the foundation of Sion
(by which is understand the Catholic church of Christ, which begone in
Sion, where the holy temple was founded within the city of Jerusalem) a corner
stone, tried, and proved, and precious, laid in the foundation. Whosoever
believes on him, let him make no haste (says the old text of Esaias) shall not
be ashamed says.s. Peter, and also.s. Paul. And both comes to one purpose:
He that believes on this stone our savior s. querere retributionem. glo.
inter. to have furthwith the reward for his believe. Let him make no haste to
see by and by the threatenynges of GODS words spoken by the Prophets or
Preachers, nor to obtain and have by and by the rewards that Gods word,
promises unto them that do well and vertuouslye. It will not be had
furthwyth, as these, viri illusores, these mockers of Gods word, would have
it. But it is differred till the time when it shall do us more good, as God
knows better then we do. And therefore believe, and at length thou shall not be
confounded, ashamed, or dismayed, according to the letter of saint Peter and
also of saint Paul. And according to this says the prophet. Expecta dominum
viriliter age, Tarry and look for our Lord God, play the man, and be not so
childish as to believe nothing that is promised the, except thou have it in
hand forthwith. And then thy heart shall be comforted says the prophet.
Therefore sustain and bear with our lord And likewise the comminations and
threatninge for oppression, extorcion, and such other misliuyng, that these
mockers of Gods word thinks will never come because they see it not at hand,
they shall then know, when they shall feel the^ in deed. Sola vexatio
intellectum dabit auditui. Esaias. Only the vexation when it comes, will make
you to understand that you have heard by the prophets Apo. xxi, Murus
ciuitatis habet fundamenta.xii. and in ipsis.xij. nomina.xii. apostoloru^ agni.
The wall of ye heavenly city that.^. John saw in his revelation and vision,
had.xii. foundations, or foundation stones, and in the^ were the names of the
xii. apostles, of the lamb our savior Christ. Primo contra Iouinianum. And
upon Christ as upon the principal foundation, and on them and their holy
doctrine al Christ's church, the whole congregation of christen people, and
every man an woman of the same must build as spiritual houses apt and able for
almightye God to inhabit and dwell in. Saint Augustine deuiseth this edifice
of Christ's church, on Christ and on his apostles nobly well, saying: that when
the foundation is laid here on earth, the walls be builded upon it, and the
weight of the walls presses and weyeth downewarde, because the foundation is
beneath allow, but in as much as our foundation is in heaven, we must be
builded upward toward heaven, and thitherwarde we must wey

The seventh treatise or
THe blessed Apostle Saint Peter prosecuteth this spiritual buylding that I
spoke of in thend of my last sermon, saying that we must be builded on this
stone our savior Christ as an holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Occasion of this saying saint Peter took of
the saying of al mighty God by Moses, to the people of Israel Exodus xix. If
you will hear my voice, and will keep my commandment, you shall be my
peculier and special people of all people: all the world is mine, et vos
eritis mihi in rengnu^ sacerd otale et gens sancta ta. And I will have you a
priestly kingdom and an holy nation. Alluding to this Saint Peter writes here
Vos autem genus electum regale sacerdo cium gens sancta populus acquisitionis.
You be a till the worlds end, as well to women as to me^ regale sacerdotium,
kings and priests: and to confirm their opinion they allege the saying of
saint John in the first chapter of the Apocalips, where he speaks of Christ,
saying: Qui dilexit nos, and lauit nosa peccatis nostris in sa^guine suo et
fecit nos regnum et sacerdotes deo et parrisuo. He loved us and washed us from
our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom and priests to God and to his
father. Of these authorities the Lutherians take an argument and occasion to
confound and deface all good order of divine and humane things, allowing the
women to serve the altar, and to say mass while the men God would have us to
keep, and that all the gospels de vocatione gentium, cap. iii. gives us a very
notable rule to expound scriptures, and it is the same rule in effect that
Tichonius puts for the third rule which he called de specie et genere, as
S. Austine writes iii. de doctrina Christiana. Saint Ambrose rule is this: In
scripture many times that thing is said and spoken universally of the whole,
which is verified and true only of the part. He puts there many examples, of
which some I will rehearse, leaving the other for to avoid prolixitie and
tediousnes. The prophet says in the psalm: Alleuat dominus omnes qui corruunt
et erigit omnes eli Our Lord God takes up all them that fall, and sets up
al them that be broken or bruised. By this text it seems that who soever
falls to sin, God sets him up again, or if he be broken against the
stone, (that I spoke of before) by sin God sets him on his feet again,
which if it might be so understand and found true, then should never manne
nor woman be dampened, and then it might seem true that I said of the mockers
of Gods word that they had made a leege with death, and a covenant with
hell, that neither death nor hell should hurt them. And our Savior says in
the Gospel: Si exaltatus fuero a terra omnia traham ad me ipsum. As though he
promised that when he was crucified, he would convert and draw to him all men
and women of the world which Dominus de celo prospexit super filios hominum vt
videat si est intellige^s aut requirens deum, omnes declinauerunt simul
inutiles facti sunt no^ est qui faciat bonu^, non est vsque ad vnu^. Psa. xiii.
Our lord looked down from heaven upon the children of me^, to se whither there
were ever a wise one, or one that sought for god, al be wried away, they be al
together unprofitable, without fruit of good works. There is none that does
any good, no not so much as one. Likewise says the Apostle. Phil. ii. omnes
que sua sunt querunt non que Jesus Christi. All men seek for their own profit,
and not those things that be for Christ's pleasure. Here be hard sayings if
they be not helped by the rule that saint Ambrose teaches us to remember when
we expound scriptures. The rule distributio pro generibus singulorum, no^ pro
singulis generum, vel econuerso. As when the prophet said: that God takes up
to him all that fall down. For of all them that falls, he takes up some,
and leaves the other in their filth and mire. And when Christ said that when
he should be exalted on the cross, he would draw all the men and women of the
world unto him, for in deed of all you be a chosen kindred, kings and
priests, the whole for the part, for of the multitude of Christen people there
were and be kings, and of that multitude should be elect and made priests,
and not that al Qui aliqua^do no^ populus dei, nunc autem populus dei qui non
consecuti misericordiam, nunc autem misericordiam consecuti. To them saint
Peter says here, that some time they were not Gods people, but now they be
Gods people, which is to be understand of part of them, and not of the whole
number. And so is the other saying to be understand that where sometime they
lacked Gods mercy, now they have gotten gods mercy, which in deed the election
or they that God knew for his own has gotten, where they that be reprobate
and naughty and vicious has it not. In like manner tribus Judah, was tribus
regia. The family or house of Judah, was the house of kings among the people
of Israel, yet they of that house were not al kings, although the kings of
Jerusalem were of that house ever after Saul till Herod the first usurped,
coming in by intrusion by the power of the Emperor of Rome. We say also that
tribus Leui erat tribus sacerdotalis, the family, house, or issue of Leui was
ye house of pristes, for there should none be prestes by Moises law, but only of
that tribe, yet for all this saying, which is true, they were not all priests
that were of ye tribe or kindred although they were al ministers in the temple
in some office higher or lower in the same. Even so the Apostle calls us
kings and priests, for of Christen people there be, and has be, and shall be
some kings and Prouer. xvi. Melior est patiens viro forti and qui dominatur
animo suo expugnatore vrbiu^ Better is the pacient man, then he that is strong
of body: and he that rules his own will, is more

pre consortibus before and above all us his coparteners. And of his plenty of
that grace of the holy Ghost we take our part after such measure as it
pleases him to distribute unto us. And after this manner saint Peter here
wylleth us to be builded on the living stone as spiritual houses, and as a
holy presthoode offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to god by Jesus
Christ. And this priesthode is common to all men, as well lay men as priests.
And Saint Iherome in his dialoge contra luciferianos calls this sacerdotum
Laicu^ the lay priesthod indifferent to all men and women that be christened,
and their spiritual sacrifices that they offer be proporcionable to their
presthod as the sacrifice of justice, the sacrifice of laud and praise of god,
the sacrifice Romans xii. prays every person to offer to God, saying: obsecro
vos per misericordia^ dei vt exhibeatis corpora vestra hostiam sanctam viuentem
deo placentem. I pray you for the mercy of God, that you give your bodies as
an holy host, as a living sacrifice pleasant to almighty God by our savior
Jesus Christ. These be the spiritual hosts that saint Peter speaks of here,
and these be every man and woman's sacrifices that will show them selves to be
of Christ's faith and belief, and these be made acceptable to God by the
merits of our savior Jesus Christ, on whom we believe. By this you may judge
how far wide from this general lay presthoode, and from the sincerity of
their Christendom they be that will neither sacrifice to God justice or
rightuous dealing, laud, praise, and thanks, but rather blasphemy to Gods
reproach, and to his dispite, and will not use prayers in the church nor in
other places, but rather with their babbling in the church, and mocking of
divine service lets and hinders other men from their prayers, and from
attending and hearing gods service. They give not their bodies as a holy
sacrifice to God, but rather as a stinking sacrifice to the flesh and to the
devil, not lively but sinful and deadly, not pleasant, but as an instrument of
mischief, displeasant to God and man. There is an other priesthode which is
one This is my body. And taking the cup with wine in his hands, he said:
This is my blood. And consequently he said to his disciples: Hoc facite in meam
comme morationem, do you this that I have done, and so doing remember me: where
he gave them authority to consecrate bread and wine into his blessed body
and blood as he had done. And in this he gave them power on him self, and on
his own very body and blood, in which consists the chief office of Pax
vobi^ peace be among you, and then he breathed upon them and said: Take you
the holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, shall be forgiven, and whose sins
you retain and not forgive, shall be retained and not forgyuen. And as the
Apostles took their order of priesthood at Christ's Segregate mihi Saulum et
Bar^^^am in opus ad quod assumpsi eos. Act. xiii. And tunt ieiunantes and
orantes imponentes* que eis manus dimiserunt eos. With fasting and praying and
leyng their holy hands on Saul (afterward called Paul) and on Barnabas they
ordered them priests, and sent them furthe to execute priests offices. Saint
Paul writes unto his scoler Timothe: Noli negligere gratiam que in te est,
que data est tibi per propheciam cum impositione manuum presbiterij. i Timo.
iiii. Be not neglygent in the grace that is given thee by prophecye, with
leynge the Priests hands upon thee. Prophecye he called here (after Saint
Ambrose) the election by which he was chosen as one that should be a meet
Minister and teacher in Christ's Church. And such prophecye is used, or
should be used to this day in making of Pryestes, where the Bishop or his
sufficient depute sits upon opposicions oportet autem illum testimonium
habere bonum ab hijs qui foris sunt. i. Timo. iii. He ought to have good report
of the infidels (says Saint Paul) and then much more he ought to have good
report of the layfe, that be neither priests nor ministers of the church,
upon which examina^ion if the bishop and his office^s think him meet to be a
priest, they set him forth to the bishops hands to take orders. This allowing
of his living and of his learning, with hope that he will so continue and
increace in goodness, is it that S. Paul in this place calls prophecy.
Imposition of the bishops hands, has with it concurring certain holy words,
by which words he (as I said before) is confirmed, made strong and able to
exercise.i. Tim. v. Manus cito nemini imposueris, neque co^municaueris peccatis
alienis, Where s. Paul with a contestacion as Timothe should answer before God
and our savior Christ, and his elect Angels of heaven commands him that he
be not to easy and light to set his holy hands on any man to promote him to
that ecclesiastical dignity of priesthode, because he will nothing to be done
in giving orders without a foresight and a fore judgment, lest peradventure if
he be found secundum misericordiam suam magnam regenerauit nos in spem viua^. I
touched that matter sufficiently.


CHarissimi obsecro vos ranquam aduenas et peregrinos abstinere vos a
carnalibus desiderijs que militant aduersus an^mam. etc. These words which
immediately follows the process that I preached of in my last sermon on
Saint Peter's epistle, be red in the church this present Sunday for the epistle
in the Mass, where in contemplation of that he had said immediately before,
that they were sometime not the people of God, but rather Idolaters and the
people of the dyuell, and that now they were the people of God, converted to
the belief on one God and on our Savior Christ by hearing the preachinge of
Christ's gospel, and that sometime they were without Gods mercy, and that now
they had obtained very well-beloved, and as his well-beloved children and friends
he entreats them to use virtue and to give to all them among whom they should
be conversant example of holy conversation and living. And afterward he
exhorts them to due subjection toward their heads and rulers. I beseech you
(says he) as Strangers and Pylgrimes to keep your selves from carnal desires
which fight against the soul. This obsecration or beseching signifies a
certain vehemency in desiring as it were for Gods sake, or for the love of our
Lady, or of all the saints of heaven, or for their faithes sake, by which they
trusted to be saved, of which he had spoken much before. So he prays them, and
not after the imperious commanding of Bishops and their officers, which yet
Titus.ii. Hec loquere and exhortare et argue cum omni imperio, that he should
rebuke them that be sturdy and fauty with all authority to command, Philemon,
says: Multam fiduciam habens imperandi tibi, quod ad rem pertinet propter
charitate^ magis obsecro. I may be bold to co^man^d the to do the thing that
shall be for the profit of the soul, but yet for the love that I have to thee, I
had leauer pray thee to be good to Onesimus thy servant. And even so S. Peter
might have been bold to command them that he wrote unto, but he had leauer
desire the^ as strangers and pylgrimes We call them strangers that dwell not
in their own country, but in a strange place. So saint Peter wylleth us to
count our selves as not at Heb. xi. which abiding in the land of Canaa^, and
had not received the promyses made unto them, confessinge that they were
Pilgrims and strangers upon earth, signifies that they seek for a better
habitacion and dwellinge place, that is to say, the country of heaven above.
An world, to come to our inheritance and dwelling Mat. v. He called his
servants and delivered the^ his goods So must we give to some of our
familye.v. talentes to be well occupied against our lords return when he
shall come to the judgment to sit on our audite: our body must be
charged with.v. senses, which we call our five bodily wits They must be well
employed, well spent, and well ordered: So that we close them up against all
things that shall be contrary to Gods pleasure. That our ear hear no ill
words, that our eye se no dishonest thing* that our mouth delight not in
things that be to sweet and delicate, nor speak any filthiness, neith^r any
lies. And that we open the same our senses to all things perteynynge to Gods
pleasure, that our ear do gladly hear on one Flower, but flies from Flower
to flower, to gather her Wax and Honye. Virtue

Fourth, in as much as the whole life of a good christian manne is Desire,
therefore although a Pilgryme by reason of his body be in the way, yet by
his mind he should be ever in his country, having his mind upon Heaven,
and ever desierynge the same. And therefore Christ teaches us thus to pray,
Adueniat regnum tuum, We desire that thy Kyngedome may come. Fyfte, a
Pilgryme should not over lode him self with superfluities, but only with
such things that shall be necessary for his way.i. Timo. vi. Habentes
alimenta and quibus tegamur his contenti simus. Having meat, and drink, and
clothe, let us be so content. Syxte, a Pylgrime should not Cicero says.i.
offi. Perigrini est minime curiosum esse in re publica aliena. The office of a
Pilgrim is not to be to busye in a strange co^minaltye, but must suffer
mockes and other hurtes as they of the country will do unto him. We shall
find in our way many flattering Hosts, and Hosteses, and diverse wanton
Tapsters that will entyce us by their good cheer to tarrye still with them,
and so for to spend Eccle. xxii. In lapide luteo lapidatus est piger and omnes
loquentur super aspernationem illius. The slouthful person is stoned with a
stone of mire, and every man shall speak of the shame that he shall be put to,
where by the hardines of the stone and the filthiness of the mire, is signified
the hard and vile punishment that the idle person shall sustain. And the same
sentence is aggrauate by that comes after in the same chapter, De stercore
boum lapidatus est piger and omnis qui tetigerit eum excutiet manus. The
slouthefull shall be stoned with ox dunge, and No^ alligabis os boui
trituranti in horreo. which saint Paul understands of the preachers which
ought not to have their mouths mouselled or so bound up, but that they may
take their sustenaunce and living by their preaching: then by the dunge of
these Oxen may be understand the sharp and hard reprehensions by which they
rebuke such dull and idle sluggardes, Seruo maliuolo tortura and co^pedes
mitte illum in operationem ne vacet. Eccle. xxxiii. He must have soore
punishment and prisonment by the heles, and must be set to work lest he be
idle. Multam enim malitia^ docuit ociositas. For ydlenes is chief maistres of
all vices, and of all malice and mischief. And where this vice of sloth and
idleness is greatly to be feared of all christen people, yet most of the
nobility, which be most ydlely brought up in youth, and therefore it will be
hard for them to leave it in age. Secondlye I said the flesh would take
pleasure with wanton knackes, raiment of the new trick, with Non saciatur
oculus visu nec auris auditu impletur. Eccle. i. There is nothing by seeing or
hearing in this world, that can fullye saciate the appetite of man. But by
the sight, and by the hearing manne is rather sturred and moved, to desire yet
more and more. Therefore Optimum est gratia stabilire cor. Hebre. xiii.

Best it is every manne to pray for grace, and Si secundum carnem vixeritis
moriemini. If ye live Gala. v. Caro concupiscit aduersus spiritu^, spiritus
autem aduersus carnem. Hec enim sibi inuicem aduersantur vt non quecunque
vultis illa faciatis. The flesh coueteth and would feign have against the
Spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, for these be enemies one to
another, so that you may not do the things that you would do. As he
says also. Romans vii. The good thing that I would do, I do not, but the
ill that I hate, that I do. I delight in the law of God by my inner man, but I
perceive a law or an inclination in my limbs of my body yt haleth me like a
bond man into the law of sin. In prolo* li. de operibus christi. The soul
uses the limbs and members of the body, as a smith uses his hammer or an
veld as his tools to work with, then what emnitie can be betwixt them, more
then is betwixt the workman and his tool? And also considering that the body
is as it were the shop in which the soul works all thing that he will.
There he forms and fashioneth the similitudes and images of all filthiness and
of al malicious driftes. The body is not the doer or causer of the sin but
the soul, for to him is given free liberty of will, by which he may have
delectation and consent to prosecute the sin, or to skippe back from it, and
to avoid it. The body Quia solius anime lis ista est que secum rixatur and
cu^ proprio arbitrio litigat. This co^tencion is only of the soul, which
strives with it self and with his own liberty within it self. The manner
follows there. Desiderii sui veneno men's ebria corpus contumeliis applicat,
and iunctis complexibus ambo in mortiferas suauitates elapsi obdormiunt. The
mind as it were being drunk with the poison of his of gatherynge and heapynge
goods together, Omnibus viciis senescentibus sola auaritia inuenescit. When
all vices wax old, couetise only waxes young again. Conuersationem vestram
inter gentes habentes bonam. etc. Where Saint Peter exhorts them that he
writ to, and us by them, that they should be of good conversation among them
that they dwelled among that where they rail and backebite you, saying evil
of you, calling you foles, because you leave their superstitions and
Idolatrye, calling you malefactors, and naughtye livers, reputing the sorrow
and pains that you suffer, to be inflicte and laid upon you for your sins
and And it is the occasion and cause of the salvation Ve homini per quem
scandalum venit. Woe, that is, dampnation everlasting shall come to him that
gives occasion of ruin or of sin, and shall damn all them that by this
evil example take occasion of sin, and by their dampnation the pains of the
evil example geuer, shall be greuouslye increased, when he shall mete with
them in Hell, that shall come thither by his example geuinge. This knew full
well the rich glotton that was buried and laid in Hell, when he desiered
Abraham to send one home to his brethren and their familyes, to bid them
amend sorrow, and so for his own ease he willed them Cum sancto sanctus
eris, and cu^ peruerso peruerteris. With the holy, a man shall be holy, and with
a froward sinner, a man shall be naughtye and synnefull, for like makes like.
Yet the other is not impossible that the naughty may live among the good, and
the good may live among the evil. For Judas was naught with Christ, and
with the other of the Apostles that were good. And Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
Joseph, Job, Thoby, and such others, were very good among them that were
naught. Even as you see in natural example. A goodly Rose springs up among
the thorns, and Prouer. vi. Se^ sunt que odit Dominus, and septimum detestatur
anima eius. There be six things that our Lord hates, and the seventh his
mind abhors. You must beware you have not Oculos sublimes, hye lokes, by
manifest signs setting furthe your pride, it will be long before any such
allure men to goodness by their example, but rather men shall hate them,
and also their conditions, few men can well agree with them, Linguam mendacem,
You must be no liars, but to have a true tongue in your head, and not
accustomed to pernicious and perilous lies Manus effundentes sanguinem
innoxium. An homicide or murderer, that will kill or procure the death of
them that be innocente and have not offended. Cor machina^s cogitationes
pessimas. He that has a venomous heart, ever studiynge to hurt his
neighbor. Such an heart must neades now and then burste out and show it
self, it will no more be kept in, then fire covered under straw, which must
neades burst out in one place or an other. Pedes veloces ad currendum in malum,
Ever ready to do harm and to hurt their neighbors, as when they perceive a
man prone and ready to Titus the noble Emperor Vespasians son was wont to
say, that he had lost the day, when peradventure in the day he had not done
some Amici, hodie diem perdidi, quia nemin^ benefeci. So, contrary they think
the day lost in which they have not done some man hurt, either by
backebityng men or sclaundering them raylinge or mockinge them, or picking and
stealinge from them, or otherwise. Proferentem mendacia testem fallacem. Where
before the wiseman had reproved generally a liynge tongue, Here he reproves
specially the lier, that will in open judgment give false testimony and
witness, both to hurt his neighbor, and also to pervert justice, which is
hurt to the common wealth. The seventh and worste of all which God abhors,
is Qui seminat inter fratres discordiam. He that sows discord and debate
among brethren. We be all brethren in God, and GOD would have us to love like
brethren, to agree in one mind and one will in God like brothers, to Vt
idipsum dicatis omnes and non sint in vobis scismata. That one says, an other
should say, without scismes, diversities of minds in things concerning our
fayeth, ceremonies, and vsages of Christ's church, of such diversity of
opinions commonly follows dissension and debate betwixt neighbor and
neighbor, by which the unity of the church, the unity of the congregation of
Christ's people is dissolved and cast asunder, which GOD most desiereth to
have kept and knitte together by the bond and knot of charity, and abhors
the contrary. If we eschew and avoid all these seven, our conversation shall
seem good to them that we occupye wythall, and dwell among, so that when they
consider our good works, they may take example

The ninth treatice or Sermon.
SVbiecti igitur estote omni humane creature propter deum. In these words
which I have taken to declare unto you. Saint Peter wills us to give example
of due subjection and humility, which is the mother and keeper of virtues. Be
you subject (says he) and lowly to al manner of men constitute and set in
authority over you, whether they be faiethfull or infidels, Pontus, Galatia,
Capadotia, etc. This we must do, not only for fear of punishment, but rather
for discharge of conscience, because it is gods will we should so do.
Witnesses.s. Paul: To. xiii. Non est potestas nisi a deo, and qui potestati
resistit dei ordinationi resistit. There is no power but it comes of god, and
therefore he yt resists power and authority of office resists gods
ordinance and so works toward his own damnation. Sieve regi quasi
presellenti. As well.iii. Esd. iiii. O viri nu^ precellunt hoies qui terra^ and
mare obtine^t. O sirs be not those men Precellente and highest of all in might
and power, that keeps both the land and sea, and all that is in them. Rex
aute^ super omnia precellit. Such is the King, for he is highest, and over al,
and is lord of the^. Here he uses the word Precelle^t, which.s. Peter uses.
Et oia quecu^que dix erit illis faciu^t. Al y^ the king bids the^ do they do
And if he send them to his army in his wars, they go, and there they pull down
hills and make plain ground, castelles and towers, they slaye precellent,
whose fame and royal name is set forth after this manner? Of the duty of
dukes, Captains, or great officers under kings, you hear: They have
authority to edify, not to destroy, to do good, and not to do ill: to
punish vice, and to auaunce and set forth virtue: to correct the^ that be
badde, and to laud, praise, and cherishe them that be good, if they do
otherwise, their dampnation is just, they well deserve it. And for them and
us, this is gods will and pleasure, that with well doing we should stop
men's mouths, that folyshly will rail, and ignorantly, knowing Quasi liberi
and non quasi velamen habentes You must give good example and occasion to men
to say well, and to leave their railing or missaying against you, not for any
bondage, or for seruyle fear, but like fre me^ set at the liberty, at which
Christ has set us, doing it with heart and all. And we must beware that we
use not our liberty as a cloak or coueringe of malice and of mischeife.
Remember what Judas of Galiley did, that is spoken of. Actu. v. and Josephus
antiquitatu^, li. xviii Cap. i. he calls him Judas Gaulonites, homo ex
ciuitate cui nome^ erat Gamala, He seduced a great multitude, and made them to
rebel, under the pretense of a Godly liberty, in as much as they were the
elect people of God, and paid to him first fruits, tithes, and other duties.
Wherefore (he said) they ought not to pay tribute to any man, nor to recognize
any other lord but only God. tempore professionis, when by the commandment
of the emperor Octauianus Augustus, ibant singuli vt profiterentur in
civitates suas, every man went to the place where he was borne, there to have
his name taken, and to pay his head penny or tribute, professinge their
subjection to the Romans, at which time Joseph and Mary went to Bethleem
where they were borne, and they being there, came the time that Mary should be
delivered of child, and An licet ce^su^ dare Caesari an non, Mar. xxii. Whether
it were lawful to pay tribute to the emperor or not? Christ said ye: declaring
the same by the coin of ye money, which was the emperors image. It is but
temporal, and why should not a temporal lord have temporal subsedy and aid? it
is his duetye so to have, therefore pay it (says christ) you must needs do so.
The said Judas pretended a liberty, by yt they were of the holy line of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Gods elect people, but this liberty he should
have understand goostly and not carnally, but he turned it to carnalitie, as
Josephus expresselye says. Obtentu quide^ vtilitatis defe^sionis communis,
reuera aute^ propriu^ lucroru^ gratia tota seditio gerebatur. All the commotion
and fraye was made under Non solum propter iram, sed propter conscientiam. Romans
xiii. That is to say: not for fear of strokes, not for fear of prisonment,
nor for fear of death, but freelye, franckely with heart and all, and with a
good will, as fre men and not as bondemen, but for discharge of your own
conscience as Gods servants, consideringe it is Gods pleasure you Omnes
honorate, As the Apostle. Romans xii. says. Honor inuicem preuenientes, Every
man thinking another better then him self, for that virtue or good quality
may be in an other that is not in the, and by that thou may take him for thy
better, and honor him. All this S. Peter speaks to auaunce humility, and
to put it in every man's bosom as far forth as he may. Fraternitatem
diligite. S. Paul says of the fame. To. xii. Charitate^ fraternitatis inuicem
diligentes. Though charity extends to all men, yet principally to christen
people which be all our brothers in Christ regenerate Deum timete, scilicet,
Timore filiali, as the child should fear his father: and next after him,
Regem honorificate, which is highest to be honored of all powers temporal,
for ever the fear of God must go before, so that doing our duty to our
king, or to any other potentate or authority, we forget not the fear of
God, neither do any thing contrary to Gods pleasure. And then we must not
only honor, but honorifie him, that is, we must do the best we can to make
others to do him honor, and their duty to him. And it is highlye to be noted,
how intyerly to men's hearts almighty God strikes the honor of a king, and
the Eccles* x. In cogitatione tua regine detrahas, and in secreto cubiculi tui
ne maledixeris diuiti quia and aues celi portabunt vocem tuam, and qui habet
pennas annunciabit sententiam. Where we be plainly monished and warned, that
another in anger nor in sport or lightness, we think any ill against our king,
or against a great man, for that a man rolleth in his mind, it will burst
forth one way or another, and many times when we think least upon it, and
fear least, it will come forth, yea, though we speak against them in our
bed, or in our bed chaumber, the birds of the air, the vtterers of
counsel, whether they be good angels or bad, will utter thy counsel to thy
condemnation, they dishonor not their king neither in deed, in word, nor in
thought. Serui subditi estote in omni timore dominis, non tantum bonis and
modestis sed etiam discholis. After that the blessed Apostle heretofore has
instruct and taught generally and commonly al them that he wrote to, and al
others by them: now he descends to the specialties, geuinge certain
special lessons to special estates of men and women, first beginning with
them that be discholi (says our text) truandes, michers that will not keep
the schole of Christ's faith and of his doctrine, to them that were infideles,
and generally swaruing and going out of the schole and right learning of
honesty, and of measure in their living and in their punishinge Some reads
it prauis, crabbed, crooked, and cumberous. Some reads difficilioribus, to
hard, sore and cruel. So that this is the Apostles mind, that what condition
so ever your masters be of, you must do your duty and true service unto
them. Servitude comes either of iniquity or of adversity: Of iniquity came
the bondage that Cham was cursed withal, because he mocked his father lying
bare, he had his fathers curse. Maledictus Chanaan puer seruus seruorum erit
fratribus suis. He cursed Cham in his child and issue, with perpetual
bondage. And after this manner, that is, by iniquity, has many men given them
self to perpetual bondage, to save their necks. Adversity made the people of
Israel bond unto the Egiptians, and after this manner they that be taken
prisoners in battle, be sometimes deputed to perpetual with all fear, S. Paul
says, Ephesians. vi. Cu^ timore et tremore, with fear of mind, like as you were
your masters child, reverently fearing to offend or displease their father, so
must you have a louinge fear, least you do the thing that should displease
your master. Such fear had good Joseph when his masters tempted him to be
naught with her, he alleged his masters goodness toward him, and the benefits
that he had done unto him, being but his servant and very bondeman, saying.
Genes. xxxix. my master has committed and delivered to me all that he tremor,
to make the servants to quake for fear. Albeit this quaking fear accords
properly to the bondsman that does al thing in omni timore, so that the servant
should cheifely fear his master louinglye, as the child the father, and if
at the first he have not such louinge fear of his master, yet beware of his
anger, fear correction as the bondsman or prentise does, and by using thy self
to do well for such servile fear, thou shalt find ease in well doing, and shall
begin to do well for love, and so of a good servant thou shall be made a good
son, faithful and loving to thy master, and by that thy master shall love
the better the^ any child he has. Prou. Si sit tibi seruus fidelis sit tibi
tanquam anima tua, Even as him self you must do your service with simplicity
of heart (says S. Paul) without doublenes, so that as you non
contradicentes, no^ frauda^tes (alia littera) no^ no choplogikes that will
countersay their masters, giving them three words for one, be it well be it
ill, be it true be it false that your masters says, you should be content and
give the^ no answer, but let them say what it please the^: you must be no
lurchers or priuey pykers or stealers, but in all thing showing good fidelity,
that so you may adourne and do worship to the doctrine of Christ in all things,
for ye good living of the scholar, is the ornament and worship of the master.
But now I pray you, if the master bid his servant to enter into religion,
is the Haec est enim gratia si propter Dei conscientiam sustinet quis
tristitias Because he had bydde servants obey their masters, although they
were crabbed and out of the schole of Christ's doctrine, if they were
infideles, or out of the schole of discrete judgment in correction. In these
words he gives them spiritual and goostly counsel, and comfort saying:
This is a special gift of grace of the holy gooste, if any of you suffer
sorrow and pain wrongfully, propter conscientiam Dei, having in his conscience
a respect to the pleasure of God, which would not the servant to grudge
against his master, and also remembering the reward that God will give to al
them that for his sake suffers more then else they were bound to suffer. S.
Paul says. Phil. i. Vobis donatum est pro Christo non solum vt in eum
credatis sed ut etiam pro illo paciamini. It is given you for a special gift
of grace, not only to believe upon i. Cor. xii. Alij datur fidesin eodem
spiritu, by the holy spirit of God the holy gooste, to one is given faith by
which we believe on Christ and on his holy word) but also for Christ it is
given you (says Paul) as a special grace to suffer for Christ's sake, as
many holy Apostles and martyrs did, for when the heat of the love of God is
inspired into the soul of man by the spirit of God the holy ghost, it gives
a certain gladness and a certain swetenes to a man which suffers him not to be
deiecte with any adversity, but makes him bold and constant against all
vexation. Example we have of the Apostles, which after they had received the
holy ghost at this holy time of Whitsontide, Ibant gaudentes a conspectu
consilii quoniam digni habiti sunt pro nomine Jesus contumeliam pari. Actu. v.
when they were reviled, threatened, and well beaten, for their settinge forth
and preachinge Christ's faith, and were commanded they should do so no more,
they went with merry hearts from the counsel of the Scribes and Phariseis,
that they were conuented and called before, because it had pleased God to think
them worthy to suffer such despites for Christ's sake. We se also by
experience, that heat causes and makes boldness in man and beast, therefore
the beasts that have hootest hearts be most bold, and for this cause the lion
is bolder then is the horse or an ox, because his heart has in it a more
feruente heat then the other have in their hearts. So when the holy ghost
inspireth the feruencie and heat of his love into the heart of any man or
woman, it makes that person wondrous bold to suffer persecution and all
manner of pain, yea martyrdom propter conscientiam dei (as S. Peter speaks)
knowinge in his conscience that it is Gods pleasure he should not reneige God,
but rather constantly suffer all adversity for Gods sake. This fervent heat
made S. Paul to say Romans viii. Certus sum quia neque mors: neque vita, etc I
am sure that nether death nor life, nor the angels, another things present nor
things to come, nether any other creature, may disseuer or put us a part
from the charity and love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. So the
servants that be tormented and beaten, and vexed with bitter and fervent
words, must take it as a kind of martyrdom, this they must suffer ever,
having a timerouse conscience toward Quae est enim gratia si peccantes and
collaphisati suffertis? What thank shall you have, if you do noughtelye and
play the sluggardes, or the false bribers in your masters busynes, and then
for your noughtye doing be well boxed, beaten, and canueste, and so suffer as
you deserve? What thank shall you have for your suffering? none at all. Sed si
benefacientes patienter sustinetis haec est gratia, but if you do well and then
suffer unjust vexation and strokes, this is a matter of thanks, worthy to be
rewarded. Take example of Joseph that I spoke of before, he was true to his
master, he run away and fled fornication: and Pharao the king reigned over
all his subjects,

The tenth treatise or sermon.
THe blessed Apostle Saint Peter in this matter that I have to be declared unto
you, prosecuteth further the thing that I partelye touched in my last sermon,
which is of the pacient sufferaunce that the servant or subject ought to
use toward his master or superior, saying: In hoc enim vocati estis.
Considre your calling: GOD has called you to serve (says S. Peter) and not
to control, to suffer, and not to remurmer, brable, or chyde against your
masters, and in your well doing and patient sufferinge of vexation and
unjust punishment, you be the true folowers of Christ's passion, as S. Peter
says here, in which in mind and in remembrance to make us to Prou. iii.
Lignu^ vite est omnibus qui apprehendu^t ea^, says the wise man, speaking of
the increat wisdom the second person in trinity, our savior Christ in whom
the manhed is joined to the same wisdom in one person, he is the tree of life
to al me^ and women that ca^ catch or take him. And ye spouse says. Can. ii.
Sub vmbra illius que^ desideraba^ sedi. I reposed my self and sat down in the
shadow of him that I desired and loved. We must repose our self, and
louinglye rest in the shadow of Christ's passion, that we may save our self
from sin, and gather our strength again, by which we may be able to
overcome the devil, and to resist all his assaults. Christus passus est
Christ fuffered for us generally for us all, what state or degree so ever we be
of, for us (he says) to move us to compassion, and in our mind to suffer
with him, in as much as he suffered not for his own fault, nor for any
advantage for him self, but for to redeem us and to make amends for our
faults, and for to auaunce us into the favor of God again. Therefore he that
has a noble and a gentle heart will count the pain that Christ suffered to
be his own pains, because they were taken for his sake. So did king
David.ii. Reg. vltimo, when he saw the angel of God striking the people, and
kill them, because he had proudly caused the people to be nu^bred. He cried to
God and said: I am he that has sinned and done amiss, these be poor lambs
or sheep, what hurt have they done in this matter^ as who should say none. I
beseech the turn thine Esaias* liii. Vulne ratus est propter iniquitates nostras
attritus est propter scellera nostra. He was wounded for our iniquities, and al
to torn for our ill deeds. Therefore Christ's passion is or should be our
passion as well because of the occasion of his passion, which was our sins,
as by the utility and profit that comes of the same, not to him but to us.
Vobis relinquens exemplum, to you servants specialli. Now to my purpose,
giving example of the despites that were done to him, of the trouble and
vexation that he suffered, of the whips and scourges that he was beaten with.
And if you be ouercharged with heavy burdens, remember the that you may follow
his steps. He was unguilty to dye, for he never did ani^ant in deed, neither
any gile or false word yt came out of his mouth, by which any man might be
deceived. All this and that follows S. Peter takes of the.liii. chapter of
Esaias, where ye prophet has the same sentence. It is a great disco^fort for him
yt has a great journey upon him to do, to go out of his way, therefore he had
need to beware at the beginning, for a little error at the beginning will be a
great error at the end. As when there be.ii. ways meting together if the
Pilgreme take the Viaticum meat to strength us in our journey. We must follow
him, thinking that if God the father Cu^ malediceretur non male dicebat, When
he was missayed he missayd no man again, nor said any ill. He was called a
Samaritane, which was as dispiteful among the^, as is now to be called an
heretik with us. For the Samaritanes were but as Cum pateretur non comminabatur.
When they laid on him with rods and scourges: he threatened not that he
would be revenged, or that he would be even with them. Ecclesiasticus
says.xxii. That like as a fore the fire burns the vapor and the smoke
rises on high, sic et ante sanguinem maledictio and contumely et mine. So
before blood shedding tradidit vindictam ei qui iudicat just (as says the new
translation) he committed the vengeance to God the father that judges iustli,
letting him alone with the vengeance, as in deed God bids us do. Mihi
vindictam and ego retribuam, mea est vltio and ego retribuam Deu. xxxii. To.
xii. Let me alone with the vengeance, and I will requite the^. And so he did in
deed by the Jews, he paid them home eueri half penny vt in prouerbio. The
blod of Christ fell upon them and upon their issue.xlii. years after, when
the noble Emperor Vespasian and his son Titus destroyed the city of
Jerusalem, with such an horrible strage and murder, as would abhor any iron
heart to consider, as Josephus in de bello Iudaico expresses it. Our
translation says: tradebat autem iudicanti se unjust He committed him self,
or delivered him self to him that judged unjustly, to Pilate, which partly to
please the Jews that pursued Christ, partly for fear, least he should be
accused of treason to the Emperor for letting a traitor escape, as they said
Christ was, because he would be a king (they said) and that was treason against
the Emperor. But there is neither favor nor fear mede nor dread that
should have made him to condemn an innocent that never offended the laws.
Now how Christ committed him self to prodere and tradere for one. Prodere is
proditor and traditor, he wroughte the treason, and also made delyueraunce. Qui
peccata nostra ipse pertulit in corpore suo super lignum. Even he delivered him
self to the unjust judge which bore our sins upon his body, nailed
fast upon the tree of the cross. He bore our sins upon his body (says
Saint Peter) not as my surpeles bears his whiteness, nor as thy gown
bears his blackenesse, for my surpelesse bears his wytenesse, so that I
may say my Esa. liii. Ipse autem vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras,
attritus est propter scelera nostra. He Cuius liuore sanati sumus, the words
of Esaye. With his blewe wales and scarres in his flesh after the scourges,
stripes and strokes that made his skin to rise, and to be black and blewe,
we were healed from the syckenes of our souls, that that made his body sick
and sore, made us whole and sound. Et dominus in eo posuit iniquitatem omnium
nostrum. Even the same sentence that Saint Peter says: peccata nostra ipse
pertulit in corpore suo. Our Lord God the father put upon him all our
iniquities. And still the blessed Apostle S. Peter alludeth to the same
chapter of Esaias, where the prophet says: Omnes nos quasi oues errauimus. Al
we went a straying like sheep out of the flock, and out of the keeping of our
shepherd, and so says S. Peter: You were once like sheep strayed out of Gods
flock, but now you be converted and turned again to the pastor and feder,
bishop and ouerseer of your souls. And in this process saint Peter also
seems to teach us the parable of the gospel of the man that had a C. sheep,
of which one was straied away, and he left four score and nintene in deserte,
and went to seek that sheep that was strayed away, and when he had in
trinity owner of this sheep, left all the rest of inhabitauntes shall praise
our Lord God world without end. There be also in wyldernes many sweet and
pleasant flowers, and so minished and made somewhat lower then the Angels,
though by his Godhead he were far above them. Here in earth he found the
sheep that was lost, and neither beat it nor stroke it, nor brawled with it,
nor rayled nor chidde, but lovingly got it upon his shoulders, when his
shoulders and arms were racked and strained to fet the holes that were bored
Humeri Christi brachia crucis sunt, illic peccata mea deposui, in illa patibuli
nobilis ceruice requieui. The shoulders of Christ be they that be extended upon
the branches of the cross, there upon them (said S. Ambrose) I laid down my
sins on the neck and shoulders of that noble galowes, I rest my self. But
because Christ in his parable says that the shepherd cast the sheep upon his
shoulders gaudens being glad and merry, but seeing all this concerns his
paineful passion on the cross As when the wit or will is applied or inclined
yet remembering Gods pleasure, and the rewards gaudens with joy and gladness in
the higher portion of his soul, knowing that by his pains and by his death man
should be restored to favor again, that before was attainted and out of Gods
favor. And that where we were before like straied sheep out of the blessed
flock of Gods faithful people, now we be converted and turned again to the
pastor and bishop of our souls, as S. Peter said to the^ that he wrote unto.
To the pastor, the shepherde, the feder of our souls our savior Christ, whom
afterward in his epistle.v. chap. He calls the prince of pastors, master of
the craft, the chief shepherd of the shepherds, the chief feeder of the
feeders, the chief bishop of the bishops, the chief curate Christ with
simplicity of heart without doublenes, serve not only to the eye while your
masters Seruo sensato liberi seruie^t Eccle. x. And we have heard sometimes
of servants which in process of time have bought their masters childrens
inheritance, or their goods, but these be no dastardes but wytty servants,
that


The third chapter.
SImiliter et mulieres subdite sint viris suis, vt and si qui non credunt
verbo, per mulierum conuersationem sine verbo lucrifiant, etc. Here in the
first part of this third chapter the blessed Apostle ascends from the
informacion that he gave to them that be in servile state (of which I
entreated in my last sermon) unto them that be joined together in the yoke of
marriage. First speaking to the wives, and ordering them toward their husbands,
and also in their exterior behavior. And consequently he teaches the
husbands their duties toward their wives. S. Peter says: Similiter et
mulieres. etc. likewise Likewise (says s. Peter) as I have spoken of the
subjection of the servants to their masters, so I must advertise and counsel
the wives to obedience and subjection according to their calling, that they do
reverence unto their husbands with fear, as Saint Paul says. Ephe. v. Vxor
autem rimet virum suum. Let the wife fear her husband with such loving fear
as I have spoken of before, more for love, fearing to displease him, then for
strokes or punishment. And in the same chapter s. Paul bids wives be
subject to their husbands as unto our Lord and master Christ, for it is our
lord Gods ordinance that the man should be the head of the woman, as Christ is
the head of his spouse and wife the church or multitude of Christen people,
Hester.i. where it is written that the great king and conqueror Assuerus king
of the Medes and Persies, and over cxxvii. provinces and realms, made an
exceeding sumptuous feast to all the nobility and head officers of his Empery
and dominions, the preparation and provision for the same, with the inuitacion
and access of his gests, continued.ix. score Vasthi his Queen keep her feast,
to all the queen's Ladies and noble women of the Emperye, and that in the palace
where Assuerus was wont to dwell, for the kings feast was kept in Haalys or
tents wonderouslye wroughte with costlye stuff, and stronglye stayed by
pyllers of fine Marble after a gorgeous fashyon all of pleasure, there the
king kept his solemn banckettes, and left his palace for the Queen Vasthi
with the other Ladies. Assuerus the king had well drunk, and was well warmed
with wine, he sent his Chamberlaynes to call Vasthi the queen to him, willing
her to put on her head her diadem or crown and to come forth after her
goodliest manner, because he would show to his kings and lords the beauty of
his queen, for she was very fair and beautyfull, but she refused to come at
him, and contempned the kings commandment, sent to her by his chamberleins,
for this cause the king was sore dismayed, and waxed wondrous angrye, and in a
rage called all the great wisemen of his priuye counsel that were ever at
hand (as the manner of kings is to have such counsel ever ready) and by
their counsayl he did al weighty matters, because they knew the laws of God
and man: he asked their counsel what sentence should be given against
Vasthi Manucha one of the chief of the counsel, which after this manner
spoke to the king before the princes of the cou^sail. Non solum rege^ lesit
regina Vasthi. etc. The queen has hurt not only the kings highness, but also
all the people and princes and noble men that be within the dominion of king
Assuerus, for the words of the queen will go abroad among all women, and
make them to contempne their husbands saying: The noble and mighty king
Assuerus bade Vasthi his queen come into his presence and she would not, and no
more will I but when me list And by this example given of her, all the wives of
the Princes of the Persies and of the Medes Vasthi shall never more come in
your presence, but that an other better then she shall take her reign, that
she has as one with you. And let the same commandment be diuulled and
proclaimed in all Provinces and Realms of your Emperie, even to the furthest
part thereof, that so all wives, as well of the great men, as of the common and
lower people may give honor and obedience to their husbands. This counsel
the men be princes and greatest in their own houses, wherefore it follows that
the wives be subject and under obedience to them. By this story all good
wives may note and mark what comes of contempt and disobedience of the
wives to their Husbands. She was deposed from her high estate and put away
from her husband, because she list not to obey nor to be subject to his
commandment. Almighty GOD made the first woman for two uses or purposes, one
for to multiplye mankind by generation, an other cause, for domestical
cohabitation, and to dwell with the manne for his comfort. And in both these
two, the woman was soore punished because she tempted her husband to eat of
the forbidden fruit. First where she should have borne child without pain,
she was deputed to exceadynge pain with many throws and panges while she is
with child, and with much more pain when she is traueylynge to be
delivered. Second, to our purpose now, where there should have been none
inequality betwixt the manne and the wife, now for a punishment for her
fault she must be content to hear, Sub viri potestate eris, and ipse
dominabitur tui. Thou shalt be under the power of thy husband, and he shall be
thy ruler. And yet let us consider the goodness of god, how he uses mercy with
the rod of correction, in this soore beatyng husband is many times made much
better the^ he would else be. And this saint Peter teaches in this place,
saiynge: Vt si qui non credunt verbo, per mulierum conuersationem sine verbo
lucrifiant. He would specially that they should remember Conuersationem
vestram inter gentes habentes bonam, etc. Biddynge them be of good
conversation, Quarum non sit extrinsecus capillatura, aut circu^datio auri, aut
indumenti vestimentorum cultus. Because Saint Peter had bid al wives please
their husbands other hue, as when it was white hoore, they dye Capillatura,
making their here, or curiouslye dressynge their here, which he disswadeth
and cou^saileth to the contrary. And.s. Paul.i. Timo. ii. bids all women
apparel and raye them selves in comelye raiment with bashfulnesse or
shamefastnes, and with sobriety. Non in tortis crinibus, not with their here
platted or sliked abroad. And both the blessed Apostles bids women not to
use superfluity, of these golden abilimentes (as they Cultus indumenti
vestimentorum, as who should say, Indumenti indumentorum, or Vestimenti
vestimentorum. The dressing of the raymente of all raymentes, to signify the
preciousnes or riches of the raiment, as we use to say, the flower of all
flowers. A fellow of all fellows, to signify the excellencye of the thing.
Saint Peter and saint Paul which were sure that they had the spirit of
God, and spoke by the spirit of God, in Gods name, disswadeth such
costlines, and bids women not to set their minds thereon. For as saint
Cypriane says. Li. de habitu virginum. Chastity in virgin, wife, and wydowe
consists and stands not only in the Esai. iii. reproves very earnestly
and grievously this costlye and Pro eo quod eleuate sunt filie Sio^, and
ambulaueru^t collo extento and nutibus oculon^ ibaut. etc. He punishes them
with shame contrary to their pride and iolitie, saiynge: Decaluauir dominus
verticem filiarum Syon, and dominus crinem earum nudabit. He brings them to
shame from top to toe, beginning at the head of which they were so proud,
and so unto the shoes of their fete. God will pluck the heeres from their
head, that they took so much thought to set forth and to painte it, and will
make it bare, and show it as it is. That every man may see it was not their
own, but perwynes or painted, either here by temporal miserye and Erit pro
suaui odore fetor. And for joy and mirth, shall come sorrow and mourning, for
their pride and exaltation, shall come vileness and deiection. What manne or
woman will be so mad as wittynglye to use that has been the destruction of
other women? If a man or a woman dye upon the meat and drink that he has
taken, it may well be thought poison lineame^tes or favor of man or woman,
because Mat. v. Non potes vnum capillum album facere aut nigru^. Thou can not
make one here of thy head white or black. And yet thou by thy pride will
prove him a liar, and make thy self a better workman then he, paintynge thy
here or thy face not only black or white (for women set little by such
colors, but also yelowe or read ( malo praesagio futurorum, says S.
Cipriane) with a shreude ossinge In agro Iezraell commedent canes carnes
Iezabel. iiii. Reg. ix. You see what payntinge served for. But now married
women will pretend and make an excuse by their husbands, saying: that they
take all the labors in payntinge and trimming them selves to please their
husbands, and so doing, they make their husbands partetakers of their
offense, and consequently of their dampnation for of carnal love after them,
this is not the way Sapient, v. Quid nobis profuit superbia? aut diuitiarum
iactantia quid contulit nobis? Talia dixerunt in inferno qui peccauerunt. etc.

They that have sinned, shall say after this manner in Hell. What did our
pride avail us? Or what profitte had we by boastynge of our riches? As whoo
should say, none at all, but rather aggrauatethe our dampnation. If thou be
rich, let the poverty feel thy riches, help them with thy riches, and
bestow it not in superfluous ornaments. Study to dress your souls (says
S. Peter here) and trymme the inward man, qui absconditus est cordis homo,
that is hyd within you, your souls which God sees very well, and do it so
that your spirit be not corrupt or defouled with sin, but be quiet, not
troubled with inordinate concupiscence or desire of the flesh, nor of the
mind, studyinge for to do displeasures or to do hurt. And also that your
spirit be modest, kepinge a mean and measure in all your sayings and
doings, such a soul (says S. Peter) est in conspectu dei locuples, is rich
in the sight of God, for the true riches is the riches of virtues, they will
stycke by us, where other be flux and fadinge, and will away. Such is the
riches that we ought to be glad of, for these we ought to labor: and with
such riches S. Peter bids all wives to adorn them selves, Sic enim
aliquando et sanctae mulieres sperantes in deo ornabant se subject propriis
viris. For so (says he) holy women that hoped and trusted in God, arrayed
them selves here before in old time, which were subject and obedient to their
own husbands. Example he takes of Sara, that was wife to the blessed
Patriarch Abraham. I think that if we saw now in our time the tiringe of
her, the dressing of her head, and the whomelines of her raiment, it would
make us laughe, and yet it was good and huswyfely for that time I doubt not.
But his sister, and he her brother, she did so as the time served. And more
over Saint Peter notes her obedience and subjection to her husband, by that
she called him her Lord, and and Dominus meus vetulus est? and my Lord is an
old man? It was her husband that she called Lord, in that gyuinge to all
wives example of subjection and obedience to their husbands: And Saint Peter
says to all wives, you be all her daughters as long as you do well, and
like sobre matrones as she did, and so doing, you shall not need to fear
any trouble or displeasure of your husbands,

Viri similiter cohabitantes secundum scientiam, quasi infirmiori vasculo
muliebri impartientes honorem.

Now you have heard the fatherlye and wholesome counsel that Saint Peter
has given to all wives, teaching them how they should order them selves
to their husbands, and to the world, because the husbands shall not be to
sore nor cruel to their wives, nor to hie and lordelye over them, he gives
also to the husbands a wholesome lesson as it were, saying: Similiter, Even
like as I have exhorted the wives to do their duties to their husbands, so I
must exhort and counsel you to do your duties her Lord, by her humble and
lowlye heart, yet you must not so take your selves as lords over your
wives, nor use them as your servants, nor as your drudges, but as your
makes, and as your fellows, specially in domestical cohabitation, and
dwelling in one house with them, and in your conjugal act to gether,
according to science, and to the judgment of right reason, and by wisdom.

Saint Ambrose. Epist. lxxxii. says, the wife must do reverence to the
husband, as to her head and ruler, but no service, as his servant, drudge,
or bondwoman. She must be content indigna est coniugio quae digna est iurgio,
she is not worthy to be a wife, that is worthy to be chydde. Then you may be
sure she is much moore unworthy to be a wife that will not do her own
work without strokes: her husbands work is her own work. Strokes be
mete for your leude servants and bondewomen, and not for your makes.
Therefore all wives when they will deserve beatinge, they reneige and refuse
the honesty of a wife, retourning to servants state again. They should not
be taken forth with the grave and sad matrones, and with honest wives, but
let them come behind with the servants, primo contra Iouinianum) with which
he had much sorrow, and specially with Xantippe, as Aulus Gelius writes,
and also Saint Hierome there. On a time after she had bytterly scolled and
rayled at him, he went from her, and let her alone, and as he went forth of
the door, she bestowed the purtinence of a chaumber vessel trouble works
patience. Many such examples of Gentyles hystoryes I could Vxoris nulla est
electio sed qualiscunque obuenerit habenda est. He thinks there is no choice
of a ever that be, mutual love, and mutual sufferaunce Exameron. libro. v.
cap. vii. recites a notable example to move all married folks as well men as
women, to concord and to agree together. The example is of the lamprey, and a
serpente called Vipera nequissimum genus bestie, a serpent most mischeuous
and venomous. If there be any of them with us, it is the adder. The property
of this serpent is this, when he list to gendre, specially where he breadeth
nighe the Sea coaste, he comes to the water side and there hisseth after his
manner, calling to him his make the Lampreye,

Here may the manne and the womanne learn to bear and suffer every one the
manners of the other. Here may the manne learn to order his wife with
sobrenes, and the wife to be gentle and obediente. What thing is worse then
venomme of a Serpente? And yet the Lampreye fears not that, in her make the
adder, she comes gentillye at his calling, and louingelye embraseth him.

Therefore good wives, if your husbands be venomous, crabbed, and cumberous,
or (as you call it) shrewe shaken, you must come at his calling, do as he
byddeth you, be gentle unto him, and so though his venom hurt others, it
shall not hurt you. And you married men, be you prudente as the Serpente,
work wyselye, and lay away your venomme, when you shall company with your
makes, that is always and ever, for you must ever dwell with her (as Saint
Peter says here) therefore you must always lay away your poysonne, so
that you use none toward her. You must always lay down as well all your
churlysshe swellynge, as all your Lordelye and secundum scientiam, according
to science and wisdom (as Saint Peter says here) considering that she is
the weaker vessel, the weaker creature, for all we be Gods vessels,
honor in Scripture has a large signification: sometime it signifies
reverence and obedience, and so it is not taken here, for the man owes none
such to the wife: Sometime it signifies provision of necessaryes, and so is
it taken in the commandment of GOD, of the honor that every man owes to
his parents, for whom he must not only bow with cappe and knee, but also
is bound to provide for them necessaryes if they need. Third, in in such
case, you must give honor and spare Galath. iii. Non est seruus neque liber,
non est masculus, neque femina, omnes enim vos vnum estis in Christo Jesus.
There is no difference betwixt the bondeman and the freeman,

Then to conclude with Saint Peter, you must use your selves toward your
wives, dwellinge and kepinge house with them, after science and wisdom,
without crokednes, rygoure, and malice, honouringe them, bearinge with them,
and forbearinge them, as the weaker vessel, and disposed to many infyrmities,
and therefore vsinge them honestly, prouidinge for them after your ability
and power, that they lack not that is necessary for them, because they be
partakers of like glory as you be. And all this must you do (says Saint
Peter) Vt non impediantur orationes vestrae, that your prayers be not let
and hindered from their effect by the contrary, for if there be rancoure,
malice, and strife betwixt you, GOD will not hear your prayers, for he is the
GOD of peace, and not of discention and debate. Therefore he that will be
heard, must be peaceable, and no brawler. If you be not clean of
conversation, absteininge for causes above mentioned, but follow your lust
like beasts, you shall hindre your prayers that they shall not be heard.
There be days appointed for fasting, and holy days appointed for prayer and
holiness, if you will not at such times abstain, but please the flesh, your
prayers will be let and hindered by fleshlye lust, that God will not hear
them. And therefore S. Paul i. Corin. vii. bids the man and the wife by one
Et ne appropinquetis vxoribus vestris. Exo. xix. that they should not come nigh
their wives. For though the act of matrimony be lawful, yet it has some
uncleanness annexed and concurrente with it, and specially it depresseth and
pulls down the wit from contemplation of heavenly things, because of the
vehement carnal i. Reg. xxi. Si mundi sunt pueri maxim a mulieribus
manduce^t, where king David and his company were sore a hungered, they came to
Achimelech the high preiste, then dwellinge in Nobe, where the tabernacle and
the Arche of GOD was, he desired meat, this preiste Achimelech had none but
the twelve holy loves of bread that stood before the Arche, by a certain
ceremony of their law, which Achimelech was content to give them, so that
they were clean from women. And then you may be

The twelfth treatise or sermon.
IN fide autem omnes vnanimes, compatientes These words be read in Christ's
church for the epistle in the mass, the fifte Sunday after Trinity Sunday,
and be written in this third Chapter of Saint Peter's first Epistle, where
after he had before given fruitful and wholesome exhortations and lessons, to
special estates of men and women, as to them that be in bondage, and to all
prentises and servants, and to all seruinge me^ and women, and afterward to
wives and to married men, of which I entreated in my last sermon. Now the
blessed Apostle retourneth to general lessons to all men and women, using us
In fide autem omnes vnanimes. He byddeth us be all of one mind in our faith,
and in all matters concerning our faith. The new translation has. In summa
omnes vnanimes. In conclusion to be short, be al of one mind, and Omnes
vnamines in oratione estote. Be you all of one mind in your prayers, which
might seem to have some coherence to that went immediatlye before, where he bade
the man and wife to agree, lest by the contrary by their dissension and
variaunce their prayers might be let and hindered. And then according to the
same he wills all men and women to be of one mind in their prayers, for if
there be discord among them, their prayers will not be heard. But let us take
this text of Saint Peter's epistle as it is writ in the common translation, In
fide omnes vnanimes, Be all of one mind in your faith, as they were that be
spoken of. Act. iiii. Multitudinis credentium erat corvnum et anima vna. The
multitude of the^ that believed in the primitive church, had one heart and one
soul, one will and one mind. And Et gratia magna erat in omnibus illis, there
was great grace in them all. For where is concord and unity, there the holy
ghost spreads his grace abundantly, and contrary where be scismes and
diversity of errors and opinions, God withdraws grace, and then me^ run
without brydell from one opinion to an other, from one heresy to an other,
till men be set all on a rore and out of quietness, as it appears evidently in
Germany, where be almost as many heresies and diverse ways in their faith, as
be cities or towns, every city taking his own wai and his own fashion in
their sacraments and ceremonies. This confusion S. Paul greatly feared to com
vt idipsum dicatis omnes, et non sint in vobis scismata.i. Cor. i. That they
should say al one way, so that there should be no scisme or division among
them, but that they should be parfite in one mind, as well in their doings as
in their knowledge or learning. He would not they should varye so much as in
thought or mind. Here among you in this city some will hear mass, some will
hear none by their good wills, some will be shriuen, some will not, but for fear,
or else for shame, some will pay tithes and offeringes, some will not, in that
wors then the Jews which paid them truly, and first fruits and many other
duties beside. Some will prai for the dead, some will not, I hear of much such
Compatientes, we must one suffer with an other, and bear one with another,
like the loving members or lims of one mistical body of Christ. Let us take
example of our own lims in our own bodies, if one hand be not able to do thy
business, anon comes the other hand to work, and if thy hands will not serve,
thou set to thy foot, yea, and if need be thy teth and al. If any part of
our body be hurt, the eyes seeks for a plaster, the fete laboreth to seek a
surgion, the tongue laboreth declaring the grief and praying for help, and so
every part of our bodies takes ii. Cor. xi. Quis infirmatur et ego non
infirmor? Who is sick or weak in his faith or in virtue or any point of
virtuous living, but that I am sick with him, being as sorry for him as I should
be for my self if I were so diseased. Quis scandalizatur et ego non vror? Who
is offended, as who should say there is no man offended taking occasion of
desperacion or of any sin, by the painefulnes of trouble, or by il example of
others, but that I am burned for his sake with the flames of charity, taking
compassion for him and with him ^ And even so we al should every one bear an
others burden, thinking an other man's misfortune as his own. Charity requires
yt we should after this manner take our neighbors hurt or displesure, and the^
you may perceive of this how far they be from charity that rejoice of other
men's harm or displeasure, Fraternitatis amatores, you must love the
fraternity, the brotherheade, not only your brothers (as we be al brothers in
God our father, and in Christ our regeneratour, that has got us again by
baptism) but we must also love the brotherhead, that is to say, the company,
unity, and knotte of the brothers all together, for although enerye man and
woman by him self must be loved, yet we must more love the comontie or common
concord of them all together, then the particular persons of the same, or then
any particular company among the same whole multitude. Heretics have
gathered to them special companies which they have called a brotherhed, as now
in our time mani callith their confederacy the brotherhead, but they be but
patched pieces and cantels of the brotherhead. They Ioh. ii. If they had been of
the^ they would have tarried with the^, but by their swaruing away, they
manifestly show the^ selves that they were no true members of Christ's mystical
body the catholic church, but rather like superfluous and corrupt humors
euomited and cast out to releue and ease the body that was infected by the^.
Misericordes, you must be merciful. Our savior Christ in the gospel,
exhorting us to mercy, like as our father in heaven is merciful, puts three
kinds of mercy. Luc. vi. One consists in not judging nor condempning our
neighbor of any mortal crime without evident signs. For he that without
evidence of a manifest fact, or of such signs as can not be countersayd and
excused by any tergiuersacion will judge his neighbor and inwardly condemn
him as a malefactor, has a cruel heart and is not merciful. The second kind
of mercy that our savior speaks of there, stands in forgiving offenses done
to us, like as we would be forgiven, Dimittite et dimittetur vobis, at the day
of judgment, as Christ says, quod cu^que supererogaueris cu^ rediero, ego
reddam tibi^ Luc. x. Whatsoever thou bestowest over head above Date et dabitur
vobis, give charitably and there shall be given you grace in this world, and
hereafter life everlasting, specially if you give as S. Paul speaks ii. Cor.
ix. sic quasi benedictione^, et no^ quasi auaritia^, as a blessinge, and not as
avarice, that is to say, abu^dantly and not nigardly or against your will.
Chrisost. Qui elimosinam dat inuitus auare dat. He that gives his alms
against his will, gives it nigardly, more couetinge to save it for him self,
qui parce seminat parce et metet, he that sows spareli and thin, shall reap
thin, and he that sows in blessings with a good will and plentifully (as
blessings be given) shall reap and gather in plenty at the time of reward
everlasting, not understanding by him yt sparely sows him that little has and
little gives, for if his mind be prompt and redi to give more if he had more
and might more spare, god will accept him among the large giuers, and his good
will shall be accept according to that he has, and not after that he has not.
ii. Cor. viii. as the poor widows offering of.ii. half farthings was better
accept, then the rich gifts of ye rich me^ that offered to the church stock in
Jerusalem. Exo. xvi. when the people of Israel should gather Manna that they
were fed with in deserte, he that gathered most had no more then he that
gathered less, they had but the measure called Gomor, for every person, and
so God disposed that meat that they were equallye served and every man had
enough, so according to S. Paul's mind, God will do with your charitable
alms bestowed on them, and with their gifts of grace, that you shall have
enough, and they shall have enough, you shall be never the poorer at the years
end, but the richer, and beside that you shall be increased in grace and goodness
by them, by which Augebit incrementa frugum iustitiae vestre, God will augment
the increase of the corn of your justice. Justice is holiness and good living,
the corn and frut that comes of justice, is reward everlasting, which shall be
increased and enlarged by your alms so yt you may now gather what is ye reward
of merci, pity and alms deeds, you shall be rewarded here te^porallye with
increase of your riches, and gostly with increase of grace, and finally with
abundance of glory and joys everlasting in heaven. And all this our savior
Christ compriseth in few words, data et dabitur vobis give, and all these
before said shall be given you. And I fear me that because men be so hard
Modesti, Tully primo officioru^ diffineth Modestia after the mind of the
Stoikes: Modestia est scientia earu^ rerum que agentur aut dicentur loco suo
col locandaru^, it is a knowledge to set in their own place al things that
shall be done or said, to place al our doings and sayings according to the
opportunity of the time as occasion shall serve. It is a foul thing and a great
faut to bring in light language, and to speak gestingly as it were in an
alehouse when Tulli brings example of Pericles and Sophocles which were
fellows or brothers together in ye office of Pretura. They were Pretors
together, highest officers in the city of Rome next to the Co^suls in so much
yt in the absence of the Consuls they bear ye consuls authority: They were a
mean betwixt the Consuls and the common people, so that they should refer unto
the commons such things as were decreed by the Consuls, and the Counsel of the
senate concerning the people, and of such things as the people had to do
withal, and they had the hearing of the causes of the people and authority to
give sentences and make laws and ordinances, for the ordering and quietness of
them, and to auance and to set the^ forth to war as need required. And as
Marcus Varro says of that the office had his name praetor dictus quod periret
exercitui: because he should go before the host and guide them. They should
also speak for the people unto the senate, and should defend the^ from wrong.
The said ii. pretors were on a time in counsel together about a cause
concerning their office, and by chance there came by them a welfauored and
fair child, then Sophocles in the middle of their matter said: O pueru^
pulchrum Pericle, O brother Pericles, lo yonder is a fair child: the other
a^swerd him: pretore^ Sophocle decet non solum manus, sed etiam oculos
abstinentes habere, It besemeth a Praetor not only to have his hands
abstaining from bribery, but also his eyes from wa^ton concupisce^ce. If
Sophocles had said those words in a time when men were about to choose men to do
a feate, as is used with us to Sophocles should a deserved none such cheek,
but then in the middle of an earnest matter to speak of such light facions or
fancies, because his saying was not well placed, he lacked Modestia that we
speak of now, and was to be blamed. Likewise if a man in his study, or
riding in his journey, would muse in making verses, or how he should tell his
tale before a Judge, or if a divine would muse or record his sermon by the way
riding, all this were good and laudable, but if he would so do, or would be in
his dumps when Modestia comes of modus a measure, which is a virtue. Nimietas
(as S. Iherome says) is his contrary vice, which is forbid by the common
proverb, Ne quid nimis do in nothing to much. To much passes measure and
passes good manners, such as in their fare at their board or in their apparel
and raiment excedeth their substance spending and wasting more then their
lands or occupying will extend to, or maintain, they keep no modesty Nimietie,
they come unto to much. How many (think you) of our neighbors now at the
holy time of Christmas coming, will excede modesty and good measure in their
fare, spending so much now for ostentacion and pride, that they shall fare the
worse in their dishe til Easter. It were best to keep such a measure now, that
you may have somewhat left to help your self an other time. As for modesty
and measure in apparel, was never less used, velvet and other silks be as
como^ly on the pore men's back, that lives from hand to mouth, as on the
gentleman, or as on the alderman of this city. The pride of the world is
such, that it brings al men almost to the extremity of nimietie and unto to
much. Therefore S. Peter knowing that pride is an adversary to modesti, to
manerlynes, and to the mean, he exhorts us as for to conserve Humiles (says
he) lowly of heart, so that when god gives you any of these gifts of goodness
aforesaid, you be not proud of them, but thank God for them, attributing al
to God that gave them to us, and may take them away when he list. It is but a
very folishnes for a man to be proud of that he has not of him self, but that
may be taken from him at every twinkling of an eye, if it please the gyuer.
Humilitas dicitur ab humo, it has his name of the earth of the ground, which
is lowest and most gross element. We must know our state, our condition,
whereof we come and whereto we shall, which if me^ would inwardly consider, they
should never be proud of any gift that god has given them, whether it

The.xiii. treatise or sermon.
NOn reddentes malu^ pro malo, nec maledictu^ pro maledicto. Now after this
godly instruction how we shall order our self in par pari refer, to
requite taunt for taunt, or like for like, but god will none such retalliatio^
in word nor deed, but co^trari that we should do good for il, and should bless
and say well for ill saying, as ^ Peter says here and our savior Christ says,
Mat. v. Diligite inimicos vestros benefacite hijs A marvelous sanctimonie that
Christ requires of us. Christian folk. He bids us love our enemies, and to
do well to them that hates us and to pray for them that pursue us, and for
them that unjustly vex us at the law that so we may be the children of our
father in heaven. We must love our enemies, not their enmity or their vices
and sins, for the^ we must hate, but the nature, the mankind, the person
must be loved, for every man and woman, in as much as they be made after the
image of God, and may receive almightye God into their souls by knowledge and
love, must be loved charitablye, for the love of charity is founded upon the
communion and indifferent receiving of perpetual beatitude, that is to say all
creatures that now have everlasting joys in heaven, or that may hereafter
bound to do, although if we pray so for them, we do well and we shall not loose
our reward for our good will, and for our prayer. It was the time of
persecution, whosoever will love life everlasting in heaven, in which no man
dies, and will love to se good days that shall never be darkened nor
disco^tinued by any night, let him refrain his tongue from il sayings, not
blaspheming ye name of god, nor murmuring against him. And let him refrain his
lips that they speak no Mat. xii. Ex verbis tuis iustificaberis, et exve^bis
tuis condemnaberis, by thy words thou shall be justified and approved as a
good man before god, and by thy words thou shall be dampened, the children of
Adders being noughtye the^ self can not say well, ex abundantia enim cordis
loquitur os, for ye mouth speaks of the stuff of the heart. Il words
declares an ill heart, and good words declares a good heart. And therefore when
the prophet and also s. Peter forbids the tongue from il, he forbids the
heart from il thoughts, as well as ye tongue from il words. S. James says Iac.
iii. Be a horse never so strong and feirce, yet with a good bit in his et magna
exaltat, and it sets forth many great matters, mors et vitam manibus lingue,
it brings life temporal and much quietness, if it be well bestowed and causes
life everlasting to him that well uses his tongue in godly doctrine and
gostlye exhortation uttered in season, where contrary a wicked tongue makes
much trouble in this world, and many times death temporal and eternal
follows of it. A little fire burns a whole grove, or a great Prohibe
linguam tuam a malo. When the Devil moves thee to say ill, then play the
controller, play the commander, bid thy tongue keep it self within his
bonds, and say none evil, though thy courage would contrary. And then
Declinet a malo, and faciat bonum. Where the blessed apostle Saint Peter by the
words of the Prophet bids us use Justice in our works and deeds, as he
has willed us to use justice in Inquirat pacem and prosequatur eam. Let him
seek peace with God and man, and earnestly follow it. The world can give no
peace, but will Oculi domini super iustos. This shall be their reward. First
our Lord Gods eyes will favorably behold them, and louinglye look upon
them as on his friends, as a man's eyes runs much on the Et quis est qui
vobis noceat si boni emulatores fueritis^ Tit. ii. Sectatores bonorum ^peru^^
Ensuers and folowers of good works, but rather will favor you, and cherish
you? And so will all good men do. Yea, good. s. Peter why ask thou that
question? Do thou marvel of this? I pray go and stand in the temple and
speak all the words of this christian life, Act. v. And afterward when Gamaliel
had by his counsel somewhat stated the malice of ye officers, yet you were well
beaten and commanded to speak no more in Christ's mane And also when Herod
agrippa would have slain Nero caused thee to be killed in deed, was not all
this because thou were Emulator boni: et sectator bonorum operum. A good doer?
Why was saint Stephan martyred? and likewise a great multitude in the
Primitive church, was it not for well doing? And in the Gospel of this
present third sunday of Lent, when Christ had cast out a devil out of a man
that was both dombe, deaf, and blind. The people marueiled and praised the
miracle, where others as the Scribes and Phariseis said he wrought that miracle
by the power of Beelzebub chief of the devils. So that where they durst not
hurt him with their hands, In epulis suis macule conuiuantes. When you be on
your Ale benche or in your bankets at the whot and strong wine, you spot your
own souls and spotteth others by your evil tongues and ill examples, teachinge
youth to be as evil as you be. Then have at the preachers, then they hurt
Math. v. Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iusticiam, quoniam ipsorum
est regnum celorum. Blessed be they (says Christ) that suffer persecution for
Justice and good livings sake, for their pain and sorrow shall be recompensed
with joys everlasting in Heaven, the pain shall be Dominum autem Christum
sanctificate in cordibus vestris. But that you sanctify our Lord and master
Christ's in your hearts. Sanctus significat firmum, sanctificare firmare. Make
Christ sure in your hearts, so that he go not from your remembrance, another
out of your love, for fear of any trouble or pain. Parati semper ad
satisfactionem omni poscenti vos rationem de ea que in vobis est spe and fide.
Ever being ready to satisfy every man that asks you the reason of the hope
and faith reasonably. That if the things yt we hope and believe were not so
obscure and removed from our carnal Col. iiii. Sermo vester semper in gratia
sale sit conditus, vt sciatis quomodo oporteat vos vnicuique respondere. Let
your communication Lu. xxi. I will give you a mouth and such wisdom as all
your adversaries shall not have power to resist. But this must be done with
modestye and with fear, without presumption, pride, or arrogancy, with
modesty and good manner outward, and with fear inwardly in your hearts, so
that you wade not to far, least in your declaration you bring in more deep
and obscure matters then were asked of you, and least man's body, parfitely
distinct in all liniamentes Modestye, (as S. Peter Conscientia^ habentes bona^,
having a good conscience, so yt in the matters that we declare to others, we
waver not wtin our selves, but that we do inwardlye believe the things to be
true, that we say we believe: and that in our outward behauour and living, we
show it in our works. And so whosoever would backebite you, or rail at you
(says.s. Peter) or would unjustly accuse you before any judge, as though your
fayeth wexe* naught, nor worthy to be received of any wisema^, they
considering your stedfastnes in Christ's faith, and your good conversation and
living in Christ, may be ashamed of them selves, and may leave their
accusementes and their tayling, and may amend their lives, and come to grace.
They that ignorantly will teach and declare the thing that Melius est For if it
be gods will that you suffer persecution, tentation, or trouble for the
exercise of your faith, and for the increase of your reward, better it is that
you suffer for well doing then for evil doing. For you shall have reward of
GOD for your paciente sufferynge of vexation that you have not deserved. Where
as if you were malefactors, and ill doers, you should have no thank of god,
for you have even as you have deserved. Take example of our master Christ which
once died for our sins, the just for the unjust, a That so he might offer us up
to god the father, not being noughty as we were before, for so we should be no
pleasant offering to almighty God: but we must be by example of him,
Mortified in flesh, and quickened in spirit: Like as he died for our sins and
roose again for our justification, so must we be mortified, and must dye to
all carnalitie and sin, so that there be none left alive in us. And we must
be viuificate and made alive in spirit, so that our living be all spiritual,
good, and godly, pliant to the inclination of the holy spirit. This example of
our master Christ saint Peter brought in to teach us that they that being good
and virtuous, yet suffers vexatio^ and trouble, against Christ as others did,
and descended into Mortificatus quide^ carne viuificatus autem spiritu.
speaking of Christ which was mortified in the flesh, bodily diyng for us, and
was viuificate and ever alive in the spirit, for his soul never dyed, in
sign and token that by his example we should likewise do: gostly diynge to
all carnalitie, and ever living spiritually, as I said before. In quo and his
qui in carcere erant spiritibus veniens predicauit. This text is diversely
expounded, one way thus. In which spirit, by which he was ever alive, Christ
came and preached to the spirits that were in prison, which once were hard
of believe, when they looked for Gods patience and long sufferance in the to
preach, therefore it is true that every person Per communicationem idiomatu^.
As we say, the son of god is a man, and a man is the son of God. And so we
say that the son of god suffered death on the cross, and that a man made the
stars in the sky, Because of the perfect union and knot of the godhead to the
manhood in one person, and the same person that now is incarnate and made man
did it. And he preached to the Prisoners that were dull in beleuyng, Noe
tellyng them Gods commination and threatenyng, to destroy the world with water
except they would amend. And yet they were hard of believe, and looked for more
favor at Gods hand, and for longer patience, and forbearynge them, and so
trifled till the floude Funes peccatorum circumplexi su^t me. The ropes of sins
have wrapped me in round about, and likewise speaks the wiseman. Pro. v.
Iniquitates sue capiunt impiu^ and funibus peccatorum suorum constringetur. His
own iniquities takes the wicked person, and with the ropes of his own
sins he shall be strayned and knit. And in that case were the people of Noes
time, for all mankind had corrupt his way, and the manner of his living. Omnis
caro corruperat viam suam. Genesis vi. All flesh, all men left virtue and their
souls that died in the state of grace, and in Gods favor, in which if they
had any thing to be purged, as for venial sins, or for lack of Pro. xiii.
Spes que differtur affligit animam. The hoope that is prolonged and put of,
vexes and punishes the mind. Among these were many of them that were
swalowed up in the water at hell, till the time when it pleased him to unite
and join his soul to his body again, against the time of his glorious
resurrection, and then took away with him such as were to his pleasure, as he
said before that he would do. Ego si If I be lift up from the ground. I shall
draw all things to me, as well in hell as in earth: for of both he drew a
great part to him. According to this speaks the increate wisdom of God, the
second person in Trinite. Eccle. xxiiii. Penetrabo omnes inferiores parts
terre, and inspiciam omnes dormientes, and illuminabo omnes sperantes in
domino. I shall pearce and enter into all the lower parts of the earth, and I
will look on all them that be a sleep, whose bodies rest in their graves in
the sleep of peace, and I will give light to all them that hope in their Lord
God. And Saint Augustine in the.cxxvii. sermon, says. Omnia ab Christ took
away with him all that were elect and chosen: for such although they were
in the bay or bosom of tranquillity, ease, and rest, yet they were kept and
holden within the clausures of hell. For our lord Christ when he rose, did not
repair or restore to pardon and forgiveness all infideles, and such as for
their crimes or mortal sins were deputed In like form and manner you be
saved by baptism from dampnation everlasting. Non carnis depositio sordium
sed conscientiae bone interrogatio in Deum. The water alone is not the thing
that does it, although his property be to wash away the filth and uncleanness
of the body, but it is the examination and discussion of a good conscience
toward God (says S. Peter) because that in the water, the word does make
clean the soul, as S. Augustine speaks tract.lxxx. in euangel. Johan. Upon
these words, Iam vos mundi estis propter verbum quod locutus sum vobis. Ioh.
vx. Take away the holy sacramental words from the water, and what is the
water but bare water? Accedit verbum ad elementum and fit sacramentum. The
word joined to the element of water, makes the sacrament. For the Act. xv.
Fide purificans corda eorum. God clensith their hearts by faith, the water and
the word concurringe with the same faith. Then this clensing of the soul must
not be attribute to the water, except we put to the word, and then join
them both together, and they shall be of such strength, that they may purge
and make clean the least child that ever was borne, which (as I have said
in times past) believes in the faith of the church, like as Conscientie bone
interrogatio in deum, the examination or discussion of a good and well believing
conscience toward God, comprehending as well the cathechisation or instruction
going before the baptism (where ye party may have such opportunity) as the
Sacramental words with the water, and with faith and all together. According
to this says S. Paul. Ephesians. v. Christus dilexit ecclesiam et seipsu^ tradidit
pro ea vt illa^ sancti ficaret mu^dans ea^ lauachro aque in verbo vite. Christ
loved his church, and delivered him self to sinful men's hands, that he
might make her holy, clensynge her with the lauer of water in the word of
life. This blessed Sacrament of baptism, by which we be regenerate and
gotten deposirio sordium carnis, a cleansing and wasshinge away of the filth of
the flesh by the water of baptism when they were christened, but it prevailed
not to eternal salvation, because they lacked a faithful conscience, well
instructed, examined, and tried toward GOD by the resurrection of Christ from
the dead, that like as he rose from the dead, so our consciences should rise
from dead works of sin, to liuelye works of grace and virtue, no more to
dye or sin again, which is in the right hand of God, swalowynge up,
consuminge, and destroyinge death, that so we might be made inheritours of
everlasting life.

That a man swaloweth he consumes, so that it shall no more appear in the
form and fashion and had subject unto him Angels, potestates, and virtues,
where S. Peter expresses three orders of Angels of heaven to be subdued and
subject unto Christ, by them understanding all the residue of the Angels,
which as S. Dionise in his book de celesti Hierarchia, writes according to
that he had learned of his master S. Paul, by whom he was baptized and also
taught in the catholyke faith) be divided into.iii. Hierarchies. Every
Hierarchy conteyninge.iii. orders Seraphin, Cherubin, and Thronos. The second
conteyneth, Dominationes virtutes, and potestares. The third Hierarchy and
lowest, has in it these three orders, Principatus, Archangelos, et Angelos. As
appears by s. Dionise in the said book. Cap, vi.vii.viii. and.ix. And by S.
Gregory. Homil.xxxiiii. super Euangelia. All these were subject and subdued to
Christ's manhod, when he came to heaven by his marvelous ascension. Of all
these orders Saint Peter in this Angelis, and two of the middle Hierarchy,
potestates, et virtutes, by them understanding all the other Angels, which
though they were ever since their first creation, subject, and subdued to
Christ's Godheade, yet here in this place he makes special mention of their
subjection to Christ, that he might show that the humanity of Christ was so
exalted and set alofte by his ascension (which Saint Peter here speaks of)
that it was preferred and set above the excellency of all the Angels of
heaven: According to the saying of the Prophet, Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus
eius. And Saint Paul. phil. Dedit illi no men quod est super omne nomen vt in
nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, celestium, terrestrium, GOD the father has
given him a name above all names, that to his name all creatures in heaven, in
earth, and of hell, shall bow the knee, and be subdued and obediente unto him.
To whom be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.


The fourth Chapter.
CHristo igitur passo in carne and vos eadem cogitatione armamini, quia qui
passus est in carne de siit a peccatis. etc. The blessed Apostle Saint Peter,
in diverse places of this epistle that we have in hand, vehemently extolleth
and commends the most abundant mercy of God, by which he has regenerate
and gotten us again to life, where we were before by our carnal parents
gotten to death. And we see by experience, that one that has a great
affection or vehement love to any thing, will be ever busy, as it were one
that could never have done, or that would be ever glad to speak of it. So
Saint mysterye of the said passion of Christ, and of CHRISTO passo in carne
and vos eadem cogitatione armamini. In as much as Christ has suffered in his
flesh, be you armed in the same remembrance. They that were newelye
converted to CHRIST in the prymityue Church had much vexation by
infydeles, and also by some false Christen men, and even so be we many times
vexte, and ever shall be unto the worlds end, with shrewes and noughtye
lyuers, that ever goethe about to disturb and trouble good men, and to work
CHRIST'S passion. Remembrance of CHRIST'S passion, must be our harnes and
our weaponne to put away all extreme trouble and vexation, and by the ^ame
we shall likewise and yde and put of all insultes and assaults of temptation
to sin: for such remembrance of CHRIST'S passion which he took for our
sake, moves a man to macerate and punysshe his flesh, to conform him self
to CHRIST'S pains, being content to take pain in our bodies, as Christ
did in his,

CHRIST fasted fortye days, and another eat nor drunk, I say not that we
must fast likewise without meat and drink, it passes our power: but yet
as the wise Poet Horace says. Est quodam prodire tenus si non datur vltra. We
must goo somewhat onwarde, though we can not come to the vttermooste: we
must do the best we can to come toward his fast, taking such meat, and
at such times as by the universal counsel of Christ's church be allowed to be
eaten in the fortye days of Lent: then how far wide from his fast they be
that contemptuousely takes flesh, or other dyattes prohibited, judge you.
After he had vt dicitur, so that he never eat nor drunk after, save that in
the extreme fayntnes before his death, when he would have drunk, they gave him
such drink as he would not drink of, after he had a little tasted it, so
that from the thursdaye in the

Now good louinge freindes, how we that will not take pains to fast nor
abstain at times appointed, but only when it please us, (that is as much to
say, as never at all, as it prouith in effect) do con form our selves to
Christ's pains that he took, judge you: Iosu. viii. Hai by interpretation is
as much to say as confusion. The king of Hai is our aduersarye the devil, and
he has a captain of his wars called fomes peccati, ye nurse or the breader
of sin, because many does obey him, and he is the captain of confusion,
because he inclines his subjects to work against the judgment and
sentence of right reasonne, and there as reason rules not, is nothing but
confusion, and all out of course and good order. GOD badde him Pone insideas
vrbi lay a stale behind the city, on the backeside because we must ever
watch and labor against the army of confusion, the multitude of mortal
sins, as well in age as in youth, because that he overcame the great wise
man Solomon when he was an old man, notwithstanding all his wisdom, as he
has done many a one moore, as well in age as in youth. When Iosue lift up
his shylde on hie on a spear, that it might be seen a far of, that part of
Iosue his host that lay in the stale, and also the company that were with the
captain joined together, and environed and closed in the whole multitude of
the town of Hay, and killed them every mothers son, manne, womanne for if
we do, it will be laid to our charge, and Sa^ctificate bellu^ et pugnate
pugna^ domini. Joel. iii. Then we sanctify a battle, and Gala. vi. Mihi absit
gloriari nisi in cruce Domini nostri Jesus Christi, per quem mihi mundus
crucifixus est and ego mundo. Where the pseud apostles, against which Saint
Paul speaks there, reputed trouble and pain, suffered for Christ's sake, to
be nothing profitable, as many pseudapostles and false gospellars says now
a days, or if they say if not with their tounges, yet they show it in their
works. Ibant Apostoli gaudentes a conspectu consilii quo nia^ digni habiti
sunt pro nomine Jesus co^tumelia^ pati. Actu. v. they went away with myrthe
and gladness, that God had esteemed them, and taken them as worthy to suffer
for Christ's sake pains and despytes. So did Saint Paul glory,
communicatynge, and taking part of Christ's pains on the Cross, knowing
(as Saint Ambrose says) that the love of the

Inuicem sibi mortui sunt dum nihil concupiscit Apostolus mundi, and dum nihil
habet mundus suum quod agnoscat in Apostolo, sicut and Dominus ^it, ecce venit
princeps mundi huius and in me inuenit nihil. Ioh. xiiii. The Apostle and the
world were one crucified to another (says Saint Ambrose) while the Apostle
had no concupiscence or desire of worldelye pleasures, and while the world
had nothing that he could know for his own, in that blessed Apostle. Even
as our Savior Christ speaks: loo, the Prince of the world comes, and
finds nothing in me that he may claim for his own. And who so ever has
so done by remembrance of Christ's pains and passion, so maceratinge his
flesh, so punysshing, subduyng, Nam qui passus est in carne desiit a peccatis.
In which words Saint Peter gives us an excellent lesson, and a general
rule, that he that suffers and takes pains in the flesh, cease from
sin, and leaves sin, as it may be declared, discurrynge generally
thoroughe all sins. When a man or woman is tempted to lechery, by ouermuche
farcinge or fyllinge the bellye with meats, and whote wines, let him take
pain to punysshe

Likewise in anger, which is a certain kindelinge or inflamynge of the blood
about thy heart, suffer in thy body, take pain in thy body, let not the
occasion of that heat comme to thy heart, stop thy mouth give fair words
though it grieve thee, and anon thy anger will Pa^iaris in carne, and desines
etiam ab hoc peccato. Suffer in thy flesh, and in thy carnal fancye: strive
with thy passion be not so folishe as to think that his thrifte hyndereth
thee, but rather take thou pain in thy body to thrive, and to go forward in
honestye and in riches as well as he, and compel thy mind to consider that
thou should love thy neighbor, and consequentlye that thou should be
glad of his auancemente and rejoice in it, as one lover should do in an other.
And so thou shalt cease from that sin of envy. And even so you shall leave
all other vices, if you will by imitation and example of Christ take pain in
your bodies, punysshe your bodies, and strive with your carnal affection,
according to Saint Peter's saiynge. Qui passus est in carne, defiit a
peccatis. He that has suffered in his body, has done with carnal vices and
sins, that so for the rest of his life time while he shall live, in the
flesh in his body, here in this world he may live not after the flesh
of carnal manne, which has pleasure communely in voluptuous pleasures of
the flesh, but according to the will of GOD, in sincerity and cleanness of
life. Sufficit enim preteritum tempus ad voluptatem gentium consummandam his
qui ambulauerunt in luxuriis. For the time paste is inoughe for to fulfill the
will of Paynyms and Gentyles that have walked, that is to say, have led
their lives in all manner of Lecherye and pleasures of the flesh. You know
that as I have often said Desideriis and in uncleanly and wanton appetites in
mind inwardlye, and as it were runnynge in Reprobumsensum, as Saint Paul
speaks. Romans i. desierynge nothing that is good for their souls Romans i.
Vinolentiis commessationibus. Nolite inebriari vino, in quo est luxuria. Be not
drunk with Wine, for in wine is lecherye, as the effect in the cause. And
therefore as Valerius Maximus writes. Lib. ii. Vini vsus Romany foeminis
ignotus fuit ne scilicet in aliquod dedecus pro laberentur quia proximus a
libero patre intemperantie gradus ad inconcessam venerem esse consueuit. The
women of Rome in the old time when Rome flourished in highest authority and
dominion, knew not the use of wine for fear lest they should fall to any
shame or villainy for the next stepped of intemperancye from the God of Sine
cerere and baccho friget venus. Without meat and drink Uenus is cold, the
fleshely lust shall not trouble thee. In sign and token that one of them
follows of the other, the bealy is next above the priuitie, to give us to
understand that if we restrain the bealy from superfluity of meat and
drink, the incontinency of lecherye shall be cold, and little shall trouble
us. Where contrary, he that is given to the pleasure of the bealy, shall not
avoid the fylthines of lecherye, Commessationibus, in extraordinarye
refections, banketynges, breakefastes, after nonemeates, reresuppers, and such
other lewd and unseasonable wanton bealyglee. All these feadeth lechery, and
so does all other potations, such other as had exceaded in one notable work
or other, while they were alive. And that this crime most odious to GOD, and
most Sedit populus comedere and bibere, and surrexerunt ludere. Exodus xxii.
And then they rose up to dance and sing, and play on such instruments as
they had in worship and honor of their Calfe that was new made, which
was plain Idolatrye. And Lactancius firmianus diuinarum institutionum. Lib.
primo capi. xxi. says of such sacrifices of the Gentilitie. Epulisque
saciati noctem lusibus ducerent. And so you shall read Qui fingit sacros ^igno
vel marmore vultus, non facit ille deos: qui colit ille facit. He that makes
holy faces in Timber or in stone, makes not Gods, he that worshippeth them he
makes them gods. And so thou make an Idol of thy wife, or of thy child by
ouermuche loving them or cherishing them, and doing more for them then
thou would do for GOD. And slackynge or leauinge thy duetye to God to please
them, after the manner of Saint Paul's speaking, Idoloru^ seruitus,
Covetousness is Idolatry, because the covetous man makes his money his Idol
and his GOD, doing more for to get richesse, then he would do to get God.
And taking more mind on riches then on God. And doing that for his goods
sake, that he would not do for Gods sake. And after this manner you may make
an Idol of the newest Image that is, if you will give it such honor as is
not kindelye for it. Make no more of an Image, but only take it as a
representer to signifye, and to put you in remembrance of the thing that it
is made after, and pass no more upon it. In quo admirantur non concurrentibus
vobis in eandem luxury confusione^. Here.s. Peter touches a common experience
which chau^ceth to the^ yt from vice be converted to virtue, i. Reg. x. of
Saul which was but a rude person, and seeking his fathers Asses that were
strayed away, he met with Samuel the Prophet, who by Gods commandment
anointed him king of the realm, and told him before hand certain things that
should be fortune him, that when he saw them come to pass, and come to
effect Et insiliet in te spiritus domini and prophetabis cum eis and
mu^aberisin virum alium. The spirit of our lord shall fall upon thee suddenly,
and thou shall prophecy as they do, and thou shall be changed into another
manner of man. And as Samuel ye prophet said, so it chanced in deed. And Saul
prophesied with them, singing and lauding god, and also speking by ye way of
prophecy of things to come. Of this came Quenam res accidit filio Cis* Number and
Saul inter Prophetas? Cis was father unto Saul, what is become unto the son
of Cis? What is Saul among the Prophets, or one of the Prophets? These
men did not thank GOD for the gift that God had given to Saul, but
rather disdayned, and fell to mocking of him. Other there were that
manifestlye despised him. Filii autem Belial dixerunt Number saluare nos poterit
iste? and despexerunt cum. The Deuylles children, malicious persons said. Can
this man save us from our enemies? They despised him and set him at naught, and
would not take him as their King, nor brought any present unto him as
others did. Even filii Beliall, the deuylles birds marueyleth at you. That you
forsake them, and that you fall not to such confusion of all Lecherye and
voluptuous living as they do, and as you were wont to do, blaspheminge
and missaiynge you, because you abstain from their noughtie conversation, they
despise you, and set not a straw by you, but says: Will you see this Pope
holy horeson? Number Saull inter Prophetas. We shall have a Prophet or a
Preacher of him, with such other blasphemynge and raylynge words. Qui
reddent rationem ei qui paratus est iudicare viuos and mortuos. Which shall
make a reakening and account for their raylinge, unto him that is ready to
Judge the quick and the dead,


^Iuant autem secundum Deum in spiritu. In these words that I have now read
unto you the blessed Apostle Saint Peter shows us the commodity that came
to the^ that being infidels had the Gospel and good tidings of Christ's
doctrine preached unto them And the same commodity comes also to all the^
that being in deadly sin, and so dead spiritually hears the Gospel and
the word of God preached unto them, which is amendment of life. Thus he
says. Propter hoc. etc. For this cause that be so converted may live
vertuouslye according Omnium autem finis appropinquabit. Because he said even
now that Christ is ready to come to judge the quick and the beade, as though
he would not be long nor tarry. Now he says according to the same that the
end of all men is at hand, for as Christ says in the Gospel, of that
day of judgment no man knows how nighe it is, or how far of it is. And
therefore we must ever think upon it, as thinkinge every morning it would
be come before night. And even so we must think of our own particular
judgment at our departinge, every man and woman for our own part, as well
for the aucthoritye of Gods word, that in many places gives Eccle. xxx.
Cogitatus ante tempus senectam adducit. And to others by ouermuche Study and
watchynge for to get learning and knowledge. Vigilia honestatis tabefaciet
carnes, and cogitatus illius ^^^chyng about matters of honestye and goodness
shall consume the flesh, and the thinkyng on such things will take away a
man's sleep, for of much thought and of profounde study about weighty matters,
and likewise of musinge on terrible and troublous causes there comes into the
sensual appetite of man many passions and troubles to vex him, and unquiet
him, as fear and sorrow and heaviness, or such other, which many times
alters the body soore and vnmeasurablye, so that a man's natural
complexion is distempered by the same, and a man's natural moisture is
consumed, and natural strength weakened and decayed, and so the flesh
widdereth and dries, the skyne wrinkeleth and quaketh. And therefore said the
wiseman. Pro. xxv. Sicut tinea vestimento and vermis ligno, ita tristicia As a
moght hurts a garment and a worm consumes a Tree: so does sorrow and
heaviness hurt a man's heart, and consequentlye all the body after. And
therefore holy Job in his great calamity and vexacion said. Cutis mea aruit
and contracta est. Job. vii. My skin is withered and shronke together. This
said holy Job, considering that his natural moisture was consumed by age,
and for his manifold diseases and sores. An other pro^ostication and messager
of our end is sickness, soores and male^ders, as weakness of complexion,
disposion to many fevers and to be now and then vexed with one fever or (...)
other, head ache, colic, ye stone, gowts, and runninge legs, dropsye, and
palsye. All these one upon an other, men will make haste to know God and to
come to God, amending their lives. And.s. Paul consideringe that ( virtus in
infirmitate perficitur.ii. Cori. xii.) virtue is made Libe^ter gloriabor in
infirmitatibus meis vt inhabitet in me virtus Christi. I shall gladlye and with
a good will rejoice and be proud in mine infyrmities, that so I may be
conformable to Christ, having virtues in me more eminent and more excellent
then else they would have been. Propter quod placeo mihi in infirmitatibus
meis, in contumelijs, in necessitatibus, in persecutionibus, in angustijs pro
Christo. I please my self (as a proud manne does) when I am weak and sick,
or diseased in body, and when I am dispitefullye vexed, and when I am in
great and extreme neade, in persecution, in distress, or in streictes. Cum
enim infirmor tunc potens sum. When I am sick and weak, then I am strong
Ambrosius. Verum est quia tunc vincit christianus cum perdere putatur, and tunc
perdit perfidia cum se vicisse gratulatur plaudit ^gitur cum illi insultatur
and surgit cum premitur. It is true that the apostle says, for then a christen
man overcomes and has the ouerhande when he is thought to lose, and to have
the worse. And then falshode loses when he is glad of his winnyng, or that he
has overcome and gotten the upper hand. And therefore saint Paul was most
glad and proud in God, when men kicked and wrought displesures against him,
and he rose upward when men thought they pressed him down. An other common
messager of death, is example of others that we see plucked away from us every
day, of all ages, of all states and degrees, As S. Aug. i. ci. dei ca. viii.
Temporalia bona and mala vtrisque voluit esse co^munia, vt nec bona cupidius
appetantur quo mali quoque habere cernuntur, nec mala God would that good
things and ill chances should be common to good men and to bad, because good
things should not be to gredely desired which we se noughty persons to have and
enjoy, nor ill things should not be shamefully eschued and abhorred, which
most commonly good people has and be combred with all. The most diversity is
in the use and occupiynge of prosperity and of adversity. For a good man is
never the prouder for prosperity, another ouercast, broken, or marde by
adversity, where contrary, a noughty person in felicity is corrupt by pride
and arrogance, and with infelicitie, with ill chances and aduersite is sore
vexed and punished, and many times brought to desperation yet beside this
almighty God shows his marvelous work in the distribucion grant men somewhat
of their peticio^s sometimes de disciplina Christiana. Therefore if thou be
afraid of a foul death, thou must fear a foul and a sinful life, for if
thou love a foul and a sinful life, and would have a fair end, thou
love no^ potest male mori qui been vixerit, he can not die ill that has
lived well. But against this you will peradventure object thus: has not mani
good me^ ben drowned by tempest or by ship wra^k in ye seas and lost their
lives with their goods and al? Has not many good men ben slain amongst their
enemies in battle? Has not thieves killed mani good men in their own houses,
or else by the hie way side* Has not some good me^ been killed with wild
beasts, yea and many al to torn in pieces with such wild beasts? and have you
not herd of some innoce^ts yt have been hanged on ye galowes as felons,
murderers, or like malefactors? Be preciosa est in conspectu domini mors
sanctoru^ eius. The death of the holy and good men is precious and of great
price and estimacion in the sight of our lord. Be not such deaths as I have
spoken of, the very deaths that blessed Martyrs (whose martirdomes we keep
high and holy in Christ's church) have suffered for Christ's sake? Therefore
let us endeavor our selves to have a good life while we be here, and then
whatsoever occasion we have to die, we shall go out of this world to rest and
quietness that shall be without al fear of trouble, and shall never have end.
The rich gloto^ yt is spoke of in the gospel yt went eueri day Take heed of
their end, and by that consideracion that shall be the mean and high way to
quietness, rest, and joys in everlasting life with Christ. Estote itaque
prudentes et vigilate in orationibus, therefore be you prudent and watch in
prayers. These words of saint Peter with certain that follows be red in
Christ's church for the epistle of the day, on the sunday within the octaues
of the ascension: which is the sunday next before Whit su^day. Saint Peter
considering the manifold troubles of this world that virtuous faithful people
be ever cumbred with all, and also considering the shortness of our abode here,
that it will away, and is come to an end, therefore he says: be you prudent
and watch in prayers. Be you prudent (he says) there be diverse manners of
prudence. The Philosopher says that omnia naturaliter bonum apperunt: Al
things naturally desires the thing that is good for them, and so does the
things that lacks their senses after their manner, for they naturally
desires to come to their natural quantity A provision As a Horse or a Cow
that has be fed in a good pasture, or wintred in a warm stable, will draw to
the same again when they have need. But man which is a reasonable creature,
provides for the thing that is good for him self or for the^ that long to him
by prudence more properly taken, which is recta ratio agibilium circa hominis
bona et mala. vi. Ethi. id est ratio rectificatiua agibilium. The reason or a
quality or a virtue in the reason that makes straight and sets in order al
things that man does to obtain that is good, and to exchew that is bad. It is
also the virtue by which a man can give good counsel and make wise provision
for all things that longs to a man's life. But then in as much as the wiseman
says: Contra bonum malu^ est, et contra malum bonu^. Every good thing has an
enemy, and so has eueri virtue, or at the lest To. viij. Prudentia carnis
mors est. The prudence of the flesh is death. And there right he says,
Sapientia carnis inimica est deo, The Sapience or wisdom of the flesh is
enemy to God. Therefore as Saint James makes a distinction Jacob. iij. So we
may divide prudence or providence, calling some earthly prudence or wisdom,
some beastlye wisdom, and some devilish wisdom or provision. Earthly
prudence or wisdom, is the wisdom of them that studyeth vehemently and
far casts to get the wealth and riches of the world, and drowneth them
selves in the same even as it were Moles or Wants that be never well but when
they be toylynge or moylynge in the earth, and there they be wyser and can
better skill then any other beast. Even so be these worldly wise men which be
never well but when they be gathering riches and mucke of the world, more
serving their riches then serving God. Against which speaks our savior
Christ, Nemo potest No man can serve two masters, God and his goods or
riches. The Phariseis that were covetous men, heard this and laughed him to
scorn, therefore they heard ve vobis diuitibus, you such rych persons shall
have woe everlasting, for the joy that you now take in your riches. Beastlye
wisdom they have that obey the pleasure of the bealy, and applies their
wits chiefelye to content the same, in that following the propertye of very
beasts, to which Christ said: Ve vobis qui saturati estis quia esurietis. Woe
be to you that be farced and stuffed full of meats, for you shall be a
hungerd, both here, and in the world to come.

proficientes in peius proceeding and going forth every day into worsse and
worsse. Diuelishe wisdom or prudence they have that by example of the devil
exalt them selves to the uttermost of their power. He would have exalted him
self above the sters of heaven above the estate of all angels, and said he
would be like the highest, equal and as good as God. Esaias. xiiii. Mark the
sequel that followed of his pride, and beware of it. Veruntamen in infernum
deijcieris in profundum laci, but thou shall be cast into hell into the depest
of the lake, and so he was ouerturned from the gloriousest angel in heaven,
and made the fowlest dyuell in hell, and yet proud men seems worsse then he
was, for he.i. Cor. i. I shall destroy the wisdom of worldly wise men and
shall reprove the prudence and providence of such prudent persons: Has not
God (says the Apostle) made the wisdom of the world very foolishnes? It has
pleased almightye God to save faithful people by the preaching of the gospel,
which worldly wisemen repute and take as very foolishnes, and as a foolish
thing. They take their policy and worldly providence as though it came of
them selves and not of God, and therefore they thank To. viij. Prudentia
aute^ spiritus vita et pax. The wisdom of the spirit by which man works
First, because a sinner loses a great inheritance for a little trifle of
pleasure, as Esau did for a mess of potage, as I said before. And it is writ.
Job. xxviij. Sapientia non inuenitur in terra suauiter niuentium, Wisdom is
not found in the land or country of them that lives delicatelye all at
pleasure. Second, sinners lacks prudence, for they little regard to recover
their inheritance again, where they might so do with a little labor and
pain like them that be spoken of in the pro nihilo habuerunt terram
desiderbilem, The Israelites esteemed not the delectable land that was promised
them, but would rather have turned back again into Egypt, even so do sinners
desperately little regard the land of life ever lasting in heaven. Third, a
sinner lacks prudence, because he does wilfully cast him self into the
snares of him that will not fail to draw him and strangle him to death
everlasting. Birds that be meshede in a net, can not get out when they
would without help, but the more they strive, the sorer they be holden in the
net, Even so says the wyseman. Prouer. v. Funibus peccatorum suorum
vnusquisque co^stringitur. Every sinner is wrapped and streyned with the ropes
of his own sins, and the more he laboreth, Sapi. i. Deus mortem non fecit:
impij manibus ac pedibus accersierunt eam. God made not the death of sin, but
wicked men with hand and foot have called it in and pulled it to them.
Fourth, it is plain that sinners lacks prudence and wisdom, by that they
be not afraid of the justice of God knowing that he has iustlye condemned so
many Angels for sin, and that the Angels were made devils for breakinge
their obedience to God. And that so many men and women be provision, the
second is Circumspection, the third may be called Caution or warynesse.

To provision we be moved by example of four Prouer. xxx. Quatuor sunt minima
terre and ipsa su^t sapientiora sapientibus. There be.iiii. of the least
things breding on earth, and they be wiser after their manner the^ some wise
men be. And here we must take our examples of insensible things and of brute
beasts and dumme creatures, according to the counsayl of holy Job. xii.
Ieterroga iumenta and docebunt te: and volatilia celi et indicabunt tibi:
loquere terre and respo^ debit tibi, et narrabunt pisces maris. Ask the beasts
and they will teach thee, and so of others. Then it may be said that we ask
these dumme creatures questions to learn wit by them, when we consider their
natural disposicions, examinyng and discussing and searching out their
natural operacions and virtues. And then they answer us and teach us, when by
consideracion of them we ascend and rise up to the knowledge of god, formice
populus infirmus qui preparat in mess cibum sibi. One is the poor Emytte or
Pismyre, which in harvest and in time of fair weather provides meat to live
by in winter, of whose diligence and provision he spoke before. Prou. vi. Vade
ad formicam o piger, and considera vias eius, and disce sapientiam. O thou idle
man or woman, go to the Emytte, and consider his labors and pain that he
takes, and learn wit. He has no ruler, captain or scolemayster Lepusculus
plebs inualida qui collocat in petra cubile suum. Here is some diversity of
translations, for that in our text is called lepus culus, in other is called
herinacius, and hericius and Mus. And in the psalm. Ciii. it is said, petra
refugi um herinacijs, the rock is a refuge, a place of safe guard and defense,
for that beast. It is a little rough beast, and builds in the rocks in
Palestine, in the holy land. I think we have none of them here with us. For
the same our translation in the proverbs of Solomon puts Lepusculus an Hare
or a Leueret. This word Saphan in the Hebrewe has diverse significations, of
which one is a Hare, and so it is put in our common translacion. A Hare is a
weak beast and a fraiful, ever protection and defense of God, as in a tower of
strength to save us from our enemies that would destroy us. Regem Locusta
non habet and Locusta is a certain long Fly, bygger then the Cricket, or
then the Grassehopper, they be very many in Affrike, and in southe part of
Asia. Their property is to fly flocking together, as it were al with one
accord, having no king nor captain to set them forward. The Bees have a
captain or master Be whom they follow when they will swarm, and so has not
these Locustes, by which is commended unto us the prudence and wisdom in
concord and unity, fellow like without coertion or compulsion* For though
concord and unity with obedience under one head and ruler be very good and
necessary, and according Terribilis ut castorum acres ordinata, Canti. vi.
Terrible like the forward or the onsette of a battle well set in order and in
array. They that have experience knowe^h this right well, that when two armies
or hosts shall meet together in battle, that host that auaunceth forward
in a ray very close joined together, shall be terrible to the co^trari part and
shall make them soon afraid, because they Stellio manibus nititur and moratur
in edibus regis. A Stote a Ueyry, or a Wesyll clyngeth and cleaves fast with
his fete, which stands him instead of hands, and by them he scratcheth and
climeth very nimlye on the walls, on the roofes, and on all other places of
great men's houses, yea and byldeth and breeds in the kings palace: and where
he has no wings to fly up, he gets up with his hands or feet as hie as
he list to do: by this teaching us this point of prudence and of provision,
that where we may not obtain our intent one way, we must assaye another way.
As if a man be not of such natural pregnancy, and quicknes of wit as others
be, yet by his diligence and stellio, this stoote or wesel that has no
wings, trustinge to her nails, climeth up to the top of the tower: so they
that be well witted, and might mount hie by their wits, many times gives
them selves to sloth and idleness, kepinge them selves allow in shreude
unthrifty and noughtie works, while good simple persons, that lacks the
wings of subtle wits, trusting to their nails, to their busy labors,
comes to great knoweledge, and to grace and Circumspection, by which we look
well about, and take good head that we do truly keep the mean of virtue, so
that while we exchew and avoid one vice, we fall not into the other extremity
and contrary vice, as that while we avoid avarice and couetousenes, we fall
not into prodigality and wastfulnes: and that while we avoid cowardnes, we
fall not into folishe hardines, or to rasshe brainesicknes. They be not
circumspecte enough, that so exchueth, and auoideth from temporal trouble and
Cautio, warines, lest we be begiled with vices cloked under the color of
virtues, as Amasa was begiled of Ioab. ii. Reg. xx. This Ioab fearing least
Amasa should have been made chief captain of the wars of king David,
envied him, and dissembled with him, and as they were setting forward to a
certain batail, met with him, and lovingly saluted him, and took him by ye
chin, as though he would have kissed him, and said to him, salve mi God speed
my cousin (for in deed they were sisters children) he had a weapon by his side,
with which he stroke him in the side that his guts fell out, and so he died.
There is none so perilous gyle, as that is hid under the similitude and
color of friendship. By this kind of prudence we shall spy when pride
disgiseth him self under the similitude and name of clenlines, and when lechery
is cloked and taken for love: and we shall perceive that in great abundance,
and in worldly wealth, is hid much indigence, need, and lack of virtue and
grace, and also that under the ignominy, shame, and sclaundre of Christ's
cross, is most excellent pulchritude and beauty, and that under the folishnes
of preaching of Christ (as many has taken Estote prudentes sicut serpents,
Mat. x. Be you wise like serpents. The serpent to save her head, will lay
forth all the whole body in danger and peril, and so should we do to conserve
and save Christ in us, and to keep his faith and his graces in us, we should
lay al our bodies in danger, rather losing body, goods and all, then him. And
therefore s. Paul says. Romans viii. who can separate or divide us from the
charity and love of Christ? I am sure that another death nor life, neither any
other creature can part us from the love of god that we have in christ Jesus:
thus soyth s. Paul in the name of every good christen man and woman. Second,
we may learn prudence by the serpent, which when he casts his old Ephesians.
iiii. Deponite vos secundum pristinam conuersationem veterem hominem qui
corrumpitur secundum desideria erroris. Put down away from you your old man,
your old manner of living, in lusts of errors, all out of the right way
of justice and of good living. Third, the serpent when he perceives a
charmer about to charm him out of his hole or den, he lays one of his
ears fast to the ground, and stops the other ear with his tail. By
which property we be taught against the suggestions of our goostly enemies,
to stop one ear with Eccle. vii. In omnibus operibus tuis memorare nouissima
and ineternum non peccabis. In all thy works remember thy last end, and thou
shalt never sin, but shall ever have a good and ready soul to god. And that
we all may so have, he grant us, that by his painful passion redeemed us. Amen.

The, xvi. treatise or sermon.
ET vigilate in orationibus. I have sufficiently (as I trust) exhorted you in
my former sermon, to use prudence and circumspection in all your affairs and
doings, now I must advertise you to beware of such things as may be
impedimentes to hinder you, and let you from well doing. The Apostle S.
Peter wylleth you to take good head where about we go, saying: Et vigilate in
orationibus, And watch in prayers. Sleep not in your prayers, for the devil
slepeth not, but watches craftily to pull away your heart from you, and from
the thing that you intend to pray for. Watch and take heed that your mind
think on nothing else but Whitsontide now coming. And so did the blessed
virgin Marye mother of Christ, with other holy women, and the Apostles, after
that they perseuerantes vnanimiter in oratione, continuinge in prayer, without
any notable interruption. Vnanimiter, al of one mind, knitte together by the
bonds of Charity, for so must they be that do wait and look for the holy
Ghost. For Spiritus discipline effugiet fictu^. Sap. i. The holy spirit that
gives learning, will fly from one that is feigned, that fayneth him self, or
is a dissembler. Therefore he that will have that holy spirit, let him continue
in prayer, and in unity, concord, and charity in heart and mind. And Ante
omnia autem mutuam in vobismetipsis charitate^ continuam habentes. Before all
thing you must have within your selves continual charity, every one to
another, Quia charitas operit multitudine^ peccatorum, for Charity covers
the multitude of sins. That you may obtain and get of almyghtye God, that
you pray for, above all things be sure of Charity, by which you may do good
to others as well as to your selves. According to this Saint James says.
Iaco. v. He that causes a sinner to return from his error, shall save his
soul from death, and shall cover the multitude of his sins. And the prophet
says, Psalm. xxxi. Beati quorum remiss sunt iniquitates, and quorum tecta
sunt peccata. Blessed be they whose iniquities be forgiven, and whose sins be
covered. Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis: Turn away thy face from my
sins. As who should say, with the eyes of thy mercy look upon me, and se
me, but see not my sins, but as it were one that had forgotte them, punysshe
them not, know them not, but forgive them, and impute them not to me, nor
lay them to my charge. And in this case be they, that without gyle or
dissimulation utters their sins: Of such it is said. Nec est in spiritu
eius dolus: In such a man's spyryte there is no gyle, where contrarywyse, they
that uses gyle and clookynge their faults, how much the moore they labor
in defense of their sins, boastynge their own merits, and their own well
doings, Quoniam tacui inueterauerunt ossa mea dum clamarem tota die. Because I
held me still my bones wexed old and decade to naught, while I cried al day
long. The bones of the soul be virtues, for as the bones of the body makes
the body strong, so does virtues make the soul strong. These bones, these
virtues decays and draws to naught, while we be still and cry al day long.
A strange manner of speakinge of the scripture. Charitas enim non inflatur,
Charity is not proud, and Beatus enim cui non imputauit dominus peccatum. He
is blessed to whose charge our lord God has not laid any sins, but giving
him charity, covers his sins. S. Peter co^sideringe this, exhorts us
above all things to have charity, for it covers the multitude of sins.
And therefore it may be called a wholesome and healthful garment for the soul,
for diverse necessary properties of a garment. First like as a garment
conserueth and keeps a man's lyuelye and natural heat within him, so does
charity conserve the life of the soul, so that he that lacks it, lacks
life and is dead. i. Ioh. iii. Qui non diligit manet in morte, He that has not
love or charity, abides in death, he is all cold master, what shall I do to
have everlasting life? Christ apposed him again in his own learning. what is
written in the law? how read you? He answered: Thou shalt love God above
all things, with thy whole heart, with thy whole soul, with all thy
strength, and with all thy mind: And thy neighbor as thy self. Thou say
well (says Christ) Hoc fac and uiues, do that and thou shall live. And all
this is done by kepinge the ten commandments of God. In the three first
commandments we be taught how to order our love toward God, and in the
seven last, how we shall extend our love to our neighbors. And if we
perform and fulfill these for love, we shall Diligentibus deum omnia
cooperantur in bonu^. To them that loves Dominus dedit, dominus abstulit,
sicut domino placuit ita factum est sit nomen domini benedictum. This is very
true charity toward God, that so laudeth God in prosperity, that yet it
keeps a man up, that he be not broken nor overthrown in adversity. And here
is hyghlye to be considered the true sentence and mind of holy Job,
concerning providence, cure, or provision about things longinge to man,
which many of the paignim philosophers imputed to desteny, or to fortune, or
to influence of the sterres, Dominus dedit, GOD has given it to me. Where he
confesses that worldly prosperity comes to man, not by chance nor by
desteny, nor by influence of the sterres, nor only by man's study and labor,
but of Gods dispensation and disposinge. And in that he says, Dominus
abstulit, God has taken it away, he confesses that adversity comes to man
also by Gods providence: meaning by this, that man has no just cause to
complain or grudge against God, if he be spoiled of al temporal goods and
gifts. For the things that God gives, gratis, without any deserving of us, he
may give them for a time, or else to a ma^s last end, as it pleases him.
Therefore when he takes them away before our end, or when we have most need of
the^, there is no cause why we should complain. And when holy Job says: Si cut
domino He declares, that considering that if a man be spoiled of all that ever
he has, yet if he love God, he should conform his will to Gods will, and so not
to be supped up or overcome with sorrow, but rather to be glad, and to give
thanks to God yt it has pleased him to fulfill his will upon him, as the
apostles did, Ibant gaudentes a conspectu consilii quoniam digni habiti sunt
pro nomine Jesus contumeliam pati, they went from before the counsel, another
weeping nor grudginge, but with a merry heart, that it had pleased GOD to repute
the^ worthy to suffer despites for Christ's name, and for his sake. As if a
sick man take a bitter potion, he should be glad so to do, in hope of health
Apo. xvi. Beatus qui vigilat and custodit vestime^ta sua ne nudus ambulet, and
videa^t turpitudinem eius. Blessed is he that walks as one regarding and
caring for his own salvation and sauegard, and that keeps his raiment of
virtues, lest he walk naked at ye day of the general judgment, that all the
aungelles and holy company coming with Christ may se his filthiness. Hester.
iiii. that it was not lawful for any man to enter into the court of king
Assuerus, being clothed in sackclothe, or such vile raiment. Assuerus by
interpretation is as much to say as beatitude, so it may not be, that any
man without charity, being as one wrapped in a sack, or vile rags of vices,
to come into the court of everlasting beatitude in heaven. This is the
heavenly virtue, by which mortal men yet here living, be made like the
inhabitauntes of heaven. Of this virtue it is written. Can, viii. Valida sicut
mors dilectio, Love or Charity, is Mihi mundus crucifixus est and ego mundo.
The world is crucified, killed, and dead to me, and I to the world.

It follows in the text of this epistle. Hospitales inuicem sine murmuratione,
You shall keep hospitality, and open householdes, or your houses open one to
another without ill will or grudginge. Saint Paul commendinge the constancy and
steadfast faith of the holy patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and others,
among other virtues, specially commends them, Quod confessi sunt se hospites
and aduenas super terram, declarantes se patriam inquirere. Heb. xi. because
pilgremes, and wayfaringe men in a strange country. For in very deed, we
were cast into this payneful and troubelous world, by occasion of the sin
of our old Adam, out of the quiet Dum enim domi sumus in corpore peregrinamur a
domino.ii. Cor. v. While we be at home in our mortal bodies, we be pilgremes
and strangers from our Lord God. Therefore let us not look for that thing in
the way in our banishment, that is kept for us at home in our country. For
rest and ease of our souls, in grace and virtue, we should travail and
labor like strangers and wayfaringe men, every one doing good one to another
while we have time liberales maxim amantur, they that be liberal be most
beloved, because they help many others, and many others fares the better for
the^. One kind of liberality is hospitality, that S. Peter speaks of here.
It is the bou^teousnes and largenes in giving meat and drink and lodginge one
to another, every one releuing an others need, according to the power that God
has lent them, and this shall releue the need of pore wayfaring me^ very
greatly. There be.ii. manners of hospitality, one is bodily hospitality, ye
other is spiritual hospitality, the first is lauded in the Gospel, by the
words yt Venite benedicti p^is mei. etc. Come to me you the blessed of my
father, and take the kingdom that is prepared for you from the beginning of
the world. For I was an hongred, and you gave me meat, I was a thriste, and
you gave me drink, I was a stranger, and lacked harborow or lodgyng, and you
took me in and gave me lodging. And saint Paul counseleth the Hebrews that
he wrote to among other things, saying. Hospitalitatem nolite obliu^sci, per
hanc enim placueruut quidam angelis hospicio receptis. Heb. xiii. Forget not
hospitality, for by hospitality some men have pleased angels that they
received into their houses, which they thought first to have been men, but
afterward they perceived that they were angels appearyng to them in the
likeness of men. Such Origene Loath dwelled in Sodom, we read not many good
deeds of his, hospitality only is praised in him, he scapeth the flames, he
scapeth the fires for that only that he opened his house to gestes and
strangers. The angels entered the house where hospitality was kept. The fire
entered into the houses that were shut up against gestes. But all men be not
like disposed to hospitality, Hospitem velut hostem vitant and excludunt. They
shun and shut out a gest as they would an enemy. Let them beware of the fire
with the Sodomites. Some other be liberal and keeps good houses, but it is
for some corrupt intent, either because they can not be merry without
companions and good company, and so they do it to please them selves, which
comes of carnalitie. Some other does it of pride and vain glory, or for
some temporal profit or advantage. As Tully the noble orator comme^deth
hospitality, but his motive and consideration is naught, it is to worldly. He
says.ii. offi. Est enim valde decoru^ patere domos hominum illustrium,
illustribus hospitibus. It is very semely for noble men's houses to be open for
noble gestes, but his cause why he Reipublice est ornamento homines externos
hoc liberalitatis genere in vrbe nostra non egere. etc. It adourneth and does
honor to our common wealth, that men of strange countries lack not this
kind of liberty in our City (speaking of Rome where he dwelled.) Est etiam
vehementer vtile. etc. It is also wondrous profitable for them that would be
able to do much or many great things among strangers, to be in good
credence of riches, of love, and favor among people of strange countries,
by the means of their geastes, which they have received in hospitality. So
that Tullies mind was to get commodity by his hospitalite, either to him
self, or to his city and country men. This is a worldly policy super Luke
xiiii. Hospitalem remuneraturis esse, est affectus auariciae. To be a great
householder or viander lokinge for acquitall, or for to be recompensed with as
good or better again, is the affect or desire of avarice, rather then of
liberality. And therefore our Savior Christ declaryng to us the very true
liberal hospitality of the Gospel, in the said.xiiii. chapter of Luke. Cum
facis prandium aut coenam, noli vocare amicos tuos, neque fratres, neque
cognatos, neque vicinos diuites, nequando and ipsi te vicissim inuitentac. etc.
When thou make a dinner or a supper, do not call thy friends, nor thy
brethren, Lest they bid thee again, and so thy benefit be redobbed or
quitte. As who should say: If thou will do this meritoriouslye to be
rewarded of GOD therefore, thou must be well ware that thou do it, so that
thou look for no temporal reward to come thereof, but as willing fullye to
eschew and avoid all expectation of reward, or reco^pensation in this world,
that thou may be rewarded.iii. Reg. xvii* of the blessed prophet Helye, that
on a time as he came toward a town called Sarepta sidoniorum, within the
territory of Sidon, he found a woman gatheringe a few sticks to make her a
fire, he desiered her to give him a little water to drink, and a morsel of
bread. She answered and said she had no bread. I have no more (said she) but a
handful of meal in a steen, and a little oil in a gearre, and I gather now
(said she) duo ligna, two sticks, as a man Helye) be not afraied. Thus says
the God of Israel. Thy steen of meal shall not fail or lack nor thy gearre of
oil shall be any thing less, till the time when GOD shall send rain upon
the earth. For in deed this fortuned in the time of the long famine that was in
yt country for lack of rain, by the space of three years and an half
(according to the prayer and peticion of the same Prophet Helye, for the
correction and punishment of Achab the king, and Iesabel his queen, and of
their false prophets, and of their people. And as the Prophet promised, so it
proved in Hec dicit dominus Deus Israel. As Helye said. Thus says the GOD of
Israel. and thus it was in deed. And even so I say unto thee. Thus says the
God of Israel our Savior Christ. This is my body, This is my blood. And
therefore so it is, and must neades be so in deed. And so shall continue Donec
veniat, until he come to the general Judgment in his visible majesty, iiii.
Reg. iiii. of the blessed Prophet Helise, that he used to resort to an honest
house in the town of Suna, where a worshipful woman maistresse of the house
perceiving him to be a holy man exhorted her husband to make for the said
Helise a Parloure with a bed in it, and a table, and a cheer, and a place to
set his candle on. And so they did. The said prophet resorted Giezi his
servant to ask of her whether she had any matters to do with the king, or
with any of the counsel, or with any great man in the court, or with the
Captain in the Wars, that he might be suter for her, and speak for her.
She answered, that she dwelled among her own friends and kindred: and neaded
none of his help in any such matters. Then said Giezi to his master, you must
understand that she has never a child, and her husband is an aged man, as
who should say, it should be most comfort for the^ both if they might have
issue by your prayer, whereupon the Prophet promised her that she should
conceive a son by a certain day that he appointed, and so she did to the
great comfort of the husband Carmelus, and declared to him the chance of the
death of her child, and prayed Giezi take his staff and run a pace, and to
lay the stasse upon the chyldes face: and so he did, but Non erat vox neque
sensus, He another spoke nor ^eled, it would not healpe. The good woman feared
so much and would not depart from the Prophet, but she would have him to
come him self. He was content so to do. And when he came to the Corpse, he
laid him self upon the corpse, his mouth upon the childs mouth, his eyes
upon the childs eyes, his hands upon the childs hands, and so the chyldes
flesh began to wax warm, and he yaned seven times, and opened his eyes,
revived, and lived. And Helye gave him to his mother again alive, and so
departed. Here these honest Uianders had double Ioh. xi. that where Martha and
Marye her sister had great disconfort by the death of Lazarus their brother,
their good geste our Savior Christ, which had many times gentle
interteinment with them, and with their brother Lazar then late departed,
reco^pensed them with the marvelous raysynge the said Lazarus to life again
after he had been.iiii. days dead and buried. This miracle was to their great
consolation and no small admiration to all the country. And it is writ in
the Storye of my blessed patron saint Curthberte, in whose honor my paryshe
church of Wells is dedicate where I am vicare, that when he was cosoner Pro.
xi. Alii diuidunt propria and ditiores fiunt, alii rapiunt non sua and semper
in egestate sunt. Some men distributeth and gives abroad their own goods, and
be richer and richer. Others ii. Co. xi. Qui seminat in benedictionibus, in
benedictionibus and metet. He that sows and distributeth abroad liberally,
and with a gentle heart, shall be rewarded in blessings largely. For it can not
be false ye truth says. Date and dabitur vobis. Give, and you shall have given
you. But peradventure a man would say. I have nothing to keep hospitalite
withal. I am but a poor man. I have nothing to spare. I have nothing to give.
How shall I exercise this virtue of hospitality? How should I be a good
Uiander, or an householder? To this I say that evangelical hospitality, the
hospitality of the gospel that is praised and commanded by Christ, requires
not multitude of dishes, nor delicat change of meats nor diversity of
exquisite wynes or other drinks. Genesis xviii. And Christ's feasts that he was
bid to, were but Manducare panem, but to eat some meat sufficiently to
sustain nature and no more. And Chrysostom answers to the said scruple and
doubt in a certain Homely that he made in the laud and praise of Priscilla
and Aquila for their gentle enterteining of S. Paul, of which it is writ.
Act, xviii. and Romans xvi. They were but pore, but their heart was good and
liberal. They were bold in Gods quarrel, they feared no peril, and they had
great thought and study to do good to others. And of that it came that they
saved many a one, and deserved well of many. For the pompose rich men can
not profit the church and congregation of Christ's servants, as the poor
men may, that have a good heart and a good will. The rich man has many things
that greueth him, and much business in his mind yt lets him to do any good
Et qui multorum est dominus, idem multorum seruus esse cogitur. He that is
master of much, is compelled to be servant to many. But the poor man that
lacks all these things, is like a Lion, fire comes from him, he rises and
auaunceth him self with a gentle and bold courage against all men that be
naught. He does all things with facilitye and easelye that may do good to
the church, whether neade be that men should be rebuked, reproved, or blamed
for evil doing or saiynge, or whether peryls, hatred, or emnity should be
sustained and borne for Christ's sake. grace be good gestes and profitable for
the soul. i. Macha. i. That Antiochus illustris king of Syria send into
Jerusalem the captain of his Tributes with a great Army of fighting men,
which first spoke fair to them intreatyng of peace In dolo, al in gile. As
to make the^ think he came for their commodity, and to do Factum hoc ad
insidias sanctificationi, and in diabolum malum in Israel. All that turns to
the harm and hurt of all the temple of God, of all holiness of the soul of man,
and is a great devil in Israel, an horrible rauener, and enemy to godly
contemplation, and to al devotion. And you must understand that in some me^ sin
is a gest or a stranger, and in some other he is one of household, yea rather
a king or a ruler, as in example. Inco^tinency or lechery was in king David but
as a stranger, as apereth by the parable or riddles that Nathan the prophet
proposed Parcens ille sumere de ouibus and bebus suis, vt exhiberet conuiuium
illi perigrino qui venerat ad se, tulit ouem viri pauperis and parauit cibu^
illi qui venerat ad se. ii. re. xii. All this was said for ye reproach of king
David, which having many wives of his own, yet to satisfy and feade his
lecherous lust, which is here called his gest or stranger) he took the sheep
of his pore neighbor, the wife of Vry, and abused her to satisfy his
unlawful lust. This adultery and unlawful lust in him was not domestical
or of household, but came sodainelye upon him as a stranger, and sone after
went away, as appears by his penance that he took peccaui domino, I have
sinned against god. He spared not to confess his fault, whereupon god was
merciful to him, as the prophet the^ told him saying. Dominus tra^stulit
peccaru^. God has taken away thy sin, thou shall not dye for it. So blessed
is he which after his offense whether it be by the flesh, or by the world has
grace to take repentance, and to do penance. For in such a person sin is not
of household, but only as a gest or a stranger. Example we have how sin is
sometime of household, continuing and as a lord or king, by Salomo^ of who^ it
is written. iii. reg. xi. when he was an old man, his heart was made crooked and
naughtye by women, so that he worshipped false Gods, and his heart was not
straight and perfect with our Lord God, as the heart of his father David was.
Hospes eram, and colligistis me, says Christ: I was a geste or a stranger,
and you called me in, and brought about me al things necessary, which Christ
reputeth as done to him self, when it is bestowed upon his pore and neady
creatures. And this must be done sine murmuratione, without murmr or
grudgynge. For he that is liberal or free and large of gifts with murmuryng
and grudgyng, has not tree liberality, but lasheth out as for a cloak to cover
and hide his nigardnesse. and not without some privy grefe in his heart for
wasting of his substance. The murmurer and grudger Number. xi. Ortum est murmur
populi quasi dolentium pre labor. There rose a grudge among them as they had
been folks being sorry for their labors. Even so they that gives and yet
groneth withal, seems to be sorry for their goods, as lest they should have
nothing left, or that their goods should fail, and be wasted and decay, if
they should help the neady. Your hospitality or viandre must also be without
grudging, not disdaining yt an other man ii Co. ix. Si enim volu^tas pro^pta
est secundu^ id quod haber accepta est, no^ secundu^ id quod no^ habet, If the
will be prompte and ready, GOD is pleased with it, if it work according to
his substance, for it is not required another looked for, that a man should do
more then he may, Romans viij. Qui prebet in hillaritate. He that gives, should
give with a good chere, and with a merry heart. And.ij. Corin. ix. Hillarem
datorem, diligit deus. He says God loves a cherable gyuer, and to such he
will requite most comfortable thanks when he shall reckon to you your good and
charitable deeds, and for them shall bid you venite benedicti patris mei, Come
you blessed children and receive the kingdom that is prepared for you in the
glory of heaven.

The.xvii. treatise or sermon.
COnsequently follows in the text of Saint Peter's epistle, Vnusquisque sicut
accepit gratia^ a domino in a^terutrum illam administrantes sicut boni
dispensatores multiformis gratie dei. Experience teaches that a great
household without good officers, is a troublous and an unruly business. For
where is no quiet order of the subjects among them selves, and of them all in
their degree toward their great master, soueraygne or ruler, every man takes
his own way, and so follows strife, brawling, and variaunce, and at the last
destruction. The householder must be fain diuisiones ministratione^ sunt, ide^
aute^ dominus.i. Cor. xij. There be diverse offices and but one Lord, which
would every man to do his office in his degree that he is called to, and every
one to help other like members or lyms of one body, which be ever ready one to
help and cherish an other, for the safeguard of the whole body. i. Cor. xij:
But in this there is a difference betwixt ye great household of God, and man's
household, that in ma^s household some there be only ministers, having charge
over no more but of Ecclesiasticus.xvij. Ma^dauit illis vnicuique deo proximo
suo. Almighty God has given such a commandment in his household that every
one should care for his neighbor, one for an other. And for this cause Saint
Peter in these words of his epistle rehearsed, exhorts us to bestow such
gifts as God has given us, not every man upon him self, or for him self,
but every one for an others profit, like good stuards in a household. He
wylleth us to be as good stuardes in gods house. A stuard receives treasure
all men like as he has taken grace of our Lord God, so to bestow the same one
upon an other like good dispensatours or stuardes of the many form graces of
God. Where s. Peter speaks of such graces as be freely given as well to good
men as to the bad indifferently, which be called Gratie gratis date, keepynge
the general name of graces given to the common vtilitye and profette of the
Church, of the whole Congregation of GODS folks and Christen people. The
other grace is specially called gratia gratum that grace that makes the hauer
acceptable to God, and in his favor, which is by an other name called
charity. Of the former graces the Apostle Saint Paul speaks.i. Cor. xii.
Alij quidem per spiritum datur sermo sapientie, alij sermo scientiae,
alterifides in eodem spiritu, alij gratia sanitatum. etc. To one is given by
the holy spirit of God, the grace of sapience to speak in heavenly matters. To
an other science to discern and judge in lower causes, and so of others. Now
because that in the using and bestowing of al such gifts received of Gods
treasure, the hauer ought to have a straight and a right intent. Saint Peter
says here that if any man speak the words of exhortacion, according to any
of the said gifts, he should speak them as the words of God, and Tanquam ex
virtute quam administrat deus, attributynge it to God that gave him the will
and the power so to do, so that in all things God may be honored, through our
Lord Jesus Christ the mediator betwyxt God and man. And they that so uses
them selves among their neighbors, may be called good stewardes, where some
others ever receives of their masters treasure and never paieth nor bestows
it. An other sort of stuards pays and deals, but they pay shreud payment.
Of the stuarde that receives and never paieth,.xxxvi. Mutuabitur peccator and
non soluet, iustus autem miseretur and tribuet. A sinful stuarde, a fautie
stuarde boroweth and never pays, ever receives of his masters treasure, and
never thanketh GOD for it, nor bestows it on Gods servants and household
mayny. What treasure receives such a sinner of almightye God? Aug. Accepit vt
sit, vt sit homo and non pecus. etc. Has received of god his being, that he is
somewhat, and that he is a man and not a beast. He has taken the shape of a
man's body, and the distinction of his five wits or senses, eyes to se, ears
to hear, nosethrils to smell, the roof of the mouth with Quicquid potest
manus tua instanter operare, nihil est enim apud inferos quo tu properas,
Whatsoever thy hand can work, do it buselye, for there is no work to do in
hell, whither thou make haste by thy idleness. Likewise beutie of face, in
which most part of women excedingly glories, should not be used as an
instrument of mischief to allure any person to concupiscence, by curious and
wanton trimming thy self like a staale to take ye devil. And so the gifts of
grace, as cunning, learning, perspicuitie and clerenes of wit should ever do
good to thy neighbor, and not only to please thy self. And riches that God
sends must be Luke. xij. Videte and cauete ab omni auaritia, quia non in
abundantia cuiusquam vita eius est. Take heed and beware of all covetousness,
for a man's life stands not in the abundance of his possession. Where our
Savior Christ forbids not only desire to have, but also desire to save.
Desire to have dampneth many a one, as it is plain of robbers, thieves and
brybers, and of such as deceive men in byinge and selling, and they that
gives false evidence, or bears false witness to win and get a living, or
to get the great man's favor, or else peradventure to save their own lives.
For (after Saint Austine) this avarice and covetousness to save a man's own life
is Nudus egressus sum de vtero matris me, and nudus reuertar illuc. Job
grudged not in all his calamity, but took it thankfullye, and said: I came out
of my mothers belie al naked and bare, and so I will return thither again.
Naked he was without bodily aparel, but he had Cauete ab omni auaritia. etc.
he speaks specially against this couetuousnesse and desire to save, as
appears by the parable there of a rich manne, whose lands had brought
fourth a rich croppe of grain: In so much that he studied by him self and
said, what shall I do nowo* even so and in like case is he (says Christ)
that hourdeth and storeth for himself, and is not rich to godwarde. Generally
all such as do not use the gifts that God has given them, but drown them
and hide them, all to them selves, and nothing to the wealth of their
neighbors, their household fellows, Gods folks, all such be slothful
stuardes, and be like him that Christ spoke Math. xxv. in the parable of a
great man that went from home into a strange country, and left his goods
among his servants to be employed and occupied for his profit in his absence.
To one he gave five talentes, to an other two, to the third he gave one talent,
and this man that had but one talent in stock, knitte his masters money in a
cloute and hyd it in the earth, and did no good upon it. When the master came
home, and should sit in his audite, where every man had labored upon their
masters stock, and had gotten good increase, this last man brought the money
whole again, and excused him self, laying the fault on his master saying: I
know that you be a rough man, a sore cruel man, a hard man, you Math. xxiiij.
Si autem dixerit malus seruus in cord suo, moram facit dominus meus venire:
and ceperit percutere conseruos suos, manducet autem et bibat cu^ ebriosis,
veniet dominus serui^llius in die If the shrewd servant say in his mind: my
master is long a coming, and upon that begins to strike and hurt his
fellows, and to eat and drink with drunkerdes, his Lord and master will
come when he thincketh not* and will divide his soul from his body, and will
lay his part with hipocrites, his soul with false christen people, with such
as begins well and end noughtely, that seemed good Christen men, and yet
dissemblers they were, and inwardly noughty livers and dampnable into hell.
Luc, xij. reads it Et cepit percutere pueros et ancillas, and begins
weping for smoke and heat, and gnashing of teethe for cold. It is said in the
verse of the psalm above rehearsed, Iustus autem miseretur and tri^uet. The
just man, the true servant and stuard to God is merciful and lends: all the
gifts of nature and of grace that God has given him, he applies to Gods
honor, and to do good to his neighbor, and such wealth and riches as god has
lent him, he parts with his needy neighbor, and bestows on works of
mercy and pity. And if he be trueli a just man, although he be but pore in
worldly riches, yet he is rich in soul. Look in he lacks money to lend,
because yt with in.xxix. Oculus fui ceco, and pes claudo, I was an eye to the
blind, and the foot to ye lame, helping the^ not only with my goods but
also if need required settinge to my helping hands without any attorney or
proctour. Of the bestowing of the goods of fortune he says: Pater eram
pauperum. In which words for the vehemency of his mercy and pity, he
leaves the name of a dispensatour or stuarde, and uses the name of a father,
converting the office of charity into the affection and fervent love natural,
using them on whom he bestowed his charity, pitye, and alms, as intierly and
lovingly as a father uses Charissimi nolite peregrinari in feruore qui ad
te^ptationem vobis fit, quasi noui aliquid vobis co^tingat My very well-beloved
friends be not dismayde or troubled in your minds, in the feruencie and heat
of persecution and vexation yt now is so hot against you, which heat almighty
God suffers to com upon you for your trial, to try you and prove you. Meruel
not, and be not troubled (I sai) as though Nolite peregrinari, (as our text
has it) marvel not, says the other text. But in as much as when a man is sore
dismayed and troubled, his wits seem to be fro home, straying and not close
together, therefore it is said here noli^e peregrinari, be not you in that case
as men out of them selves, in such hot and perilous times: but consider that
such perturbacion and trouble comes life, and so in the primitive church
suffered many a if we be fellows and partakers of his pains, we shall be likewise
partakers of comfort with him.ij. Cor. i. And therefore if it be comfort for us
to hear of the abundant reward that we shall receive for our pains taking, let
not the pain of labors make us afraid, For this is sure that no man shall be
crowned as a victour, but he that will take pain lawfully to fight, and
therefore he that now refuses to fight in this present life against our
gostlye enemies, shall have no crown or garland of victory in the life to
come. And what soever pain we suffer for our captains sake, for Christ's sake,
we ought to be glad of them, not only because we follow his steps,
according Sicut co^municantes Christi passionibus gaudete, Be you glad as men
taking part of Christ's passions, and made his fellows and like unto him,
sufferynge pain and trouble as he did, that so at the time when he shall show
him self in his glory, you may be merye and glad, and may be fellows with
him, and partakers of his joy and glory. Saint Paul said: Collossi. i.
Gaudeo in passionibus and adim pleo ea que desunt passionum Christi in carne
mea pio corpore eius quod est Ecclesia. Saint Paul was in prison in Ephesus
when he wrotte his Epistle to the Collossenses, where he says the words
rehearsed: I am glad Saul, Saul (for so he was first called) why pursuest
thou me? Yet he was then in heaven, where no persecution could approach to
hurt him, but because they were his lymmes fast joined to him by faith
adorned with charity, he took and regarded their pains, as though he had
suffered them him self. In like manner Saint Peter in this place of his
Epistle wylleth all them that suffers pain for Justice sake to rejoice and
be glad, as taking part of Christ's passions, that they may likewise rejoice
to take part of his everlasting glory.

Si exprobramini in nomine Christi beati eritis. A flagello lingue absconderis.
Job. v. but he had no respect to the life to come* but only pondred and
weyed the benefits that God gives to men in this world, which worldly people
most regards and most earnestly desires to have, for they would have no ill
spoken to them, nor of them. And yet they that be very good men, would be
loathe to be ill said by, they would be loathe to be distayned, blotted, or
spotted in their name and fame, because it is their highest riches and
treasure, and therefore the prophet prayed: Domine libera an imam meam a labijs
iniquis and a lingua dolola. us be for justice, for well doing or saying, for
Christ's cause, or in Christ's cause, and thou canste have no remedy but men
will rail, then remember blessed S. Peter's comfort, Si exprobramini. etc. If
you be vmbraided, and called fools Galileans: and Christ was called Galileus,
because he was brought up in Galile, but they that would not believe on him,
called him by that name in despite, because they would not confess him Christ,
nor call him Jesus: As Iulianus used to call him, till at the last he cried
Galilee vicisti to his pain. And if they feared not to missay and rail
against the master, let not the disciples and servants look to escape
without despite. Therefore when you use any such devout christian manner of
abstinence as has be used in old time among christen people. As if you
absteyne from flesh, and from whitmeate in the holy time of Lent: or if you
fast Fridayes and Wednesdaies, or more days in the weke in that holy time, or
in this holy weke now present called the Rogation weke, the procession weke,
if men not willinge to run before a law, new that pertains to honor, to
glory, and to the virtue of GOD, and also his holy spirit rests upon you.
In this present life you shall be worthy to have honor in your Nam honor
est praemium virtutis. Honor is the reward for virtue, and in time to come you
shall be partakers of Christ's honor. And now you shall have the glory of a
pure and clear conscience, which is the glory of a Christen man and the very
way to come to glory of body and soul. Gloria nostra haec est testimonium
conscientie nostrae. ii. Cor. i. This is my glory (says S. Paul) the witness of
mine own conscience, without remorse or grudge, for my conversation has be in
simplicity among you without carnal or crafty subteltie or deceit, says S.
Paul. Even like glory of your own consciences shall rest upon you, which
shall comfort you against the insulties Nemo autem vestrum patiatur vt
homicida, aut fur, aut maledicus aut alienorum appetitor. When you take pain
and be rayled on for justices sake, you may be glad.

But I would not (says S. Peter here) that any Si autem vt Christianus non
erubescat (says S. Peter.) If you suffer as a Christen man or woman, either
displeasures in body and goods, or by words, for that thou art a good
Christen man, or liueste like a good christen man or woman, be not ashamed what
so ever be said or done against the, but rather glorify God, give Glorificet
autem deum in isto nomine, quoniam tempus est vt incipiat iudicium a domo dei.
For now is the time for the judgment of God, to begin at the house of God.
The judgment begins in our life time: for which you must note, that the
judgment of God is of two manners: one is privy and secret, the other shall
be manifest and openly known to all men and women. The first is in this life,
the other shall be at the day of dome, and the general judgment. For almighty
God will leave no ill unpunished, therefore in as much and be made better and
better, and takes Job. v. Beatus homo qui corripitur a domino, Blessed is the
man or woman that is correct and punished of our lord God. And the reason is
this, for if man's correction may be good and wholesome then Gods correction
must needs be much more wholesome: for man knows not parfitly the manner and
measure of wholesome correction, neither is omnipotent to take away the
punishment when it is enough, or when he list* nor to do good and to ease a
man in time convenient: but God by his omnipotency, by that he is almighty,
and knows all things, he knows how much or how little he may punish his
living is full of labor and pain, and is hard to come to, but that love and
charity makes that easy to them that loves God, which to other is very
painful. And this is the occasion of this privy Tau, upon all them that
lamented and wayled Tau marked in their foreheades, and to spare neither old
nor young, man, woman, nor child. Et a sanctuario meo incipite. Ezeck. ix. And
begin at my holy church, says almighty God, because that the iniquity of
the people, rose that time by some occasion of them of the church, either
because of ill example giving unto the people, or else because they would not by
wholesome lessons instruct them to live vertuouselye, or else for fear of
displeasure of great men, would not sharply reprove their vices, and noughtie
living. The day of judgment is at hand, as appears by many signs,
continual war or suspicion of battle, countries against countries, realms
Nolite tangere Christos meos: et in prophetis meis nolite malignari. Touch not
mine anointed (says God) and malign not, ymagin no mischief, nor do any such
harm to my prophets, such as preach and teach, and tell you of the will of Si
autem primum a nobis, quis finis eorum qui non credunt euangelio dei* If Gods
judgment begin, and be so sore upon us that believe upon him, what shall be
their end that believe not Gods gospel, or that have believed it in times
past, and now believes it never Et si iustus vix saluabitur, impius et peccator
vbi parebunt* And if a good man shall scarsely and with much a do be saved,
where shall the wicked and common sinner appear? Aristotle says. Quod fere fit
no^ fit sed quod vix fit fit. That is almost done or well nere done, is not
done: but that is scarsely done, yet it is done though it be with much a do. So
if a man do many times well, and live well long and many a day, yet at the
last falls to sin and lives naught, and so dies, this man was almost
saved, but yet he was not saved all out in deed, because he died in deadlye
sin, and out of the state of grace, as offendinge Factus est omnium reus, is
made guilty in them al, as much as concerns everlasting salvation: for if a
man break one, then the obseruinge and keeping of all the rest shall not save his
soul from damnation. But the just man, the good liver, takes pain and labors
to avoid from sin, and to please God by virtuous living, and by doing
good works, and it is not one days work only, but he must continue in well
doing, and in continual battle against the devil, the world, and the
flesh. It is no small business, but continual pain and sorrow, as S. Paul
said, Actu* xiiii. Per multas tribulationes oportet nos intrare in regnum Dei.
Through many troubles and much business (which can not be avoided, overcome, or
vix saluabitur iustus, the good man, the good liver shall be saved scarcelye, or
with much a do. I heard one preach in an excellent and learned audience,
which expounding this text of S. Peter, Iustus vix saluabitur* resolved this
word vix folishly into ye.iii. letters, v.i.x. understanding by v. virtute. by
i. Jesus. by x. Christi. as though S. Peter had meaned yt a just man, or a good
liver shall be saved by the virtue or power of Jesus Christ. And this is true,
for with out his power no man shall be saved: but this is not taken of the said
word vix, so resolved by an Ethimologie, for it is a folish Ethimologie in
every point, and specially because that why this letter.x. should signify
Christi, there is no reason, although ch, which is the first letter of Christus
in ye greek, be made like our latin x. But this common text of S. Peter (which
is almost in every man's mouth) is taken of the Prou. xi. Si iustus in terra
recipit, quanto magis impius et peccator. If a good liver receives pain and
punishment here on earth, how much more may the noughty livers look to receive
and take? If ye martirs have suffered innumerable displeasures, and intolerable
pains for Christ's sake here in this world: how much more sorrow and pains
groneth and looks for their tormentors that put the^ to those pains? And if
holy Job and the old patriarchs and prophets, and in Christ's time, the
apostles, martirs, and such other vix, scarsely, where shall the vicious wicked
sinner apeare? he can not so come to salvation, then no remedy but he must come
to dampnation, with the devil and all his dampened company in hell. Then for
the final conclusion of this matter of sufferynge adversity, Itaque and hi
qui paciuntur secundum voluntatem dei. etc. Therefore they that suffers of ill
folks: by the will and permission of God, this is called Voluntas signi* it is
a sign that he is content it should so be* because he suffers it for the
time, and it seems that he will so, because he suffers it. They that so
suffers, let them commit their lives, their souls to almighty God their
faithful maker, in good works, let them live well and do well, nothing
presuming on their own power, and then let him alone withal, when you do the
best, and you can do no more, let him alone with ye rest, for he is faithful
(says S. Peter) he is trusty and ^aythful, and will not

The, xviii. treatise or sermon.
The fyfte Chapter.


Seniores ergo qui in vobis sunt obsecro, consenior and testis Christi
passionum, qui and eius quae in futuro reuelanda est glory communicator,
pascite. etc. i. Pet. v. Because the blessed Apostle Saint Peter would leave
none estate of people destitute of learning, and without gostlye exhortation,
therefore after his wholesome lessons given before, generally to all manner of
people, as well rich as Capi. i. In all manner of doctrine the authority of
the master has great efficacitie, and does very much in making the scholar
to apply his mind to that is taught him, to learn it, and bear it away.
Therefore Saint Peter, because he would here teach preistes, he professes him
self to be a priest as they be, and therefore they should be gladder to hear
him, and to follow his doctrine. As if there should be a matter of the trade of
marchaundise to be entreated Peter here professes him self to be a preiste,
and a preiste not made at all adventures, as these leude ministers be made now
a days of shoemakers, smithes, cobblers, and clouters, as well married as
single, but one taught and brought Testis Christi passionum, Though all
Christ's life were a very passion, and a time full of trouble, pain, and
persecution, yet chiefly his passion begone when he prayed on the bank beside
Gethsemani, in the mount Oliuete, when he was in a marvelous agony, that made
him sweet so sore, that the drops fell from him like water mixed with blood.
Then came Judas, and a train with him of the pontifexan ni illius, then to
Pilate, then to Herod, because all the world should wonder on him, as condemned
by so many judges, and none of the^ all speaking one word for his dispatching
or acquiting. Then they brought him back again to Pilate which condemned him
to death, partlye to stop the Jews mouths and their clamoure, partlye for
fear lest he should have been accused to the emperor for lettinge one escape
that took upon him to be a king, as the Jews bore him on hand that Christ
did, as preparing or intending a commotion oculatus testis, a witness that
saw it with his eye, to his great discomforte, pain and heaviness, and
specially after that the cock had crowen thrice, when Christ looked back upon
him, and so pierced his heart with his look, that he remembered what he had
done deniynge his master, that then forth he went and wept bytterly, and
afterward by his preaching and teaching he testified the same process of his
passion, and of his glorious resurrection and ascension, and stickt neither for
threateninge, beating, nor imprisonment. This should make all them that would
believe on Christ to credit him, and to do as he bad them. Another Qui et eius
quae in futuro reuelanda est gloriae communicator. I am a Priest as you be, I
am a witness of Christ's pains and passion which I saw with mine eyes, and
third, I was partaker of his glory, which shall be reveled and openly showed in
time to come, meaning the marvelous and glorious sight that he saw at
Christ's transfiguration, of which S. Mathewe writes in the.xvii. cha. At
which time he saw the glory of Christ's glorified body for the time: for the
which it is to be understood that there be.iiii. dowres (as they be called
dotes corporis gloriosi) of a glorious body, for which you must consider that
the soul of our savior Christ from the first moment of his conceptio^ was
glorious, and had the gifts of glory by reason of ye perfect vnio^ of it to his
Godhed, albeit by Gods pleasure Passio transiens, a quality passing, and
therefore for that time not properlye the dowrye of a glorified body. Quia dos
de sua ratione importat qualitatem permanentem. And this that I say of these
gifts or dowryes of a glorious body, is not only a fraske or a knack of the
scolastical lernyng, but it is the true doctrine of saint Paul.i. Co. ^v.
Seminatur in corruptione, surget in incorruptione. Where he expresses the gift
or dowrye of Impassibilitie. Now our bodies be subject to all pains of
sickness, strokes, and like harms, then we shall rise impassible, so that
neither fire nor water, sword, nor any other weapon shall hurt us, by the
dowry or gift of impassibilitie. Seminarur in ignobilitate, surget in gloria.
Our bodies shall be buried in ignobilitie, that is to say, dymme, dark,
colourlesse, but it shall rise in glory by the gift of clearenesse and
brightness, Seminatur in infirmitate, surget in virtute. Our bodies shall be
sowed or buried in Infirmity, that is to say, dull, weak, and not able to
stir hither or thither, but they shall arise in might, strength, and
subtlety, so penetratiue and percynge, so subtle and fine, that it shall be
able to pearce through the stonewals without any division or breaking either of
our bodies or of the wall, even like as Christ came among his disciples without
breaking of ye doors or walls, or any division of his own body Seminatur corpus
animale resurget corpus spirituale. Our bodies be buried as of the kind of the
flesh such as beasts have, but it shall rise a spiritual body, by the gift
or indument of Agilitye, so as well Moses and Helias, as John and James. Bonu^
Here is good abiding for us, and he wished lodgings to be made for Christ,
and also for Moses and Hely, and would have placed him self (I think) with
Christ and his two companions with Moses and Hely. But anon his courage was
delayed when he saw a bright shining cloud covering the^, by the which was
signified the presence of the holy ghost. And out of the said cloud came the
voice of the father, saiynge: Hic est filiu^ meus dilectus in quo mihi been
co^placitu^ est ipsu^ audite. This is my well-beloved son in who^ I delight hear
him. When Peter, John, and James heard this voice, they fell flat on their
faces, and were sore afraied. Christ came to the^ and touched the^, seigniours
or elders, and ancients, specially for their ancie^tnes, gravity and sadness,
in manners and conditions. In very deed presbiter in the greek is by
interpretation senior in the latin, in English an ancient, or an elderman.
Albeit every old man, or ancient man is not a Priest, but only such as by
prophecye, or election and imposition of a prelates hand is piked out and
chosen among the more to be addict and appointed to God, and to be a minister of
God in the Church or congregation in things belonging to God and to his
service, somewhat Luke. vi. Factum est autem in diebus illis. Exiit Jesus in
montem orare, and erat pernoctans in oratione dei: and cum dies factus esset
vocauit discipulos suos and elegit duodecim ex ipsis quos and apostolos
nominauit Simonem, quem cognominauit Petrum and Andream fratrem eius. etc Simon
to whom he gave surname Peter, and Andrewe his brother, and so forth of
others till he came to Judas that was the traytoure, whom (as Saint Ambrose
notes) Christ chose not unawares or ignoraunte what he would be, and how he
would prove, but by especial providence, foresight, and of purpose. For our
savior Christ took upon him man's infirmity and frailnes, and therefore he
refused not such pains of our infirmity, as men commonly do sustain. He was
content to be left and forsaken, as many men be of their friends sometime that
they loved Act. xiii. where it is written that the holy Ghost spoke unto them
that were in Antiochia, prophets and doctors with other company there serving
God and fasting. Segregate mihi Saulum and Barnaba^ in opus in quod assu^psi
eos. Separate and set out for me Saul (which was afterward called Paul) and
Barnabas into the work for which I have taken the^. And it follows* Tunc
ieiuna^tes and ora^tes imponentesque eis manus dimiseru^t illos. They
altogether fasted and prayed and put on the^ their holy hands and sent the^
forth likewise. Act. xiiii. I read yt Paul Listra, Iconiu^, and Antiochia,
co^firming and staiynge the minds of their disciples, and exhorting the^ that
they should persevere and stedfastlye continue in their faith which they had
receued. And declaryng and persuading the^ that by many tribulatio^s and much
trouble we must enter into the kingdom of god. And when they had made for the^
priests in every church, and prayed devoutly for them with fasting they
committed and betoke the^ to our Lord God, on who^ they believed. And here
(good and worshipful audience) it is to be noted that in the Primitive church
even in thapostles time, when soever there were priests ordered to be Gods
ministers, the imbring days, in which all christen people used fasting and
praiyng to god, that it may please him to inspire such grace into the hearts of
the pre^ats and pastors yt they may circu^spectly look upon the qualities,
co^dicions, and learning of them that shall be ordered, so yt they be not accused
hereafter for putting on i. Timo. v. Manus cito nemini imposueris neque
communicaueris peccatis alienis. Put not thy hands to sone upon no man,
neither take thou part of other men's sins, for the Prelate or Bishop that
gives orders to one that is unworthy because of his vice or ignorance, and
lack of learning, and by that occasion lives not like a priest or can not do
his service and duetye like a priest, then he that gave him orders is partaker
of his fault, and shall bear his part of the judgment, condemnation, and
punyshemente for the same. This is no small peril for Prelates that give
orders, therefore very christian charity moved christen men and women to pray
to GOD, specially at such times, to inspire them with the Tymothe and Titus. He
bids Tymothe. i. Ti. iiii. Nolineg ligere gratiam quae in te est, quae data
est tibi per prophetiam cum impositione manuum presbiterii. Se that thou do
not neglecte or make light of the grace that is in thee, which was given the
by prophecy or election with imposition or puttyng ii. Tim. i. Admoneo te vt
resuscites gratiam dei que est in te per impositionem mannum mearum. I warn
thee that thou stir up and exercise the grace that is in thee, the which was
given thee by puttyng on thee my hands. After that Paul being at Ephesus, met
with certain new converted christen men, and asked the^, whether they Et cum
imposuisset illis manus Paulus venit spiritus sctu^s super eos and loqueba^tur
linguis and prophetabant. When Paul had set his hands upon the^ the holy ghost
came upon the^, and they spoke with tongues of diverse languages, and prophesied.
And he willed his disciple and scoler Titus, whom he had made Bishop of
Creta (which now we call the I Will of Candye,) to constitute and make priests
in every City. Sicut and ego disdosui tibi. As I have prescribed and given
thee a rule, and taught thee (says he) even as he had Oportet Episcopum sine
crimine esse. I will prosecute some points of Saint Paul's writing to Titus
in this matter, for it agrees much with his like saying to Timothe. First he
requires that a preiste be sine crimine, without crime. A crime is more then a
sin, or a fault, for it is a notable or a great fault, worthy to be
accused and to be condemned. Some sins be lighter, and not dampnable, such
as it very hard for any man to escape. And therefore said s. John in his
epistle.i. Io. i. Si dixerimus quoniam pec. If we say that we have no sin,
or no fault, we deceive and begile our selves, and there Pro. xxiiii. Septies
in die cadit iustus, and resurget. A just man, a good man falls.vii. times in
a day, the determinate number is put for the uncertain number. It is as much
to say, As a good man falls often, and rises again. The scripture calls
him a just man, and yet says that he falls, by which it is plain that such
fallinge destroys not his justice, Therefore it must needs be taken of such
falling or fautes without which man does not lead his life in this wretched
world. By ignorance, by obliuio^, omission, or forgetting of duties undone, by
surreptio^ or privy crepinge of matters into men's minds, by necessity, by
fragilitie of the flesh every day, Impij autem corruent in malum. Because that
wicked persons neither good to God, nor good to man does run down headlonge
to ill, to sin, and to damnation. So that when they have fallen by consent to
sin, penance, and repentance is laid aside and despised. And then must neades
follow eternal dampnation. Then to Saint John's saiynge. Si dixerimus. etc. Of
veuiall sins it is plain, for without such we can not lead this frail
life. And of deadlye sin there is no man Titus should promote to be a
Priest, such as be without crime, that is to say: such as be without any
enorme dete^table, and notorious fault or vice, or sin. Oportet enim
Episcopum sine crimine esse. For a bishop must be without blot or blemish of
crime And that is it yt he says to Timothe. i. Ti. iii. Oportet without any
matter by which he may be reproved as criminal. And here is to be noted that
even now S. Paul spoke of the orderyng of priests, and now by and by he
tells the same tale of bishops, saying: A bishop must neades be without
crime, wherefore you must note that in the apostles time a priest and a bishop
were all one, every Bishop was a priest, and so he is yet in our time, and
every priest was a bishop, as it is taken plainly, and proved by these words
of saint Paul here. And this S. Jerome notes in an epistle that he writes ad
euagrium, where he says also that afterward in process of time, they used to
chose Episcopum a superintendent, that is, a bishop, to take heed and ouersee
the others. Even like as if in the time of war, the hooste being destitute,
or without a captain, should chose a captain among them selves, and call
him their Emperor, or as if the Deacones should chose one among them
selves, whom they knew to be circumspect, wise, and diligente, and would call
him an Archedeacon, or chiefedeacon, for what thing is it that the Bishop
but a priest does the same, except it be geuyng Quanquam secundum honorum
vocabula, que iam ecclesie vsus obtinuit Episcopatus presbiterio mayor sit,
tamen in multis rebus Augustinus Iheronimo minor est. Although by the terms of
honor (which now the use of the church has gotten) a bishop is greater then a
priest, yet notwithstanding in many things Augustine is less of reputation
then Jerome, albeit Augustine were a bishop, and Jerome but a priest. Well then
we must take it indifferently as well of a bishop as of a priest, yea and also
of a deaco^.i. Ti. iii. yt they must be without crime, De neophitis. i. Timo.
iii. Where he would not have him promoted to be a Bishop or a Priest that
is a new converse. As who should say, yesterdaye at the Carte, or in the
barn among Non Iracundum, a priest must not be a fumishe or passionate man,
anon in a rage for every turning of a straw, or for a triful, for he that is
as a judge Iratus is he that for some cause is kindled or moved, and provoked
to anger. Iracundus is he that for light occasion or small cause is moved to
auger, Saint Paul would not have a Priest to be sone on fire or angrye,
but rather with Patience, longa^imitye, and long sufferaunce to bear with his
neighbor, Non vinolentum, no great drinkers of wine, they must be, that be
promoted to holy orders, specially above all men, because that we be set
in the stead and place of the Apostles, therefore Nolite inebriari vino, in
quo est luxuri^, says Saint Paul. The filthiness of Lechcrye and carnal
lust, comes principallye of taking to much wine, and hoate or strong
drinks, and with overmuch feadynge, for it is true that Terence said. Sine
Cere and Baccho friget Venus* Esaias says. Capi. v. Ve qui^ potentes estis ad
bibendum vinum and fortes ad miscendam ebrietatem. Woe be unto you, eternal
pain shall come to you that be strong to drink Wine, and to mengle
drunkenness, not only to be drunk your selves, but also to make others
dronken. Let us therefore above all other Cogitaui a vino carnem meam
abstinere, vt animam meam transferam ad Sapientiam. Ecclesiastes. ii. I have
thought, decreed, and determined my self too abstain my Body from Wine,
that so I might turn my Soul and wit to Wisdom. And we read of
Dauyell and his fellows. Dany. ii. That they refused the meats of the Kings
reward, and from his boarde, and took pulse and herbs of the Gardeyn to eat,
and water to drink, and so they became wyser then all their companions, and
excellently learned in all books, and in all sciences. For in very deed
abstine^ce with study breadeth science and learning, which Non percussorem,
they must not be light fingered, or ready to stryke, or to hurt any manne.
As they be commonly that will not refrayn their passion or anger, and also they
that be dronken with wine, which the Apostle excludes here immediately before.
And some men deuoutlye understand, that Non percussorem, that he must not by
words in preaching rappe at any man, strikynge his conscience with perverse
and false doctrine, and with sedicious opinions. And Saint Peter says here.
Pascite qui in vobis est gregem dei, prouidentes non coacte, sed spontanee
secundum deum neque turpis lucrigratiased voluntary. Prelates and Priests
must

So a priest that has refused worldly trouble and turpe lucrum, shameful
gains in him. But yet there is a more filthy gains that some prelates and
priests laboreth for, to the great infamy of the church, and that is the
gredie appetite that they have to get winning at dise and cards and such
unlawful games, and myspendinge their good hours at the same. This is vere
turpe lucru^ filthy or dishonest gains. The Philosopher.iiij. says, that
turpe lucrum est quu^ aliquis parui lucri gratia obprobrium sustinet, filthye
and dishonest gains or winning, is when a man for small advantage susteineth
shame or an ill name, and he puts example of disers, and gameners, and
robbers of dead men's graves: As we had amongst us these that steal plates of
brass with Epitaphies from men's graves or tombs, or iron from the grates or
partcloses and al such privy pikers, and also hoores and horehunters. Al such
says the Philosopher, lucri gratia negotiantur and opprobria sustinent, they
lay forth their ware for advantage, and gets dispite and shame there by,
and they be all illiberales, churles without liberality or bountuousnes, or
gentle heart, as it is plain of these gameners which studieth to get and win
of their own friends and lovers, to which they should rather do good then
harm. For amite Labora sicut bonus miles Christi Jesus. Nemo milita^s deo
implicat se negotijs secularibus vt ei placeat cuise probauit.ii. Timo. ii.
Labor and take pains as a good Sadiour of Christ Jesus, of Gods turpiter
affectantes lucrum, unhonestly, gredy and hongrie for money and lucre, thinking
all that lost that contra pelagi. Li. i. Nullus aut rarus est qui omnia habet
que habere debet episcopus, either none therbe S. John Chrisost. de sacerdotio.
Li.vi. says Fu^ctio sacerdotalis angelica^ virtute^ requirit etenim
sacerdotis animum solaribus radijs puriorem esse oportet ne quando spiritus
sanctus desolatu^ illum reliquat vt dicere illi liceat viuo ego non amplius
ego, viuit autem in me Christus. The office of a priest requires the virtue of
an Angel, for the priests soul and mind must be more pure and clear then
the sun beams for fear leaft the holy ghost Sacerdotium in terra quide^
peragitur ceterum in rerum celestiu^ classem ordinemque referendum est.
Priesthood is occupied and used on earth, but it must be referred and taken as
into the order of heaven and of heavenly things. And well worthy (says he) for
no mortal man, no angel, nor archangell, neither any other creature, but the
very holy ghost himself has disposed this order, for he was the auctour and
causer that mortal men yet abiding in the flesh, should conceive in their
minds this ministry, service and office of the angels. Therefore a priest
terribilia namque atque horrifica fuisse feru^tur. etc. Me^ say that the
things that went before the time of grace, were terrible and honorable (as no
doubt they were in their time) such were the small belles and pomegranates about
the skirttes of the priests vestiments. The.xii. rich precious stones
curiously set in ye golden plate on the prestes breast. And other precious
stones set upon his shoulders, his miter upon his head, and his rich and large
gyrdle about his middle, and his garment preciouslye brodred and wroughte down
side to his feet. Then to consider the honor of the tabernacle, sanctum
sanctorum, the holiest part or place of al holy places, and was divided from
the larger part called sanctum, by a rich veyle or curtain, which at the time
of Christ's death was rent and torn down from the top to the neither part, as
it is plain in the gospel. Then to consider the great and wondrous quietness
and silence in the same temple used, with other circumstances about the same
ceremonies, surely it is a wondrous thing to muse upon and to be remembered.
But yet (says Chrysostom) if we convert our contemplacion to consider what
things the time of gra^e has ij. Cor. iij. Nec glorificatu^ est quod claruit
in hac part propter excellentem gloriam. Where S. Paul of purpose compares
the glory and the excellency of the ministers of the new testament to the
glory and ryaltie of the ministers of the old testament. That thing that
floorished and was had in glory and riallie esteemed, was not glorified in
this behalf, in respect of the excellent glory of the things of the new
testament of Christ. As the Apostle says a little before. Si ministratio
mortis litteris deformata in lapidibus fuit in gloria, ita vt If the service of
death, described and written with letters in the stones of the two tabels, was
had in glory and reverence so that the people of Israel could not look upon
the face of Moses, which was the minister of that law for the glory and
shyning bryghtnes of his face, which is sone taken away, for it tarried not. How
then can it be that the service of the spirit, by the grace of the new
Testament should not be in glory much more? He calls the ministration and
service of the old leuits and priests of Moses law, the ministration and
service of death, because that Moses law was the occasion of death of the
soul, not of it self, but by the malice down from the mount from GOD,
bringinge Exo. xxiiii. Of this the Apostle Saint Paul argues. If the
ministration and service of death, which also is euacuate, abolished and gone,
were had in glory and reverence as it was into prison whom it pleased him, and
to take him we ought to fear them, and to do them more honor, ex sanguinibus
and voluntate carnis, of blood, and the peasure of the flesh, but these men,
these priests, be the aucthors and doers of that birth, which we have of God,
and of that blessed regeneration and true liberty, by which we be made the
children of God, by adoption and special grace. The Jews priests of Moses
law had power, not to pourge and cleanse the body from leprie of them that were
infecte with the same disease, but rather to discern and judge, whether men
were purged or not purged from that disease, and yet was their priesthod, in
hie estimacion and ambitiously desired, as appeared by Chore, Dathan and Abyron,
which for their obstinate and greedy desire sanke into Hell, the earth opened
and swalowed them up, with all their confederacy. Then consider how the
priesthod and to be reproved, then ever were Chore and their confederacy, which
with so ardent and feruente desire aspired to the priesthod of Moses time. The
one sanke down into the gapinge earth, which swalowed the^ down into Hell,
then let not the other think to escape, without more shame and vengeance.
Moreover yet further to compare the priests to our natural parents. Almighty
God has given to priests more power upon us, then to our natural parents.
For our parents begets us into this present temporal life, but the
priests gets us into everlasting life. Our carnal parents, can another
save us from temporal sickness nor from temporal death, but the priests not
only when they regenerate us by water and with the holy spirit, or when by
their holy doctrine, they recover us from vice to virtue, but also when we be
bodyly sick, and also sick in our soul, they cure and heal us, obtaining by
the succor and help Iaco. vlt. Infirmatur inter vos aliquis, accersat
presbiteros ecclesie and orent super eu^ vnge^tes eu^ oleo in nomine dn^i and
oration fidei saluabit infirmu^ et alleuiabit eu^ dominus et si in peccatis sic
remittentur ei. When any man among you is sick, let him send for the priests
of the church and let them pray over him, and anoint him with oil in ye name
of our Lord and the prayers of faithful persons shall save ye sick, and our
lord shall set him up again. And if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him.
Natural parents cannot help their children, if they offend against princes or
kings in any

The.xix. treatise or sermon.
WOrshipful friends, I trust you remember that in my last sermon that I made
in this place, I entered on the fifth chapter of Saint Peter's first epistle, In
which I declared unto you, how Saint Peter like as he had given good and godly
lessons to all kind and manners of men and women, married and single, masters
and servants, bondmen and freemen, so because the ministers of the church
should not lak learning, he instructs prelates and priests, and informs the^
of their duty, alluring al priests to give credence to his doctrine, by that
he professes him self to be a priest, and one of such experience Pascite qui
in vobis est gregem dei, Feed the flock of God that is under your hand.
Because that now lateli this matter of the diversity of shepeheards and
pastors was very well and abundantly handled and declared, I will pass over
it, presupposing these good properties before rehearsed of him that shall be a
good shepherd or pastor. We must take heed to our Act. xx. Atten dite vobis
and vniuerso gregi in quo vos spu^s s^tu^s posuit episcopos, regere ecclesia^
dei qua^ acquisiuit sanguine suo. Take heed to your self (says S. Paul to
the priests and prelates of Ephesus) and to all the whole flock, in which
the holy ghost has set you bishops. Lo, here he calls them bishops, they
were not then all in such preminence or so set in authority or superiority
above others, as bishops were then sone after: and be now, but he means
priests, before he called them maiores natu ecclesie, the elders of the church
or congregation. Now he calls the same bishops, these S. Paul bids take heed to their flock. Saint Peter byddeth them feed their flock, as Christ
had commanded Peter to feed his lammes and to feed his sheep, his people
which should be like la^mes, full of simplicity, prouidentes non coacte
providing for the^ without coaction They must with discrete solicitude and
study provide such pasture and feedinge for them, as shall be good and
wholesome, and not driving them to rank feeding that will bane them: to corrupt
ground, as to a certain spire white grass, that growith in some ground, or
to grounds that be morish, maresh or otherwise unwholesome, and like to coothe
the flock, for such the flock most desires. And if they be let run at
their own No^ coact^, their feeding and provision for gods folcke, must be
fra^k and free without coaction. For all the works of our religion must come of
a good will, following the example that we have of the old Testament. Neque vt
dominantes in Beware of the lowering brows and proud looks and hearts of the
old Pharisees, they look for dominion, they will be like lords and masters,
they will be had in reverence, they will have cappe and knee, and not only that,
but also will look for presents, gifts, and bribes, and do little or nothing
therefore: Saint Peter would not that any priests should so use them selves
but rather to be in manner felowlyke, humblye and lowelye behauynge them
selves among their brothers, so giuyng to them as well as to the lay see
example of humility, and lowlynes, affabiliti and gentleness. Remember our
savior Christ's saying in the parable of the ill servant. Mat. xxiiij If the
ill servant say or think in his heart, my Examino, with heart and all, that
they may likewise show the^ selves to the people that they must teach. And
thus doing (says saint Peter) when the prince of pastors our savior Christ
shall come in his glory at the general judgment, you shall receive the crown
or garlande of everlasting glory and joys of heaven that shall never fade,
welowe, or widder away, but shall be ever fresshe and pleasant, above that
any mind of mortal man can apprehende, perceive, or understand to our
endless solace and comfort Similiter adolescentes subditi estore senioribus.
When he has fatherlye instruct and taught the Presidentes, the Prelates and
Priests, that they should take pain and solicitude or care to feade their
flocks, and to provide such pastures for them as should be most wholesome,
and not infectuous, coothinge or rottynge grounds too feade upon for to bane
them. And that this they should do with a good will, and not by coaction or
compulsion against their wills. And that they should not play the Lords and
tyrants among their clergy, but that they should show them selves as the
form, that patron, or fashion of their flock, and to be familiar with them
as one of them, that by their behauioure their neighbors may learn to
conform and fashion them selves to the manner that they see them use,
promisinge them that for their so doing similiter. Likewise as your Elders
must care and provide for your Soul health without coaction, even from the
bottom Hebr. xiii. Obedite prepositis vestris and subiacete eis ipsi enim
peruigilant quasi rationem pro animabus vestris reddituri, vt cum gaudio hoc
faciant and non gementes hoc enim non expedit vobis. Obey them that be set in
auctoritye over you, and submit and lowelye subdue your selves unto them, for
they watch and take pain to ouersee you, as men that should yield and make
account for your Souls, them you must obey so gentlye that they may have
joy and be glad to take pains for you, and not to groan or mourn in their
solicitude and pains taking, for that is not profitable for you. Obey them
that Preach and teach you the Que dicunt seruate and facite, secundum opera
eorum nolite facere. Math. xxiii. What they say take heed and do it, but after
their doing do not you, When they say, and live not or do not according to
their saiynge. Vt cum gaud^o hoc faciant. That they may be glad of their
labors taking among you, like as an husbandma^ which is glad to do his work,
when he sees the trees of his setting and graffing prove well, and bear
fruits, When he sees the fields of his tillynge bear Adolescentes subditi
estote senioribus, Where you shall understand that there be two manners of
yongelinges. Some be young for lack of many years, as the word is commonly
taken, others be worthy to be counted yongelinges because they have young,
light, leude, and childishe conditions, more like children, then like sad
men or women of natural and ripe grauitye and discretion. Such a distinction
of young persons, uses the Philosopher in the beginning of his first book
of the Ethikes, declarynge who and what manner of men be meet and profitable
hearers of Moral philosophy, or of matters of secundum morem, in manners and
conditions, as be these young ruffians and lustye bloudes. They be to
obstinately and stifelye bended, and set to follow their own passions and
appetites, thinking the way that they be noseiled in, brought up, and used
to, to be best. They will not be persuaded nor counseled, but even as they
have been used and brought up, that will they use, and so will they continue by
their good will who so ever faie nay. Teach them how to use them selves
temperatelye in their dietes, in eatinge and drinkinge to avoid ingurgitations
and riotynge by night and by day, it helps.iii. Regum. xii. where it is
writ that after the death of Solomon the king, succeaded him Roboam his
son. And when the power of the whole Realm came to crown him and make him
king, and to profess

This heavy yooke and burden was no vile service that Solomon put them to,
for it is written. Capite. ix. that Solomon set or put none of the people of
Israel to any Servile work or drudgerie, but these soore coactions were
certain money, grain, and vitailes, which they paid every month toward
the furniture of the charges of Salomons house and familye, which were very
great in deed, as.iii. Regum. iiii. And for this purpose there were twelve
rulers, or master purueyours assigned by the King, over every trybe one,
beside their undertakers and gatherers, and some purloyners, by such the
people were greuouslye oppressed, as appears by their humble Supplication
here made. Well the young king somewhat amassed at their request, badde the
people depart till the third Day after, and then they should have an
answer what he would do. In that time he consulted, first with the
aunciente Fathers and grave Counseylours that were of Si hodie obedieris populo
huic and seruieris and peticioni eorum censeris locutusque fueris ad eos verba
leuia erant tibi serui cunctis diebus. If you do after the pleasures of these
people this day, and do give place to their peticion, and if you will speak
to them soft and gentle words, they will be your loving servants at all times.
But he rejected this sage and wise counsel that these grave men gave him,
and called to him the lustye bloudes and young ruffians that were noursed from
youth, and brought up with him, and were at hand every day with him for his
solace and pastime, and said unto them: what counsel will you give to
answer this people that have said to me, make light this yoke and ease us
of it that your father has laid upon us? Then they said according to
Minimus digitus meus grossior est derso patris mei. My least finger is greater
and stronger then my fathers back, or then his whole body. My father laid on
you a heavy yoke, and I will lay on more peyse upon your yooke: My father
did beat you with scourges, but I will beat you with scorpions. These
scorpions be scourges having knottes of wire or leadde on the coardes, and
specially on the ends, And they be so called after a certain venomous Worm,
which when he stingeth, turns up his tail over his head, and so styngeth,
and so perelouslye, that without there be had by and by a certain Oil of
scorpions in which Oil such scorpions have beaten them that has not
learned some experience or practice Omnes inuice^ humilitatem insinuate. All
men stop and show humility one to another, every man be lowly one to another,
even as that you would one crepe into an others bosom by lowliness,
Insinuate, by which he means an inward and hearty lowliness that we must use
among us. If thou will not, god will make thee to come allow, for god loves
Iac. iiii. says the same, how God has ever resisted the proud, you may know
how Lucifer the most excellent angel for his pride was pulled down and made
the fowlest devil in hell, he said he would ascend and get up to be equal and
like the highest. Nay not so (says god) but thou shall be cast down to the
bottom of the lake, or dungeon of hell. Eve our first mother she would have been
a Goddess, and like to god in knowledge, but God stopped her of her enterprise,
and cast her into such blind darkness and ignorance as we al be in, by occasion
given by her. And then what humility and lowlines has done, yea, and in the^
which at other times were very proud and out of Gods favor, appears by
Pharao the king of Egypt, which after the great stroke of vengeance and
horrible plage of hail stones, with whirle winds, thunder, and lightenynge,
such as was never Peccaui etiam nunc, dominus iustus est: and ego and populus
meus impii, orate Dominum. etc. I have offended now again, our Lord is
just and righteous, I and my people be naught and wicked, pray you to your
lord that these Thunders and Haylestormes may cease, that I may dimisse you,
and let you go, so that you tarry not here any longer. Exodus ix. Like wise
when that wicked king Achab heard the terrible comminations of God for the
death of Naboth, and for other his and his wives noughty living. Scidit
vestimenta sua, and operuit silicio carnem suam ieiunauitque and dormiuit in
sacco, and ambulauit demisso capite factus est autem sermo He toore his
cloothes and covered his body with cloothe of Here. And he fasted, and lay
and slepte in sackeclothe, and went loutynge and holding down the head. And
then the word of our Lord God came to Helie, saiynge: Do thou not see how
Achab the king is become lowlye before me? Therefore because he is humiliate
for because of me, I will not bring in this mischief of punishemente in his
time.

And Nabuchodonosor king of the Caldeis after Nonne hec est Babylon ciuitas
magna quam edisicaui in domu^ regni, in robore fortitudinis me, and in gloria
decoris mei? cu^que sermo adhuc esset in ore regis, vox de celo ruit. Tibi
dicitur Nabuchodonosor rex, Regnum tuu^ transibita te and ab hominibus eiicient
te and cu^ bestiis atque feris erit habitatio tua fenu^ quasibos comedes, and
septe^ te^pora mutabu^tur super te donec scias quod dominetur Is not this
Babilo^ the great city that I have builded for a palaice of mi kingdom in the
might of my manlines, and in the glory of my beauty. And even while this
saiynge was in the kings mouth, a voice came al in have from heaven. This is
said to thee Nabuchodonosor king. Thy kingdom shall go from thee, and they shall
cast thee out from man's company, and thy abiding shall be with wild beasts.
Thou shall eat hey like an ox. And seven years shall change and go over
thee, until thou know that there is a high one yt is lord in the kingedome
of men, and that he may give it to who^ soever he will Eade^ hora. The same time
this word and saiynge was performed, he was stricken with such amencye and
madness that he ran abroad out of men's company, he eat hay and grass like a
best, he lay forth out of any house. The dew, rain, hail, and snow fell on
his body, Et gradientes in superbia potest humiliare. Dan. iiii. And the^ that
goes in pride, he can humiliate and pull down, as it proved in effect by him
self in deed. When he exceaded in pride, God resisted him and pulled him down.
And when he knew him self and became lowly, god sent him grace even as* s.
Peter sayt^ here. In the new testament we have examples of the proud Pharisey
and the lowlye Publicane, one was repelled for his pride, the other was
Justified and allowed for his lowliness. And generallye, all the Scribes and
Phariseis which did all their works that they did, that they might be seen
and praised for their doyngs which ever proved naught at length, and
prevailed not, where contrariwise the humilitye of the blessed virgin Marye
mother of Christ, and Humiliamini igitur sub potenti manu dei vt vos exaltet
in te^pore visitationis Considering therefore these examples how pride has a
fall, and prevails not where humilite and lowlines is exalted and set aloft.
Therefore concludes s. Peter that you and all we must be made low in our hearts
under the mighty hand of god, that it may please him to exalt us at the time
of his visitation, as well every man for him self, when every man shall depart
out of this world, as at his great and general visitation, at the general
judgment, when he shall call to account all that ever Sicut simpliciter ad
simpliciter, sic magis ad magis and maxim ad maxim. As they that be humiliat
and made lowly in heart now in this time of battle against our gostly enemies,
shall be exalted and set aloft in glory, so he that is more lowlye, shall be
more exalted in glory, and he that is is most lowly shall be most exalted among
the^ that for their humility shall be exalted, and contrary he that here is
exalted by pride, shall be made most low, in pains everlasting. Yet
furthermore to declare the nature of this virtue of Humility, you shall
understand that Humilitye in us and in Christ, of whom, and by whom we
must learn to be lowelye, is not in all points after one manner in him and in
us. For in us humilitye is a virtue that by his office restrayneth and keeps
down the appetite of man from Superiores sibi inuice^ arbitrantes. Says S.
Paul. Phil. ii. By humility you every one must think an order better then
you. Therefore it is not with out cause, that the apostle s. Peter so ernestly,
exhorts us to humility, as to the virtue contrary to pride, which the world
does hoyst us up unto, and not for any profit unto us but rather contrary for
our overthrow and down fall, even as the men of Nazareth led Christ to
the top of of the hill on which their City was builded, only because they
would have pitched him down and have broke his neck, but he so invisibly
conveyed him self away among the^, that they had not their purpose. And the
devil carried our savior Christ and set him on a galerie of the temple,
because and how miserably we live in soul daily offe^dinge Io. viii. Si ego
glorifico me ipsum gloria mea nihil est. If I glorify my self beside or
contrary to the rule of gods truth, my glory is nothing. The^ much less
worth is our glory which commonly is vain, and in things contrary to his
pleasure. This considered s. Paul. i. Timo. vi. Diuitibus huius sec. pecip.
non sublime sap. Neque sperare in incerto diuitiaru^. Willinge Timothe to
speak to the rich men, and bid the^ not to be proud nor to trust in the
uncertainty of their riches, but to put their trust in the living god, Aug. Non
expauit diuitias apostolus sed superbia^ que est vermis diuitu^. The apostle
was not afraid of riches, but Non enim est potestas nisi a deo: Itaque qui
resistit potestati ordinationi dei resistit. Qui aute^ resistu^t ipsi sibi
da^natione^ acquirunt. To. xiii. Ye may obiecte, yea sir? I put Principes non
sunt timori, boni operis sed mali. Of such princes, or rulers yt make not men
afraid for well doing, but rather that lawde and praise men for well doing,
and of such as be terrible to malefactors and to ill doers, them we must obey
under pain of dampnation, in all their just commandments and requests, not
only for fear of punishment, but also for conscience sake. The other we may
not obey in no cause, but rather Subiecti estote omni humane creature propter
deu^ sieve regi quasi precelle^ti, sieve du. ta^que ab eo missis ad vindicta^
malefactoru^ laude^ vero bonoru^ And it followith deu^ timete, regem
honorificate. On a time, when there was a contentyon among his disciples, and
not without some cause as it seemed, because they perceived by diverse sayings
Reges ge^tiu^ dn^a^tur eoru^: er qui potestate^ habe^t super eos benefici
voca^tur. Luke xxii. Kings of people be lords over them, and they that have
power over them, be called sovereign lords or gracious lords. But you must
not do so, I will have no such lording or maistership among you, but he yt is
hiest or thinks him self best of you, let him be as the yo^gest or as the
least of you al. And he yt will go formest, let him be a seruitour, Humiliamini
sub potenti manu dei vt vos exaltet in tempore visitationis. Make your selves
humble and lowlye, under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalte you, and
set you up in honor, at the time of his visitacion, at the general

The twenty treatice or Sermon.
OMnem solicitudinem vestram proiicientes in eum. Where Saint Peter
considering that the world does unquiet many a man, and does al^enate his
mind from the exercise of humility toward GOD, and of other Godly virtues
by ouermuche cumberaunce of mind, with solicitude, carke, and care of the
world, exhorts us to cast all our solicitude, thought, and care upon
almightye God, for he has cure over us, and cares for us. The world does even
as Christ speaks of the sede sown among the bushes, thorns, or briars, it
can not prove, for ye thorns suffocate it, stiful it, hinder it, and marreth
it. Solicitude and care of the solicitudo obrue^s and confundens intellectu^,
such solicitude as does over whelue and confound a man's wit. And because
that Mundus par immoderantiam sauciat. The world wounds man by excess and
superfluite, therefore Saint Peter byddeth us be sobre, contrary to glotenie,
which kills more the^ does the sweard. And this sobriety is ye same virtue
that we call temperaunce, which is one of the.iiii. cardinal virtues, of
which the wise man Sapi. viii. speaks, among the praises of sapience,
Sapientia increata. The wisdom of the father, the second parson in Trinity,
of whose wisdom every man and woman has a spark, that lighteneth and
inclines him to goodness and to eschew ill. This heavenly Sapience and wisdom
(says the wise man.) Sobrietatem et prudentiam docet et iustitiam and virtutem
quibus vtilius nihil est in vita hominibus, heavenly wisdom, the increate
wisdom of the father of heaven, teaches a man sobrenes, that is te^peraunce,
and prudence, and justice, and virtue or power, that is fortitude. And these be
the.iiii. cardinal virtues, unto which all moral virtues be reduced, et
vigilate, watch, take heed that you fall not to sin, beware, for you have a
shrewde whelp to bite you, to bring you to sin if he may. A duersarius
vester diabolus tan Where s. Peter uses the devils own term, a word of his
own confession. Cu^ venissent filij dei vt assisterent coram deo affuit inter
eos etia^ satan, cui dixit dominus vnde venis? Qui respo^densait, circuiui
terram et pera^bulaui ea^. Job. i. When the children of god the good angels
came to stand before god our lord the adversary the dyuel was also among them.
The good Angels be called here the children of God* in as much as they be made
like unto him by participation of his glory, and for the gracious favor and
love that he has toward them, and they toward him. The ill Angels were not
ill by creation or by name, but of their own froward Cum assisterent coram
deo filij dei, affuit inter eosetia^ Satan. Satan the Devil was among them,
not so taking that saying of holy Job, as that Satan was one of the good
Angels that contynuallie and still beheld the glory of GOD. For so only
the good Angels and blessed spyrytes, that be associate with Cayn, where is
thy brother Abel? and, quid fecisti? What have thou done? Even so in our
purpose, Our lord God spoke to Satan, that is to say, made him to
understand that he knows all things. And even so you must understand the
other saiynge: that Satan answered God Circuiui terram and perambulaui came. I
have compassed or gone about the earth: and have walked through it. By this
circuit or going about the world of Satan is understand his callidyte,
wylines, and sutteltie to search, whom he may disceyue and bring into his
snares. And this is it that saint Peter means, Aduersarius vester diabolus
tanque, leo rugiens circuit querens que^ deuoret. Wily persons goes compass
about the bushe. Psalm. in circuitu impij ambulant, in a compass Medium exit ab
extremis. The middel or mean goes out from the extremities, like as in
things that be straight the middel wrieth not, another goes out from the
extremities, as appears plainly in a straight line, in which every part
lies straight, and none swarueth aside out of course, so they that be just and
straight, when they entende a thing or say it, in their doings, and setting
forward toward that end or purpose, they swerve not by wrenches and wyles, and
bypathes, but goes as straight as they may, to the thing that they intend
or promise, and to bring their purpose to pass, and to good effect. But the
wily Pie, the medium exit ab extremis. The midell exhorbitateth from the
streightnes of truth, as pretending some common pro^ect, or some honesty or
common wealth or some particular pleasure or honest gaynes or such like, but
in prosecuting of his purpose, he will clean go compass and awrie from justice
and from charity, and will end finally upon some money matter for a private
luker to him self, with the spoylinge, robbing, or undoing of their poor
neighbor. Examples of this we have seen in our time more then I can have
leisure to express or to rehearse at this time. In the acts of parliamentes
that we have had, made in our days, what goodly prea^bles has gone before in
the same? eue^ quasi oraculu^ apollinis. As though ye Job. i. When God asked of
him where he had been, he said he had compassed about the earth and walked
throw it. Where ye shall understand, there be three sorts of true doctrine,
then they rore like the Dyuell, and as the dyuels ministers, to devour men up
to Pro. xx. Like as the roringe of a Lion, even so is the fear of a King, who
so does provoke him, synneth against his own soul. And thus they have shaken
poor men, and made them either to say as they say, or else to hold their
peace and say nothing. The Devil the aucthor of these troubles, Saint Peter
byddeth us resist by faith, in which in very deed as Saint Paul says in
the last Chapter to the Ephesians. In all things taking the shield or
buckeler of faith, with which ye may quench all the fiery Darts or weapons
of the most wicked Devil. But Saint Peter adds and puts to more then
Saint Paul does, exhortinge us to be strong in faith, fortes in fide,
strong in faith, but very weak in faith, therefore they be sone overthrown
and overcome. And that is the cause that Heresies so much prevail among us,
and peruerteth and turns the most part of people, As says that great
ancient Father Tertullian libro de prescriptionibus contra hereticos. Hereses
apud eos multum valent qui in fide non valent. Where he imputes (as he well
may) all the strength of Heresies to the weakness of the people, saying:
Heresies be of great strength among them that be of no strength in faith,
or that have no strong faith. He puts an example Tertullian. Non aliter
Heresis de quorundam infirmitatibus habent quod valent. Nihil valentes si in
been valentem fidem incurrant. Even so Heresies gets and has of the
weakness of some persons that they be so strong as they be. And should be of
no strength, if they should match or chance upon a faith that is myghtie and
strong. Therefore if you will resist the roaring of the Devil, and quench the
fyrie Darts of the most wicked, you must do it by faith, and that by
strong faith, for a faynte and a weak faith will not be able so to do. How
many think you of this audience here present be there? A great many I am
sure, that would have said once within this twenty years, that no man living
finem fidei vestrae salutem animarum vestrarum. Cap. i. The end and reward of
your faith, that is the health of your souls, that shall never fade nor fail,
as he said before in the first chapter Scientes eandem passionem ei que in
mu^do est vestre fraternitati fieri. Knowing that you have the same passion and
suffering in you, that has be laid on your brotherhed. Here S. Peter induces
a strong parswasion to this purpose, that we should strongly resist all
temptacion, knowinge that the same pain and passion that you have, also have
your brotherhead that is abroad in the world, your brothers in Christ,
faithful people men and women suffer like tempation by the Devil our goostly
enemy as you do, they Deus autem omnis gratie qui vocauit nos in eternam
gloriam suam in Christo Jesus modicum passos ipse perficiet, confirmabit,
solidabitque. Almyghtie GOD the gyuer of all grace which has called us by our
Savior CHRIST into his eternal glory, which he would us to receive finally
after this present life. Modicum passos, although we have suffered but little,
for all that we can suffer is very little and almost nothing in comparison
of the everlasting Solidabit, And where we have now but as loose limbs or
members shaken with fear and with errors, and scarce agreinge every man
within our selves in our opinions and in matters of our faith, but as it were
one while of one mind and a none of a another mind, and very waueringe and
unsure. And this is the very property of Heresies, they be ever unsteadfast and
not agreinge among them selves, but some take one way and some an other, and
that pleases seen nor worshipped. And anon that way seemed Arrius sect, as
saint Basil rehearses in diverse places, and specially Epistola. lxxii.
speaking of one Eustathius a disciple of Arrius, which was made Bishop in
minor Armenia, As he came through Paphlagonia a country in maigne Asia.

Basilidis Paphlagonici altaria cu^ Paphlagonia^ transiret subuertit Eustathius
and propriis mensis liturgia^ obiuit. This Basilides not ye heritike, but
Basilides Paphlagonia, a familier acquaintance of Basilius used aulters as they
had been used ever still since ye beginning of Christ's church. The said
Eustathius coming through his country or dioces, pulled down the alters, and
said his masses after his fashion upon bordes or tables, as we did lately. And
after in ye next epistle he says. Qua^obre^ cu^ Dardania redire^t heretici,
altaria Basilidis in agro Ga^grenoru^ subuerteru^t me^sasque suas
substitueru^t. When certain heritiks came back again from the country called
Dardania, they overthrew the aulters of Basilides the bishop in ye country of
the Gangrens, and set up in steed of the^ their own bordes or tables. All
such wauerynge and Per Siluanum fidelem fratrem vobis vt arbitror, breuiter
scripsi. I have written a short epistle to you by Siluanus who^ you know, you
need not to suspect him, for you know he is faithful, and no false apostle
(of which they were Obsecrans and co^testa^s hanc esse veram gratiam dei in qua
statis. Praiyng and beseching you for Gods sake to conform your selves unto yt
I have written (says.s. Peter.) And protesting here and before God that this
is the true grace of the Gospel in which you stand. Therefore be steadfast and
continue in the faith of the same, according to.s. Peter writing in this
epistle yt his holy doctrine may take note in you and bear fruit of good
works. Salutat v^s ecclesia que est in Babilone collecta and Marcus filius
meus. Here he sends Semiramis the queen, wife to Ninus sometime king there,
Berosus. Ipsa ha^c vrbe^ maxima^ ex oppido fecit vt magis dici possit illa^
edificasse qua^ a^pliasse. As ye ancient historiographer of ye Caldees Berosus
writes antiquitatum libro quarto, saying. Anno ce^tesimo, trigesimo primo a
salute ab aquis, prima omnium Where he calls Nembroth Saturn of Babylon, and
Belus his son Jupiter of the Caldeis, his son was Ninus, which was husband to
Semiramis the queen that after her husband reigned there marvelous
vyctoriouslye by the space of.xlii. years. Berosus says, In the fourth place
reigned at Babylon the wife of Ninus, Semiramis, the Ascalonite.xlii. years.
This woman exceaded and passed al men in chivalry triumphs, riches,
victoryes, and imperie. There is no man comperable to this woman There be so
many magnifice^t and noble things Da. xiiii Nonne hec est Babylon ciuitas magna
quam edificaui in gloria mea? Of which I spoke in my last sermon here made,
declarynge how GOD could pull down them that would not stoop, by example
of this proud Nabuchodonosor that had Daniell and other of the Israelites in
captivity at the time when he made this proud boastyng. By the name of this
Babylon.s. Peter calls Rome, because of the confusion and vncerte^ty of
innumerable idolatries yt there in Rome were used as horribly as ever they were in
Babilo^ where by ye commandment of king Ninus husband of the Semiramis the
queen was first erect a temple and an image of Belus the God his father, and
then by like commandment of the queen was Ninus her husband deified, to which
she had commanded among her people divine honors to be given. And by example
of her, many other great men caused like divine honors to be given to great
men's images of their ancestors, and so began their first idolatrye, which
afterward was spread through all the world, which by Christ and his apostles,
and their holy doctrine was extinct and quenched. And even like as the elect
people of God, the people of Israel, among which were Ezechiel, Daniel, and
many other holy men and women were a small number in comparison among the
people of the city of Babylon, and there in much vexation, mockinge, and
scoffinge, and increased. All such as there were with him Salutate inuicem in
osculo sancto. Salute you one another by holy kissynge one another. By holy
kissynge (he says,) meaning that there be diverse manners attempted
afterward, when he made his father to forsake the City, and to shyfte for him
self ii. Regum. xx. fearing that he would aspire into the favor of the
king, that he should be like to put him out of favor, when he met him
at an opportunity, for his purpose, came to him flattering, and took him by
the chynne with the one hand, and kissynge him, drew out his skeen or hanger
with the other hand, and stroke Amasa in the side so sore a wound, that his
guts fell about his feet. Here was a fayning cosse, fainyng love, where was
naught else but malice and hatred. There is an other traiterous cosse, and such
kissynge used Judas to our Savior Christ, not for any love which he ought
to have had toward Abducite caute, as he had given them instructions. The
traitor was afraid (now that he had gone so far) lest Christ should by
his mighty power have escaped from them, as he might if he would inuisibly,
as he did at Nazareth, when the malicious people for his preaching, and for
reprouyng their vices, rubbing them on the gall, they would have pytched him
down the clefe or rock on which their citi stood and was builded on.
transiens per medium illorum ibat. Inuisibly he escaped away that never a man
spied him This Judas knew he could do, and therefore he ^ade them beware, and
convey him away craftily. There is an other baudy or lecherous cosse as the
adulterous woman or the courtisan kisseth the youngman, as it is write. Pro.
vii. Apprehensu^ deosculatur inuenem and procaci vultu bla^ditur. She colled
the young man and kissed him, and with her fliering countenance flattered him.
All these manners of kissing must be left, and you must among you (says.s.
Peter to his scholars that he writ unto) kiss like dowes with peaceable
cosses, chaste cosses in sign of peace and love. And this was much used in the
primative church, and afterward eue^ to our time in the holy church at the holy
time of mass, when the priest in some places, and specially in chathedral
churches kisseth the deacon, and then Genises) Our corrupt nature is prone to
noughtines more the^ to goodness, and in as much as some have more followed
carnalitie and carnal love then chaste love, the people have misused the said
cosse of peace, turninge it to wantannes. Therefore such kissing of peace at the
mass has been left, where has been present both men and women, and when the
priest has given the cosse of peace, saiynge to his minister, Pax tibi and
ecclesie dei. He kisseth the paxe of silver Gratia vobis oibus qui estis in
Christo He begone his epistle with hearty prayer, for grace to them that were
dispersed as strangers in Pontus, Galatia. etc. Gratia vobis and pax
multiplicetur. And eue^ so he ends his epistle or letter, wisshyng and
praiyng for grace to al them that be constant and remain steadfast in Christ
Jesus, to whom with the father and with the holy Ghost be all honor and glory
for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

