THE ANALYSIS OF CHYRVRGERY, Being the Theorique and Practique part thereof.

Briefly composed for the benefit of all those who desire the knowledge of this
worthy Profession.

BY The pains and industry of Ed: Edwards Doctor in Physic.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper.

1636.

TO HIS WORTHY Friends Master Alexander Read Doctor of Physic, and the rest of
the Brethren of the Worshipful Company of Chyrurgians, of the City of London:
Ed: Edwards, Doctor of Physic, wishes prosperity; and good success in
their Art, with increase of knowledge to Gods glory, and the great good of the
Weal public, etc.
WOrthy Friends: having considered the great labor, industry, and study,
required in the thrice worthy, excellent and needful faculty of Chyrurgerie;
which God of his great love to Mankind have ordained to preserve us. By
comforting us in curing our infirmities laid upon us sinful wretches; whereby
he will be glorified: How ought we then to use our best endeavors by all
means possible to seek to attain to the highest degree of knowledge herein,
that we may, whereby God may be glorified, the patient releeved, and the
Artist rewarded. And not to rest satisfied, as too too many do only in what
they have learned, by tradition from their Masters; looking only what Medicines
their Masters used: for Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, etc. whose Masters (no doubt)
knew the differences of those Infirmities with the varieties thereof, and all
other circumstances thereto belonging; and how to change, add, or diminish in
the use of their Medicines, and considering the times, how, where, and when to
approve each thing in order and in due time: which I heartily wish that all the
younger sort that intend to practice this worthy Faculty may seriously follow,
and consider well that they are called hereto; not only for their own gains,
as the most sort (I doubt) do persuade themselves, but let them strive to use
the best means chiefly to stir up Gods glory, and then he will bless our
labors with reward, and send good success in our practice; for if we begin
first with him, and make a conscience of what we do, he has promised to
guide and bless our labors, who will not fail in his part if we do ours
faithfully, and my soul is grieved to see the daily abuses and errors
committed in many of this Profession! Chiefly in the Country, of many wicked
wretches, not only men but infinite Petticote Surgeons, that swarm in every
Town, Parish, and for the most part in every Village: that take on them to
practice this worthy Faculty; having neither conscience, learning, art, nor
fear of God; nor never had good Tutor to instruct them. Yet like blind Bayards
boldly adventure on that precious subject of Chyrurgerie; promising to
perform, and cure all things that come under their unfortunate hands: yet
neither know method nor any means rightly to use for to cure it; but for a
show to get money, they will apply some thing be it right or wrong they make
little care; they will be sure to get by the bargain. But for the care and
love that I have of those that are trained up (under the true and worthy
Professors of this needful and worthy profession) that they should be such as
the World expects; and seeing they daily see the use of the practicke part at
the hands of their worthy Masters, so I admonish them all to be very careful
to use all means possible to attain the theorick part of their Faculty, and
to be very well seen therein; that they may persevere with the light of true
knowledge in that Art, to guide them the perfect way or path of perfection. For
he that works without the perfect rules of the theoricke parts of this Art,
does work but as a blind man that caryeth a Picture: cutting sometimes too
much, sometimes too little, as well, where he should not, as where he should,
and so marres all. Wherefore for the better instruction of the younger sort
that intend to follow and practice this needful and worthy Faculty; I have set
forth these brief instructions, for their better memory: as a Lodestone to
draw them from one degree to another, both in the parts theorick and practick,
with many other needful passages, to be known of them, for their further good
herein, with a brief tract of Anatomy thereto annexed; all in analised Tables,
in the which if they will diligently bestow a little labor, and study therein,
I think they shall learn more in one mouth, then they shall do in five, in
any other, formerly written in our vulgar tongue, and if they desire further
knowledge herein, they may find many great Uolumes written at large concerning
all those things (that are herein touched, but in brief) for their further
satisfaction. Mean time accept my love, and zeal herein toward the true
professors hereof, and the good of my Country; and having this collection, I
have been entreated by diverse of my good Friends, to publish it: and for the
benefit of others I am very willing to bestow it gratis; for the good of many:
and shall be ready if this be well accepted, to set forth diverse other things
worthy observation; although it have been and will be something troublesome to
mine old years, being now 81 and six months. Yet willing to labor to do
good to posterity, and to give my best directions to any that endeavor to do
good in the fear of God. For which cause I do here put forth this
Introduction to the public view of all; hoping that the judicious, will herein
censure the best, and herein accept my good meaning in setting it forth:
weighing the imbecility of old age, from whom none must expect to have a thing
so exactly done, as in the flourishing years and vigor of riper wits.
Therefore I hope you will censure all the best way, and accept it as friendly,
as I bestow it faithfully and lovingly; seeing that it comes from a mind
which much regards your company, though acquainted with few: yet I desire,
and wish much happiness, deep knowledge, perfect ability in your Faculty, in
all the Brethren of the whole Society: with my hearty Prayers unto Almighty
God, that they may all receive as much fruit by the reading of this
Introduction, as I hoped they would do when I penned it. And so with my love I
salute you all, and commend you to Gods blessed protection.

Valete in Christo. Nec pudet vivere. Nec piget mori.
TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, I do not write to fill thy fancies with fables or fruitless
lines to fill papers, but I present unto thee a fruitful garden full of
comfortable flowers. I consider we that live in this iron age, (where so much
impiety overwhelmeth the world, being so full fraught with an inundant deluge,
or overwhelming flood of malice and disdain) that men go to hard edge one
with another, must not care for the reproachful taunts of envious snarlers,
which wicked impes in these our days, swarm so abundantly, that few
professions are free of such wretches, whose like informer ages was never
seen; with such diabolical devices, as impudent boasting, disdainful
mocking, complainers, false accusers, dissembling hypocrites, being part of the
errors of that brood of sycophants of this age; which declare their base low
prized conceits, ever showing themselves squint eyed in all good things; who
out of malicious, poisoned, and cankered disdain, seek ever to abuse such as
mean well: for who is more wicked than those which oppose themselves against
virtue, finding fault with others, yet do no good themselves? like the dog in
the manger, which will neither eat hay himself, nor suffer the horse to eat:
but I wish all such as seek the advancement of Gods glory, and their Countries
good, never to be dismayed of such spiteful wretches. If the heathen held it
odious to conceal any thing that might either preserve health, or cure
diseases; then how vile may we account those, that make show to be religious
Christians, to omit it, nay, not only so, but do use all their endeavors to
hinder such as desire to perform it. A lover of the truth ought to hide
nothing secret, that he has found out for health, says Hippo, and Galen,
vide Gal. de Compos. but to reveal it to Gods glory, and the good of the
public weal: wherefore forasmuch as every man is bound by the laws of God
and nature, to live under the title of some honest and godly calling, and
therein to endeavor himself to the uttermost of his power, so far forth as
God shall enable him, wherein he must above all, remember that he study and
labor to advance in all his attempts and actions, first the glory of God, and
then the good of his Country and Commonweal, which duty is not performed by
such as do omit, either to reveal, or otherwise leave behind them in writing,
such secrets as God has bestowed upon them, for the advancement of his glory,
and to leave it to posterity, but the envions sect I think are drenched in the
forgetful hellish lake of frozen oblivion, out of whose peevish brains no
good can be expected, and small comfort had, but rather a scoff or a frumpe. I
speak it with grief of conscience, to think that there should be such a
frozen hearted crew of godless caitiffes, infected with that incurable poison,
unworthy the name of Christians, having their conscience (if any) seared up
with a hot iron, that nothing can open it, not considering that he which has
the means, and does not cherish, shall with the hider of his talent perish:
these neither love God in his mercy, nor fear him in his justice, therefore not
excusable in the day of vengeance, odious to God and christian charity, who
with restless rage do manifest their godless minds, holding nothing
tolerable, but what they like and allow. In what they loathe, every mite is
made a monster, every trifle a trespass, and every Gnat a Cammell; so
untunable is it to their ugly ears. I think these persons lovingly link in
league with the devil, having obstinate wills, and barren fruitless hearts,
senseless, except in things that feed their filthy fancies, only they swell
with intolerable pride and envy; they live Foxe-like, these participate not
with that worthy renowned Knight, Sir Philip Sidney, who said, love them that
do some good, because there be many that do none at all: let such take heed
that they perish not with such as hide their talent, therefore according to my
bounden duty herein (with that poor myte which God has endued me withal) I
do here leave some fruits of my labors to posterity. We read that the poor
Widows myte, was more accepted because she gave all, then the great gifts
that were given by the mighty ones out of their superfluities. Alexander
accepted a cup of cold water at the hands of a beggar, so do I bestow these
rude lines, as a token of my love, not ambitiously for vain glory, or as one
that goes about to instruct the learned, but the ignorant, nor to impair the
credit of any good meaning professor of this worthy faculty, for (God knows)
I love and reverence them, and although this work be to me very tedious and
toylesome in this mine old age, yet will I not deny the importunate request of
my faithful loving friends in satisfying their desire herein. Furthermore for
my part, I hold it neither fit nor lawful for every ignorant person that
practices Surgery, being unskilful in that deep thrice worthy learned
faculty of Physic, to undertake, or once offer to give inward medicines to
any Patient, without the counsel of the learned Physician: let them consider
how precious the subject is on which they work, (viz. the body of man) being
the image of God: yet many of these homicides (chiefly in the Country) having
neither fear of God, learning, art, nor honesty, do daily like brazen faced
monsters, boldly adventure on all the parts of physic, wherein they have no
skill, to the great disbonour of God, the utter ruin and spoil of their
unfortunate Patients, and infamy to both these worthy faculties, being as unfit
thereto, as the Ass to play on the Harp: which careless crew of abusers
deserve sharp punishment, as deceitful malefactors and murderers. A most
lamentable thing that it should be suffered: and here for the avoiding of
tedious circumstances, I do abreviate my speeches, discoursing no further,
till a more fit opportunity be offered.

Vale in Christo.
The whole art of Surgery both theoricke and practicke, is accomplished by
the exact knowledge and perfect operation of these six things in general
following: as to know.
1 The 13. principal points belonging to a Surgeon. 1 1 a Surgeon is
Surgery
what 2 3 subject of surgery. next way to learn this art.
the 4 5 conditions are required in a Surgeon. 6 Instruments be fit 1
medicinals manuals.
both 2 ever to carry with him
7 medicines ever to have in readiness, method is best to use, conditions the
Patient should have, in how many things the contemplation of the Surgeon do
consist,
6 7 what 8 9 10 11 the six things to consider before you take charge, that
the operations of the Surgeon ingeneral are but 3
2 3 4 5 9 10 11 12 13
2 That this art is generally divided into two parts, i. 1 Theorica, learning,
2 Practica, practice.
3 That the Surgeon works generally upon five indispositions against nature,
as 1 Tumors against nature, 2 Wounds, 3 Ulcers, 4 Fractures, 5 Dislocations.
4 That the Surgeon accomplisheth his intent generally by 3 things, as by 1
taking away things 1 hurtful, 2 divided, 3 displaced.

2 joining 3 reducing
5 That the Surgeon takes his indications curative generally of 3 things, as
of things 1 natural to preserve the^.
2 not natural to restore with 3 against nature to destroy
6 That the 3 operations above said are accomplished generally by these two
instruments or means, as 1 medicinals which do either bind loose alter the
property.

2 manuals

Brief answers to all the aforesaid questions, and first to the thirteen
principal points aforesaid, as to know that
1 A Surgeon is natures servant to help nature in things pertaining to
surgery. 2 Surgery is both art and science. 3 The subject of surgery is man's
body being sore, etc. 4 The next way to learn this faculty, is to begin at
things general, and so come to particulars. 5 The conditions required in the
Surgion are generally 2. i. to be 1 virtuous and religious 1 theoric 2 practic.
2 expert in his prof. both
6 his instruments 6 generally are but two, i. medicinals manuals
7 ever fit to carry with him are 6. i. 1 probs, 2 needles and stitching quil,
3 mullets with spatula, 4 incision knife, 5 cysors, 6 launcets.

7 8 Medicines ever to have in readiness are generally 6. i. e 1 restrictives
to stop 1 blood, 2 afluxio^ that runs to other parts
2 Basilicon to cause matter, 3 Apostolorum to cleanse, 4 Aurinum to incarnate
flesh. 5 Album to cease dolor and heat, 6 Desiccativum rubrum to dry and skin.
9 The best method to observe is generally to note well the 1 disease, cause
and symptoms, next way to cure it 1 speedily, 2 surely, 3 not to make false
promises for money, and promise no more then may be performd.

10 The conditions required of the Patient, are generally 3 i. e. to 1 hope
with 1 assurance 2 diligence, 3 patience.

2 obey 3 endure
11 The contemplation of surgery do consist generally in the perfect knowledge
of things, 1 natural, 2 not natural, 3 against nature.
12 He should observe before he undertake any cure, generally six things, i.
1 whether lawful before 1 God, 2 Man. 2 temperature of the 1 Body, 2 Members,
3 the sickness 1 and nature thereof, 2 if curable or not,
4 5 medicines proper for the disease, 6 right way of application.
13 The operations of the Surgeon are generally but three, as are before
mentioned.
The two general parts of this art follow,.i. 1 Theorica,.i. the learned part
by rules, showing the perfect ways to work herein, gotten by reading, etc.
being Science, and is divided generally into four parts, as things 1 natural
being 7. as 1 Elements, 2 Temperaments or Complexions, 3 Humors, 4 Members, 5
Powers or virtues, 6 Operations of those virtues, 7 Spirits.
2 not natural, being 6. as 1 Air, 2 Meat and drink, 3 Sleep and watch, 4
Fullness and emptiness, 5 Moving and rest, 6 Affections of the mind.
3 against nature being 3. as the 1 Disease, 2 Cause of the disease, 3
Accidents that follow the disease
4 Iudicall, as to judge of diseases, what 1 they be, 2 nature they be of, 3
cure or not, and the reason why they may or may not be cured, 4 medicines and
method is best.

2 Practica,.i. practice showing how to order, prepare, and to work with the
hand according to the precepts of the theoricke, done by these three means, as
by 1 Diet, or the right use of the 6 thing, not natural above said, in 1
health to preserve with things like, 2 diseases to cure with contraries.
medicines, which is in two sorts used, either 1 inwards, 2 outward.
3 Manual operation, or hand-working, as by 1 Incision, 2 Stitching, 3
Rolling. 4 Reducing, 5 Cauterising, etc.



Now follows the tract of the part Physiologia, or the seven things natural
aforesaid, as they lie in order.
1 Elements of which consider generally four things, i. as 1 what an Element
is, it is 1 A body most pure and simple, unmixt, 2 The least part not dividable
into any other kind. 3 That whereof all things natural have their original.
2 their 2 Numbers which are four, i* 1 Fire, 2 Air, 3 Water, 4 Earth.
3 Qualities be 4. i. 1 Fire, is 1 hot and dry, 2 hot and moist, 3 cold and
moist, 4 cold and dry.

2 Air, 3 Water 4 Earth,
4 operations are generally 2. i. 1 Active, i. to do as is 1 heat and 2 cold,
2 passive to suffer to be done, as does 1 dryness, and moystnesse.




Note that these two active qualities of heat and cold, do work into the two
passive qualities or dryness and moystnesse to alter them.

2 Temperaments or complexions, wherein consider generally four things, i. e.
that they are 1 generally 2. i. 1 well tempered,
2 evil
2 Particularly 9.. 1 1 simple, as 1 hot, 2 cold, 3 moist, 4 dry,
2 compound, as hot and 1 dry, 2 moist,
cold and 3 dry, 4 moist,


2 3 4 1 four 2 3 4 2 one temperate by Equality of all these in perfect
proportion, rara Avis, as hard to find as a black Swan.
3 Either 1 simple, qualities of some or all the four Elements, either 1 hot,
2 cold, 3 moist, 4 dry,

2 compound,
4 To no end known by the differences of temperatures, if we know them not by
their signs also: for the which read and consider well those rules, which are
set down by Levine Lemnie, written in his book called the Touchstone of
Complexions, where you may be sufficiently instructed, which in this place is
too tedious to relate at this time.

3 Humors be generally two, i. 1 Natural being 4. as 1 Blood, Natural and
profitable.
2 Choler, 3 Phlegm, 4 Melancholy,
1 Blood being either too 1 thin, by 1 heat, 2 cold.

2 thick,
2 adust and so the 1 subtle, parts 1 choler, 2 mela^choly
become
2 gross,
3 distempered by mixing of other humors, as of 1 choler, 2 phlegm, 3
melancholy, etc.

2 Choler either 1 Vitiline, like yolks of eggs, 2 Eruginous, like
verdegresse, 3 Prassyne, like juice of herbs, 4 Azure or blew.

2 Unnatural, and are of diverse sorts, as 3 Phlegm either 1 Vitria, like
melted glass, 2 Acide, sour like vinegar, 3 Salt, like brine, 4 Gypsum, like
white mortar.
4 Melancholy being of two sorts either of brent 1 blood, 2 choler, and is the
worst,



Note that of these three things aforesaid, i. as 1 Elements, all the members
of the body are made.
2 Temperaments, and 3 humors,


4 Members are generally two, i. 1 Simple, being 11. as 1 Bones, 2 Cartilages
or gristles, 3 Ligaments, 4 Veins, 5 Arteries or heart pypes, 6 Nerves or
synewes, 7 Cords or tendons, 8 Panicles or felmes, 9 Simple flesh, 1 substance,
2 use or office, 3 temperatures, 4 utilities.
10 Fat, 11 Skin, in all these consider these four things, i. their
2 Compound, as are the 1 Head, 2 Heart, 3 Liver, 4 Lungs, 5 Legs, 6 Arms, 1
Brain, 2 Heart, 3 Liver, 4 Testicles or stones,
7 Hands, etc.
Whose other diversities are generally five, whereof some are 1 Principals
being 4. as the 2 serving the principals are 4. as the 1 veins, to carry the
spirit 1 natural, 2 vital, 3 animal 4 sperme or seed.


2 arteries, 3 nerves, 4 spermatick vessels.
3 Proper of themselves and others, as the 1 Belly, 2 Kidneyes, 3 Matrix, etc.
4 Excrementall and not proper, as 1 Hair, 2 Nails.
5 Neither governed, nor do govern others, as are the Bones, Gristles,
Glandles, Fat, Simple flesh, etc.



5 Of the powers, virtues, or faculties, being three, of which proceeds the
actions, being the 1 Animal, whose actions generally are double, i. 1
sensitive being also double, as, 1 External or outward, as, 1 Seeing, and are
called the five senses.
2 Hearing, 3 Smelling; 4 Tasting, 5 Touching,
2 Intern or inward, called the virtue principal or common sense as 1
imagination, 2 reason, 3 remembrance.

2 Motive done by the sinews and muscles, being their instruments of
voluntary motions all these proceed from the brain by the nerves.
2 vital, which 1 have two motions, as 1 Active to dilate the heart and
Arteries, as in 1 joy, 2 hope, 3 mirth, etc.
2 Passive, the heart and arteries, and to bind them, as in 1 care, 2 fear, 3
sadness, 4 sorrow, 5 revenge, 6 melancholy, etc.

proceeds from the heart by the arteries, and serves to carry the spirit
vital and lively heat, to all the members, which arteries or heart pipes do
spring from the heart.
3 natural, 1 proceeding from the liver, sending nourishment to all parts of
the body by the veins that grow out of the liver 2 hence proceed the four
natural virtues, i. as those four virtues do their operations thus by
degrees one after another, i. as 1 attractive, wrought by 1 heat, and drith,
2 cold, 3 heat, and moisture.
4 cold,

2 retentive, 3 disgestive, 4 expulsive,
1 attraction is made, 2 retention til the disgestive virtue have alterd it
fit, 3 digestion to alter the property by heat, as aliment into Chyle, Chyle
into blood, and blood into flesh, etc. 4 expulsio^ to expel and cast out the
excr. etc
by this faculty we do 1 nourish our bodies, 2 increase and grow, 3 engender
more of the kind, etc.



The sixth of the operations done by the foresaid three virtues.
6 The virtue 1 Animal moves 1 Apprehension, in the two former ventricles of
the brain.
2 Fantasy, 3 Imagination, 4 Opinion, 5 Consent, etc. 1 Judgment, in the
middle ventricle of the brain.
2 Esteem, 3 Reason, 4 Resolution, 5 Disposing, 6 To discern, 1 Remembrance,
in the hinder ventricle of the brain.
2 Knowledge, 3 Calling to mind
2 Vital moves, 1 Mirth, by vital heat stirred up in us either 1 moderate, 2
immoderat

2 Joy, 3 Hope, 4 Trust, 5 Humanity, 6 Victory, 7 Glory, 8 Boldness, 9 Mercy,
10 Fear, 11 Sadness, 12 Despair, 13 Envy, 14 Hatred, 15 Anger, 16 Mildness,
17 Stubbornness,
3 Natural, moves, and 1 Alters 1 Aliment into Chyle, 2 Chyle into blood
and humors, 3 Blood and humors into flesh, etc.
2 joyneth. 3 forms. 4 ingendreth. 5 nourishes. 6 increases.
These actions proceed from the faculty or virtue, being cause of the action,
and not contrary, i. the action is not cause of the faculty, for the actions
are certain movings and affections as abovesaid, stirred up by those three
virtues or faculties, i. 1 animal, 2 vital 3 natural.


The seventh are Spirits proceeding from the three virtues aforesaid.
Spirits, wherein consider these five things, which are 1 An ayrie substance,
i. 1 subtle, 2 stirring the powers to perform the office and operations.
2 Bred of the most pure and thin parts or vapors of the blood and humors
sent to each part of the body, whereby each member may do his office. 3
Principally, seated, i. the 1 animal, in the 1 brain, to stir up 1 moving and
feeling, 2 heat and life, 3 nourishing,

2 heart, 3 liver,

2 vital, 3 natural,
4 sent from those four principal members to all parts of the body i. the 1
animal, by the 1 nerves, 2 arteries, 3 veins.

2 vital, 3 natural,

4 5 As a Prince do move his Council, and the Council the subjects, so every
one according to his vocation as it is appointed by nature, so that every
inferior must be ready to serve his superior. Remember diligently, seek ever
to preserve these seven things natural aforesaid, by the right use of the six
things not natural, following. note that we 1 preserve health, by things 1
like in quality.
2 contrary

2 cure diseases,
Note the spirit 1 Vital, is engendered of the vapor of the vital blood in the
heart and arteries. 2 Animal, is engendered of the spirit vital, carried up to
the head by the arteries, and there more disgested, for which purpose nature
has the Rete mirabile in the brain, as a manifest changeable maze. 3
Natural, infuseth and breaths its nutritive vapors and spirits to nourish
the parts of the body.
Also in these seven things natural, consider these nine things following,
whether you meant to preserve health, or to cure diseases.

Of the nine things that are to be considered in things natural.
Consider these nine, i. the 1 Strength of the patient, if that fail, medicine
is used in vain, 2 Complexion, which must be countergarded, although it be
evil, as a thing of custom, for custom is like another nature. 3 Members
whether 1 simple, 1 principal or noble,
2 serving to the 3 not able at all*
2 compound, 3 organick, as 4 sensible, because 1 the
5 insensible,
2 whose form or figure may be unfit in 1 magnitude, 1 eye cannot endure so
strong a medicine as the flesh, etc. 2 nerve cannot endure so strong a medicine
as the lygament, etc.
2 number, 3 figure, 4 situation, etc.

4 Habit; i, a body either 1 fat and fleshy, 2 lean, 3 delicate, 4 rusticke,
etc.
5 Age, for often youth is curable, when the aged cannot in the like case, and
the strong sooner than the weak, etc. 6 Sex or kind for 1 Eunuchs, cannot
endure medicines so strong as men. have bodies 1 weaker, then men of like
temperament.
2 moister, 3 softer,

2 Women, 3 Children,
7 Time of the 1 year, for some medicines are fit in the Spring, and others in
other seasons in the like disease, used, i. A. 2 Day to observe order. 3
Disease as 1 beginning, every one must have medicines according to the time:
where the time is unknown, the cure is unknown.
2 augmentation, 3 state, 4 declination,

8 Region, 1 The order of cure must differ according to the region. 2 hot,
cause humor, 1 subtle and thin, their use, 1 coolers to thicken it 2 heaters
to make it thin

2 gross and thick

3 cold,
9 Custom 1 must be observed as the proper temperature, as 1 citizens, must be
used according to their custom
2 courtiers, 3 easy livers, 4 rustickes, 5 carters,

2 brings properties, example if they eat or drink either Ptisan, either they
1 vomit, 2 scowre, 3 be very sick therewith.

Apples, Milk, Cheese, Partrich, etc.



Things annexed to things natural, are four, fit to be considered. These
four are
1 Ages be generally, as from the 1 birth to 25 hot and moist, all which time
the body 1 grows, and is 1 sanguine, 2 choleric, 3 melancholicke.

2 is in perfect growth, 3 begins to decrease

2 25 to 40. hot and dry, 3 40 to 60. cold and dry, 4 60 to the end of life, 1
accidentally cold and moist diminishing the strength of the body, and all the
powers and faculties thereof.
2 naturally cold and dry,

2 Color, and is in two sorts observed of the 1 body caused two ways, i. 1
inward, i according to the humors abounding, clymat for country, 1 hot make 1
sallow, 2 black,
2 cold make 1 white, 2 pale, etc.



2 outward in two sorts, i.
2 here be generally 4 sorts, i. 1 black, hair signifies, 1 either abundance
of 1 choler inflamd 2 blood adusted,
2 too much heat, not adust, 3 excess of melancholy, 4 lack of natural heat,
caused of putrified phlegm.

2 red, 3 gray, 4 white,

3 Figure or habitude of body, as 1 good proportion of the four humors,
causes good temperature, and comely proportion of body. 2 thick and tall,
shows excess 2 heat and moisture, Sanguine 3 heat and dryness, Choleric 4
cold and moist, Phlegmatic.

3 thin and lean, 4 fat and gross,
4 Diversity of kinds are generally 3. i. the 1 male is hotter, then other
kinds of the same complexion, as the male is hotter then the female,
2 female is colder Epafroditus is 1 both male and female, 2 temperate in heat
and cold.

Age must not be accounted according to the number of years, but rather after
the temperature of the body, for some are 1 old at 40. as those 1 cold and dry,
soon wax old. 2 hot and moist, are long young and lusty.

2 young at 60.

Now of the second part of the Theoricke, called Hygiena, or res non naturales,
i. things not natural, being six, as follows in order, as
1 Air that do inviron us, in which consider six things, i. the 1 The
temperature of its own nature is hot and moist. 2 Difference is of two sorts,
i. 1 good and temperate to our bodies*
2 evil and distemperate
3 quality is altered by three things, i. by the 1 Region either 1 well
tempered.
2 evil
2 winds being four, as 1 East is hot and dry attractive, 2 West, cold and
moist expulsive, 3 South, hot and moist putrificative, 4 North, cold and dry
retentive.
3 wind is the body and spirits altered.
4 Situation of the place, as 1 stony, cold, and dry
2 sandy, hot, 3 marish, cold, 4 woody, hot and moist,

5 fatty,
5 body may alter by the air three ways, i. by the 1 quality in three sorts,
i. by the 1 region, 2 winds, 3 situation of the place.
2 substance, 1 gross and thick, 1 clowdy or troubly is worst, make the 1
body fat and strong, 2 wit dull and slow.

2 pure and clear, 1 thin is best, 2 makes men 1 lively and nimble, 2 sharp
wits,


3 sudden change, for nature cannot away with sudden changes.
6 Vtilities are these, it 1 ingendereth the spirit animal, 2 is the matter of
our respiration, 3 Author of 1 life to mortal men.
2 diseases 3 death



2 Meat and drink herein consider six things, i. the
1 quantity must be according to the 1 substance either 1 gross and hard of
digestion.
2 fine and easy
2 quality either 1 hot, moderate, or immoderate.
2 cold, 3 dry, 4 moist.
3 Complexion of the eater, etc.
2 quality some 1 are either 1 hot, and that either temperately in degree.
meanly extremely

2 cold, 3 dry, 4 moist,
2 nourish 1 much, 2 little.
3 make juice either 1 gross and thick, 2 watery and thin, 3 mean and
temperate:
4 be 1 good, 2 evil.

3 custom 1 in feeding must be well regarded, 2 it is like another nature, 3
makes bad meats by use better to some, than better meats, 4 of such meats and
drinks as best like the eater, are often best, 5 if it must needs be left, do it
by little, in health, if it may be.
4 order 1 eat 1 not that first that should be last, 2 first things that 1
molifie 2nd loose the belly, 1 except it be loose, 2 as 1 broth, 2 milk, 3
rear Eggs. 4 all that properly loose

2 be stiptick if you will bind a loose belly.
3 not 1 slippery meats first lest they hastily draw down other meats
undisgested. 2 restrictives, lest they let the descending of other meats.

2 Drink. 1 not till some thing be eaten at meals, 2 the strongest first, and
smallest after, 3 moderately helps 1 digestion 2 to mingle the meat, 3 the meat
the better to pass its juice 1 Liver, 2 Veins, 3 Arteries, etc. 4 Parts for
to nourish.



5 Time in it observe three things, i. time of the 1 age, as in my golden Key
you may observe.
2 year, 3 day
6 Age 1 children should eat meat hot and moist moderately, drink no wine it
hurts them.
2 young men 1 may eat 2 must 1 Sallets of cool herbs. 2 Meats more drink
little Wine, use all these moderately, fit to the 1 colder, and of grosser
substance.
2 moister,
complexion, exercise, custom.


3 Old folks must use meats 1 hot and moist, do 1 make the humors thin, 2
purge and cleanse the blood by urine.

2 easy to digest, 3 and drinks that
Place this before Folio 17.


Of Fullness and Emptiness, i. Repletion and Inanition.
3. Repletion or fullness in it consider generally these eight things in the 1
substance it is either 1 aliment either 1 profitable, 2 hurtful.
2 spirits being either 1 gross and thick, 2 thin, subtle and pure.
3 humors either 1 good, 2 bad.
4 Excrements being diverse.
2 kinds are in 2 sorts, i. in 1 quantity and in 2 sorts, i. of 1 Aliment, and
is also in two sorts, as sacietas quoad 1 vasa, 2 vires.
2 humors and is in 2 sorts, i. of 1 Plenitudo, i. when all the humors abound
equally in the 1 Veins, 2 Arteries.
2 Cacochyma* i. when one humor alone abounds as 1 Choler, 2 Phlegm, 3
Melancholy, etc.


2 quality the humors being either 1 hotter, then is fit and are then called
also Caerochymiall.
2 colder, 3 thicker, 4 thinner, 5 salt, 6 sour, etc.

3 Differences i. 1 universal, possessing 1 all the body. 2 some part or
member.

2 particular.
4 Place is diverse according to the matter offending, be it 1 aliment, 2
spirits, 3 humors, 4 excrements.
5 cause is either 1 general as of 1 meats being either 1 in the way of
disgestion. 2 utterly forsaken of natural heat, and so do corrupt.
2 humors being either 1 Plenitudo, 2 Cacochymia.

2 particular, i. either of 1 Spirits, 2 Excrements.

6 Signs are according to the cause and diversity of fullness. 7 cure must be
1 according to the 1 matter offending, 2 place offended, etc.
2 fit evacuation, S. A. 1 either 1 general, 2 particular.
2 in 1 Plenitudo by bleeding, etc. 2 Cacochymia, by purges, etc.


8 accidents are diverse according to the 1 cause, 2 place wherein it is
contained, etc.


Now of Inanition or Emptiness.
3 Inanition, i. Emptiness, in it consider these six things, i. the 1
Definition, it is 1 emptiness and lack either of 1 aliment, 2 spirit, 3
humor natural, etc.
2 a diminishing or let of any of those either 1 general, 2 particular.

2 kinds are either 1 general, where either 1 all the body waxes thin and
weak, slender and empty.
2 some particular part,

2 particular,
3 Differences are generally two, i 1 universal in all the body.
2 particular in some part of
4 causes are either by 1 nature, the body or member so made, 2 Art so done, i.
by 1 purging, 2 bleeding, 3 sweating, etc.
3 accident as either by 1 obstruction either stopping the passage of by
excrement, etc. 1 vital heat, 2 nutritive, etc.

2 a flux either 1 washing the natural substance, etc. 2 exhibiting the juice
nutritive, or the spirits from the place.


5 Signs are Atrophia, which is a 1 wasting of the body or part, etc.
2 consuming
6 Cure is by Removing the cause, s. A. 2 restoring the lost substance, etc.
(if it may be done.)


Of sleep and watch.
4 Sleep and watch, in it consider generally seven things, i. sleep. 1 what
it is 1 sleep is rest and quietness of the 1 virtue animal, i. 1 sense, and 2
motion.
2 body and mind, 3 spirits.
2 the image of death, 3 Deaths eldest brother, says Galen.

2 the cause is 1 a sweet vapor of nourishment sent up to the brain, 2 the
coldness of the brain that turns those vapors to humor which 1 close the
conduits of the nerves 2 stop the ways of the 1 sense, 2 spirits,
3 prohibit the spirits.

3 times of sleep are generally 2. i. sleep in the 1 day, chiefly after noon,
is hurtful to health, and utterly to be disliked for the most part. 2 night,
it fit to sleep 7 or 8 hours, as cause requires.
4 the manner of it is either, 1 long, according to the 1 temperature of the
body, 2 disease and time of it, 3 custom.

2 short, 3 mean,
5 the differences are generally two, i. the 1 moderate, whose effects are
showed in my golden key.
2 immoderate,
6 and watch the utilities, these two being 1 fitly used, comfort much, 2
moderately used, they 1 refresh 1 the memory and all the senses 2 chiefly the 1
spirits, 2 animal faculty.

2 quicken and refresh the spirits, 3 help digestion, expel excrements, etc.

7 or watch the Hurts of either of these abused as immoderate, 1 watch 1 makes
giddy brains, 2 ingenders rheum, 3 postmes, 4 troubles the spirits, 5 causes
rawnesse and crudities, 6 idle brains and idiots, etc.
2 sleep 1 dulleth the senses, 2 cause much superfluous excrements, 3 makes
gross spirits in 1 old folks, 2 children,
4 it retains excrements, 5 it fills the brains with crudities.

Look more of these in my Golden Key.

Of Exercise and Idleness, i. moving and rest.
5 Moving and rest. 1 Exercise, i. moving, 1 is either of the 1 body, or both.
2 mind,
2 in it consider generally these two, i. the 1 Differences being generally
two, i. 1 moderate, i neither too 1 much, 2 little.
2 immoderate, i. 1 vehement, 2 excessively.

2 effects, i. the 1 moderate, do 1 stir up natural heat, 2 quicken the
spirits, 3 open the pores, 4 wast excrements of the third digestion, 5 make the
1 body, strong,
2 spirits, 3 senses,
6 comfort all the members, 7 profit nature much.
2 immoderate do 1 hurt the body and parts, 2 wast the body and spirits,
3 dry 4 consume 5 weary 6 overthrow natures actions.



2 Idleness and rest the 1 Differences be two, i. 1 moderate, not excess, 2
immoderate and excess.
2 Effects i. the 1 moderat do 1 comfort nature.
2 refresh 3 maintain health, 1 senses, 2 body and parts,
4 fortify and strengthen all the
2 excess 1 dulleth the 1 mind, 2 senses, 3 principal instruments,
2 causes 1 great 1 cruditi 1 humors, 2 excrem.
2 plenty of evil 3 and cold sicknesses,
2 infinite infirmities.
3 hasteneth old age, 4 causes deformity.




Affections of the mind are generally of two sorts.
6 Affections of the mind are generally two, i. 1 Content, 1 as in 1 hope, 1
effects these 1 dilate the heart and arteries, 2 bring out the 1 vital
spirits, 2 natural heat.
3 do comfort and strengthen all the parts of the body and mind, in all their
actions.
2 differences are generally two, i. 1 moderate, which do 1 comfort, 2 hurt

2 imoderate, body and mind.

2 joy, 3 love, 4 mirth, etc.
2 wherein consider their
2 Discontent, 1 as in 1 anger, 2 hatred, 3 fear for things to come, 4 care
for things past, 5 sorrow, 6 grief of mind, etc.
2 whose effects are, i. 1 that diverteth the vital heat and spirits into the
center of the heart, and thereby consumes and dries the 1 vital spirits, 2
body, and causes leanenesse
2 these are the 1 fore runners of body and mind
2 destroyers 3 overthrowers 4 murderers
3 hastners of old age, death, by extinguishing and drying, or consuming vital
heat and moisture.

4 observe more of these six things called res non naturales, in my book
called the Golden Key.

consider how to use these six things not natural, before said, both to 1
preserve health, which is done by like quality and nature, for every thing is
maintained by its like, and so must the 7 things natural aforesaid be preserved
and maintaind 2 cure diseases, which is done by things of contrary quality, for
every disease being a thing against nature, must be cured by its contrary.


Of the third part called Pathologia, i. res contra natura, i. things against
nature, being generally three, as follows.
3 Part. Things against nature are generally 3. i. the 1 disease being of three
sorts, i. intempary of the similar parts in 1 quantity being either too 1 much,
2 little,
2 quality being either too 1 hot, 2 cold, 3 dry, 4 moist,

2 evil confirmation, this hurts organicks in 1 figure, 2 number, 3 magnitude,
4 situation.
3 solution of unity in both, 1 simple and organick parts.


2 Cause being three, i. 1 primative, i. 1 outward, as 1 wounds, 2 contusions,
3 fractures, 4 dislocations, etc.
2 or by some outward hurt or means.
2 Antecedent, i. of evil humors, etc. being either 1 hereditaries, i. bred in
the mothers womb, by some infection, etc. from the parents, or weakness, or
ill form of some part or member. 2 after the birth by 1 evil diet, disorder,
etc 2 accident or abuse, etc.

3 Conjunct, which appears after the collection of the matter offensive, in
some part or member, and never else, and is ever present in the body or part
offended.
3 Accidents or symptoms 1 are called Insulsum, i. a brag or reproach of the
whole body, or part, says Jerimeus Thriverius. 2 do follow the disease, as
the shadow does the body 3 do offend 3 ways, wherein the actio^ is either 1
abolished 1 hurting the quality either by vehement 1 heat, 2 cold,

2 any accident or cause.
2 changing 1 the natural heat into infla^mation, 2 scabs into lepra, etc.
2 diminished. 3 depraved or wholly lost.



Of the fourth part called Semotica, i. the judging part or judicial part, i.
the Prognosticke part.
This fourth part how to judge of diseases. 1 What 1 they be 1 hot, 2 cold, 3
simple, 4 compound, 5 infectious or not, acute or coronicke.
2 nature they be of either 3 danger, or none like to follow.
4 cure, 5 time of cure long or short. 6 the cause is and to prove that it is
either 1 to be cured, and by what means, 2 not to be cured, and the reason
why.
7 medicines in quality and operation are fit to be used.
2 whose judgments are taken generally of four things, i. of the 1 Disease it
self, 2 Nature of the part, 3 Symptoms or accidents, 4 Excrements voyded by
nature.


Note that these four parts aforesaid, are the contemplative parts of this
thrice worthy faculty of curing, which ought to be first exactly known of any
professor herein, before he enter into the practicke part; for upon these
four pillars, was this worthy art built, and is as necessary to the Artist, as
the head to the body: for as the body that has all other members, and wants
the head, can do nothing for want of knowledge, so it is with the Artist that
wants these four Theoricke parts, which in him are required: for he is ever
ready to mayme, kill, or spoil his unfortunate Patient, that enters under his
hands, sooner than to help or cure him, for lack of the knowledge of these
four parts before mentioned.

Of the Therapeuticke, i. the practicke part, being the second general part of
Surgery, of some called the fifth or curatiue part.
2 Part, Theraputica, or Practica, i. practice. 1 shows the 1 method of
curing diseases.
2 manner or way
2 is triple, that is, 1 diet, i. the right use of the 6 things not natural. 2
Pharmacopia, i. the use of medicine either 1 inwards, 2 outward.
3 manual operation, i. hand working.
Note ever, where one of these three will serve, use no other. All operations
agreeable to the rules of the Theoricke part aforesaid, which the skillful
Artist must follow effectually in his practice.

These unfortunate people that seek to the unskilful for cure of their
infirmities, may well be compared to a foolish man, who having a garment to
make, will not put it to a Tailor to do it, but to a Smith or a Carpenter to
make it, and though it be not his profession, yet peradventure for lucre of
gain, he will undertake to do it, but how well (every man of judgment may
conjecture) but now commonly, most people in these our days, seem to have
more care of making their garments, than the cure of their maladies. To make a
garment, they will look out the best workman, but to cure their infirmities
(though it stand on life or limme to be lost,) they as soon choose a silly
woman, or an ignorant fellow (chiefly if they have gotten a little applause of
the vulgar) before the learned and skillful Artist, and why? because those idle
brained wretches that neither fear the wrath of God, nor make conscience of
their ways, will not only adventure, but make sure promises to cure any that
they take in hand, though it be unpossihle to be cured by the art or skill of
man; for how can they foreshew the danger, that know it not, but to get money?
and some thinking to get praise of others for their work, will undertake any
cure, so bold and impudent are they, yet neither know the disease, nor any
perfect way to cure it, but as the blind man shot the Crow; but the more
unwise those that employ them, as woeful experience daily shows too much, and
were perfect knowledge herein gotten so lightly, as these Ignorants seem, then
vainly were all those great volumes made, and so great study employed thereon.

The end of this worthy art or faculty.
promise no more than you may with a good conscience perform, and consider 1
That health lies not in thy hands to give, therefore promise and perform
only thy painful diligence and industry. 2 There belongs to every cure
generally, these four things, i. the 1 Determination of God, 2 Good industry
and skill of the Artist. 3 Honest act of the Apothecarie, 4 Obedience and good
usage of the Patient.
3 Of these four parts abovesaid, there is but one in thy hands to use, or two
at the most. 4 The end of this worthy art is either to 1 preserve, so far
forth as art and nature may afford.
2 cure,


Four special things to be considered of every man that will practice this
famous worthy art of medicine.
These are the four things to consider, i. 1 First, let your honest manners be
equal to your excellent knowledge, therefore be 1 faithful to your diseased
Patient.
2 true 3 trusty 4 honest, of life and conversation.
5 sober 6 comfortable in words, 7 not deceiveable in deeds, 8 ever serving of
God, love and pray unto him daily for his grace and assistance, and consider
the end wherefore thou art called to use this worthy faculty, it is not only
for thine own gain, as too too many do now abuse it, but you ought with all
diligence to search out the secrets of nature, and endeavor chiefly hereby to
stir up Gods glory, showing his great goodness toward us, by comforting and
curing the sore, sick, and diseased people.
2 Before you take charge, foresee these six things, i. whether it be 1 honest
before God and man, 2 profitable to the Patient, 3 easy to be done, and the
reasons how and why it may, or may not be done.
4 hard 5 possible, 6 impossible
3 to admonish and urge the Patient to observe the three conditions of a
Patient, i. to 1 hope with assurance, 2 obey with diligence, 3 endure with
patience, consider also that medicine was not ordained for disorderly persons,
says Hippocrates.
4 There be three causes why you should refuse the cure, i. where the 1 disease
is uncurable by its own nature, or the party so weak, that he cannot endure fit
remedies. 2 cure of one disease causes a worse. 3 Patient is disobedient, and
will not observe fit order in all things as is requisite for the cure, for
medicine, says Hyppocrates in his Aphorism, was not ordained for disorderly
and disobedient persons.


Brief instructions for the Artist to consider, being called to a Patient,
both generally and particularly.
First when thou see the Patient, consider well 1 generally two things, i.
what is 1 done, 2 to be done.
2 particularly these eight things, i. to know perfectly the 1 disease whether
it be either a 1 tumor against nature, 2 wound, 3 ulcer, 4 fracture, 5
dislocation, etc.
2 kind, i. whether 1 simple, 2 compound.
3 Differences wherein they differ the one from the other. 4 causes. i. whether
1 primitive, 2 antecedent, 3 conjunct.
5 Signs, 1 general, 2 particular.
6 Prognostication what is like to follow, i. 7 Accidents that follow the
disease as the shadow does the body. 8 cure, in which consider the 1
perspectation, i. 1 what must be done first, and so to proceed, s. A. 2 to
foresee what may cross your cure, and how to prevent it.
2 intentions fit to use in 1 diet, 2 preperation of the matter, 3 evacuation,
4 corroboration, 5 preventing or removing of accidents, 6 cure at all times, 7
manual operation.




Of Tumors in general being but three.
Tumors in general be three, i. 1 according to nature, as the 1 balls of the
cheek, 2 brawnes of the 1 arms, 2 legs, etc.
3 muscles, etc.
2 Above nature which 1 causes deformity only, 2 hurts not the action, use,
nor office of the member, but can do things without let or hinderance.
3 against nature, are generally three, i. 1 Humoralis being generally two, i.
1 simple be generally two, i. 1 hot being two, 1 Phlegmon, of blood, 2
Erisypilas, of choler.
2 cold, being 2, 1 Oedema, of phlegm, 2 Scirrus, of melancholy.

2 Compound of many humors mixed together, being generally two, 1 equal when 1
when all four humors be equally mixed, 2 two are equally mixed,
2 unequal, as two parts of one, and but one part of another.

2 Flatuosus, i. a windy tumor of spirits or vapors, as are 1 Timpanites, 2
Priapismus, 3 Hernia Ventosa, etc.
3 Varicosus is sometimes of 1 Spirits, 2 humors, 3 both spirits and humors.



Now of the several branches that spring of the tumors aforesaid.
From 1 Phlegmon springs these ten branches following, i. 1 Phygithlon, i.
Emunctory tumors inflamed, 2 Bubo, tumor of the groyne inflamed, 3 Phyma, a hot
push, as a Fungus, 4 Fornuculus, a felon or whitflowe, 5 Antrax, a Carbuncle, 6
Gargareon, uvula inflamed, 7 Paristhma, Tonsilla inflamed, 8 Anurisma, an
artery delated, 9 Gangrena, an inflammation not mortified, 10 Sphacelus,
mortification confirmed.
2 Erisypelas, springs these 5 branches following, i. 1 Herps 1 Miliaris, i.
pustles that eat.
2 Excedence, 3 Formica,
2 Phlictene, blisters, 3 Epinyctides, blew pustles, 4 Hydrea, pustles, i.
night galls, 5 Dracunculus, crimson veins.
3 Oedema, whose branches are nine, as follows, i. 1 Atheroma, a soft tumor
of the head, etc. with matter like oatmeale or pap, without pain. 2 Steatoma,
with matter like grease, with hardness, i. Napta, 3 Meliceris, i. great softened,
with gravelly hard matter, 4 Hydrocele, Hernia aquosa, or humoralis, 5 Ascites,
a hot dropsy, 6 Leucophlegmata, a cold dropsy, 7 Chyradis, Serophulus, the
Kings evil, 8 Bronchocele, i. Bocium, a great tumor about the throat, 9
Hydrocephalea, a watery tumor in a childs head.
4 Scirrhus, whose branches are ten, as follows, i. 1 Cancer, i. an unequal
1 Occultus with 1 out ulceration,
2 an

2 Vlceratus
2 Elephantiasis lepra, i. an universal Cancer, 3 Psora, dry scabs, itch, and
is not lepra. 4 Enchymoma, contusions, i. black and blew, 5 Varices, swollen
veins, 6 Sarcocele, Hernia Carnosa, flesh growing to the testicle, 7 Polypus,
spungy flesh growing in the nose, 8 Verruca, warts, 1 Acrochordonis, hangs by a
thread, 2 Myrmeciae, broad, allow, sharp, above,
9 Cornua, Corus and hard 1 feet, with labor.
2 hands,
Callus on
10 Calbo,
5 Flatus as is before mentioned with many more. 6 Varicosus, whose branches
are fourteen, i. as 1 Vitilig, i. morphew, 2 Exanthemata, i small pox or
measels, 3 Parotides, tumors behind the ears, 4 Mentagra, i. scabs on the
chin, 5 the 5 rupturs 5 Entercole omentum, i. the carle falls down into Serotum.
6 Epilocele, the testicle 7 Enteroepiplocele, when both 8 Bubonocele, a tumor
of the flank, 9 Exomphalos, a tumor of the navell,

6 7 8 9 10 Arthritis, all gouts, 11 Chiragra, hand gout, 12 Sciatica, huckel
bone gout, 13 Genugra, knee gout, 14 Podagra, feet gout, etc.


Of Wounds.
A wound is solution of unity new, bloody without matter or putrefaction,
whose difference is generally taken of three things, i* of the 1 nature of the
parthurt being either 1 simple i. in parts, 1 soft in the 1 flesh, 2 fat, etc.
2 hard, i. in 1 bones, 2 joints, etc.
3 mean, as 1 veins, 2 arteries, 3 tendons, etc.

2 organicks which are three, i. 1 principals, i. the 1 brain, 2 heart, 3
liver, 4 testicles,
2 servants to these principals are 1 veins, 2 arteries, 3 nerves, 4 vessels
spermaticke
3 proper to themselves, as 1 belly, 2 kidneys, 3 matrix, etc.


2 the wound it self is either 1 simple without and healed by the first
intention, i. co^glutination, 1 loss of substance, 2 accident,

2 compound 1 with accidents, as 1 lost substance, 2 contusion, 3 dolor, 4
tumor, 5 inflammation, 6 convulsion, etc.
2 requires intentions to cure it.

3 differences are diverse, some are 1 great, 2 little, 3 easy to cure, 4
dangerous, 5 mortal, etc.
the utilities by the perfect knowledge of these above said things, we have
four special utilities, for thereof is taken the 1 Prognostication, 2
intentions curative, 3 invention of fit medicine 4 perfect manner of applying
of medicines most fit.


Of Ulcers.
An Ulcer is solution of unity, with matter differing in substance, and every
Ulcer is either 1 simple without accide^ts whose names and differences are
taken of five things generally, either of the 1 disease being either 1 simple,
2 compound.
2 cause being either 1 primitive, 2 antecedent, 3 conjunct,
3 kinds which are diverse, as 1 plain, 2 hollow, 3 fistulous, 4 filthy, 5
sanious, 6 virulent, 7 cancrous, 8 corrosive, 9 putrifactive, etc.
4 Sanies either 1 good, 2 evil,
5 accidents as with 1 dolor, 2 tumor, 3 inflammation, 4 induration, 5
Callus, 6 evil flesh, 7 hard lips, 8 distemper, 9 varices, 10 worms, 11
bones corrupted, etc.


2 compound, without accide^ts

Of Fractures.
Every Fracture of the bone is either 1 simple without any other malady, and
are generally three, either it is 1 rift, that cleaves the bone long wise, 2
overthwart, broken short off, 3 oblique, whose sharp ends hurts the flesh, and
causes dolor, etc.
2 compound, either with 1 a disease, as with 1 a wound, 2 contusion, 3
gangrena, 4 a mortifying tumor, etc.
2 accidents, as with 1 dolor, 2 itch, 3 inflammation, 4 tumor, 5 hard
legature, etc.

1 old folks because they be 1 hard, and 2 dry,
2 choleric persons 3 the ribs with 1 inflammation, 2 spitting of blood,
4 joints and heads of the bones, 5 the scull, how little soever be dangerous,
6 which 6 be many broken pieces, 7 is a wound because of the binding,
7 8 bones with much marrow.
1 hard to cure, are these in 2 easier and less dangerous to cure, are all
simple fractures of the 1 ribs, 1 arms, 2 legs, 3 fingers, etc.
2 middle of the bones of the 3 younger, soft, and moist persons.
3 join in 1 head in 35 days,
45 40 16 20

2 thigh in 3 legs in
1 the 3 arms 4 nose in 5 ribs in
6 jaws 7 shoulder 8 cannell 9 hands 10 feet 11 hanch and point of the
shoulders in forty days, 2 al according to the nature of the 1 bone, 2 age, 3
air or region, 4 time, constit. etc.

Consider Fractures
Of Dislocations.
Every dislocation is either 1 simple, and is either 1 perfect, i. an absolute
Dislocation. 2 imperfect, i. a luxation not altogether out, i. either the 1
wrench is 1 forwards, 2 backwards, 3 side ways.
2 ligaments, be over stretched or broken.
3 tendons, 4 n^^es,

2 compound, and is either 1 perfect, then is the bone displaced either with 1
Dolor, 2 Tumor, 3 Wound, 4 Fracture, 5 Contusion, 6 Induration, etc.

2 imperfect


Now having briefly discoursed both of the Theoricke and practicke parts of
Surgery, I will briefly touch some other needful things for the Artist not
only to know, but also to be very expert in the use thereof.
The three operations of the Surgion aforesaid, i. to 1 separate things
hurtful. in these operations, consider these six things, i. to work 1
safely, without hurt, 2 speedily, not detracting time, 3 easily, with little
pain as may be. 4 Doing as you would be done to in the like case. 5 for
competent reward, and not only for lucre, ungodly. 6 not warranting the cure,
but fly uncurable things as much as may be; promise no more than art may
perform, and perform that faithfully.

2 join things divided, 3 reduce things displaced
To perform these abovesaid three things the better, he must know the perfect
manner and exact ways to accomplish his intent, both in 1 things 1 medicinal,
2 manual as follow.
2 stitching of wounds, 3 fit ligature or rollings. 4 making of 1 tents, 2
splints, 3 stupes, 4 bolsters, etc.

Instruments and means in general which be in common use to work by manual
operation to accomplish this great work in Surgery, are 11. as 1 stitches are
generally three, as 1 conglutinate, or incarnative are five in particular*
2 compressive, 3 reservative.
2 Tents, whose sundry sorts are eight. 3 Bolsters, whose sundry sorts are
six. 4 ligatures be three sorts, i. 1 conglutinate or incarnative, 2
expulsive, 3 retentive.
5 bleeding artificial be generally four, as 1 Phlebotomy to open a vein, 2
Arteriatonica to open an artery, 3 Ventose with scarification, 4 Sansugium or
horseleaches applied.
6 Cetous, 1 active by fire, 2 potentiall by burning medicines.
7 Cauteries are two, i. 8 Bathes are generally two, i. 1 natural, 2
artificial.
9 Frications are three sorts, i. 1 soft, 2 hard, 3 mean.
10 Sweats are generally of two sorts, i. 1 natural, 2 artificial.
11 To do all the operations with all its instruments, the 1 medicinals are
generally 11. i. 1 Anodines, 2 Repercussives, 3 Attractives, 4 Resolutives, 5
Mollificatives, 6 Suppuratives, 7 Mundificatives, 8 Incarnatives, 9
Conglutinatives, 10 Corosives, 11 Cicatrizatives.
2 manuals, under which is comprehended the use of his 1 Instruments in
general, s. A. handy work, i. to 1 reduce 1 fractures, 2 dislocations.
2 separate things hurtful, 3 join things divided, 4 use frications, etc.




Now to begin with stitches, tents, bolsters, etc. and so to proceed in order
as they are before mentioned, a brief touch of them all as follows.
Stitches in general are of three sorts, so named by their effects, as 1
Conglutinative, and is of five sorts, i. the 1 first, ordinary in wounds, thus,
2 secondly, with the Needle left in the place, as in stitching the hareshorne
lip, etc. with the thread wound about the needle, thus, 3 thirdly, with quils
or leather, etc. 4 fourthly with hooks, 5 fifthly, the dry stitch.
2 compressive is 1 that stitch which Skinners use, 2 used to 1 stop great
flux of blood, 2 wounds of the 1 guts, 2 panicles, etc.


3 Reservative, i. 1 as other stitching, but not drawn so straight together as
the other. 2 good in wounds, 1 rend, 2 torn, 3 ruptured, etc.

Also there be other stitchings wherein I refer you to the beholding of the
cunning doer of them, with many of the abovesaid also. consider in stitches
these thrce things, i. the 1 Diverse sorts of them, 2 Diverse manner of their
doing, 3 utility which is either to 1 unite, 2 retain.



Of tents, when, how, and to what end they are used, whereof they are made, and
of their diverse forms.
Tents, of which consider generally these four, i. they 1 serve to eight
sundry uses, i. to wounds, 1 Deep, to enlarge and mundifie, 2 needful to keep
open, 3 with filthy matter, altered by the air, etc. 4 contused, 5 bitten, 6
rend, 7 venomous, 8 8 sores where the bone must be handled, 9 fistulaes, 10
sores that must be kept open.
9 10 and
2 are made some of 1 soft old linen cloth, 2 tow, cotton, flax, wool, etc.
3 gold, hollow,
4 silver, 5 lead, 6 sponge, 7 eldern pith, 8 gention roots, etc.
3 are of diverse forms, i. 1 some are 1 long, as need requires.
2 short, 3 big, 4 little, 5 hollow, 6 massive,
2 all are taper wixt, the better to enter in.
4 are applied sometimes 1 dry, 1 unguents, 2 waters, 3 powders, etc.
2 dipped in
consider of tents generally these four things, i. their 1 substance whereof
they are made, 2 forms, 3 manner of application, 4 sundry uses as abovesaid,
being eight.


Of Bolsters or Plumatioles.
Bolsters they are made either of 1 flax or tow, 2 cotton, 3 wool, 4 fine
linen 1 cloth, 2 rags,
5 sponge.
2 for the most part of six sorts, which take their names of their uses, as
bolsters, 1 retentive to stop blood, 2 conglutinative, or incarnative, 3
expulsive, 4 restrictive, 5 confortative. 6 conservative.
3 applied, some, 1 wet, 2 dry*
4 some to 1 compresse the member divided, 2 nourish natural heat,
3 conserve 4 keep the member from pain of rolling, etc.
Consider in bolsters these four things, i. their 1 substance, 2 six sorts, 3
manner of application, 4 sundry utilities.


Of Ligatures or Roulings.
Lygatures or Roulings are of three sorts, i. 1 Conglutinative or Incarnative,
used in 1 green wounds, 2 fractures, etc.
2 Expulsive used in hollow 1 Apostomes, 2 Wounds, 3 Old ulcers, 4 Fistulaes,
etc.
3 Retentive, being common, used only to keep on medicines, being applied,
etc. herein consider six things, i. the 1 substance 1 woollen, 2 linen, etc.
2 length, 3 breadth, 4 sort which is best for your purpose, 5 manner of doing
it, 6 utilities, etc.


Of bleeding, and the manner thereof in general.
Blood is evacuated generally three ways, i. either by 1 nature, as by 1
Menstrua, 2 Hemoroyds.
2 Art, done either by 1 Phlebotomy, i opening a vein, 2 Arteriatomia, i.
opening an artery, 3 Ventose, with scarification, 4 Leaches or bloud-suckers
applied.
3 Accident, as by eruption by 1 nose bleeding, 2 vomit, of blood.
3 spitting, 4 Dissenterie, or bloody flixe, 5 pissing of blood, 6 Varices, 7
Anurisma, or ruption of an artery, 8 Erosion in ulcers, etc. 9 Wounds, 10
Diverse other casual means.
Note that we bleed either by 1 Evacuation, i. to bleed abundantly, 2
Eventation, when humors boil and bubble in the veins by evil quality, and
done by little at once to vent the vapors. 3 Revulsion, to divert or pluck
back, or opposite the humor to the opposite part in full bodies, etc. 4
Derivation, derive the matter from one part to another, flowing before it be
fully settled or congealed, as in Plurisie, etc.


Of Phlebotomy, with diverse observations to it belonging, it is an artificial
incision of veins.
The Artist that must be admitted to let blood, must 1 1 sharp sighted, 2
steady, strong, and nimble handed, 1 good 1 launcets, 2 flemes, etc. 3
ligatures.
2 bands, 3 cotton, i. lint, 4 bolsters, 5 restrictives to stop blood, etc.
3 much used to this operation, 4 furnished with things necessary, as
2 3 be 4 5 5 number of veins usually opened, which are thirty nine, i. in the
1 head 15 2 arms 6 3 hands 6 4 fundament 4 5 legs 8
6 true place of the veins, that he mistake not. 7 right way to open them,
which differ according to the 1 place, 1 little, 2 great, 3 deep or aparent.
2 veins, either 3 blood, either
8 manner how to do it, i. 1 first, to make 1 frication, 2 ligature*

2 secondly, 3 thirdly, the vein being found stir it with your thumb or
finger, that it slip not, then open it, s. A. 4 fourthly, after the evacuation,
1 remove your ligature, 2 close with wound. 3 apply your lint and bolst. 4 then
bind it up, s. Ar.


2 know perfectly the 6 7 8 9 never let blood without the counsel of the
learned Physician, and do it as he appoints, i. 1 open the right vein, 2
draw the just quantity of blood, if possible.
10 observe these three orders very diligently, what is to be done, 1 before,
bleeding.
2 at the present time of 3 after


Of him that gives counsel to let blood.
The Artist that gives counsel to let blood, must consider that it is done
with an intent 1 generally either to 1 preserve health, in which he must
consider in all persons, these eight things following, i. as
2 remove diseases,
2 particularly either to 1 Evacuate, 2 Draw out, 3 Restrain, 4 Alter, 5
Disburthen nature,

The 1 Age, if to 1 preserve, do it not to 1 children before fourteen years
old,
2 old folks after seventy
2 remove diseases, do it to all ages, s. A.
2 Strength, if 1 strong, bleed largely, 2 weak, bleed more sparingly,
3 Habitude if 1 good, with great veins, bleed largely, 2 ill, bleed less.
4 Country, if 1 hot, bleed the 1 more, 2 less.

2 cold,
5 time, if to 1 preserve, do it in the Spring, chiefly in the morning, 2 cure
sickness, do it at all times when need is, s. A.
6 Custom, being done either to 1 prevent some disease, 2 avoid excrements
that hinder health, as 1 menstrua, 2 Hemoroyds, etc.

7 Signs and rules of astronomy, are of some 1 observed, 2 omitted chiefly of
the most learned, 3 nay, of all in extremity neglected.
8 orders to be observed are generally three, as how to use the Patient. 1
before, bleeding, follows
2 at the present time, 3 after


What to do before bleeding.
Before bleeding, consider generally these eight things, i. 1 first, who may 1
bleed, 2 not bleed.
2 why we bleed, it is for two causes, either to 1 preserve health, and prevent
sickness 2 cure diseases.
3 four ways to bleed, it is done either by 1 evacuation, to empty 1 much, 2
little, 3 and draw back, 4 near hand.

2 eventation, 3 revultion, 4 derivation,
4 four things put back bleeding for a time, till they be remedied, 1
cruditie in the 1 stomach, 2 veins.
2 Compaction of filthy humors, hurtful in any part, 3 Costivenesse with
dried excrements, 4 weakness of the mouth of the stomach.
5 that Egestion be voyded before bleeding. 6 The strength 1 of the party,
either 1 strong, 2 weak.
2 to consider thereby the quantity fit to draw.
7 The veins if it 1 appear not, how to help it, 2 be small, bleed after
meat, s. A.
1 Also have all needful things for your use, ready in place before you begin.

What is required at the present time of bleeding, there is required in the
Artist and Patient, generally two things.
At the present time of bleeding, there is required in the 1 Artist in
general, these six things, i. to 1 have clear and perfect 1 sight, 1 day, 2
candle,
2 light either by
2 prepare the member, 1 first, by friction, 2 secondly, by ligature, 3
thirdly, to stay the vein that it slip not, 4 fourthly, to open it, s. A.
3 consider which is the best way of the three to open it, either 1 long wise,
2 overthwart, 3 oblique.
4 know 4 when to make the orifice, 1 large, or 2 small.
5 6 how to 5 govern the patient in time of bleeding.
6 redress any accidents.

5 6
2 Patient in general, these three things, as 1 quietness both of 1 body, and
2 mind.
2 willing obedience, 3 bold and stout of courage, void of fear.


After bleeding.
After bleeding there is required in the 1 Artist these five things, i. to 1
remove the ligature. 2 close the wound, and bind it up, s. A. 3 place the
member fittest from bleeding, etc. 4 Instruct the Patient how to govern
himself in 1 Diet, 2 Exercise, 3 Sleep, 4 Venus acts, etc.
5 discern and judge of the blood, what and how it is by the 1 color, 2
substance, 3 contents, 4 taste, etc.

2 Patient diligently to obey, and not to omit the precepts of the cunning
Artist, lest he repent his folly too late, saying had I wist.

Of Arteriatomia or opening of an Artery.
This is an artificial opening of the artery, used chiefly but in two places,
i. 1 on the temples, whose 1 manner of opening is 1 first, shave the place, 2
secondly, rub the place with a napkin, etc. 3 thirdly, make small incision, 4
fourthly, having drawn sufficient, stop it. 5 apply either 1 a plaster of
Masticke, 2 half a Bean slit in two
6 then bind it fast. 7 some cut 1 the artery, through
2 not the artery

2 utilities are for 1 great flux of Catars to the 1 eyes, 2 breast, etc.
2 sickness of the head caused of 1 hot flux inveterate, 2 vaporous spirits
contained in those arteries.
3 long dolor of the sides. 4 all dolours that proceed of a hot pituitous
substance. 5 swimming of the head,
6 giddiness 7 long fluxion of the eyes.




Of Ventosing or Boxing.
Ventoses are applied in two sorts, either with 1 scarification, in these
consider these eight things, i. 1 what it is, 2 for what intent you do it. 3
which sort is best to use for your purpose, either with scarification or
without. 5 what places are fittest to apply them, both general and particular.
6 requisite 6 before the application, 7 the manner how to apply them, 8 after
the application.

7 8

2 out scarification, Of the differences between 1 Phlebotomy draws blood
deeper than 1 boxing, 2 bloudsuckers.
2 Ventoses purge more the 1 thin blood than the thick, 2 utter parts than the
inner parts.
3 Leaches or bloud-suckers draw deeper then Ventoses.

we apply Ventoses with 1 scarification, 1 to the 1 neck behind near the
head, for diseases of the 1 face, 2 head, 3 eyes, 4 palsy, etc.
2 mids of the shoulders in 1 coughes, 2 difficulty of breath.
3 sides of the neck and chin, in defects of the 1 mouth, 2 gummes, 3 teeth,
etc.
4 shoulders for the 1 breast, 2 shoulders, 3 plurifie, etc.
5 reins, for apostoms of the 1 reins, 2 liver, etc.
6 arms 1 pained 1 stead of bloodletting, 2 young and old.
2 used in
7 Os sacrum for 1 fistulaes, 2 Hemoroydes.
8 thighs, good in 1 strangurie 1 matrixe, 2 reins, 3 bladder, etc.
2 ache of the

9 legs, 10 ancles,
2 it is 1 somewhat painful 1 divert 2 evacuate
2 done either to

2 out scarification to the 1 mould of the head to 1 stay rheumes, 2 draw up
the uvula.
2 Hypoconders to divert bleeding at the nose: if the right nostrill bleed,
apply it on the liver, if the left, on the spleen, so in all other parts:
Galen. 3 beginning of the nerves in the poule for Palsy. 4 parts under the
Paps to divert 1 menstrua, 2 livers ventositie.
5 ribs to reduce them. 6 Navell for the 1 matrix fallen, 2 wind collicke, 3
dolor after purgation.
7 Flanks, for ventositie of the spleen. 8 Vritories to draw down the stone
and gravel into the bladder. 9 Ears to draw out 1 a thing contained therein,
2 venim or poison, 3 matter, etc.

10 orifice of ulcers 11 tumors to draw matter that lies deep to the utter
parts, etc. 12 neck in squinsie, etc. 13 biting of venomous 1 beasts, 2
worms, etc.



Things to be considered before you apply Ventoses.
Before you apply them, consider these six things, i. 1 the time of the 1
Moon, do it 1 in the full, 2 not in the wane,
2 day is best about 2 or 3 after noone, 3 being of the glasses, etc. on the
place is half an hour.
2 in plethoric bodies do it with scarification. 3 if the blood be 1 thick, 1
scarifie the deeper, 2 and gross, foment the place with hot water, and rub
it well with a hot cloth.
2 thin, 1 scarifie lightly, 2 rub the place with the hand first.

4 If you will scarifie, then apply first, ever a dry Ventose, and then
scarifie, and then set on the Ventose again, s. A. 5 Rub well the place first
all about with your hand very well to disperse the blood and humors, before
you apply your Ventose. 6 Apply your Ventose an hour or two after the bath,
and never in the bath.

The manner of applying Ventoses.
If they be of 1 Horn, etc. to suck, prepare the place, and apply them
without scarification, then suck them with your mouth. 2 Glass, etc. put wax
or some sticking plaster within, in the bottom, then put in your tow that it
stick fast to it, then fire the tow with a candle, and clap the mouth of the
glass close on the place, s. A. 3 any sort, 1 draw sufficient, 2 remove them
often if need be, and new scarifie it, and wipe it dry, and then apply it
again. 3 if it bleed not well after the first scarification, then rub the
place with the mouth of the glass, or thryp it with your nail, and garse it
anew, and set on the glass again. 4 Let it remain a reasonable time to draw
out sufficient, if not at one time, reiterate it two or three times, and ever
scarifie it new. If wind or evil blood, gross and thick do it, after that
dry the place scarified with a soft cloth, and then anoint the place after the
use of the Ventose with oil of Roses, fresh Butter, etc.


After the ventosing is finished.
After ventosing, consider these four things, 1 dry the place either with a
soft 1 cloth, 2 sponge.
2 next, anoint the place either with 1 oil of roses, 2 fresh butter, etc.
3 he may sleep within an hour after it. 4 if done with scarification,
govern them as those let blood.
Ventoses 1 must not be set on 1 women's breasts lest they enter too deep.
2 other soft places
2 if they will stick fast being applied, foment the place. 3 must not be kept
on long, chiefly 1 about the principal parts or members, 2 behind the 1
neck, 2 shoulders,
on the right Hypoconder, etc.


Of application of Horseleaches.
In the use of these consider 1 make good choice of your worms, some be 1
good, and are 1 found in 1 clear waters, 2 ponds with sandy ground or gravel.
2 with little heads and small bodies, 3 round red bellied, 4 rayed on the
back like threeds of gold, 5 kept a day or two in clean water to 1 cleanse
them, 2 draw the better.
6 by some kept a year in a glass, and change the water once in 10 days,
with crumbs of bread.
2 malign or venomous, i. 1 bred in filthy pooles with carrion, etc. 2 with
great heads, 3 greenish color with blew rays on the back, with black
bodies. 4 these cause 1 tumors venomous, 2 inflammations, 3 ulcers.
5 Messalinus dyed by putting one on his knee.

2 these are used where ventoses cannot, as on the 1 lips, 6 legs, 10 old
ulcers, 11 apost. 11 venomous, 12 emunctory,

12 13 places bare of flesh.
7 fundament, 8 matrix mouth 9 parts empty of flesh,
2 nose, 3 groyne 4 fingers 5 toes,
3 Diseases wherein they are most used, i. 1 morphew, 2 ring worms, 3 great
itch in any part, its fitter then scarification, 4 set to the hemeroyds, they
evacuate from all the members, and excellent for melancholy.
4 how to apply them 1 first, let the place be very clean, else they will not
bite, 2 then rub the part till it wax red, 3 then apply them, hold it near
the head with a cloth, then prick the place that it bleed, or put a drop of
blood on the place, and then put the head of the Leach to it.
5 how to 1 make him draw 1 much 1 cut off his tail, 2 or strip out the blood
with your fingers,
2 little, leave him whole, and being full, will fall of himself,
2 remove him, put on his head either 1 salt, 2 vinegar, 3 sinders or ashes,
separate him with a hair.

6 being fallen, if he bleed too much, apply either 1 lynt, 2 brent cloth, 3 a
cloth wet in cold water and vinegar, 4 Hysop stamped, etc.


Of Cetous and the use of them, etc.
Cetons, in it consider in general six things, i. 1 Quid, it is usually a
little cord either of 1 hair, 2 thread, 3 silk, 4 cloth, 5 woollen yarne,
etc.
2 the intent why we use them is either to 1 divert fluxes, 2 draw out humors,
etc.
3 manner of applying is 1 with fit Instruments, 2 either with 1 fire much used
in old time, 2 out fire, now most in use.

4 the places commonly of their application, are generally four, i. the 1 neck
behind, between the first and second vertibers to divert and draw 1 fluxion, 1
head, 2 eyes, 3 gummes, 4 jaws, 5 loins, 6 back, 7 hanches, 8 joints,
2 cattars, etc. from the 3 rheums that fall from the head to the 1 stomach, 2
lungs, etc.

2 Navell swollen with watery humors, etc. 3 cods or scrotum for 1 watery
humors, 2 Hernia aquosa, etc.
4 wounds 1 through the 1 legs, 2 thighs, 3 arms, etc.
2 the better to purge the matter.

5 the utilities are to 1 revell or turn a flux to the contrary part, 2
derive or draw from the place conjunct, 3 evacuate, 4 intercept, prevent or
stop a flux, that it fall not to a place to hurt.
6 the order to govern him after it is done, i. 1 first dress it presently
with a disgestive two or three days, and so proceed, s A. to other intentio^s,
2 secondly, put in a new Ceton when need is, 3 thirdly, after the Ceton is
taken away, purge the Patient, and so do before you apply any.


Of Cauteries in general with their use, etc.
Cauteries in general are of two sorts, i. 1 Actual done by metal in
instruments, in the applying of which, consider generally three things, i. what
to do 1 before, in which consider 1 the differences, 2 which sort is best for
your purpose, 3 their effects, 4 how they further your intent, 5 who is fit
thereto. the 6 complexion of the body, 7 nature of the part, 8 disease, and how
it may benefit, 9 time of application, 10 places usual thereto.

2 at the time present, i. to 1 to comfort the Patient with good words, 2 know
how to apply the cauteries 3 prepare the place, f. A. 4 to be careful in doing
it, and do it with good consideration, 5 do it boldly and effectually, not
regarding the clamor or cry of the Patient, but do what must be done, yet be
not butcherly, 6 bind him fast if need be.
3 after it is done, consider how to 1 Dress the place, 2 continue the issue,
and how long, 3 remove the accidents, and what they be that usually happens
thereby.


2 Potentiall done by burning medicines applied,

Of the actual Cauteries.
In actual cauteries consider these five things in general, i. 1 it is very
profitable in many diseases. 2 its made 1 either of 1 gold, 2 silver, 3 iron, 4
steel, 5 lead, etc.
2 in diverse forms, as the work and place requires.
3 places to apply them are diverse, i. 1 to the coronal future 1 at the end of
the sagitall future, 2 for 1 megrim, 2 other pains of the head, 3 to draw
gross vapors from the brain, 4 Epilepsia to breath out venomous vapors at
the part.

2 as cause is to 1 revell, 2 derive, 3 intercept, 4 evacuate.

4 the utilities it is 1 without venomous quality, more 1 healthful, 2 suddenly
done 3 sure operation.
2 enemy to all 1 venime, 2 corruption,
3 free from causing any accident, 4 to preserve the part from putrefaction, 5
wonderful to consume a malign quality hid in the body or member, applied to
the place grieved 6 excellent to 6 correct a cold weak distemper, 7 consume
and dry superfluous moisture,
8 good in 1 tooth ach, 2 ears payned, 3 squinsie, 1 almonds, 2 columella,
4 inflammation of the 5 rheums 6 polipus 7 aegilops 8 ulcers corosive maling
all these following in 9 sciatica, 10 gangrens, 11 great flux of blood, 12
mortification, 13 carbuncles malign
14 bubons 15 corrupt bones to sep. 16 venomous bitings, etc

5 after removing of them, apply a fit disgestive to remove the asker, and then
use other things, s. A.

Of the potentiall Cauteries.
The potentiall Cauterie is 1 Medicines which by extreme heat do burn the
part like fire, 2 of these be diverse kinds both 1 simple, 2 compound, 3
natural, 4 attificiall.

2 Carefully to be considered the nature and temperature of the 1 person that
its applied to, if 1 strong and rude, use strong 2 delicate and tender use
weaker medicines.

3 lean 4 nervous, 5 tendous, 6 to the heads of Muscles, 2 great 1 Veins. 2
Arteries.
3 body repleat, then first bleed, purge, etc.



2 place
3 Applied to diverse parts for diverse causes, i. 1 chiefly to the 1 Head, 2
Arms, 3 Legs, etc.
2 To the head in 4 places, the hair first shaven 1 oftenest to the forehead
where the sagital and coronal Isutures meet, it must penitrate to the bone,
good for Flux of the Eyes, Megrum, Headache, Epilence, Difficult breathing,
Obthalmia, Red face, Tooth- ach.
Ears Squinsie, Vuula, fallen.
Almons,
2 also 2 behind the ears on each side of the head.
3 above
3 at the end of the Suture Lamdoyd, not on the Muscle Cratophit, to be sure
hold your finger on the place, and cause him to open and shut his mouth, to and
fro, so may you perceive the Muscles end, 4 to the neck 1 between the first
and second vertiber, 2 for 1 inveterate flux of the eyes, 2 catters to stop
them from falling to the breast
3 distillations


3 Item, in the inside of the arms about the midst of it near the 1 Veins,
but touch them not.
2 Arteries,
4 on the leg three inches from the knee either in the 1 outside between the
two bones, 2 inside near the Veins.

4 Applied to diverse other parts 1 of the body to issue out matter contained 2
as in 1 vehement dolor, 2 humors malign, 3 vaporous fumes. 4 Emunctories 1
to expel 1 vapors, 2 humors.
2 do it before perfect suppuration*




Of Baths.
Baths are either universal or particularly used and are generally of two
sorts, i. 1 Natural in the use of which consider generally five things i.
their 1 Qualities either 1 hot, 2 cold.
2 Effects as to 1 bind. 2 loose. 3 open the pores. 4 restrain. 5 make thin. 6
heat. 7 cool. 8 dry. 9 moisten. 10 cleanse. 11 evacuate. 12 resolve. 13 appease
dolor, etc.
3 Vtilities, i. as to 1 preserve health. 2 cure diseases.
4 Order, i. the 1 Preparation of the body before. 2 Manner 1 of bathing. 2 to
hot 1 closes the pores. 2 stops excrements. 3 heats the blood.

3 Time 1 to bathe is either 1 in the morning fasting. 2 at 4. afternoon.
2 stay- 1 in it the 1 day half an hour. 2 next one hour or two.
2 ing into long hurts.


5 Hurts being ill used, i. 1 immoderately 1 dries the body
2 weakens
2 go not in with a full stomach it hurts much. 3 also not to dry the head
well after a Bath does very much hurt.


2 Artificial

Of Frications or Frictions.
Frictions in it consider these six things, i. their 1 Definition, it is a
rubing or friction of the utter parts of the body, or part either 1 general on
all the body. 2 a particular part as 1 Head, 2 Arm, 3 Leg, etc.

2 Kinds are three, i. 1 hard. 2 soft. 3 mean.
3 Times 1 it may be done at all times, chiefly in the mornings. 2 are either 1
long. 2 short. 3 mean.

4 Effects it 1 hard and 1 long it 1 fasteneth, constrains, makes the flesh
hard. 2 extenuateth, dissolves, makes revulsion.
2 short it 1 makes the skin red for a time. 2 leaves the flesh moist, and
very little hard.
3 mean, increases and fills with flesh, but hard.
2 soft and 1 long 1 evaporateth and breaths out. 2 diminishes the flesh. 3
opens the pores of the skin. 4 leaves the flesh soft and moistneth.
2 short makes little alteration. 3 mean 1 makes thick 1 soft, 2 foggie. 3
moistish
2 agments and fills with flesh, yet

3 mean and 1 long diminishes and leaves the flesh neither 1 hard. 2 soft.
2 short 1 warmeth a little. 2 leaves the flesh in a mean.
3 bring so in 1 quality agments the flesh neither to 1 hard. 2 soft.

2 quantity


5 manner of doing it 1 either with a 1 warm hand. 2 sponge. 3 course linen
cloth warm, etc.
2 in this order 1 soft and easy till the place become red. 2 begin below and
so ascend upwards.

6 utilities it 1 disperseth 1 humors. 2 spirits. 3 excrements.
2 warmeth and exciteth natural heat. 3 loses and opens the pores of the
skin. 4 mollifieth or hardneth, used accordingly. 5 diverts Fluxes, Rheumes,
etc. 6 canseth free passage of blood and humors in the fleshy parts. 7
prevents or removes 1 Scabs. 2 Itch. 3 Tumors. 4 Cramps. 5 Cold. 6 Dolor of
diverse parts. 7 Discusseth winds and crudities, etc.



All the Applicative Medicines which the Chyrurgion uses, their operations are
generally but eleven as follows.
These are those eleven as 1 Anodines to appease pain are of three sorts done
either by 1 Attractives, 2 Evacuatives, 3 Narcotticks.
3 Repercussives be three sorts done either with things either by 1 cold and
moist, 2 cold and dry, 3 hot and astringent to corroborate.
3 Resolutives are of two sorts, i. 1 Rarificatives, 2 Disgestives.
4 Mollificatives done by strong heat and little 1 Dryness, 2 Moisture.
5 Attractives three sorts done either 1 elementall quality, i. heat and thin
substance, 2 hidden property as Purges work, 3 accident.
6 Suppuratives, i. two sorts done by 1 things hot and moist, 2 accident.
7 Mundificatives they 1 separate out excrements by hidden property
2 draw 3 scour
8 Incarnatives scowre and dry moderately to increase flesh. 9 Conglutinatives
be 1 dryer then 1 Incarnatives. 2 Cicatrizatives.

2 less dry
10 Cicatrizatives be hot and astringent, some 1 proper by nature. 2
Artificial.
11 Corosives are of three sorts, i. 1 Vesicatories, 2 Causticks or ^uptories.
3 Corosives.
More of all these shall follow in order to show more at large particularly.


Of Anodines to appease pains.
These be generally of two sorts, i. 1 Proper and are all that contrary the
cause of pain, which is either 1 distemper of 1 heat, for heat or cold cause
sharp pains, and cause sudden change
2 cold, 3 dry do cause mean pains. 4 moist cause little dolor.
2 solution of unity.
2 all that 1 open, of matter either thick, viscous, windy, vaporous, sharp,
cold, etc.

2 purge, 3 rarifie, disburthen nature 4 digest, 5 attenuate, 6 evacuate,
3 done so that it exceed not above one degree of temperature, of the distemper
that causes the pain in either 1 heat, do all S. A.
2 cold, 3 drith, 4 moisture,
4 used 1 first to contrary the disease, 1 inflammation, 2 fluxion, 3 tumor,
etc.
2 in pains that be not very stubborn or rebellious, to resist either in

2 Improper and are 1 Narcotticks, stupifactive, i. to astonish the sense of
the part. 2 Seldom used before purging in weak parts, or near noble part. 3
Most commonly cold in the fourth degree. 4 Such 1 as stop the passages of the
Animal spirit from the part, and so deprive the sense thereof, 2 as neither
removes the 1 cause do stupifie and be numme the part.
2 pain

5 Done by accident, as by 1 hard legature. 2 compression.
6 Used in bitter pains 1 that resist all other Medicines, 2 sometimes first,
lest the patient perish.
7 Seldom used 1 without addition of 1 Castorium. 2 Mirrh. 3 Saffron, etc.
2 without those correctives for fear lest they 1 extinguish the natural heat
2 cause 1 mortification. 2 blacknes of the part etc.




Herein consider the 1 cause of pain also consider, some Medicines remove the
cause, pain and not the cause. neither 1 cause but stupifie.
2 pain



2 pain it self 3 part pained
Note intolerable pains by 1 inflammation are sooner mitigated by 1 bleeding
then by other 1 Anodines 2 Narcotticks.

2 purging 3 scarifying the part
Dolorsit medicina doloris,

2 ga^grena

Of Repercussives.
Repercussiues be generally of 2 sorts either by 2 Nature being also of two
sorts, either 1 watery, cold and moist without any astriction, and 1 therefore
weak as 1 Purslane, 2 Lettice, 3 Melons, 4 Housleeke, 5 All Narcotticks, etc.
2 Do expel and drive back by cold, etc.
2 Earthy and astringent of which some be 1 cold 1 gross 1 and of earthy
parts, 2 be truly Repercussives.
2 and more effectual mixed with 1 lenitive things, 2 Vinegar in cold gross
matter.

2 Hot and corroborative and keep back Fluxes.
Simple 1 legiture, 2 compression, 3 rolling, 1 bleeding opposite.
2 friction
4 revultion, by 5 ventoses, etc.
Compound 2 Accident without quality as

Consider 1 Well to remove your Medicine before 1 the part wax black, 2 it
extinguisheth natural heat.
2 To respect herein the 1 Complexion of the 1 body. 2 part pained.
2 Medicine to be made fit to the 1 grief, 2 part offended.
3 Nature of the part grieved, for all parts may not endure liker^ percussion.
3 By no means apply repercussives 1 to the 1 Groynes, 2 Arm pits, 2 Glandles
behind the Ears.
2 strong to 1 Women, 2 Children, 3 Eunuchs.
3 on 1 bodies 1 plethorick before purging.
2 full of ill humors
2 make 1 gross but use rather attractives.
2 sharp 3 venomous 4 critical


4 Weak repercussives in great 1 inflammations, as Lettice, etc. avail little.
2 disease,
5 Put no strong repercussive on a small defluxion, for it 1 straightens the
skin, 2 stops the passages, 3 increases the inflammation, 4 often causes 1
Scirrus, 2 Induration, etc.

6 To repel carefully according to the 1 magnitude of the disease. 2 strength
of the patient. 3 nature of the 1 flux, 2 member offended.



Of Resolutives.
Resolutives are of two sorts, i. 1 Rarifactives 1 work by heat and thin
substance they do 1 dry little, 2 open the pores of the Skin.
3 relax 4 attenuate humors, 5 dissipate by evaporation things shut up under
the Skin, and do case the pain as Anodines do.
6 discus
are 1 simple as 1 Sage, 2 Ebulus, 3 Melilot,
2 compound as 1 Dill, 2 Camomill, 3 Lillies, etc.

2 called weak resolutives used in the 1 increase of superficial humors.
2 state
2 matter 1 windy. 2 hot and moist.


2 Digestives. 1 called Diaphoreticks, or relaxes 2 some be 1 simple, as these
and such like, i. 1 Brioni, 2 Galbanum, 3 Thus, 4 Amomacum, etc.
2 compound as 1 Oil of 1 Bay, 2 Tyles, 3 Nardinum.
2 Diapa^ma, 3 Oxycrotium, etc.

3 be hotter 1 then Rarifactives. 2 to divide insensible matter compact. 3
often then Attractives, for often an Attractiue applied to a hard body is
resolutive, but used to some other, it draws from within.
4 Are not used in the increase of Tumors, except Astringents be added, lest
thereby they draw and increase the fluxion. 5 Used 1 only in the declination of
Tumors. 2 where the 1 Skin is thick and hard. 2 Humor 1 is cold and gross
after incisines lest it 1 mollify the subtle part
2 harden the gross
3 lies deep in the body or part grieved.

3 in part of least sense, because these be strong workers.
6 Are not used to 1 A part oppressed with fluxion 1 for fear of 1 Grangrena,
2 Sphacelus.
2 There leave resolution, and use scarification, etc.
2 the 1 Liver, but with Astringents added.
2 Spleen, 3 Stomach, 4 Bowels,

7 Are applied to a part more 1 dull, use the stronger, etc. 2 sensible as the
1 Eye weaker.
2 Nerves


Also in cold and gross matter use 1 incifines to cut and make thin the matter
first. 2 next mollificatives. 3 after by degrees to digestives, lest you
resolve the thin matter and harden the gross and thick part.


Of Mollificatives.
These are 1 soften and relax hard parts 1 and to bring them to their natural
estate. 2 hardened either by 1 consolation, cure it by things hot and dry. 2
dryness cure it by things hot and little moist, as in Scirrus.

2 Temperately hot without manifest show of 1 dryness, for if heat and
dryness join together, it causes attraction. 2 Moystnesse such are
putrifactives, for if the heat cannot overcome the moisture, it causes
putrefaction.
3 To work more by strong heat 1 to moysten as the Sun dissolves Ice, etc. 2
but are temperate in 1 drying, 2 moystning.

Some 1 simple and weak as 1 Lillies, 2 Mallows, etc. 3 Butter.
2 compound as oiles of 1 Lillies, 2 Almonds Dule. 3 Camomill, etc.


5 Many of them are hot in the first, and dry in the second or third degree,
The bettter to 1 disperse the congealed matter, consuming a little of the
humiditie, contained within the part affected, but not drawing it by violence
of heat and drith, thereby would follow greater hardness.
2 diffuse,
6 Some 1 weak as 1 Butter, 2 Lanasuccida.
2 strong as 1 Amoniacum, 2 Galbanum
3 to mollify 1 Scirrus tumors of the musculous parts, etc. 2 Hard lips of
Ulcers. 3 the 1 Belly hardened by cold gross matter and viscous either of 1
Phlegm, 2 Melancholy, etc.

2 Bowels, 3 Limbs, 4 Glandles,
that work by stronger heat then Suppuratives.
4 Melancholy tumors be exasperated with mollificatives, and turn to Cancers.
7 Hurt full to 1 Cancers, 2 Malign tumors.
8 Herein considers 1 in the use of them three things, i. 1 the 1 greatness of
the 1 corruption, 2 part.

2 nature
2 whether you must add incisines or no.
2 how much the part differs from its own temperature, the better to use fit
Medicines. 3 to distinguish the nature of the disease and parts how it must be
done, whether to mix with the mollificatives either 1 discussives, 2
mundificatives to deterge.

Note 1 many desperate Scirrus tumors that resist all mollification do grow
hard and senseless, and become smooth without hear by stopping the pores. 2
sometimes the part becomes cold in excess, so that the native heat shows
plainly to decay, then use an Iron Stove, etc. to restore the heat, heat again
as Ambrose Parrey describes.


Of Attractives.
Attractives. 1 Are generally two, i. 1 Simple as Amoniacum, Galbanum,
Euphorbium, etc. 2 Compound.
2 Must neither 1 Burn. 2 Discuss.
3 Must be hot with thin substance the better to pierce. 4 Draws to the utter
parts, offensive matter that works within the parts 5 work effects by three
means either by 1 Elementall quality of heat and thin substance. 2 Hidden
property, as 1 The 1 Loadstone draws Iron. 2 Ieat draws a straw.
2 Vomits works their effects.
3 Purges 4 All Antidotes against venom, etc.
3 Accidents, as 1 Stercus onima. 2 Leven. 3 Old Cheese. 4 Sharp things
applied that do cause 1 Dolor. 2 Inflammation 3 Blisters. burning, etc.
5 Ventoses. 6 Suckings. 7 Horsleaches. 8 Hard Friction. Legature, etc.
9

6 If 1 Weak add Oil of Bay, etc. to strengthen them. 2 Strong and sharp,
add Oil of Roses, or other lenitives.
7 Vtilities are to 1 Open. 2 Draw out 1 Heat to cold parts. 2 Thorns. 3
Splinters of 1 Wood. 2 Bones. 3 Iron. 4 Things fixed in the flesh or parts, etc.
4 Matter and filth from malign Ulcers, etc.
3 Restore cooled parts to life by drawing thither the spirits vital. 4 Hasten
Critical Tumors. 5 Draw life into parts. 1 Benumbed. 2 Consumed and withered.
3 Cooled by restoring vital heat and spirit into it by Attractives.



Of Suppuratives.
Suppuratives. 1 Shut the pores, and 1 prvent transpiration by 1 consistence. 2
Emplaistic to hinder evaporation.
2 so increases the heat, and turns the matter into 1 pus, etc. 2 sanis, etc.

2 are 1 Hot and moist, so that the heat cannot subdue the moisture. 2 Little
exceeding the natural heat of the member with moisture.
3 By natural heat, turns the blood and humors superfluous into matter. 4
Differ from molificatives, it being hot, but according to the native heat of
the part affected. Or else Emplaistic to augment the natural heat by closing
the pores 1 Unable to evaporate, in which they differ from molificatives 2 And
so the matter being kept in, converts to pus.

5 are generally of two sorts. 1 Proper and are 1 All that heat, having any
moisture. 2 Rightly prepared if they little exceed the natural heat of the
member with moisture. 3 Such as work more by abundance of moderate heat then
by sharp quality. 4 Either Simple, as 1 Lillies. 2 Figs. 3 Mysfle. 4
Galbanum. 5 Amoniacum.
Compound as Mussalage. Diachilon. Oiles of 1 Lillies. 2 Lumbric.



2 Accident. 1 Such are 1 Emplaisticks that stop the pores.
2 Repercussives, that by cold
also 1 Astringents by their earthy and thick parts do suppurat as ungue. de
bole. Nutritum.

2 Such as to keep in the heat, and shut the pores, for which Sorrel is
highly commended, to generate pus, for by keeping in the heat, it increases
its effects, to thicken the rotten matter, and also it overcommeth other
rebellious qualities. 3 Ripening are used in great inflammations whose increased
cannot be hindered procured with Repellents. Resolutives. Discussives.




6 Are used in 1 Great contusions. 2 Wounds contused. 3 Phlegmon which will
scarsly 1 Repercusse. 2 Resolve.



Of Mundificatives.
These 1 Cleanse ulcers, etc. and are hot and of thin substance. 2 Purge a
double excrement, i. 1 thick, i. sordes and draws from the bottom of ulcers.
2 thin and watery, i. sanies, done by drying Medicines. 3 so every ulcer must be
cleansed and dried. S. A.
3 Are some 1 simple and are either. 1 sweet as Licoris. Honey. Sugar, etc.
2 sower as Vinegar. Tender tops of Vines. All sower things, etc.
3 bitter as 1 Alloes. 2 Absinth. 3 Scabeos.

2 Compound as 1 Lixivium. 2 Apostolorum. 3 Praecipitate, etc.
3 Weak. 4 Strong.
4 Separate and draw excrements from ulcers, etc. 5 Are used. 1 to cleanse
ulcers, etc. before the use of incarnatives. 2 But first, consider these 4. i.
the 1 Whole body, whether it be 1 Healthy. 2 Plethoric. 3 Cacochimiall.
2 Part which is 1 Moister. 2 Dryer. 3 More 1 Exquisite. 2 Dull or senseless.

3 Accidents. 1 Callus. 2 Dolor. 3 Induration 4 Flux of humors as 1 Hot. 2
Malign, etc.

4 Ulcers whether, 1 New. 2 Old.

3 In which consider in 1 all the foresaid medicines they must differ in 1
Quality. As the cause requires.
2 Quantity.

2 an ulcer. 1 Dry and painful, none will agree but a moist abstersive, etc. 2
moist, none will agree but dry powders, etc.



Of Incarnatives.
These 1 By moderate drying 1 get flesh in hollow Vleers. 2 helps Nature to
remove superfluities.
2 Differ 1 According to the 1 Temperature of 1 Body, 2 Part affected.
2 Quality of the blood.
3 Quantity
2 For 1 Nature is the efficient cause of this work. 2 Good blood is the
material cause. 3 The Medicine. 1 The assisting cause, by consuming the
Excrements, 2 Without which it cannot be done. 3 Removes the cause that hinders
nature.


3 Must be mixed according to the affects which passes the Ulcer. 4 Have double
virtue to 1 Scour and dry without biting or corosion, 2 Dry the thin Sanies
lest it cause 1 Sordes. 2 The Ulcer to be more filthy.

5 Must dry in the first degree 1 Says Galen, 2 Forbearing to dry, it consumes
the moisture of the blood that causes the flesh. 3 I mean a degree dryer then
the body or part, if it be 1 More dry it causes either 1 Inflammation. 2
Dolor. 3 Asker, etc.
2 To moist it breeds 1 Matter of filth, 2 Hollownes for want of drying

4 For 1 It is 1 on thing to 1 add that which lacks, which is done with
things like, 2 diminish and done by co^traries

2 another
2 Every thing is 1 Maintained by its like, 2 Destroyed by its contrary.


6 Are some 1 Weak, 2 Strong, Simple as 1 Thus, 2 Arabic, 3 Sarcocole.
2 Compound as 1 Vnguentum aurum, Emplaysters, Powders, etc. fit thereto.

7 To speak truly, no Medicine can properly be called Incarnative. 8 Ought to
be more liquid in deep Ulcers or Wounds. 9 Not to be used before the ulcer be 1
cleansed 2 free from 1 Pain, 2 Inflammation, 3 Fluxion, 4 Hardness, 5
Distemper or any accident that may hinder the cure.

10 Drying to 1 little cause filthy ulcers because the 1 Dries not enough. 2
Its Acrimony do cause fluxion, etc.

2 much
Also consider some parts be less dry by nature, and so require a Medicine 1
More drying then other that are more dry, as the Glandels must be more dried
then the proportion, though the Glandell be less dry.
2 Stronger Incarnative
These must be diligently examined and very well considered.


Of Conglutinatives.
These 1 Are between Incarnatives and Cicatrizatives 2 Dry 1 less then
Cicatrizatives. Incarnatives.

2 more 3 in the second degree.
3 Let the Flux by its astringent faculty, being free from detertion, and so
joyneth the parts divided. 4 Do conglutinate some by 1 their proper nature as
1 All the 1 Consolidaes. 2 Plantaines, etc.
2 Saincle. 3 Elder. 4 Sopewoort. 5 Balsome. 6 Aquavitae. 7 Turpentine. 8
Clownes wound-woort. 9 All things acerba, etc.
2 Accident as 1 stitching. 2 rolling. 3 binding. 4 rest. 5 all that hinder
fluxion, and bind the parts, etc.

5 Joins parts distant and helps nature, who is the chief agent in this
work. 6 Herein consider whether the 1 Body be either 1 hard that is, how 1
robust. 2 tender.

2 soft,
2 Ulcer be 1 New, Hence take your Indications what the 1 quality, of the
Medicine ought to be.
2 quantity,

2 Old, 3 Great, 4 Little.

7 Herein consider before you apply them. 1 Whether the skin be 1 but divided.
2 clean gone.
2 That all knit difficulties if the skin be gone by any means.
8 Are used to 1 New Wounds. Because they let and hinder the flux of humors
from flowing to the place, etc.

2 Green 3 Bloody 4 Fistuloes. 5 Ulcers old malign.



Of Cicatrizatives, i. to procure skin of sores.
These 1 Dry without Mordication. 2 Astringe, bind, thicken, harden the flesh
into a skinny substance called a Cicatrize or skarre. 3 Are also the work of
Nature, except something hinder it, which Art must amend. 4 Consume superfluous
moisture. 5 Thicken and bind the next adjoining flesh, and must dry more then
Incarnatives. 6 Assist Nature to cause a skarre in stead of skin. 7 Are of
three sorts, the 1 Only dryes and binds, and be true Cicatrizes. 2 Be sharp
biting to wast proud flesh, use such sparingly, and that only in hard and
rustic bodies, chiefly to dry and consume superfluous moisture. 3 Only dries
moderately without astriction.
8 Are used when the ulcer is near filled with flesh, equal with the skin. 9
Herein consider, 1 The body, if 1 Tender. Here such things as Cicatrize in
rusticks, will prove corosives in these tender bodies.
Soft. Delicate.
2 Rusticks and hard, to these use Cicatrizes more drying. 3 Plethoric, such
do not easily admit Cicatrizes. 4 Cacochymiall, i. of ill juice, these hinder
Cicatrizes until the body be freed from that evil disposition, and brought to
a good habit by the help of physic, etc.
2 Well 1 To remove all such lets as hinder your intent, and then proceeed S.
A. 2 Whether the ulcer be fed by the present defect of any part evil affected.
As the 1 Liver. 2 Lungs. 3 Spleen. 4 Varicks finding it, etc.
2 For that must be first cured before it be Cicatrized.
3 If hard typs of an ulcer do let then scarifie or soften the hardness, else
it will not Cicatrize. 4 Too 1 much drying leveth the skar too 1 hollow or low.
2 high raised up.

2 little




Now of simple Medicines with their qualities and effects.
All simple Medicines have one or many of these four Elementall qualities,
videlicet, either to 1 Heat. 2 Cool. 3 Dry. 4 Moisten.
Heat. 1 Moderate 1 Heats. 2 Attracts. 3 Rarifies. 4 Opens the passages and
conduits. 5 Digesteth. 6 Suppurats.
2 Immoderate 1 Dries. 1 Violent attraction. 2 Rubification. 3 Consumption. 4
Pining of the parts. 5 Askers. 6 Mortification.
2 Inflameth. 3 Burns. 4 Biteth whereof ensues.

Cold. 1 Moderate. 1 Cools. 2 Stops. 3 Restrains.
2 Immoderate. 1 Congealeth. 2 Stupifieth. 3 Mortifieth.

Moist. 1 Moderate. 1 Moisteth. 2 Lubrifieth, i. makes slippery. 3 Mittigateth
and sweetneth. 4 Makes smooth. 5 Glueth.
2 Immoderate 1 stops or obstructeth. 2 lifts up. 3 breeds flatuous, chiefly if
the moisture be vaporous.

Dries. 1 Moderate. 1 Dries 2 Rarifieth. 3 Attenuateth.
2 Immoderate 1 Binds. 2 Contracts and shrinks. 3 Causes chaps or fissures. 4
Causes dry scales, dandruffe, furfuration, etc.

The effects of these qualities be set in certain order called degrees,
because they should be applied by a certain measure or proportion.
Example.
A disease hot in the second degree, the Medicine must be cold in the like
degree, or little exceeding, and for your better instruction consider. That all
simple Medicines be either hot, cold, dry, or moist, either in the 1 beginning,
either of first degree.
second third fourth

2 middle, 3 end,

The heat, cold, drith, or moisture of the first degree is 1 obscure and
insensible, 2 manifest and apparent. 3 vehement or violent. 4 very immederate
or excess.

second third fourth

Example.
Water only Warm is temperate, 1 A little horter, is hot in the first degree.
second third fourth

2 Manifestly hot, 3 Vehemently hot, Scalding hot.
Judge the like of all other qualities, as of cold, drith, and moisture. How to
deal in all diseases of every Complexion, for either the disease and the
co^mplexion agree in quality, or be contrary to each other.
Example.
These agree when both the complexion and the disease be either 1 Hot, Such
require more gentle and weak remedies or Medicine.
2 Cold, 3 Dry; 4 Moist,

Examples of these similies.
If the Complexion and the disease be both 1 hot, there use things 1 Mild and
least cooling is best, 2 Meanly hot not extreme brings rest, 3 Least moystning
best please. 4 That d^y least, bring best ease.

2 cold, 3 dry and hard, 4 moist and soft,
Remember still to countergard the Complexion.

Example of Contraries.
If the complexion and the disease be contrary as the complexion. 1 hot with 1
cold, disease the 1 hottest, remedies or medicines are best, it must surmount
the temperature of the Complexion, otherwise the Complexion it self would
effect it.
2 coldest, 3 dryest, 4 moistest.

2 hot, 3 Moist, 4 dry.

2 cold 3 dry and hard 4 moist and soft
Observe due regard of all the above said things, otherwise you hurt or
destroy, and not preserve or cure, for want of the true considerations hereof,
great errors are daily committed, as well in many Professors of Physic, as in
Surgery a very common fault in many fit to be redressed.
How to work with contraries by accident, and their effects.
Diverse have showed the 1 proper nature of Medicines drawn by their true
effects.
2 qualities 3 effects 4 operations
Yet have they other operations which be 1 not by Elementall quality, 2 done
by accident.

Example.
Heat extern 1 cools the inner part by accident, by opening the pores, and so
the heat evaporates out with the spirits, and so diminishes both appetite and
disgestion. 2 Invironing us, moisteneth by accident, by lubryfying, or
moistning, scattering and spreading the humors congealed and settled with cold,
so is Venery thought to moisten.
Cold extern 1 heateth 1 the bodies inwards 1 not by it proper nature, 2 by
accident.
2 by accident, example of cold in Winter with outward cold closes the pores,
lets the expiration of vapors, and issues of natural heat, and repels that
heat to the inner parts.
2 Doubleth the inward heat, as they that handle snow, feel after very great
heat by like reason. 3 furthers concoction. 4 strengthens the appetite, and
for that cause the appetite is greater in Winter then in Summer. 5 Dryes by
accident, by repelling the moist matter that was ready to flow down to any
part.

Example.
By immoderate use of repercussives by repelling matter 1 phlegmatic, They
harden the matter collected and turns it into Scirrnes, hardness from a gross
viscous phlegm.
2 gross, 3 viscous,
Dryness, because they be qualities passive, show not their operations as heat
and cold do in their force.
Moistness,
Of the second faculty of Medicines, its that which ensues the effect of the
first elementall quality, and is as follows.
Heat do 1 rarifie, Cold do 1 stop, 2 repel, 3 confirm or shut up, 4
congeale or thicken, 5 heap together, 6 restrain fluxes.

2 attenuate, 3 open, 4 attract, 5 mittigate, 6 cleanse.
Moist do 1 soften, Drith do 1 harden, 2 stiffen and withhold.

2 relax.

These Medicines following, have their names from their Effects.
We call those 1 anodines, Which do 1 appease or mittigate pain, 2 repel, or
dry back, 3 resolve, rarifie, and open the pores, 4 mollify, soften
hardness, 5 draw out, 6 turn tumors, etc. to pus, or sanies, 7 cleanse filthy
sores, etc. 8 increase flesh in sores, 9 glue together new wounds, 10 cover a
raw sore with skin. 11 gnaw or eat the flesh.

2 repercussives, 3 resolutives, 4 mollificatives, 5 attractives, 6
suppuratives, 7 Mundificatives, 8 Incarnatives, 9 Conglutinatives, 10
Cicatrizatives, 11 Corosives.

Of the third faculty of Medicines.
These for the most part are drawn from first and second faculty sometimes by
1 joining, 2 separating, 3 coupling two qualities together. 4 on quality only
of the first faculty proceeds the 1 anoidine proper of it self by a moderate
heating faculty to ease pain. 2 anodine to evacuate the matter causing pain.
3 anodine by narcotticks to 1 Astonish the sense by cold, simply cause rest. 3
Provoke sleep by cold moisture.

5 Neither of these faculties but by an occult property, as the Loadstone
draws Iron, for which no reason can be showed: Also when by touching the
Needle of a Dial, it shall make that end to stand to the North always is by
occult property.
2 the effects and operations of the said faculties as some be 1 Anodines, 2
Repercussives, 3 Incarnatives, done by two faculties, as by moderate 1 drying.
2 clensing.
4 Cicatrizatives, dry and astringe 4 more then 1 coglutinates 2 Cicatrizes.

5 less,

5 Conglutinatives, 6 To move or stay 1 Urine, 2 Sweat, 3 Vomit, 4 Milk, 5
Stool, 6 Menstrua, 7 Hemoraids, etc.

3 A hot and attenuating faculty, such 1 move 1 Sweat, 2 Urine, 3 Menses, etc.
2 cause Milk, etc.
4 The contrary facultties, keep back and stop the same. 5 Occult cause, as
vomit comes neither from the first faculty, but
second
from an occult or hidden property, naturally planted in any vomitory
Medicine, etc.


Of the fourth faculty of Medicine.
In these consider their 1 Dependencie, i. they work only by an occult
property found out by experience, and no reason to be showed why it does so. 2
Difference is 1 It works not by Elementall qualities of 1 Heat. 2 Cold. 3
Drith. 3 Moisture.
2 Also this, we see that diverse being hot, cold, dry, or moist in on and the
same degree, yet produce not the like effects.
3 Manner of working their effects is 1 More in on part then in another. 2 Such
that they purge humor more then another. 3 Known only by experience. Thus
that some hot and dry in the second degree do cause either 1 Vomit, all by an
occult property for which no reason can be given why or how they do so.
2 Egestion, 3 Sweat, 4 Urine, 5 Milk, 6 neither
5 As 1 Agaric, draw 1 Phlegm from the 1 head and joints, 2 liver and reins.

2 Choler

2 Ruberb,

4 Medicines are furnished some with 1 on simple faculty alone. 2 More and
those contrary, of which the taste will manifest it unto you.
5 Means are partly taken, from the parts they most respect in their
operations, as 1 To work more on this part then another, and none can find
out the reason, but only experience.
humor
2 Cephalicks, These respect the 1 Head, 2 Lungs, 3 Heart, 4 Liver, 5 Spleen,
6 Reins, 7 Joints.

3 Pulmonicks, 4 Cordials, 5 Hepaticks, 6 Spleniticks, 7 Diuriticks, 8
Arthriticks,


Now of the Tastes, in which consider these things following.
The 1 Definition, it is a decoction of humiditie into dryness, first giving a
taste on the tongue, according to the variety of the matter. 2 Kinds 9, i. 3
Hot as 1 Actide, 2 Bitter, 3 Salt.
3 Cold as 1 Acerbe, 2 Austere, 3 Acide.
3 Temperate as 1 Sweet, 2 Oily or fat, 3 Insipide.

3 Differences are according to the degrees of concoction it is 1 great in hot
taste
2 lesser in cold 3 mean inte^perate
4 Cause 1 Is heat, 1 That turns moist into dryness. 2 Which is diverse by
degrees of concoction.
2 Of taste is in these two i. 1 complexion being either 1 hot, 2 cold, 3 dry,
4 moist, 5 temperate.
2 Substance being either 1 thick, 2 thin, 3 mean.


5 Signs are 1 Known by applying on the tongue well disposed by the nerves. 2
Taste which is 1 strongest of hot taste.
2 least of cold 3 mean of temperate
3 Complexion 1 Hot causes five tastes, 1 sweet, 2 bitter, 3 Oily or unctuous,
4 Salt, 5 biting taste.
2 Cold causes four tastes, 1 sour, 2 less sour, 3 yet less sour, 4
insipid, watrish without taste.

4 substances are 3. i. 1 thick substance causes taste either 1 sweet, 2
bitter, 3 sour.
2 Thin substance cause taste either 1 biting taste sharp, 2 Oily, 3 sowrish.
3 Mean substance cause taste either 1 sharp biting. 2 salt, 3 watrish.




Nature observes this order in concoction of most bodies.
The order of this concoction. 1 The Acerbe taste should take place. 2 The
Austere. 3 The Acide. 4 The next instruction of concoction arises thus, 1
without taste. 2 Oily. 3 Sweet, perfectly, concoct, and temperate.
5 If 1 salt, This concoction exceeds the bonds of mediocritie in the highest
excess of almost a fiery heat.
2 bitter, 3 acrid,
6 Note that all things that be by nature taste less, do not always ascend
to the height of sweetness by the degreee of 1 Acerbitie, As if by absolute
necessity that all sweet things must first pass these three degrees.
2 Austeritie, 3 Aceditie.
7 Note that many plants and their fruits being 1 ripe are some 1 sour, 2
bitter, 3 salt.
2 unripe are sweetish which after further co^coction become 1 bitter, Which is
a perfection in nature by full ripeness and convocation, and not an excess in
nature in that species.
2 austere, 3 sour.

8 In many things the sweet and fatty taste becomes so by concoction, as in 1
Grapes. 2 Figs. 3 Pears. 4 Apples, etc.


Now it follows to speak of each of these in order, and first of cold tastes.
Acerbe taste the 1 Definition, it is a harsh taste as in unripe fruits
between bitter and sowrish, being yet all raw. 2 Kinds vary according to the 1
temperature, 2 substance.
3 Difference it is 1 dryer than Austere.
2 colder 3 grosser 4 earthier 5 less moister 6 much less moist then Acide.
4 Temperature, it is 1 notably cooling and drying. 2 of cold, gross, and
earthy substance being yet all raw and unripe.
5 Effects, it is 1 condensative, i. to 1 thicken. 2 harden. 3 congeale.
2 refreshing. 3 stopping. 4 restraining. 5 repelling. 6 binds chiefly in the
superficial parts.
7 exasperates
6 Some is as the taste of 1 Granat peeles, 2 Galls, 3 Tan or Oak bark, 4
Sumach, 5 Cypress Nuts, etc.
7 Some perform as are said in Austere, far more powerfully being absolutely
1 earthy, Not partaking of watery moisture.
2 cold, 3 dry,
Note that fruits Acerbe before they be ripe, having accession of heat, turn
sweet as Chestnuts, do.

Of the taste Austere, the second cold taste.
Austere the 1 Definition, it is much Acerbe, but milder, not so harsh. 2 Kinds
are according to the 1 temperature, 2 substance.
3 Differences 1 It 1 Increases a degree in concoction, more toward maturity,
then Acerbe. 2 Consists in a medium 1 Not so 1 dry as Acerbe, 2 moist as Acide.
2 Only by heat and moisture either by 1 Air, 2 Water, 3 Moisture only.

3 Having accession of moisture only, and that more gross of Acerbe, and so
causes Austere.
2 Both Austere and Acerbe are in like degree cold, but austere is the moister.
3 It gets sometimes 1 more 1 heat alone 1 airy and passes 1 sweet taste.
2 Oily

2 watery
2 moisture alone and that either
2 Both together are joined.
4 If the cold remaining in fruits, a subtle humiditie grow, it causes taste
Acide. 5 If it have a watrish moisture and fit heat, it turns either to 1
sweet taste, if the moisture growing with heat be Oily.
2 Oily

4 Temperature, 1 Its 1 cold and dry, but not so much as Acerbe, 2 Near in 1
temperature, to acerbe, but less drying.
2 effect,

sappy bodies acerbe become sweet by the interposed degree of 1 Austere, as
they get a diverse increase in heat and moisture either 1 conjunctly. 2
seperately.

2 Acide, 3 Oilinesse

5 Effects are as they be 1 cold, they expel fluxes. 2 dry and earthy 1 they
do 1 condense, 2 thicken, 3 stop, 4 straighten the passages, 5 restrain, 6
conglutinate, 7 cicatrize.
2 such are raw unripe fruits.

6 Some consist in a mean, i. a more earthy body, as it is apparent in 1
Grapes, unripe.
2 Sarvices,
7 Some is changed 1 with further concoction of heat from Acerbe, 3
Gooseberies, 4 Crabs, all fruits.
2 Example. 1 Acerbe fruit, i. unripe by 1 heat only augmented become sweet, 2
cold being gross of acerbe turn austere.
2 Cold in fruits augmented, and there retained is turned into Acide. 3 Heat
and moisture augment together, if 1 ayrie, they pass to 1 Oily taste.
2 sweet

2 watery,




Of Acide the third and last cold taste.
Acide the 1 Definition, it is a sour taste, as is that of Vinegar, Verjuce,
Aligere, Sour juces, etc.
2 Kinds are according to the 1 temperature, 2 substance.
3 Differences are 1 According to the kinds. 2 More subtle then any of the two
former tastes. 3 The subtiller, the more 1 piercing or penetrating. 2 It divides
almost as powerfully as the Acride.
4 The 1 thicker in substance, The duller in ooperation.
2 colder the temperature,

4 Temperature 1 is 1 without natural heat, 2 cold and watery, 3 subtiller then
Acerbe or Austere, 4 near in effect to Acerbe, but less drying.

5 Effects, it 1 attenuates, 2 insides, 3 diuides, 4 penetrates, 5 opens
obstructions. 6 cleanses, 7 repels all fluxions by its deep piercing cold, 8
dryes strongly even in its watery consistance. 9 Stays and stops all 1
Bleedings. 2 Haemorthoids. 3 Dissentories.

6 Manifests it force in 1 Vinegar, 2 Verjuice, 3 Juice of 1 Lemmons, 2
Sorrel,
4 Cheries, 5 Barbaries, 6 Sloes, etc.
Thus far of the three cold tastes.


Now of temperate tastes, and first of Insipide.
Insipide the 1 Definition it is 1 fresh or tastlesse as water, 2 improperly
called a taste, 3 rather a privation of tastes.
2 Kinds are according to the 1 temperature, 2 substance.
3 Differences 1 it increases a degree in concoction from the former more
toward maturity. 2 it 1 inclines more to warmness then Acide, 2 cools and
is grosser substance.

4 Temperature 1 it is cold and moist with a little natural heat, but not so
much as the two following, yet sweetish, not brackish but watrish. 2 It is
without 1 taste, as water simply, 2 smell.

5 its effects, and 1 it draws together the 1 Pores, 2 Orifices of the veins.
2 repercusseth and restrains by cooling. 3 constupates. 4 stupifieth and
astonisheth the member. 5 Moistneth and thereby softneth. 6 cools and
quenches heat.
2 Inspisate, that is, it 1 thickneth and congealeth, 2 constipates and
stupifies.

6 Some manifests its force in 1 Taste 1 Water chiefly. 2 Melons. 3
Cucumbers. 4 Gourds.
2 All of watery tastlesnesse.


The second temperate taste is sweet taste.
Sweet taste the 1 Definition it is as Honey, Sugar, Manna, sweet Fruits, etc. 2
Kinds are diverse according to the 1 temperature. 2 substance.
3 Differences it 1 is made by moderate and well growing heat. 2 consists in
a matter more 1 thin and hot, then Insipide, 2 gross then the oily, from which
in the first qualities it do not differ.

4 Temperature it is of 1 hot nature
2 ayrie 3 temperate
5 Effects 1 very sweet 1 cleanses. 2 digesteth. 3 concocteth. 4 ripeneth. 5
relaxeth. 6 asswageth pains. 7 glueth.
2 All sweet things work effects according to its differences of their degrees
and their 1 temperatures. 2 substance.

Some is such as are 1 Milk. 2 Honey. 3 Sugar. 4 Manna. 5 sweet 1 Almonds, 2
Fruits, etc.



The third and last temperate taste is oily.
Oily taste the 1 Definition it is a taste as 1 Oil, 2 Butter, 3 Grease, 4
Marrow, etc.
2 Kinds are diverse according to the 1 temperature, 2 substance.
3 Differences 1 are diverse according to the kinds. 2 some are made of 1 green
unripe Olives.
2 mature, or ripe
3 some be 1 new and pure, 2 old and musty, 3 acrid by nature as that of 1
Lions, 2 Foxes, etc


4 Temperature 1 hot, more then the former sweet taste.
2 moist, 3 aierie,
5 Effects, it 1 humacteth, 2 relaxeth, 3 molifieth, 4 lubryfieth, 5 appeaseth
pain.
6 Which are such as 1 Oil Olive, 2 fresh Butter, 3 Greases, 4 Marrowes, 5
Diverse other 1 Oiles, 2 Fats, etc.

Thus much of temperate tastes.


Now follow the three hot and sharp tastes, as first of salt taste 1 salt. 2
bitter. 3 acride.

Salt taste the 1 Definition, the taste is manifest yet of diverse kinds. 2
Kinds as diverse according to the 1 temperature, thereof as 1 common Salt. 2 Sal
2 niter, 3 gemm. 4 ammoniac, 5 natural, 6 artificial, 7 Seawater, etc.


2 substance,
3 Differences are 1 according to the 1 kinds, 2 temperature, 3 substance.
2 some 1 naturally so 2 artificial and be of diverse 1 natures too long here
to recite.
2 effects


4 Temperature they 1 are 1 hot, 2 dry, 3 astringent, 4 are less earthy then
bitter things.
2 proceed from an earthy drynes.
5 Effects, it 1 contracteth the pores, 2 cutteth, 3 cleanses, 4 scoureth, 5
restrains, 6 preserves from putrefaction, 7 dries without manifest
appearance of great heat, 8 digesteth, 9 shuts up or thrust together. 10 have
many strange operations.
Salts are either 1 common, Salts.
2 natural, 3 artificial, being diverse and rare secrets.


The second hot taste is bitter taste.
Bitter taste the 1 Definition this taste is manifest, as Aloes, Absinthium,
etc. 2 Kinds are more or less according to the 1 temperature, 2 substance.
3 Differences are diverse according as they differ in 1 temperature 2 substance.
4 Temperature is 1 hot, 2 earthy and gross, 3 drying, 4 abundant heat
torrified and dried up.
5 Effects taken, 1 inwards it does 1 purge 2 void superfluous humors. 3 open
1 the 1 pores, 2 mouths, 3 passages, of the veins often by their abstergent
faculty, and so cause 1 menstria, 2 hemoroids

2 Subtle and thin.


2 outward it 1 cleanses, 1 the Sanies from Ulcers, 2 superfluous humors from
the body.
2 wipeth, 3 scoureth,

6 Some as, such as 1 Aloes, 2 Gentian, 3 Absinthium, 4 Centory 5 Colosinth, 6
Fumitorie, etc.


The third and last hot taste is Acride of sharp.
Acride taste the 1 Definition, it is a hot biting fiery taste as Pepper, etc.
2 Kinds are diverse according to the 1 temperature, 2 substance.
3 Differences are 1 According to the 1 kind, 2 temperature, 3 substance.
2 Also to be considered, 1 How and in what manner to use them. 2 Some are 1
venomous. 2 used 1 inwardly safely 1 Pepper, 2 Mustard, etc.
2 outwardly, and not inwards. 3 both inwards and outward.
3 putrifective as 1 Arsenicum, 2 Realger, 3 and Sublimate, etc.
4 Vesicatores as 1 Cantarades, 2 Sperewort, etc.
5 Caustic as 1 Calx viva, 2 Lixivivum, 3 Oil of Sulphur, etc.



4 Temperature 1 hot. 2 dry. 3 subtle. 4 biting. 5 fires, etc.
5 Effects they 1 heat, prick, bite. 2 open the passages. 3 penitrate. 4
attenuate. 5 draw out gross humors. 6 evacuates and urine. 1 Pepper. 2
Cloves. 3 Greines. 4 Ginger. 5 Garlic. 6 Onions. 7 Squilla. 9 All the
abovesaid and diverse others to be used in time and place as occasion serves.
10 Exceeding the bounds of mediocritie in excess and fiery heat.
terms. sweat.
7 sends forth 8 digesteth. 9 inciseth. 10 dries. 11 purges and cleanses. 12
consumes. 13 liquifieth. 14 cause 1 blisters. 2 asters. 3 rubification.

6 Things fit to accomplish this are --

Here follow the things of most note to be considered in every particular
Region, part and member of the body.
Things of note concerning the head are generally, these two, i. the parts
contai -- 1 ning, be 5. i. the 1 Hair. 2 Skin. 3 Membrana carnosa. 4
Pericranium. 5 Craina, or Scull.
2 ned, are 5. i. the 1 Dura matter.
2 Pia 3 Retemirabile. 4 Vermiformis. 5 Cerebrum.

Things of note of the parts of the face are these 11. i. the 1 Bones. 2 Front.
3 Temples. 4 Eie-browes. 5 Eie-lids. 6 Eyes. 7 Ears. 1 Lips. 2 Teeth. 3
Tongue. 4 Vuvla. 5 Pallat. 6 Jaws.
8 Nose. 9 Cheeks. 10 Mouth, also the 11 Chin.
Things of note of the parts of the neck, are these 15 following, i. the 1
Spondels. 2 Legaments. 3 Tendons. 4 Nerves. 5 Veins. 6 Arteries. 7 Nucha. 8
Paxwax. 9 Muscles. 10 Almonds. 11 Epiglot. 12 Isophagus. 13 Ismon. 14 Thachia
Arteria. 15 Gula.
Things of note of the 4 shoulder and great arm are 14. i. the 1 Bones. 2
Cartilages. 3 Ligaments. 4 Marrow. 5 Tendons. 6 Muscles. 7 Nerves. 8 Veins. 9
Arteries. 10 Panicles. 11 Flesh. 12 Skin. 13 Hair. 14 Nails.
5 Breast are generally two, i. the things contay- 1 ning be 12. i. the 1 Utter
skin. 2 Flesh. 3 Muscles. 4 Panicles. 5 Bones. 6 Cartilages. 7 Nucha. 8 Paxwax.
9 Ligaments. 10 Nerves. 11 Paps. 12 Plura.
2 ned be 6 i. the 1 Trachia arteria. 2 Oesophagus. 3 Heart. 4 Panicles. 5
Lungs. 6 Midriffe.


Things of note of the 6 Region of the belly are in general two, i. the things
contay- 1 ning be 8. i. the 1 Myrac. 2 Syphac. 3 Bones. 4 Nucha. 5 Nerves. 6
Ueines. 7 Arteries. 8 Muscles.
2 ned be 12. i. the 1 Cale. 2 Liver. 3 Gall. 4 Spleen. 5 Stomach. 6
Intestines. 7 Mesenterium. 8 Reins. 9 Bladder. 10 Spermatick vessels. 11
Matrix.

12 parts below without froth be three, i. the 1 Groyne. 2 Yard. 3 Cods.

7 Great leg it is 1 divided into three parts, i. the 1 Thigh. 2 Shank. 3
Foot.
2 As in the great arm the Nucha excepted, and so but 13 particulars.


A brief Anatomy of the parts of the body in general, and first of the
simple Members.
Simple members are a 11. besides Hair and Nails, as 1 Bones. 2 Cartalages,
or gristles. 3 Legaments. 4 Nerves, or sinews. 5 Cords, or tendons. 6 Veins.
7 Arteries, or heart pipes. 8 Panicles, or Felmes. 9 Flesh. 10 Fat. 11 Skin. 1
Hair, these two be excrementall parts.
2 Nails,
1 Bones are 1 Simple. 2 Spermatick. 3 Cold. 4 Dry. 5 Insensible, i. without
feeling. 6 Inflexible, i. without bowing. 7 The bearers up of the body. 8 Many
for diverse causes. 9 248 in number after Avicen. 10 307. after some other.
2 Cartalages are 1 Simple. 2 Spermatick. 3 Cold. 4 Dry. 5 Insensible. 6 Partly
flexible. 7 Ordained for five causes. 8 Next to the bones in hardness.
Legaments are 1 simple. 2 spermatick. 3 cold. 4 dry. 5 insensible. 6 flexible.
7 to bind the bones together. 8 resting places to diverse sinews. 9 to hold up
diverse members. 10 harder then Nerves. Gristles.

11 softer a substance that springs out of the bones and gristles
Nerves are 1 called sinews. 2 simple. 3 spermatick. 4 cold. 5 dry. 6
sensible. 7 flexible. 8 strong. 9 tough. 10 of two sorts, i. 1 sensatives. 2
motives.
the things that give voluntary motion to the cords, etc the instruments to
convay the Animal spirits.
Cords are 1 called tendons. 2 simple in quality, but compound in substance. 3
spermatick. 4 cold. 5 dry, 1 strong. 2 tough.
6 very 7 partly sensible. 9 made of nerves and legaments for three causes. 10
mean, between legaments and nerves.
6 Veins are 1 simple. 2 spermatick. 3 cold. 4 dry. 5 the vessels to carry the
blood nutritive. 6 all begun in the Liver. 7 with on only coat or covering. 8
hollow of a nervous substance. 9 diverse whereof two are most principal, i.
vena porta, in that hollow part of the Liver.
cava, in the bunchy
10 said to be 365 of note, beside the Capillar Veins.
7 Arteries are 1 simple. 2 spermatick. 3 cold. 4 dry. 5 hollow and nervous. 6
all begun at the heart. 7 All with two coats, except Arteria venalis. 8 diverse
whereof two are principals as Arteria 1 magna. 2 venalis.
9 the Pulse. 10 vessels to carry abroad the vital blood and spirits.
8 Panicles are 1 some 1 simple as 1 periostea, i. the felmes that cover the
bones. 2 mediastinae, etc.
2 compound as Diaphragma, etc.
2 spermatick. 3 cold. 4 dry. 5 made some to 1 cover diverse members. 2 divide
parts on from another.

9 flesh is 1 some 1 simple. 2 compound.
2 sanguine not spermatick. 3 hot. 4 moist. 5 caused of blood 1 simple and
pure. 2 musculous, or brawny. 3 Glandulous, or kernelly.
6 of three kinds as flesh,
10 fat is 1 simple. 2 not spermatick. 3 cold. 4 moist. 5 insensible. 6 made of
the subtle parts of the blood. 7 without sinews in it. 8 of three kinds, i. 1
Adeps, i. is that next under the Skin. 2 Pinguedo, i. is that mixed with the
flesh. 3 Auxungia, i. that about the Kidneyes and Intrailes.

11 skin is 1 simple. 2 partly spermatick, 3 temperate. 4 strong. 5 tough. 6
flexible. 7 sensible. 8 of two sorts, i. 1 Epiderims, i. is that true thin
utter Skin. 2 Panniculus carnosus, i. the inner fleshy Skin.
9 made 1 temperate the better to judge, 2 of 1 Veins. 2 Arteries. 3 Nerves.

10 of diverse properties in certain places, and varieth according to the place
whereon it grows, for some you may cannot flay.



Of the Excrementall parts aforesaid.
1 Hairs are 1 Excrementall parts and no members. 2 made of gross fumosities.
3 cold. 4 dry. 5 made to 1 to cause comeliness. 2 evacuate fumosities of the
third digestion. 3 show by their color, etc. the temperature of the brain.
6 Superfluities.
2 Nails are 1 Excrementall parts and no members. 2 superfluities. 3 cold. 4
dry. 5 softer then bones. 6 Tough like horn. 7 Engendered of earthy vapors. 8
made 1 the better to hold. 2 to 1 claw and scratch. 2 divide things the better.



A brief Anathomy of the compound members the better to help the memory, for
the attaining thereof with Expedition.
Things of note concerning the head are generally these two i. the parts
contay- 1 ning, are in particular 5. i. the 1 Hair, 2 Skin, 3 Flesh, 4
Panicle, Pericranium, 5 Scull.
2 ned, are these 5. i. the 1 Dura Matter.
2 Pia 3 Retemirabile. 4 Vermiformis. 5 Brains.


A further relation of those ten parts, what they are, with their proper
places, etc.
1. The 5 parts co^taining, i. the 1 Hair, crinis, is sufficiently spoken of
in the tract of simple members. 2 Skin, i. cutis, is that in which the hair
grows. 3 Membrana carnosa is the hard flesh on the head growing between the
utter Skin and Pericranium. 4 Pericranium is the Panicle that covers the
Scull without froth, between the membrana carnosa, and the bones of the Scull.
5 Craina the scul have 1. 7. bones, i. 1. 1. os coronale, i. the bone of the
forehead. 2 3. 2. ossa later alia, i. the side bones of the head. 4. 5. 2. ossa
petrosa, i. the hard stony bones of the ears whereon they grow. 6. 1. os.
Basilare 1 called Paxilla. 2 i. the foundation bone of the head.
7. occiput 1 called lauda, or occipitiall bone. 2 is the bone wherein the
hole, before the Nucha passes.
3 true 1 Coronale, i. it goes cross over the mould of the head. 2 Sagittales
joyneth the side bones to the crown of the head. 3 Jamdoides joyneth the hinder
ends of the side bones to the bone occipitiall.
2. 2. False, that join the eare-bones to the side bones of the head.
2. 5 futures, or seames, i.


The five things contained, i. the 1 Duramater, is the thick hard panicle
within the Scull next under it. 2 Pia matter, is the soft mother, or panicle,
next under Dura matter, in this the brain is wrapped. 3 Rete mirabile, i. the
wonderful Net, is set under the panicles, and is composed of Arteries that
come from the heart, herein is the vital spirits made Animal, in this Net is
the brain enclosed, from this has the spirit of feeling its first creation,
and thence passes to other parts. 4 Vermiformiss i. the two Wormelike
substances in the middle ventricle of the head. 5 Cerebrum is the brains, it 1
is of two sorts, i. 1 Cerebrum is the great marrowy substance in the forepart
of the head, etc. 2 Cerebellum, it is the little hard brain in the hinder part
of the head.
2 have 3 ventricles, i. the 1 former ventricle.
2 middle 3 hinder



Of the Anatomy of the face.
Things of most note of the parts of the face are these eleven, i. the 1 Bones,
2 Front, 3 Temples, 4 Eyebrows, 5 Eyelids. 6 Eyes, 7 Ears, 8 Nose, 9
Cheeks, 10 Mouth, 11 Chin.

A further relation of those parts, for your better understanding hereof.
Of those 11. things, i. the 1 Bones called ossa facies, are nine. 2 Front,
called frons, i. the forehead. 3 Temples, called Tempora. 4 Eyebrows, called
Supercilia. 5 Eyelids, called Palpebrae. 6 Eye, called oculus, each Eye has 1
A Nerve, called Nervus opticus. 2 Seven Tunicles. 3 Three Humors. 4 Seven
Muscles. 5 A kernet of tears in the corner next the Nose. 6 Veins. 7
Arteries, etc.
7 Ears are called Aures. 8 Nose is called Nasus. 9 Cheeks are called Genae.
10 Mouth called Os in the which are these things of note, i. the 1 Lip, i.
Labra. 2 Teeth, Dentes. 3 Tongue, Lingua. 4 Vuvla. 5 Pallat, i. Palatum. 6
Iaw-bones, i. -Maxilla.
11 Chin, called Mentum.

Of the Anatomy of the neck.
This part reaches from the 1 foundation bone of the head behind, to the
nether end of the seventh Spondle. 2 Epiglot to Gula before.
Things of note of the neck are 14, i. the 1 Spondels. 2 Ligaments. 3 Nucha. 4
Nerves. 5 Veins. 6 Arteries. 7 Paxwax. 8 Muscles. 9 Almonds. 10 Epiglot. 11
Isophagus. 12 Ismon. 13 Thachia Arteria. 14 Gula.
A further Relation of these.
1 7. Spondels, or turning joints of the neck. 2 7. Paires of Nerves of those
Spondles. 3 Marrow of those Spondles called Nucha. 4 Ligaments. 5 Veins,
Jugular or Guidigi, etc. 6 Arteries. 7 Paxwax called Servisis, i. the white
hair. 8 Muscles being 20. 9 Almonds called Amigdales. 10 Epiglot, i* called
Ligulam, of some Operculuin laringis, is the knot or gristle in the throat at
top of the windpipe. 11 Oesophagus, is the gut that carries the meat and
drink from the mouth into the stomach, etc. 12 Ismon is above between the
Oesophagus, and the Trachia arteria. 13 Trachia arteria, i. the windpipe. 14
Gula, is the pit or box, at the nether end of the neck before, at the upper end
of the breast between the two furcula bones.

Of the Anatomy of the Shoulder and great Arm, the great Arm reaches from
the Shoulder to the tops of the fingers.
Things of note of the shoulder and great arm 14. i. the 1 Bones, 1 Shoulder
are 3. i. the A further relation of these.
1 Os spatula, i. the shoulder blade. 2 Os furcula, i. the Camel bone. 3
Adjutory, i. the bone from the shoulder to the Elbow.
2 Great arm are 30. i. 1 On Adjutorie. 2. Two focils, i. 1 major, these two
reach from the Elbow to the Wrist.
2 minor,
3. 8. Wrist. 1 bones called, Rasseta manus 2 i. 4. 1 above at the ends of the
1 focils 2 Ossa platinis

2 beneath

4. 5. called ossa platinis, i. the bones in the palms of the hands. 5. 14.
Ossa digitorum 1. three in each finger. 2. two in each finger.


2 Cartilages, 3 Ligaments, 4 Marrow, 5 Panicles, 6 Nerves, 7 Veins, 8
Arteries, 9 Flesh, 10 Muscles, 11 Cords, 12 Skin, 13 Hair, 14 Nails. 1 Bones
of the 2 Cartilages, 3 Ligaments, 4 Marrow, 1 Basilica, called the Liver vein
2 Cophalica, i. the head vein 3 Mediana, 1 The middle vein 2 called 1
Venanigra, of the Arm.
2 Cardiaca. 3 The common vein

4 Fonis Brachii, proceeds from the shoulder Vein, and spreads with diverse
branches on the back of the hand. 5 Cophalica oculorum appears between the
thumb and the forefinger, and is a branch of Cephalica.
5 Panicles, 6 Nerves, 7 Veins of note to let blood in it are these 6, i. the
8 Arteries. 9 Flesh 10 Muscles of note of the great Arm are 13. i. 1 4 no the
1 adjutory 2 Focils. 3 Hand.

4 5
2 3
11 Cords, Of these and all other things herein for brevity herein omitted, I
refer you to my next Tract of Anatomy, which shall be more at large, if God
permit me time.
12 Skin, 13 Hair, 14 Nails, Note that the great Leg is composed of the
like things as the great Arm.


Of the Anatomy of the Breast, this part reaches from Ossa furcula, down to
Diaphragma.
Things of note of the Breast are generally two, i. the things contay- 2 ning
are these 12. i. the 1 Utter Skin. 2 Flesh. 3 Muscles. 4 Panicles. 5 Bones. 6
Gristles. 7 Nucha. 8 Paxwax. 9 Ligaments. 10 Nerves. 11 Paps. 12 Plura.
A further relation of these.
1 Utter Skin, called Cutis. 2 Flesh, Caro. 3 Muscles, called Lacertus, or
Musculus, are eighty, and after some Writers, ninety.
4 Panicles, or the Periostea, etc. those that cover the bones. 5 Bones of this
Region are 27. i. 1 Twelve Spondels beginning at the last Spondle of the neck,
and so reaches downwards. 2 Three breast bones, called 1 Pectorale. 2 Sternon.
3 Twelve 1 Seven called, Costae verae. 2 Five called 1 Costae spuriae. 2 The
short ribs.


6 Gristle, Ensiformis, it grows at the lower end, of the nether Sternon bone
in the breast before. 7 Nucha, i. the marrow of those 12 Spondels. 8 Paxwax. 9
Ligaments. 10 Twelve pair of motive Nerves of those Spondels. 11 Paps of a
glandulous substance, or flesh. 12 Plura, i. the panicle that covers the 1 Ribs
within. 2 upper part of Diaphragma.

2 ned of note within the Breast are generally these six, i. the 1 Tracha
Arteria. 2 Oesophagus. 3 Heart. 4 Panicles. 5 Lungs. 6 Midriff


A further relation of these foresaid parts contained.
Things of note of the things contained in the Breast being six as aforesaid, i.
the 1 Trachia Arteria, i. the wind pipe that brings air to the Lungs and
Heart. 2 Oesophagus, i. called Merry. 3 Heart in which note these seven things.
1 It is 1 called Cor. 2 a principal member, the Well of heat and life.
2 it has two Ventricles, i. the 1 right, 2 left.
3 The two 1 deaf Ears. 1 Venalis, to carry blood to the Lungs, and brings
back air to the Heart. 2 Magna.
2 great Arteries of the left Ventricle, Arteria.
5 Into the right Ventricle comes a Vein into the Heart, to bring it blood
nutritive, from vena cava. 6 It is wrapped in the capsula cordis, a thick
Panicle like a purse. 7 it has two motions 1 Diastole, i. opening of the Heart
and Pulse.
2 Sistole, i. closing

4 Panicles of note are three i. the 1 Plura aforesaid. 2 Capsula Cordis. 3
Mediastine, i. a Panicle that divides the breast right down, i. divides the
right side from the left.
5 Lungs of it consider these seven things of note 1 It is called pulmo, i. the
lights. 2 The temperature is 1 naturally cold and dry. 1 accidentally cold and
moist.
3 Their creation is first spermatick. 4 It has 1 Two parts, i. on each side
of the Breast on part. 2 Five Jobs, i 1 Three on the right side.
2 Two on the left

5 They were ordained for three causes, i. to 1 draw in Air. 2 purify and
temper the Air. 3 receive the fumous superfluities that the Heart does breath
forth.
6 Their vessels of note are three, i. their 1 Veins, 2 Pipes, 3 Arteria
venalis, 4 Trachia Arteria.
Their ligaments.

7 Midriffe 1 called 1 Diaphragma in Greek. 2 Septum transversum, in Latin.
2 Is set at the lower part of the Breast to divide the spirituals members from
the nutritives 3 The 1 upper part is made of the Panicle 1 Plura, Peritoneum.

2 nether middle between these 2. Panicles toward the ribs is lacertus flesh.
4 Was made for 3 causes, i. to 1 defend the spirituals that the nutritives
oppress them not. 2 keep that the vital heat descend not down too much. 3
defend the Spunals from malign fumes.



Of the Anatomy of the Region of the Belly, it reaches from the Midriffe,
down to os pubes, i. to the bottom of the belly.
Things of note of the Region of the belly are generally two, i. the things
contay- ning of note are generally these 8. i. the 1 Myrac, 2 Syphac, 3 Bones,
4 Nucha, 5 Netves, 6 Veins, 7 Arteries, 8 Muscles.
A further relation of these eight things.
1 Myrac. 1 called 1 so in Arab, 2 Abdomon in Latin.
2 Is all the whole substance of the belly from Syphac, outward. 3 is made of
these 4, i. the 1 utter skin, 2 fat, next under that skin. 3 Carnosus, fleshy
panicle, musculous flesh.

4 in this substance are eight muscles, i. 1. 2. longitudinals, 1 called
misculi recti, 2 to draw out 1 wind, 2 urine, 3 egestion.

2 latitudinals 1 called musculi transversi. 2 to retain things.
3. 4. Obliqui 1 called masculi obliqui. to expel 1 ventositie, 2 urine, 3
odours, etc.


2 Syphac. 1 called the Peritoneum. 2 is the inner skin that covers the
belly, and also makes the nether panicle of Diaphragma. 3 grows to Myrac,
and seems to be part of its substance. 4 is 1 spermatick, 2 cold, 3 dry, 4
nervous, 5 sensible.
5 the breaking of it below is called a rupture. 6 note in large wounds of the
belly, such Myrac and Syphack both together.
3 bones are here 13. i. the 1. 5 spondels. 1 of the back, called lumbrorum
vertebrae, these begin at the lowest rib, and reaches to ossacrum.
6 lower spondels are all joined with os sacrum by sympathy, but the lowest of
those six, is a gristle called os caudae, i. the tail bone. 3. Two pin-bones
joined be- hind to os sacrum, fore, and do make os pubes, i. the share bone.
4 Nu^ba, is in all those eleven spondels likewise. 5 Nerves that come from
those spondels are a 11 pair, and one odd nerve. 6 Veins, 7 Arteries. 8
Eight muscles are spoken of in Myrac.



Things of note in the region of the belly contay- 2 ned, are 12. i. the 1
Call, 2 Liver, 3 Gall, 4 Spleen, 5 Stomach, 6 Guts, 7 Mesenterium, 8 Reins,
9 Bladder, 10 Spermarick vessels, 11 Matrix, 12 The parts below without froth.
A further relation of those 12. parts.
1 Call 1 called 1 Zirbus in Greek, 2 Omentum in Latin.
2 is the fat Call that covers the bowels next within Syphae.
2 Liver, 1 called in Greek, Hepar, Latin, secur, i. massa sanguinis, i. a
mass or lump of congealed blood.
2 it lies 1 under Diaphragma, 2 in the right side under the short ribs.
3 i 1 Spermatick in the first creation, and after become sanguine. 2 a
principal member, 3 hot and moist, 4 insensible of it self, 5 the place of
the second digestion, 6 Gibbons and round, on the outside, 7 hollow in the
inside toward the stomach. 8 the original seat of all Veins, 9 bound to
Diaphragma, 10 sensible by accident.
4 have five lobs, 1 Porta, i in the hollow, part of the Liver.
2 Cava, i. magna, in the bunchy
Two notable veins, i. vena,

3 Gall, 1 called 1 called vesicula f^llis, 2 the bladder of the Gall.
2 is 1 the receptacle of choleric superfluities, 2 placed in the concavitie
of the Liver, 3 Spermatick, 4 in most men half a pint.
3 have ^. orifices, i. 1 on to draw in choler, the other to cleanse the blood
in the Liver. 2 Two to send choler to the 1 Stomach, to scour out 1 slime,
excreme^ts

2 gut piloru^, leen,


4 Spleen is 1 called lienae, i. the Milt or Spleen, 2 Spermatick, 3 cold, 4
dry, 5 the receptacle of Melancholy placed on the left side under the 1
Midriffe, 2 short ribs.
7 fastened to the 1 Liver behind to draw away the fecks of the blood. 2 Stomach
before to cast in a sour juice, to cause the sharper appetite.
8 ordained for three causes, i. to 1 nourish it self, 2 cleanse the blood from
Melancholy, 3 sharpen the appetite.




Things of note in the region of the belly contay- 2 ned, are 12. i. the 1
called ventriculus, 2 under Diaphragma, 3 lies between the Liver and the
Spleen, 4 compound, 5 Spermatick, 6 Nervous, 7 very sensible, 8 made of two
Panicles, i. the 1 inward, 2 utter.
9 the place of the first disgestion, 10 narrow above and wide beneath, 11 the
first foundation of nourishment to all parts. 12 in quantity three pints. 13
fastened 1 above to Oesophagus, 2 below to the Gut Duodenum.
14 in form 1 much like the bag of a Bag-pipe, 2 both ends partly upward, 3
with the nether passage better then the other 3 for causes as shall in the next
Tract be declared.
And are called the Intestines. 1 Duodenum 1 grows to the nether mouth of the
stomach. 2 is twelve inches long, 3 also called pilorum.
3
2 Iejunium 1 The empty or fasting gut is ever more found empty 2 Into this gut
passes choler from the gall to cleanse it.
3 Jlion. the small gut, this is 1 fifteen or sixteen cubits long, 2 called
in Latin Tenue.
4 Monocubus, i. 1 The blind gut, called saccus, i. a sack, 2 This gut seems
to have but one end, 3 There goes no Mesentery Veins beyond this gut, to draw
any juice because all the food is spent before.
5 Colon 1 is the great gut 1 full of wromples, 2 in it is bred the wind
Colic,
2 receives all the dross being past all nourishment. 3 have no Mesenteries
come to it.
6 Longaon 1 called 1 intestinum rectum, 2 the gut of the fundament.
2 is a span long. 3 reaches near to the Kidneyes. 4 have 1 Muscles in the
nether end some say Two i. 1 open, 2 close.
one to 4 one to 1 open, 2 shut, 3 retain, 4 expel.


5 Hemoroidal Veins that come to it from the Liver and Spleen.



Mesenterium.
Things of note of the region of the belly contay- 2 ned are 12. i. the 7
Mesenterium 1 called the Megerum, or the Crow of some. 2 is the fat substance
that holds the guts together. 3 keeps the guts together, and tyeth them in
their places. 4 is full of 1 Veins mensetery, i. sucking Veins. 2 kernels mixed
with the fat thereof
5 grows fast to the back. 6 The Veins thereof are called meseraiaca vasa,
whose innumerable Veins serve to draw the Chylus that is made in the stomach
by the digestion, from the stomach and guts into venae porta, in the hollow
part of the Liver.
8 Reins are 1 called Renes, i. the Kidneys. 2 lacertous flesh. 3 Two in
number. 4 tied fast to the back. 5 like to the Kidneys of a Cow. 6 placed 1 on
each side within toward the back of the nethermost or twelfth spondle of the
breast, or very near thereunto. 2 the right ever higher then the left. 3 with
fat about them, ever to temper the heat made about them, by sharpness of the
urine, etc.
7 made 1 to cleanse the blood from watery superfluities. 2 with two fine
passages, the one to 1 draw the watery part of the blood from venaekelis, by the
emulgent veins to the Kidneys. 2 send the urine to the bladder which passage is
called porus ureticus.

8 of harder flesh then any other member for two causes, i. the better to 1
resist the sharpness of the urine without hurt. 2 Alter and cleanse the urine.




Things of note of the region of the belly contained, be these 12. i. the 9
Bladder is 1 called Vesica. 2 Spermatick. 3 compound with many Veins and
Arteries, etc. 4 cold. 5 dry. 6 made of two Panicles. 7 Carnous, or fleshy on
the neck. 8 placed 1 Men, between the share bone and 1 Longaon, 2 The Matrix.

2 Women,
9 The receptacle of urine. 10 A pint or more.
10 Spermatick vessels, i. 1 called vasa seminaria, 2 Come from venakelis and
arteria magna. Some 1 bring fit blood for it to the resticles, to be there
changed into Sperme. pass from the testicles to cast the Sperme from them, in
1 Men into the yard. 2 Women into the bottom of the Matrix.


11 Matrix 1 the 1 neck is called 1 Cervix uteri, 2 Vulva.

2 port
2 is 1 cold, 2 dry, 3 Spermatick, 4 compound of 1 Veins, 2 Arteries, 3
Nerves, etc.
5 placed between Langaon and the Bladder. 6 much like the Bladder in form. 7
The field of man's generation.
3 Embreon in which the 1 first things shaped are the 1 principal members 2
bones and Cartilages. 3 other members all in general.

2 next 3 last 4 Secundine is the Panicle or Wrapper in which the child lies.
5 Rest of these things that might be here spoken of, concerning these matters
for brevitie I omit.

12 parts below.

The twelfth of the parts below without froth are the 1 Groines 1 or flanks
called Ingunie, or Emunctories, the clensing place of the Liver. 2 are full of
Glandules or Kernels.
2 Yard. 1 called virgam 2 whose 1 he is 1 called glans, 2 true and simple
flesh.
2 utter loose skin that covers over the head of it, is called praeputium.

3 Cods 1 called Scrotum. 2 contains in the^ these six things, i. the 1
(...), i. the hollow string that holds the stone. 2 Testicles, i. the stones.
3 Dartos, i. the Panicle that covers the stone (...) within the Dedim. 4
Erythroeida, i. the next thin covering within the Dartos. 5 Epidydimis, is a
Glandell that cleaves to the upper part of each stone. 6 Seminary vessels,
that erect the seed from the stones into the Yard.



Of the Anatomy of the thigh and great leg, which reaches from the Pin-bone
to the top of the toes.
The great leg is divided into 3. parts, i. the 1 Thigh have. 1 one bone 1
called foemora, or coxa, 2 it reaches from the pin-bone to the knee,
2 the other parts as that of the great arm.
2 Shank have 1 On whirle bone* on the knee called 1 ro^ulae genu. 2 The knee
pan.
2 bones 1 that reach from the knee to the Ancle. 2 called focile or Tibia, 1
majus. 2 minus.
3 The greatest is the shin-bone, whose nether end makes the inner Ancle,
least stands on the outside of the leg from the gartering place under the
knee I own to the utter ancle, the nether end of it makcth utter Ancle.

3 4. Veins, see.

The great Leg is divided into three parts i. the 2 Shank-have 4 Veins to be
opened by Phlebotomy, i. Venae. 1 Popletica, i. the Vein vider the ham. 2
Saphena, is on the 1 in side of the Ancle.
2 out

3 Sciatica, 4 Kenalis, i. the vein that lies between the little Toe and the
next to it.

3 Foot have 26 bones, i. 1 Os Talus, i. the bone next under the focils of the
Leg, 2 Os Calcis, the heel bone, it is joined behind to os Talus, under it.
3 Os naviformis, i. 1 the shiplike bone, i. the bone of the instep. 2 is joined
to Os Talus, under the fore part of it.
4 Ossa Rassita pedis, be 4, i. 1 On called Cubiforme, i. the square Dye-bone
in the inside of the heart of the foot. 2 Three called Chalcoidea.
5 Ossa planta pedis, be five small bones in the plant of the foot, reaching
from the aforesaid four bones to the bones of the Toes. 6 of the Toes are 1
next below joining to those five bones last above said. 2 fourteen i. 1 Two in
the great Toe.
2 Three in each other


4 Bones of the great Leg from the hip downwards are 30. i. 1 on in the
thigh. 2 one on the knee. 3 Two in the Leg from the knee to the ancle. 4 six
and twenty in the instep and foot.
5 Other parts are like those of the great Arm.

Laus DEO.
FINIS.

