A PLAIN PATH-VVAY TO PLANTATIONS:

That is, A Discourse in general, concerning the Plantation of our English
people in other Countrie^*

Wherein Is declared, That the Attempts or Actions, in themselves are very good
and laudable, necessary also for our Country of England. Doubts thereabout are
answered: and some means are showed, by which the same may, in better sort
then hitherto, be prosecuted and effected.

Written For the persuading and stirring up of the people of this Land, chiefly
the poorer and common sort to affect and effect these Attempts better then yet
they do. With certain Motives* for a present Plantation in Newfound land
above the rest.

Made in the manner of a Conference, and divided into three Parts, for the more
plainness, ease, and delight to the Reader.

By RICHARD EBVRNE of Hengstridge in the County of Somerset.

Printed by G. P. for John Marriot. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHERS IN GOD, AND HONORABLE LORDS, ARTHVR, LORD
BISHOP OF Bathe and Wells, and ROBERT, Lord Bishop of Bristol, RICHARD EBVRNE
wishes all health and happiness external, internal and eternal.
COnsidering, ( Right Honorable) and not without grief of mind, and sorrow of
heart, viewing the great misery and encombrance of this our goodly country,
the Country of England (which heretofore admirably flourished in plenty and
prosperity) by reason of the excessive multitude of people, which therein at
this present do swarm and superabound, the many fair Opportunities which
God, in his gracious Providence, often has, and at this instant does offer
unto it, for a present, a speedy, and an infallible remedy thereof: and yet
the notorious neglect and wayward unwillingness of the people of this Land, our
English Nation, to regard and accept such Offers, and to seek and take their
own good: I thought I might do a work worth the labor, and (in all likely
hood) grateful and useful to my Country and Countrymen, to write something,
(and the rather, for that none that I know, has yet traveled this way) that
might stir and encourage them, specially the common and meaner sort of them,
as whom chiefly, and most of all it does concern, to make better use of these
fair, worthy and necessary opportunities.

Whereupon I have in a plain and familiar manner, (as one that intended to
submit himself to the capacity and understanding, even of the meanest, The
sum of he whole Treatise.
for whom specially this my labor I intended.) First, declared and justified
these kind of Attempts, Plantations, to tend notably to the glory of Almighty
God, the enlargement of the Kings Majesty's Dominions, and the manifold and
inestimable benefit of this whole Land, the Realm of England; and to be in
their own nature lawful and just, ancient and usual. Secondly, I have showed
some particular means, or inferior courses, how and whereby, both men and
money, the two principal things that must plentifully be had for Plantations,
may easily and speedily be raised and procured in and out of our Land for this
purpose. And thirdly, I have given and set down some particular Instructions
and observations touching these Actions, not unworthy happily the Notion and
Consideration of many such as yet are little acquainted with them; and added
some special Motives, for a present Plantation in New Foundland, before and
above any other place of Plantation yet attempted. Withal, in every of these
passages, I have answered all such, either real (or rather Regionall) or
personal Objections, as commonly are made against the enterprises themselves,
why they should not be regarded, or by persons that should employ themselves in
the enterprises, why they should not adventure therein?

These plain, but I hope plausible and profitable Labors of mine, I am bold,
and humbly desire your Lordships both, that I may be bold to present to the
open view and consideration of this Land, under the Patronage and protection of
your Honorable Names: The one of you being my much and worthily honored
Diocesan; the other my worthy and favorable Patron: both special Fautours of
all good Learning, and furtherers of all goodly Endeavors; and therefore, such
as I hope and presume will vouchsafe these Labors of mine, and these worthy,
pious, and religious (if they be worthily, piously, and religiously handled)
these notable Attempts, and for our Land at this present most necessary and
expedient, your best furtherance and countenance: not doubting but that thereby
both my Endeavors shall the better be respected and received, and the Actions
themselves the more advanced and followed, I shall be shielded from the
malicious envy of the carping Cauiller, that takes more delight, and can be
content to bestow more labor and time in deprauing what others have done, then
in setting forth and publishing, I say not any better, but any like and as good
of his own: and they (the Actions) shall be shrouded from the canine
unkindness of those lazy Lurdans that will neither take the good of them
themselves, nor suffer, by their good will, any other to do it.

One reason more particular has moved me to tender to your Lordships these my
Labors, and that is, for that the one of you is resident in that City, as in
his proper and Episcopal Sea: the other in the next neighboring both City and
Country, which either by it self in general, or by a certain number of the
worshipful Citizens thereof, in particular, has already begun, and at this
present continues a Plantation in New Foundland: which I therefore hope will
be an occasion that may move your good Lordships both, this way to do to the
Places of your own abode (which truly by reason of the number of people,
wherewith they are cloyed and ouerlaid, do as greatly need these helps, as any
Cities or Counties in England) much good and benefit. Which thing, I am
persuaded, you may easily and greatly effect, if you will be pleased, but to
show your selves in countenancing and assisting me and others, that do and
will employ our selves in them, to approve and favor, to allow and like of
these kind of Labors and Endeavors, and namely, that wherein your own people
and so near Neighbors are already so far interessed and proceeded.

The Lord Jesus, the high Bishop of our Souls, vouchsafe unto your Lordships,
whom he has called to be Principal Pastors in this his Church of England,
such plentiful store of his Heavenly gifts, and so guide you by his Holy
Spirit, that you may sincerely set forth his Gospel, and seek his Glory in
this World, and in the World to come be crowned by him with Celestial and
eternal Glory. Amen.

Your Honorable Lordships (...) to command in the work of the Lord, RICHARD
EBVRNE.

TO THE CVRTEOVS AND Christian READERS, especially the Common People of this
Realm of ENGLAND.
OTher men, diners, have labored severally in describing and commending, one
this Country, another that: as Captain Whitbourne, New Foundland; Captain
Smith his New England; Master Harecourt Guiana; and some others, more then one
or two, Virginia And every of these has used sundry Motives for the
advancement of a Plantation, in the place by him most affected; all tending to
this maine end: To move our people of England, to plant themselves abroad, and
free themselves of that penury and peril of want, wherein they live at home.
But none that I know has handled the point in general, viz. to show the
benefit and the good; the lawfulness and the ancient and frequent use; the
facility and necessity (that is indeed, if I may so speak, the Doctrine) of
Plantations. That task therefore, have I undertaken, which how I have
performed, I leave to others to judge; requesting this at your hands
(beneuolent and courteous Readers) that you observe and consider: First, That I
am the first that has broken this Ice, and searched out this way; and that
therefore it must needs be to me more rough and rude, then if I had passed a
smooth water, and gone along in an usual and beaten path. Secondly, That my
whole purpose and intent is, principally and specially to do some good this
way, for and with the meaner sort of our people: to whose capacity therefore,
it was fit, and more then fit, necessary, that I should fit and frame my
speech. That observed, I doubt not but you will, not only bear with, but also
approve of my plainness, as best befitting my purpose to work; and my subject
to work upon: the more learned and judicious sort, I freely and ingeniously
acknowledge my self more desirous to have my Teachers and directours in this
kind of Learning, then my Readers and Followers.

If any think it a point beyond my Compass, for a Divine by Profession, to
deal with an argument of this Nature, viz. to entreat of Plantations, which
are commonly taken to be a matter altogether of Temporal and Secular right.
Let him be pleased to know: First, That I am not alone, nor the first in this
attempt, but have for my president the precedent examples of some far before
me in Learning and Knowledge; as Master Hackluit, who long since wrote a great
Volumne of English Voiages, Master Crashaw in England, and Master Whitaker in
Virginia; who have both employed their Pens and pains for that Plantation.

Secondly, That Plantations are Actions wherein we also of the Clergy are as
far interessed as any other. They are as free for us, as for others: and, if
men will have any hope that they shall prosper in their hands, we must have a
distinct part, a certain share, and Cleargie-like Portion in them, as well as
men of other places and qualities have theirs. And therefore, to write and
discourse of, and for them, it behooves, and becomes us of the Clergy, as
well, and as much as any other.

Thirdly, That one proper, and principal end of Plantations, is, or should be,
the enlargement of Christ's Church on Earth; and the publishing of his Gospel
to the Sons of Men: and therefore in that respect, it cannot but properly and
directly belong unto them, to whom Christ has given commandment and authority
above others to take care of his Flock, to seek the furtherance of the Gospel,
and to sound forth the glad tidings of Salvation to all Nations, to be
principal Agents therein, and special furtherers thereof.

That my proofs and examples are most out of the Bible and Sacred Histories, I
have done it of purpose, not only because they are with me most familiar and
of best authority, but because they should be so with all Christians; even the
Lay sort likewise. As I am not of the Papists opinion, that is, to care little
for the Scripture: so I like not to be of the Popish fashion, which is, to fill
the peoples ears with sound of the Names of Fathers, Councels, and
others-like, which they nor are, nor can be acquainted with but to let them
hear little and see less the Word of God, in which they easily might, and
certainly should be ripe and ready, and well both seen and read.

Besides, for this present argument, it is so frequent in the Scriptures, that
there is not any substantial point thereabout, for, or of the which (because
the practice thereof was very much in those times) there is not some, either
precept or president to be found.

If I have any where dissented from the common practice, and showed some
dislike of the ordinary proceedings in these Proiects, I desire but so far
to be borne with and accepted, as I bring good reason for it, and declare or
intimate some just and reasonable cause thereof.

Though I have not presumed to set down any certain and regular platform of
a good and right Plantation which happily to have done, would have seemed in me
too much either boldness or rashness: yet thus much I presume to affirm of
that I have written, that if any will read and consider it well, he may,
without any great labor, collect and find out a true and good platform of
such an Action.

I have so answered many and most of the common Objections made against and
about these attempts, that out of, and by the same, an answer may likewise be
shaped to any other objection that lightly can be made there-against.

The whole I have so drawn unto certain heads, and s^rted again into
several parts, as I thought might best accord with the matter haudled, and be
most likely to yield ease and delight to the Reader.

Wherein that I have digested all into the form of a Conference or Dialogue,
having so many examples for it, and most of them from the best of all Ages, I
am so far from fearing lest thereby I should offend any, that I presume rather,
that in that point and pains above the rest, howsoever I be a little the
larger, because of the Interlocution, I shall be the better accepted, my
meaning and drift the sooner perceived, and my Labors and Lines the oftener
looked upon and perused.

And now* that I may reuert my speech to you my countrymen and friends, you, I
say, of the meaner sort, for whose sake chiefly, out of the abundance of my
ardent love and fervent desire to do you good, I have put my self to all this
pains, I have undertaken this work. Be pleased, I pray you, to peruse* that
is, to read, and cause to be read to you, over and over this book, which I
have written to you, and for you. The Argument whereof I entreat therein, is,
of Plantations, which howsoever attempted by many worthy, great, and honorable
Personages, yet seem little to be accepted and respected of you, for whom, of
all other, they are most necessary, and to whom properly they are intended.

Looks upon the misery and want wherein you do, and abiding in England, you
cannot but live. Look upon the plenty and felicity, wherein going hence, you
may live. Prefer not poverty before riches, nor your perpetual evil and
wretchedness, before perpetual good and happiness. Now is a time wherein you
may do you and yours nitie, for ever, if you will. Now God does offer you that
Opportugood with choice of place, to rid your selves from your present misery
and distress, which if you neglect to take, and refuse, as hitherto you do,
to make use of and embrace, will never, happily can never be had again.

Believe not the idle tales and vain speeches of such, as knowing not, and
caring not to do, either themselves or other good, persuade and tempt you to
abide at home, that is, to dwell (as many of you do) in famine and penury,
and to die in need and misery. Harken unto me, read, hear, and consider what
I say for your better information, and to stir up and animate you to accept
your good, while you may, and to stablish your Happiness, while Opportunity
serves. Never can, or shall you do it with less labor and travail, with
less charge and expense, with less peril and hurt, with less trouble and
incombrance then now you may. My words and speeches are plain and familiar, my
reasons and arguments are strong and evident, and my answers to the vain
Objections of the contrary minded are sound and solid. Let truth take place
within you, let reason move, and let evidence of the cause sway and settle you.

Be not too much in love with that country wherein you were borne, that
country which bearing you, yet cannot breed you* but seems, and is indeed,
weary of you. She accounts you a burden to her, and encombrance of her. You
keep her down, you hurt her and make her poor and bare, and together with
your own, you work and cause, by tarrying within her, her misery and decay,
her ruin and undoing. Take and reckon that for your Country where you may best
live and thrive. Strain not no more to leave that Country wherein you cannot
prove and prosper, then you do to leave your fathers houses, and the parish
wherein you were borne and bred up, for fitter places and habitations.

And if you will needs live in England, imagine all that to be England where
English men, where English people, you with them, and they with you, do dwell.
(And it be the people that makes the Land English, not the Land the people.) So
you may find England, and an happy England too, where now is, as I may say, no
Land, and the bounds of this Land, of England, by removing of your selves, and
others the people of this Land, to be speedily and wonderfully removed,
enlarged and extended into those parts of the world, where once the Name of
England was not heard of, and whereon the foot of an English man (till of late)
had not trodden.

Be not so vaine-minded or weake-hearted as to think or believe that you shall
do better in this England with little or nothing, then in any other with
something: here with an house and a backeside, then otherwhere with forty or
threescore, with one or two hundred acres of ground. It is the means and not
the place that keeps and maintains men well or ill. And Englishmen above many
others are worst able to live with a little.

Know and consider, that as it is the same Sun that shines there, as well as
here, so it is the same God, (that God in whose name you are baptized, in whose
Church you have, and do, and shall live, whose servants you that remove are,
shall, and may be as well as they that remove not) that God, I say, that rules
and guides all things there as well as here. And doubt ye not, but that if you
fear and serve him there, if there you keep his commandments and walk in
his ways, as here you have been, and there you shall still be taught and
directed. (For the Ark of God, and the sons of Aaron and seed of Leui, must
and will go over with you) The hand of his all-guiding Providence, will be
stretched out unto you, and the eye of his all-sauing mercy, no l^sse there
then here will look upon you. For, God is nigh unto all those that call upon
him, yea, all those that call upon him faithfully, Psalm. 145. 38. wheresoever
it be. Read over and peruse often ( good Brethren) the 107. Psalm. and the
139. They will teach you most plainly, plentifully and comfortably, that by Sea
and Land* far off and near, in one part of the world as well as in another,
the Lord is at hand, (for he is Lord of all) he sees and beholds all the
sons of men, an^ defends and provides for all that be his. To whose
fatherly tuition, and merciful protection, betaking and commending your
selves, fear not to follow him whither soever he calls, and defer not to
accept his bountiful riches and goodly gifts wheresoever he presents and
offers them unto you, no more then did Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebecca,
Jacob and many other famous, godly, and holy Patriarchs and persons, when God
commanded them, to forsake their kindred and their fathers house, and to go
into that land which he should show them: whose sons and daughters you shall
be made, if you also walk in their steps, doing well, and not being dismayed
with any fear. But of these things, I have spoken more at large in my Book,
to the reading whereof I will now remit and leave you.

Your Companion in one or other Plantation, if the Lord will: RICHARD EBVRNE.

The Sum or principal Contents of the whole Book.
The first Part.
WHere in is declared 1. What profit may come by reading such Books as
concern Plantations. page 2. See also part 3 page 90. 2 That Plantations are
Actions very commendable and necessary. p. 3 3 That by them the Church of
Christ may notably be enlarged, partly by the Addition of other Countries to
Christendom. p. 4 And partly by the Conversion of infinite heathens to the
Christian faith. Ibidem. To whom the Gospel must be preached before the end
can be. p. 7 The Papists have endeavored much this way. p. 4 4 That by
Plantations the Dominions and Majesty of the Kings of England may much be
augmented. p. 8 5 That the good of this I and may notably be thereby procured.
p 9. viz. In the 1 Easier supportation of the regal estate. ibid. 2 Ridding
out of the Land the over great and superfluous multitude thereof. ibid. 3
Abating the excessive high prices of all things to live by. p. ibid 4 Enriching
the poorer sort hence removed. p. 10 5 Amending the Trade and Traffic of
Merchants. p. 11 6 Rooting out Idleness out of this Land. p. ibid
The fruits of Idleness. p. 16 An Objection answered of Idlers. p. ibid
Another of Idlers removed hence. p. 14 6 That the practice of making
Plantations, is a thing very lawful. p. 1. And very usual and ancient. p. 176
7 Certain Objections commonly made against Plantations are answered. as, 1 Of
the distance of the place. p. 18 2 The wildness and desolatenesse of the
Countries. p. 19 There that Tents may serve for housing for a time. p. 20 3 The
badnesse and barrenesse of the soiles. p. 21 There, against the spoil of woods
in those Coutnries. (...) 4 The countries are full of wild Beasts. p. 24 There,
what means may be used for profitable Cattle to be had and transported
thither. p. 26 5. The people there, rude and barbarous. p. 28 6 The Adventures
very dangerous. p. 29. 30. 31 7 That small profit, no wea^th is there to be
had. p. 32. 33. 33. There, what great riches and livings by all likelihood, are
there to be had. p. 34 35 There, N^rmandie and Aquitaine lost in France, and
when. p. 36 8 That it will be long time and much expense spent, Before any
thing there to any purpose can be effected. p. 37
The Sum of the second Part.
Wherein is showed. 1. That the best course to be taken for Plantations, is by
Act of Parliament. page 46 2 Two things being principally necessary to the
working of Plantations, viz. Men and Money. What Inferior courses might be
taken for the raising or procuring of both plentifully: that is, Of Money. 1 By
Voluntaries. p. 47 2 By personal Adventurers. p. ibid. 2 By general
Collections. p. ibid. 4 By Hospital Money. p. 48. By moneys given to the use of
the poor. p. ibid. 6 By Moneys given to the use of the Church. p. 49. 7 By
Lotterie. p. ibid. 8 By some ratable Imposition. p. 50 9 By base Moneys for
those purposes and places to be stamped. p. ibid. 10 By Gold and Silver coins
altered. p. 52. 11 By frugall expenses. p. 53 An Extrauagant. p. 54. By godly
parsimonie of the richer sort at home. p. ibid. Then of Men. 1 By Proclamation.
2 and 3 By good order for removing. p. 56 4 By provision supplied. p. 57 5 By
Vagrants. 6 By Prisoners. p. 59. 7 Maimed Soldiers 8 Cottagers. 9 Inmates. p.
60. 10 Soldiers and Servants. p. 62 There what sort of persons are fittest for
a Plantation. p. 63 11 Ministers of the Word. p. 64 There how they may be
provided for. p. 64. 65 12 Scholemasters and other Scholars. p. 66 There, what
means may be used for procuring such men to be go over. p 67 A notable
History of the Conversion of certain Indians in the time of Athanasciou^. p.
67 13 By men of name and note to be Governors. p. 68 14 And that in the State
Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal. p. 69 15 That his Majesty would entitle
himself to that Country in which any Plantation shall be. p. 70 Certain
Objections answered: as, 1 The greatness of the expenses. p. 72 2 The removing
of so many at once* p. ibid. 3 The weakening and impouerishing of our Land. p.
73 4 The wast of the revenues of the Crown. p. 78

The sum of the third Part.
1 Causes why Plantations proceed no better in England. viz. 1 The want of a
general resolution thereto. p. 90 2 The want of some good course for it. p. 91
3 The great idleness of our people, and lack of industry. p. ibid. 4 The
immoderate love of their natural Country. p. 92
2 How many Plantations there be now in hand. p. 93 3 Whether all of them can
be finished. p. 94 4 Which of them seems to be best to be set forward. p. 95
5 How many ways to make a Plantation. p 96 There Planting by invasion
disliked. p. ibid 6 That Plantation and Invasion are somewhat like in some
things, and how. p. 100 There, what Celeritie is needful in making a
Plantation. p. 101 7 Whether better to plant in an Island or a Continent. p.
104. 8 Certain motives gathered out of Captain ^ huburnes book, why Newfound
land may be thought fittest for a present Plantation. p. 104. 105. 106. 9
Certain personal Objections usually made by such as are unwilling to go in a
Plantation, answered, as, 1 Of Agednesse. p. 109. 2 Vn-vsuall for old men. ibid.
There whether old men and married, or young single men be fitter for a
Plantation. p. 100. 3 Hard Traveling by Sea. p. 111 4 Of them that have some
good livings here. p. 112 5 That such men do not usually go. p. 114 6 That
women, men's wives are not willing. p. 116
10 To go into one or other ^lantation, the Author intends. p. 19
The end of the Contents.
Errata.
Page 6. line 4. for barren read barbarian. page 15. line 5. for idle r. such.
p. 19. l. 6. for Island r. Ireland. p. 24. l. vlt. for employed r. enpeopled. p.
59. l. 19. for stealing r. filching. p. 61. l. 10. for poory r. poor. p. 62.
li. 32. for of r. to. p. 64. l. for informed r. enforced. p. 65. l. 2. for
distinted r. distincted. p. 110. l. 27. for hur r. hurt. p. 114. l. 7. for
willingly r. willing. p. 115. l. 19. for approve read prove.

A PLAIN PATHWAY TO PLANTATIONS. The first Part.
The Speakers be Respire, a Farmer. Enrubie, a Merchant.

Respire. I Am very glad to see you in health (good Master Enrubie) and hearing
of your coming home, I am come to see you, and to salute you.


Enrubie. I thank you heartily for it, Neighbor Respire, and am glad to see
you and the rest of my good Neighbors and friends here, to be also in good
health. I pray you sit down by me in this Harbor.


Resp. That I would do willingly, but that I doubt I shall be troublesome to
you: for I see you are busy in reading some Book, what-euer it be.


Enr. That shall be no trouble to me, nor let to us. For it is but to recreate
my self withal, for want of better company and exercise.


Resp. If it be for Recreation, then I hope it is some matter of delight and
special observation.


Enr. Yes indeed. It is a new and pretty Discourse of some of our new
Plantations; namely, that in N.


Resp. I marvel what good or pleasure you should find in such idle Books,
fables I think, not worth the looking on.


Enr. They are better then you yet understand, I see: and therefore be not you
rash in condemning, lest you be hastic also in repenting: for, Ad poenitendum
properat, cito qui iudicat. Hasty men (as they say) never lack woe.


Resp. Why? But do you indeed find any good in reading such books, which I
know of many to be but little regarded?


Enr. Yea truly: and that I doubt not but you also shall acknowledge, before
you depart from hence, if you have the leisure to stay with me but a while.


Resp. I have lost more time then this ere now: and therefore for your good
companies sake, I will, God willing, see the event: and any great business to
hasten me away at this time, I have not, I pray you therefore tell me, what
good you get by those Books?


Enr. Besides the delight that comes by the novelty of the contents What
profit may come by reading such books as concern Plantations.
thereof, and you know that, Est natura hominum Nouitatis auida: we are by much
nature like the Athenians spoken of in the 17. the Acts of the Apostles,
desirous very much to hear News: I do reap thereby unto my self this
threefold benefit. First, I do thereby after a sort, as blessed Moses from
mount Nebo, Deuteronomy. 34. view and behold with the eyes of my mind those goodly
Countries, which there God does (offer to) give unto us and to our seed.
Secondly, Thereby I am enabled with Joshua and Cal^b, Number. 14. to stop the
mouths, and confute the malice of them, that in my hearing, like the ten
unfaithful spies, shall go about to bring up an evil report upon those good
lands, and stay the murmurings of such foolish and ignorant people, as upon
every idle hearesay, or any lazy vagrants letter, are ready to believe the
worst: and withal, thirdly, I am the better prepared to inform them and
others, that are willing to know the truth and certainty thereof.


Resp. I see there is good use to be made of such books, if a man will. And
therefore I shall from henceforth forbear to think of them as I have done:
and I shall desire you to lend me that book of yours for a day or two, that I
may read it over also.


Enr. I shall willingly lend you this, and one after another, two or three more
that I have of the like argument. For I wish with all my heart, that both you
and all my friends were as well acquainted in them as I am.


Resp. I thank you much for this courtesy. But seeing you make such use and
reckoning of those books, it seems that you make more account of the actions
themselves, that is, of Plantations, whereof they do entreat, which yet I ever
held, and so I know do many else, that be men of good wit and understanding, to
be but idle proiects and vain attempts.


Enr. Without any dislike or disparagement to any other men's Plantations
themselves are Actions very commendable necessary, etc.
wits or understandings be it spoken, for mine own part I do profess, I
estimate and account the Actions themselves to be very good and godly,
honorable, commendable, and necessary: such as it were much to be wished might
be, and much to be lamented they be not, in far better sort, then hitherto
any of them are, followed and furthered, as which tend highly, first, to the
honor and glory of Almighty God. Secondly, to the Dignity and Renown of the
Kings most excellent Majesty. And thirdly, to the infinite good and benefit of
this our Commonwealth. Three things, then which none weightier or worthier, can
in any Design or Project be leuelled or aimed at.


Resp. You make me even amazed, to hear of you, that so great good may be
effected or expected out of those Courses, which of many are so much contemned
and dispraised. Wherefore for my better satisfaction therein, I pray you, let
me hear of you in particular somewhat, how these notable effects might be
produced, and namely first, the Glory and Honor of God.


Enr. The Glory of God cannot but be much furthered thereby, 1. By them the
Church of Christ may notably be enlarged.
were it but only, that the Gospel of Christ should thereby be professed and
published in such places and countries, by those alone, that shall remove from
hence to inhabit there, where before, since the beginning of the Gospel, for
ought we know, or is likely, it was never heard, at least professed, as it is
now of late come to pass, (God be praised) and we hope will be shortly in
Newfound land.


Resp. Will be, say you? Me thinks you should rather have reckoned that among
the first, because that for fifty or threescore years before ever the Summer
Islands or Uirginia were heard of, our people did yearly go thither a fishing,
and so the Name of, Christ was there long since honored among them.


Enr. But for all that, till there be Christians inhabiting there, we cannot
say properly, that the Gospel of Christ is planted there, or that it is any
part of Christendom. It must therefore in that respect, give place to the
other before-named, as which indeed were Christian before it.


Resp. I cannot dislike that you say. And indeed any man may By the Addition of
other Countries to Christendom.
see, that this must needs be a great advancement to the honor of God, when
as the Scepter of his Son is extended so much farther then it was, as is from
hence to those remote and unknown Regions. Christendom will then be so much
the larger. And it seems to me it will be in a goodly order, seeing that as I
understand, from England to Newfoundland, and so to the Summer Islands, and
thence to Virginia, all is in one tract, no Turkish, no Heathen Country lying
between. But proceed, I pray you.


Enr. This is, as you see, greatly to the honor of God, And by the Conversion
of infinite heathens to Christianity.
but it will be much more, if when and where our people do plant themselves in
such countries where already are an infinite number of other people, all
Savages, Heathens, Infidels, Idolaters, etc. this in the Plantation may
principally and speedily be labored and intended, That by learning their
languages, and teaching them ours, by training up of their children, and by
continual and familiar converse and commerce with them, they may be drawn and
induced, persuaded and brought to relinquish and renounce their own
Heathenismes, Idolatries, Blasphemies and Deuill-worships. And if (for that I
take it cannot The Papists have much endeavored this way.
be denied) the Papists have done much good that way, by spreading the Name of
Christ, though but after their corrupt and superstitious manner, into so many
unknown Nations that lived before altogether in the service and captivity of
the devil, (for Better it is, that God be served a bad way, then no way at
all.) How much more good must it needs be, if the Name of the true God, in a
true and sound manner, might there be published and spread abroad?

To which purpose, I would to God, there were among us, us Protestants, that
profess and have a better Religion then they the Papists, one half of that
zeal and desire to further and disperse our good and sound Religion, as seems
to be among them for furthering and dispersing theirs. Which not found, for our
zeal is coldness, and our forwardness, backwardness in that behalf, in
respect of theirs, I need not say, we may fear; but rather, we may assure our
selves, that they shall rise against us in the day of Judgment, and condemn
us. As they have deserved, so let them have the Palm and Praise in this point.
For what other ends soever they proposed in their conquests and courses,
questionless Religion, the Christian faith, according to their knowledge, was
not the least, nor the last, since certain it is, They never set foot in any
Country, nor prevailed in any Coast, wherein they did not forthwith endeavor
to root out Paganism, and plant Christianisme, or leave behind them at least
some Monuments and signs thereof.

And who can tell? (I speak this to provoke ours the more withal) who can
tell, I say, whether God has even therefore, as to Iehu that rooted out B^l,
himself continuing to worship Ieroboams Calves, 2. Reg. 10. 30, 31. bestowed
on them a great part of that success in wars, increase in wealth, and honor
on earth, which had we stood forth in their stead, and gone before them, as we
should, and might have done; he would more admirably, happily, and abundantly,
have conferred on us? For he that is so kind to his enemies, what would he
have been to his friends?


Resp. I easily perceive that this might redound not a little to the glory of
God, if the Conversion of such People and Nations might be accomplished. Lord,
How many thousands and millions of souls might so be saved, which now run
headlong into hell! It were a glorious work, imitating notably that of the
blessed Apostles, which converted the world so long ago, from dead Idols to
serve the living God. And in so holy and religious a labor; I am sorry to
hear that we should not be as forward as Papists, but that to be verified
twixt us and them also in this case, which our Savior said in another: The
children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children of
light. But as I must needs confess, that the work were a worthy piece of
work, if it might be wrought, and that happy were our Land, if the children
thereof might be made of God, Agents therein. So me thinks, we had need to
have some assurance of the will of God, that it should be done. For as you know
better then I can tell you; If the time of their Conversion be not come; or if
God, as he has wrapped them hitherto in unbelief, so he be not pleased nor
determined to release them, to call them to the knowledge of his truth, and to
manifest his Son unto them at all: our labor then will be but in vain, and
our attempt not pleasing, but displeasing in his sight.


Enr. That God desires and wills his Name, his truth and Gospel by us to be
published in those Heathen and barren lands; It is Gods will to call them to
the knowledge of his truth.
the inclination and readiness alone of those people and Nations may
sufficiently assure us, who as it were prepared of God, to receive the Gospel
from our mouths, if it might be but sounded unto them, do even of their own
accord offer themselves to be taught, suffer their children to be baptized and
instructed by us; and, as weary of, and half seeing the grossness of their
own abominations, and the goodness of our observations do make no great
difficulty to peferre our Religion before theirs, and to confess that it is
God that we, and the devil that they do worship.

For my own part, I am persuaded, that God will instantly have them either by
us or by others, if we will not, called to the And their conversion must be
before the end of the world can be.
knowledge of his Truth, and turned from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan, unto God; that so the words of our Savior may be fully fulfilled,
who, Math. 24. 14. has foretold us, That the Gospel, before the end shall
come, must be preached throughout the whole world: and Mark. 13. 10. be
published among all Nations, which, howsoever most hold is long since
accomplished, in that it either now is, or heretofore has been preached to
all, or near all Nations of this upper Continent: yet I am now resolved, (let
it be my private error, if I do err) that they will not be fulfilled
indeed, according to our Saviors intent, until that unto them also that
inhabit that other, the under Continent, it be made manifest, which it seems
unto me, God does now hasten to accomplish, in that within our Age alone, a
great part thereof has had the same, though corruptly, though imperfectly,
brought unto them.


Resp. You do well to say, that this is your own private Opinion, for no man
else, I think, is of that mind.


Enr. Not many, it may be, but yet I assure you, I am not alone. For there was
but few years past, a Preacher in Dorsetshire, of some note and name, that in
a Sermon of his entitled, The Magold and the Sun, now extant in Print, page
40. upon these words of his Text, Luke 1. 79. To give light to them that sit in
darkness, etc. says thus: This light rising first from the Jews, as from
his East or Orient, is carried over all the world, and has given light to us
(English) that sat in darkness. Of his first rising read Luke 24 47.
beginning (says our Savior there) from Jerusalem. Hence sprung this blessed
light first, and thence, besides his dispersion into other parts of the world,
was carried over all Greece, Italy, Germany, France, and rose to us also, and
is now making day to the Indians and Antipodes. For the world shall not end,
till he have finished his Course, I mean, till, as the Evangelist Math. 24.
14. says, The Gospel be preached in all the world, and be a testimony to all
nations: and then shall the end come. Thus he. D. Keckerman likewise, that
famous professor of Arts and Learning, divine and humane, in his Manuduction D.
Keckar. Dantiscan.
to Theology, of late translated into English by my worthy friend Master T.
Uicars Batchelour in Divinity, page 94. writes of this matter in this manner:
And doubtless toward the end of the world, the true Religion shall be in
America: as God is now preparing way for it by the English and Low Country
Merchants, that, that of Christ may be fulfilled, Math. 24. 14. This Gospel of
the Kingdom shall be preached through the whole world, for a witness unto all
Nations, and then shall the end come. For God in all his works is wont to
effect a thing successively, and therefore first he sends to those Nations some
light of his Essence and Truth by the Papists, and afterward will make these
things shine more clearly unto them by the true and faithful Ministers of the
Gospel. Thus far he.

So that in their opinion, as well as mine, this is a work that must be done
before the end can be. Wherefore since it is a work, and a most holy and
necessary work, which must be done, before the day, the great day of the Lord
can come, I see not how we can, without sin (having any thing to do in those
parts) withdraw our shoulder from this burden, or withold our hand from this
plough. And so much the more will the sin be, by how much it is far more
easy for us this to hold and undergo, then it was for those that did
undertake the like task for us, I mean, the Conversion of our Ancestors and
predecessors in this land, a people as rude and intractable, at the least that
way, as these now, in as much as they were to preach and not to subdue: but we
may plant as well as preach, and may subdue as well as teach, whereby the
Teachers shall need to fear no loss of goods or life, no prison nor sword, no
famine or other persecuting distress for the Gospels sake. Whose steps, if our
Nation now, if our Countrymen in their intended Plantations among those
Infidels would in any measure follow, how many souls might they save alive?
How many sinners might they convert from going astray? How much might they
ampliate the Kingdom of Christ in earth? advance the name, glory, and worship
of our, the only true and everlasting God? and prepare for themselves an
abundant, or rather a superabundant heap of glory in heaven, according to that
which is written, Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise, shall shine as the firmament:
and they that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever?


Resp. That these courses tend to the glory of God, I plainly see and
acknowledge: But how may they be to the renown and benefit of the Kings most
excellent Majesty?


Enr. These could not but much augment and increase the Majesty 2. By them the
Majesty and renown of the Kings of England may be much augmented.
and renown of our dread Sovereign, if thereby his Dominion be extended, as
it were into another world, into those remote parts of the earth, and his
kingdoms be increased into many more in number, by the Addition and Access of
so many, so spacious, so goodly, so rich, and some so populous Countries and
Provinces, as are by these Beginnings offered unto his hands.

We see the Evidence and certainty of this Assumption as clear as the
Sunshine at high Noone, in the person of the King of Spain, whose
Predecessors and Progenitors accepting that which others did refuse, and
making better use of such Opportunities, then any else have done; he is thereby
become Lord, not only of Territories, almost innumerable, but also of
Treasures and riches in them inestimable.

Whose Right thereto, and to the rest of that Continent, be it what it may be,
cannot, I suppose, in any equity or reason, be any sufficient Bar to any
Christian Prince, why he should not yet, by any lawful and good means seize
into his hands, and hold as in his own right, whatsoever Countries and Islands
are not before actually inhabited or possessed by him the Spaniard, or some
other Christian Prince or State. Of which sort, since yet there are many, it
were much to be wished, That his Majesty might in time, while Opportunities
serve, take notice and Possession of some of them, whereunto these courses of
Plantation (being rightly prosecuted) are a singular, if not the only means.


Resp. All this is most apparent: but may the like be said for your third
point, The good of this land likewise?


Enr. Yes verily. Whosoever shall but lightly consider the 3. By them the good
of this Land may notably be procured.
estate thereof, as now it stands, shall plainly see, and will be enforced to
confess, That the prosecuting, and that in an ample measure, of those worthy
Attempts, is an enterprise for our Land and common good, most expedient and
necessary. For,

First of all, whereas toward the Supportation of their Regal 1. In the easier
supportation of the Regal state.
estate, for many and urgent Necessities, the Kings of this Land are often
occasioned to demand and take of their Subjects, great sums of money by
Subsidies, and other like ways, which to many of the Subjects, specially the
Clergy (who for the most part, to such payments, as things now stand, pay
eight or ten times as much proportionably, as other Subjects do) is somewhat
hard and heavy to endure. This Burden would be more easily borne, and could
not but become much the lighter, if by the accession of more kingdoms to their
crown, store of treasures being brought into their Coffers, the same were
borne by diverse other lands and Subjects, as well as of this, and the rest, yet
under their subjection.

Secondly, Whereas our Land, at this present, by means of our 2. In ridding
out of the land the great and superfluous multitude thereof.
long continued both Peace and Health, freed from any notable, either war or
Pestilence, the two great deuourers of mankind, to both which in former Ages
it was much subject, even swarmeth with multitude and plenty of people, it is
time, and high time, That like Stalls that are ouerfull of Bees, or Orchyards
ouergrowne with young Sets, no small number of them should be transplanted into
some other soil, and removed hence into new Hiues and Homes.

Truly, it is a thing almost incredible to relate, and intolerable to behold,
what a number in every town and city, yea in every parish and village, do
abound, which for want of commodious and ordinary places to dwell in, do build
up Cotages by the high way side, and thrust their heads into every corner, to
the grievous ouercharging of the places of their abode for the present, and to
the very ruin of the whole Land within a while, if it be not look unto; which
if they were transported into other regions, might both richly increase their
own estates, and notably ease and disburden ours. 3. In abating the excessive
high prices of all things to live by.



Resp. These be motives of some weight and likelihood: but let me hear more to
these, if you have them.


Enr. Next. Thirdly, Whereas at this present, the prices of all things are
grown to such an unreasonable height, that the Common, that is, the meaner
sort of people, are even undone, and do live, in respect of that they did for
thirty or forty years past, in great needinesse and extremity, that there
is neither hope, nor possibility of amending this evil, but in the diminution
of the number of people in the land. Which, if men will not, by departing
hence, elsewhere effect, we must expect that God, (they having first eaten out
one another) by war or pestilence do it for them.

I know, that much help in this case might be had, if our Magistrates and
great ones did take some good course ( cum effectu) for the increase of
Tillage. But neither thereof is there any (great) hope, nor therein a
sufficient help, since it is out of all doubt, that unless it be in an
extraordinary fruitful year, and of them now a days, God for our sins,
sends but a few, our land is not able to yield corn and other fruit enough,
for the feeding of so many as now do lie and live upon it. And when it which
was wont to help feed other countries, must, as of late we have to our cost
both seen and felt, be feign to have help and food from others; how can our
state be for the commons, but woeful and ill? Likewise, if some good course
might be taken for restraint of excessive Fines and Rents, whereby Landlords
now a days, grind the faces of the poor, and draw into their own hands all
the sweet and ^at of the land, so that their poor Tenants are able, neither to
keep house and maintain themselves, nor (as anciently such houses did) to
relieve others, then could not the prices of all things but much abate and come
down. Yet this were but an imperfect Cure. The true and sure remedy is, The
diminution of the people, which reduced to such a competent number, as the land
it self can well maintain, would easily cause, not only the excessive height
of Fines and Rents, but also the prices of all things else, to fall of
themselves, and stay at so reasonable a Rate, that one might (which now they
cannot) live by another, in very good sort.

4. Consider also the great riches, wealth, and good estate which 4. In
enriching the poorer sort hence removed.
such who here live, and cannot but live parce and duriter, poor and hardly,
might by Transplantation, within a while rise unto: while as they may have
otherwhere, for their bad cottages, good houses; for their little gardens,
great grounds; and for their small backsides, large fields, pastures, meadows,
woods, and other like plenty to live upon.

5. The benefit that might that way accrue unto Merchants, 5. In amending the
Trade and Traffic of Merchants.
and all kind of Adventurers by Sea, is infinite. For Traffic and Merchandise
cannot but by means thereof wonderfully be bettered and increased. And
withal, which is not the least point in Observation, most commodious and
delightful must merchandising and traffic needs be, while it shall be
exercised for the most part, between one and the same people, though distant
in Region, yet united in Religion, in Nation, in Language and Dominion. Which
surely is a thing likely to prove so material and beneficial, as may turn
the greater part of our Merchants voyages that way, and free them from many of
those dangerous passages which now they are feign to make by the Straits and
narrow Seas; may find them out their rich and much-desired commodities, and
greater store, and at a better hand then now they have them other where, and
vent them many a thing, which now do seldom, or not at all pass their hands.

But of all other, I need speak little of the Merchants good, as who can, and
I am persuaded, do so well know it of themselves, and thereupon affect the
enterprise so much, that if other men's desires and endeavors were
correspondent, it would take both speedy and condign effect.

6. The last benefit to our Land, but not the least, is the curing 6. In
rooting out Idleness out of this Land.
of that evil Disease of this Land; which, if it be not looked unto, and cured
the sooner, will be the Destruction of the Land, I mean, Idleness the Mother
of many Mischiefs, which is to be cured, and may be rooted out of the Land, by
this means, yea by this only, and by none other, viz. by Plantation.


Resp. Idleness is a naughty vice indeed, but commonly it does hurt none but
them in whom it is, and yet except that fault, many that be idle be honest men,
and have in them diverse good qualities: and therefore me thinks you speak too
hardly of it; to call it The Mother of Mischiefs. There be worse vices a great
many in the Land, as this Drunkenness and unthrifty spending of their goods,
which are every where so common.


Enr. I perceive by you, it is a very bad cause that cannot get a Proctour.
That which I have spoken against Idleness, is but little to that I could
speak, and which writers both humane and divine ^aue spoken of it, to whom I
will refer you, le^t we protract this our Conference ouer-long. But for the
vices you speak of, if they be, as you say, worse then Idleness; yet, as
sometime of a bad mother, there may come worse daughters; I assure you, The
fruits of Idleness.
they and many more, as filching and stealing, robbery and cousenage, adultery
and incest, fornication and all kind of wantonness and uncleanness, beggary
and roguery, profaneness and idolatry, and a number more, that upon the
sudden, I cannot call to mind, and with which this Land of ours is defiled
and filled, be none other (for the most part) then the fruits and of spring,
the brood and increase of Idleness; which alone taken away, and weeded out,
these all would fall away and vanish with her. For, Sublata causa, tollitur
effectus, says the Philosopher, The cause of any thing taken away, the effect
is also taken away with it, and must cease.


Resp. A happy work indeed were the doing thereof. But do you think, or is
there any probability, that this might be done by so speedy and easy a
means, as Plantation?


Enr. Questionless, The best and the only Cure thereof by the hand of man, is
this way, and none other. The diminution of the people of the Land unto a due
and competent Number will do it. This is apparent by Experience. For, look we
back to the state of our Land for 40. 50. or 60. years ago, before it did
thus exceed in multitude, and we shall see, that few or none of these vices did
then abound, nothing in Comparison of that they do now, as which have since
sprung up out of Idleness, that since that time, together with the multitude
and increase of the people, is risen and increased.


Resp. Indeed I remember well, when I was a young man, there were no such
swaggering Youths, potting Companions, and idle Gamesters as be now in the
Country: little fornication, bastardie, quarrelling and stabbing, and other
like wicked facts, in respect of those that be now, howsoever it be that the
world is so much altered. But that these evils may be amended by Plantations,
yet I see not.


Enr. I will make you see it, and confess it too. You have your self a great
many of Children, if you should keep them all at home, and have not wherewith
to set them to work, nothing to employ them in (for all the work you have to
do ordinarily, is not enough for above two or three of them) must they not
needs fall to Idleness? what will most of them prove but Idlers and Loyterers?
Now, to prevent and avoid this, what other remedy have you, but either to get
work for them into your own house from other men, if you can have it, or else
perforce to place them forth of your own house into other men's, one to this
trade or occupation, another to that, where they may be set aworke, and kept
from Idleness.


Resp. This is true. But what is this to our purpose?


Enr. Very much. For the cases are very like. Thereby you may plainly perceive,
that, as the only way to rid Idleness out of your house, having no work for
them at home, is, to place abroad your children into other houses, as it were,
into Colonies, where they may be set aworke; so the only way to rid Idleness
out of a whole parish, town, county or country (the same being not able to
set the that are idle therein aworke. And it is a thing so evident, that for
the idle people of our Land, what by the great number of them, which is almost
infinite; and what by the present dampe and decay of all Trades and
employments, the Land is not any way able to set them aworke, that it needs no
proof, is to place abroad the Inhabitants thereof, which therein be not nor
can be set aworke, into other parishes, towns, counties and countries.


Resp. If this Course should be taken, it would touch very near a great many
of the best livers in the Country, who, both themselves, and their children be
as idle as any can be, and yet would be loath, having so good means here to
live by, to be removed into Plantations abroad.


Enr. These might be brought from Idleness, and yet abide at home too. For, if
the superfluous multitude of our Land were removed, those which you speak of,
would for their own need fall to work, and leave Idleness, because that
multitude removed, they should have none to do their work for them, as now
they have, while they go to playing, potting, and other like vain and idle
courses.

The Magistrates of our Land have of late made many good statutes and
provisions, for the beating down of drunkenness* for setting the poor and idle
people to work, and other like: but how little effect has followed?
Drunkenness increases daily, and laughes the Laws to scorn. Poverty more
and more arises, and idle people still do multiply. Other sins and
disorders are sometimes punished, but yet they still remain, and, as it were,
in despite of Laws, they spread more and more abroad. The reason is, (if a man
may be bold to give the reason of it, They strike at the boughs, but not at
the Roots.) If there were the like good Orders taken for the rooting out and
beating down of Idleness it self in our Land, which can be done no other
way, but by Plantations, both Idleness it self, and all the rest of the Evils
beforenamed, and other like that arise out of it, would vanish away as smoke
before the wind, and melt as Wax against the Fire.

Then, these blind and filthy Alehouses, which are none other Ale houses.
than the Devils Dens, wherein lurk his beastly slaves day and night, which
all the Justices in the Country cannot now keep down, would sink of
themselves to the ^ound.

Then, these Tobacco-shops, that now stink all the Land over, Tobaccoshops.
would shortly cease to ^ume out their infernal smoakes, and come to a lower
rate and reckoning by an hundred fold.

Then, the many idle Trades, which of late are risen up in the Idle Trades.
Land, under color to keep people from idleness, and to set the poor on
work, such, I say, as the former Ages knew not, and our present Age needs
not, as which serve to nothing, but to the increase of pride, and vanity in
the world, would quickly grow out of request.

Then, the Prisons, and Sheriffs Wards, would not be one Prisons.
half so full of Malefactors and Bankrupts, as now they are. And last of all,
(but not the least; for, who can reckon up all the benefits that this one
Remedy would bring unto our Land?) then should not one half so many people of
our Land be cut off, Violent deaths.
by shameful, violent, and untimely deaths, as now there are.


Resp. Your speeches are very probable: but by this means, so many idle people
of our Land, as you intimate, being removed, the Plantations will then be
pestered with them there, as much and as bad as we are here; and so, those good
works be discredited, and happily euerthrowne thereby. It is but the removing of
evil from one place to another.


Enr. Howsoever, such a Remouall made, our Land (which is the point in
question) shall be cleared and cured. But of that extreme hurt to the
Plantations that you forecast, there is no fear. For, whereas there are in
our Land at this present many idle persons, some are such as gladly would
work, if they could get it. They are idle, not for any delight they have in
idleness, but because they can get no body, nor means to set them on work.
Some are idle indeed, as may work and will not. They have wherewithal to
keep themselves from idleness, that is, work enough of their own to do,
but, delighting in idleness, and counting it a disgrace to men of their
means, to work and labor in their vocation, they will have and hyre others
to do their work, to be their servants, and laborers, which they needed not,
and which other men of like quality and ability, that are thrifty, and good
Commonwealths men indeed, do not, nor will do, and they themselves the while
live idly, spend their time vainly, lie at the Alehouse, or Tavern,
bibbing and bowzing beastly, sit at Cards or Tables loosely, haunt idle and
lewd company shamefully, and give themselves to no good practice or exercise
commendably, but run on from ill to worse, to the shame and discredit of
themselves and their friends, and many times to the utter undoing and overthrow
of them and theirs miserably. A third sort there are, as it were a mixed kind
of people, neither altogether idle, nor yet well and sufficiently set aworke.
Of these, some work at a low and small rate, many times glad to serve for any
thing, rather than to beg, steal, or starve: and some of them set up idle
and pelting Trades, as it were shifts to live by, for lack of better
employment, that so they may have one way or other somewhat to live upon.

Of all these, if the first and third sort were removed into Plantations, where
they might have either good Livings of their own to live upon, or good
employment by others to labor upon, it is no doubt, but that the most part of
them, would be glad of the exchange, and prove laborious and industrious
people, to their own good, and the good, not the hurt, of the Country into
which they shall be removed. And then for the second or middle sort, it is not
much to be doubted, but that the occasions of their idleness taken away, as I
said but now, they also will leave to be idle, fall to do their own work as
they should, learn to thrive and become profitable to themselves, and this our
Country, wherein they remain* and ^e at length as much ashamed to be idle and
vain henceforth, as heretofore they were to work and labor.

If any continue their former lewd and disordered courses, being but a few, so
many of their wonted Companions being severed and gone from them, there is hope
that a little severity of the Laws, which easily reclaimeth a few, when on a
multitude sometimes it can do little good, will and may bring them also to a
better course.

And thus I hope you see, That it is not impossible the idleness that is in
our Land, to be notably cured and expelled: and that this may be done either
only, or at least no way so soundly, readily, and speedily, as by Plantations.
And therefore, the slate of our Land considered, if there were no other benefit
that might arise of Plantations, yet this alone, viz. the rooting out and
destroying of idleness out of the Land, which else Uiper-like, will in time
root out, and destroy the Land it self, wherein it is bred, were cause
all-sufficient, and reason enough, why such attempts should be undertaken, and
by all possible means furthered and hastened.


Resp. I cannot but like well of all that hitherto you have said, touching the
goodness and necessity of these Actions. But yet, me thinks, there may be a
Question, Whether they be lawful or not? For, me thinks, it should neither
be lawful for any people to forsake the Country wherein God has placed them,
and in which they and their Progenitors, for many generations have remained:
nor to invade and enter upon a strange Country, of which they have no warrant
nor assurance that God is pleased, they should adventure upon it.


Enr. If any will make question of the lawfulness of such Actions, Plantations
be lawful.
Nature it self, which has taught the Bees, when their Hiue is ouer-full, to
part Company, and by swarming, to seek a new habitation elsewhere, does
evidently inform us, That it is as lawful for men to remove from one Country
to another, as out of the house wherein they are borne, or the parish wherein
they are bred, unto another. If humane reason satisfy not, (for some will make
doubts in cases most clear) there is divine warrant for it that may. For it
was Gods express commandment to Adam, Genesis 1. 28. that he should fill the
earth, and subdue it. By virtue of which Charter, he and his have ever since
had the Privilege to spread themselves from place to place, and to have, hold,
occupy, and enjoy any Region or Country whatsoever, which they should find
either not pre-occupied by some other, or lawfully they could of others get or
obtain.

Upon which clause, we Englishmen have as good ground and warrant to enter
upon New Foundland, or any other Country hitherto not inhabited or possessed
by any Nation else, Heathen or Christian, and any other that we can lawfully,
(I say lawfully) get of those that do inhabit them, as to hold our own
native the English soil.


Resp. But this, though I see it to be lawful, seems yet to be a very strange
course, the like whereof, in former Ages has not been used.


Enr. That this course has been in former times both usual Plantations no
new nor strange course: but both usual and ancient.
and ancient, and not as you seem to imagine, new and strange, though I might
prove by conjecture only: For, how else had it been possible, so many, so
diverse, so distant, and so great Countries to be peopled, but by removing from
one Country to another? or refer you to humane Histories, which are full of
such Narrations, and of them, above all to the Roman state, which from their
very first years, ab v^be condita, after that Rome it self was builded, fell
apace to that practice, and had ever in hand, one or other Colonie. One of good
Antiquity, and therefore not partial, and of great Observation, and therefore
regardable, Tully.
does tell us expressly, That as other things common by nature, so Lands, so
Countries, (for they also are a part of his omnia) have become private, from
time to time, aut veteri Occupatione, aut victoria, aut lege: either by ancient
usurpation, men finding them void and vacant, or by victory in war, or by
legal condition or composition in peace. But what need I care what such say,
or say not, when as holy Writ it self tells us very plainly, Genesis 10. 5. That
whereas after Noah's fioud, there were no more Genesis 10. 5.
alive on earth, of all the posterity of Adam, but Noah, and his sons, and
their wives, eight persons in all, Of them only were the Isles of the Gentiles
diuidea in their Lands, every man after his tongue, and after their Families in
their Nations? And again, verse 32. Out of these were the Nations divided in
the earth* that is, These, as they increased, dispersed themselves, and
inhabited, and replenished, first one Country, and then another, as we see at
this day. And this upon warrant of that Grant which Adam had, being renewed and
confirmed unto Noah, and his sons, Genesis 9. 1. Replete Genesis 9. 1.
terram, Replenish ye the earth, or fill it up again. Lastly, let such but
look back and think, How at first we, the Inhabitants of this Land, came
hither. Were all Indigenae? or rather Terregenae? Did they at first spring up
here out of the earth? Are we of the Race and offspring of Noah, or his
sons? and therefore per conseq. undeniable, (as all our Histories do accord)
have come from other-where? Why then should that seem so insolent to us, and
in our time, which have been so usual at all times, and in all Ages?


Resp. You have, me thinks, well justified this course in general: Now, if
you can as well clear it in some particulars, I shall happily at length be of
your mind also, for the maine.


Enr. Object your particulars, and I doubt not whatsoever Certain Objections
answered.
they be, but I shall be able reasonably to satisfy you in them.


Resp. The places, the Countries to be planted and inhabited by us, 1.
Objection.
are very far off from hence.


Enr. To that I say, first, If nearer places cannot be had, better Answer.
a good place, though far off, than none at all.

Secondly, others, as the Spaniards, have and do remove and plant further off,
by a great deal.

Thirdly, Abraham, Jacob, and other good men, have been content in less need,
^aue that GOD so commanded to depart far from the places of their birth, as
we may see, Genesis 12. 4. Acts 7. 3. and other-where.

Fourthly, When God calls, and as with us now, Necessity does so require, good
men should be indifferent to dwell in one Country, as well as in another,
accounting, as one said well, Ubibene, ibi patria: wheresoever a man is, or may
be best at ease, that is, or should be to him (as) his Country. A very Heathen
man could say:

Omne solum forti patria est, vt pis^ibus aequor: ^id.

Ut volucri, vac^o quicquid in orb patet. that is,
Unto a valiant-minded man, each Country good is his:
As is wide world unto the Birds, and broad Sea to the Fish.
And, another being asked, Cuius esset Vrbis? answered, Orbis: as who would
say, The World at large were his Seat or City.

Fifthly, Sister-land, or as it is yet commonly called, Newfound-land, which
for the present seems to be the fittest of all other intended Plantations, is
not very far off. It is not with a good wind, above fourteen or fifteen
days sail. As easy a voyage in manner, the Seas and passage considered, as
into our next Neighbour-Countrey Island, whither of late years many have out of
England, to their and our good removed.

Sixthly, Our Merchants, in hope of present but uncertain gain, do yearly
and usually travail into farther Countries a great deal: and why, then should
any for his assured, certain, and perpetual good, think it intolerable or
unreasonable to make one such a journey in his life?


Resp. The Countries themselves are wild and rude: No towns, 2. Object.
no houses, no buildings there.


Enr. Men must not look still, in such a case, to come to a Answ.
Land inhabited, and to find ready to their hands, as in Israel, in Canaan,
great and goodly Cities, which they builded not: houses full of all manner of
store, which they filled not: wells dug, which they dug not: Uine-yards,
and Orchards, which they planted not: as Moses speaks, Deuteronomy. 6. 10. It must
content them, that God prepares them a place, a Land, wherein they may build
them Cities, Towns, and Houses to dwell in, where they may sow Land, and plant
them Uine-yards and Orchards too, to yield them fruits of increase, as the
Psalmist writes, Ps. 107. 39.

2. Think they it is no bodies lot but theirs? And do they imagine, that in
any Country wheresoever, where now there are Castles and Towers, Houses and
Habitations of all sorts settled, there was not a time when none of these were
standing? but that the ground was as bare and naked thereof, as wild and void
of Couerture, as any of our Plantations are. For, according to our English
Proverb, Rome it self was not built in one day.

3. They that shall at first come there, may account it a benefit to find the
places unbuilt, in that they may thereby chose them seats, and divide the
Country at their own will: That they may enter large Territories, and take to
themselves ample possessions at pleasure, for them and theirs for many
Generations: That they may be freed from these extreme Fines, and ouerrackt
Rents, which make their old Neighbors and native friends behind, to groan,
and may well make them weary of the Land it self: For, who can bear them?

4. And if they can be content here to build up houses upon the High-way-side,
though there be not the ^ourth part of an Acre of ground lying unto it: or
think themselves bountifully dealt with, if any Gentleman would give to any of
them, three or four acres of ground, for their own time, at a reasonable
rent, (and yet few be the Landlords that be so liberal) so as they would
build a House on it; why should they not rather go where they may have an
hundred, five hundred, or a thousand Acres of ground, to them and theirs for
ever, at the like rate?


Resp. But what, and how shall men do the while, for houses and dwellings,
till they can build, etc?


Enr. They may and must for a time dwell in Tents and Pauillions, Tents may
serve for a time.
as Soldiers do now in the Field, Tradesmen in a Fair, and as in ancient
times men of good and great account, from time to time, from place to place,
many years together have done, as appears, Hebr. 11. 9. The particulars
whereof you may read at leisure, Genesis 12. 8. and 15. 5. and 18. 1. and 24. 67.
and 31. 33. So dwelled all Israel in the Wilderness, full forty years, as
you may find, Leuitic. 23. 42. and Numb. 14. 33, 34. Yea, was not GOD himself
content to dwell in a Tent, in the midst of Israel, till the days of David,
and reign of Solomon, who found that favor in his eyes, that he might build
him an House? as it is written, 2 Samuel 7. 63. and Act. 7. 45. The like did the
Family of the Rechabites, as appears at large, Ierem. 35. for the space of
three hundred years together, when as all Israel besides dwelt in houses, and
in walled Towns and Cities, and saving for the commandment of Ionadab, the
son of Rechab their Father, so might they have done. So that it is neither
unnatural, unusual, nor impossible to take pains this way for a time, and
that a long time, if need be.


Resp. Your examples I must needs yield, are al good, because they be so
authentical. But yet I see not that the use of Tents can be any thing
serviceable, for that being made, as commonly they are, but of raw cloth or
canuase, besides that they are very cold, they are not able to keep off any
rain or wet an hour to an end.


Enr. Well and artificially made, they are more serviceable then you take them
to be. Read but Exodus 7. and 14. and to confer it with 2. Sam. 7. 2. and you
shall find, That they may be made very durable: and that to the well making of
Tents, there may go a Covering or two of skins, or other stuff, so dressed
and fitted, as nor w^ nor cold can easily pierce them.


Resp. I see it well: I pray you proceed.


Enr. Besides these, Men may, having once gotten place certain for their
abode, soon erect some Cabbins and small houses, which may for a time, some
years if need be, serve for habitation, and afterward when they can build
better, may be converted to inferior uses, as for corn, cattle, etc. Men must
be contented at first with low and plain buildings. England has been
inhabited two or 3000. years at least, and yet what poor, what homely houses
be there many till this very day, and within your remembrance and mine, many
more there were? If the Living be good, though the house be but bad, it is no
great matter, good Husbands will say.


Resp. The Countries themselves are scarce habitable and good: and 3. Objection.
the Soil thereof but barren and bad.


Enr. Experience it self, the surest teacher, shows altogether Answer.
the contrary. For, if any credit be to be given to those that have set us
forth their own knowledge, and trial thereof by the constant testimony of
them all, not one of those Countries intended or attempted to be be planted by
us, but is found to be exceeding good and fruitful. In every Country to be
inhabited, three things are specially to be respected; The Temperature of the
Climate, the goodness of the Air, and the fatness of the Soil. All and
every of these in those Regions (a thing seldom found in many of this upper
Continent,) in comparison of many of our Northern parts, are in the
superlatiue degree, viz. The Soil most fat and fertile, the Air most sweet
and healthy, and the Temper most mild and dainty. If those that lie near (or
under) the Aequinoctiall, seem at first to be somewhat of the hottest, yet
since they are inhabited with Naturals of many sorts, and our men by their
abiding there some years together, have found that they can inhabit them,
there is no doubt, but that that excess of heat, whereby as Spain, England,
they exceed these our Northern Climates, will by use and time become very
tolerable and kindly to men of our Constitution, as well as of others.

The Healthinesse of any Country, by plantation and inhabitation must needs be
much increased. For, the ridding of grounds, casting of ditches, and
watercourses, and making of fires, together with the destroying of wild and
filthy beasts, all which, and other like, do necessarily accompany any good
Plantation, further much to the clensing of the air, clearing of fogges, and
so ridding of much corruption and vnhealthinesse from the place.

Add to these the two much-desired Commodities in all good Habitations, I
mean, Wood and Water, (the former whereof so fast decaies with us, that very
want of it only, within few years is like to prove exceeding hurtful to our
Land, and can be no way repaired, but by transplanting the people) and it is
out of all question, That neither England nor Ireland, nor any country else in
this part of Christendom, can at this present compare with those, much less
exceed them* All which considered, what need any doubt, but that The Sun, as
the old Proverb is, does shine there, as merrily as here? and that a little
good husbandry will make the dwelling there, as commodious as healthful, as
gainful, and every way as good, as any other-where.


Resp. Your words do sound somewhat pleasing: But yet I have heard some say
somewhat otherwise, as namely, Those countries are very barren and unfruitful.


Enr. I believe you; For I have heard say too, Evil will, will never say well.
Many idle wretches, when they come into such places, because they cannot have
the plenty without pains, not find those golden mountains they dreamed of at
home, though many things be notable and very good, yet will cavil at, and
blame every thing.

Suppose it be somewhat as they say, that is, The ground not so fruitful as
some places here in England, yet does it follow therefore, it is not worth the
having? If I be not deceived, There be few Countries in Europe that can
compare with England for richness of the Soil, and fatness of the earth; yet
we all know, they are not therefore forsaken. Again, in England it self, all
places are not alike good. As there be some of excellent mold, so there be
barren, heath, and hungry Soiles a great many: yet we see, people are glad to
inhabit them. Be it then, that some of those parts be no better then our worser
grounds, our heaths, Mendip hills, Wiltshire downs, Salisbury plains, and
other like; yet I hop^ they are better then none. A great deal of such ground
together, I think, may be as good, as a little good ground. If any man will
thus consider of such complaints and murmurs, he shall see no great cause to
regard them. These therefore thus satisfied, if you have any thing else to say,
say on.


Resp. Some say also, That those Countries are so over grown with wood, trees,
bushes, and such like, that there is no room for building, no ground for
pasture and tillage, or at least, not without excessive labor and charge, or
intolerable and pit^ifull spoil of the woods and timbor to no use.


Enr. It cannot be, but that those countries, having either not at all, or but
little as yet been inhabited, must needs be much ouergrowne with woods, and no
small part thereof to be a very Forest and Wilderness, yet certain it is,
that there are (a thing very admirable, and almost beyond expectation:) there
are, I say, in them to be found many goodly parts of those Countries, that are
very clear of woods, fair and goodly open champion ground, large Meadows and
Pastures many hundred, sometimes thousands of Acres together. So that besides
the wood-lands there is abundantly room, and ground enough to build and
inhabit upon, for more people, I believe, then will hastily be gotten over to
dwell there: and more ground open and clear already rid for pasture and
tillage, then yet there will be people and cattle enough had thither to such
uses, the same to convert and employ.

And therefore there needs not, either that Complaint which The spoil of woods
in those countries not sufferable.
they make, of the excessive store and encomberment of woods, nor, which is
worse, of that present and hasty spoil, and burning up of woods on the
sudden, for making of room, that some do talk of, and would have to be made;
and, as it is reported, have already made by burning up thousands of Acres
together. This, truly in my opinion, is a thing very wicked, and such as cannot
but be displeasing to Almighty God, who abhors all wilful waste and spoil
of his good creatures. Gather up that which is left, says our Savior, Ioh. 6.
12. that nothing be lost: and a thing that in common civility, and humane
policy, should not be suffered to be done, or being done, not pass unpunished.

We may know by our own present want of wood here in England, what a precious
commodity wood is, and be warned by our own harms, to make much of it, if we
have plenty thereof, and no further nor faster to cut it down, then present
use and good occasions from time to time shall require. We should not be so
blind as not to foresee, that if the countries come once to be inhabited,
there will be so many, and so great occasions of cutting down wood and timber
trees, as will quickly cause infinite store thereof necessarily to be employed,
and so the grounds from, time to time speedily enough to be made clear and
rid for other uses.

For, first, the very building of Houses, to which add the necessary making of
fences about houses and grounds, will use an infinite deal of Wood and Timber.

Secondly, The store that will daily and yearly be spent in necessary uses for
fire, which at the first specially, till houses be warm and dry, and the
air corrected, will and must be more than ordinary, cannot but, if once any
number of Inhabitants go over, be exceeding great.

Thirdly, The building and making of Ships and shipping, will require and
consume very much there. And such order may be taken, that by the woods there,
great spare (a thing very needful) may be made in England, of our Woods here
for that use.

Fourthly, To these places may be transplanted, the making of Glass and Iron,
as well for England, as for the same Countries: two things, that as it is well
known, do devour (yet upon necessary uses) wonderful store of Wood
continually.

Fifthly, The Trades of Potters for earthen vessels, and of Coupers for treen
Vessels, both very necessary, specially at the first, will and must still from
time to time spend up much Wood and Timber.

Sixthly, And little behind them in expense of Wood, will be that very
necessary Trade of making of Salt, considering how great use there is and will
be thereof there, for the fishing voyages, besides all other uses thereof, both
there and elsewhere.

Seventhly, No small quantity thereof likewise may be cut up and transported
into England, for our Buildings, for Coupers, Ioyners, and Trunk-makers trades
here, which now at a daerer hand, we buy and fetch out of other Countries.

Eighthly, Besides, the Woods standing are of themselves, and by industry more
may be made, a great fortification for the Inhabitants against man and Beast,
till the Countries be, and can be better employed and fortified.

These, and other like necessary and great uses of wood considered, which
either must, or may be made thereof, little reason or cause is there, why, as
if it could, like the waters in the rivers, never be spent while the world
stands, there should any sudden and needless spoil by fire or any other
wastfull havoc be made thereof: and severely deserve they to be punished that
shall make it, and sharply the rest to be restrained, that none like hereafter
be made.


Resp. These Countries are full of wild Beasts, Bears, etc.


Enr. 1. Some of them, as the Summer Islands, have no such at 4. Objection.
Answer.
all. No harmfull thing in them.

2. None of them, especially Newfound Land, as far as I hear, have any, or
at least, any store of noisome creatures, as of Serpents, Crocodiles, etc. as
have many parts of this Continent, which yet long has been, and still be
inhabited.

3. It is well, there are some beasts there, wild at least, if not tame. That
is an argument undeniable, that tame beasts may there be bred and live.

4. Better wild then none at all. For of some of them, some good use may be
made for the present, viz. for labor, for food, and for apparel, till better
provision can be made. To which purpose such infinite store and variety of
beasts, birds, fishes, fruits, and other like commodities, as in them all are
already found, and do abound, ought rather to provoke people to go thither,
assured they cannot, if they will be anything industrious, want necessaries ad
victum and ami^tum, for back and belly, where such plenty is, and to praise
God that has, as for Adam in Paradise, before he placed him there, Genesis 1. so
for them, before he bring them thither, provided so well, rather then the want
of some better or other, should move them like the Israelites against God,
Exodus 16. to murmur and repine, or which is worse, wholly to refuse and forgo
the places.

5. Have not other Countries, think you, or at least, have had the like? Is
England? is Ireland? is France altogether free? was Canaan, even that blessed
land, without the^, yea good store of them? I take itno, and that not at the
first only, as one may gather, Deuteronomy. 7. 22. but also many ages after, there
were Lions. Judge. 14. 5. and 1. King. 13. 24. Bears, 2. King. 2. 24. Foxes,
Judge. 15. 4. Hornets, Deuteronomy. 7. 20. Serpents, Esaias 30. 6. etc.


Resp. Among other means in these Plantations requisite, the having thither of
tame cattle, as horses, kine, and sheep, seems hard to be compassed, and
yet most needful, and that with the very first, to be provided, considering
those Countries, howsoever they abound in other, are altogether destitute and
unprovided of these. And it will be objected, That, besides the difficulty of
Transportation, our Country is not able of them to make any spare.


Enr. But if I be not deceived, It were easy to take such What means for
profitable cattle to be had and transported.
a course as might at will furnish that want, and yet leave us far better
stored then now we are: and that is,

1. For horses, if all Transportation of them into France and other vicine
parts beyond Sea, were restrained, that so all such as were wont to pass out
of the Land that way, might now go this.

2. For Kine and Sheep, our Land is well stored of them, or rather pestered
with them, that if of the one sort, some hundreds, and of the other, some
thousands yearly were thither sent, our Land should have thereby no loss nor
lack, since it is a rule infallible in husbandry, howsoever it seem to some
a Paradox in sense, The more Kine, the dearer White; The more Sheep, the
dearer Cloth. And therefore we must never look to have those two Commodities (
White and Cloth) at any reasonable hand, till the Number of those two kind of
Cattle be, and that in a good measure too, diminished in our Land. It is also
a Maxim undeniable: The more Cowes, the fewer Ploughes, and The more Milkings,
the fewer Weanlings. And therefore till those cattle ( Kine) be diminished,
and that in a good Number, we must not look to have Corn and Flesh plenty,
Bread and Biefe cheap in England again. But (alas) Narratur fabula Surdo. For
whose hands be deeper in this sin, then theirs that should redress it?

3. If a strict course might be taken (and for a public good, why should not
our wanton appetites be a little di^ted?) that in England, from the third of
February, till the first of May, or happily but from Septuage^ima Sunday, till
the first Sunday after Easter, the chief time for breed, no Calves whatsoever
should be killed, but all to be weaned and kept for store; within a year or
two, without all doubt, we should have Biefe better cheap in our market a
great deal, then now it is, or for many years past it has been, and yet
many hundreds, happily thousands, of fair yeerelings to be had for those our
new Countries which now have none.

Where, if any good course be taken, and well observed for preservation of
every kind, I doubt not but they would faster there increase and fill the
Countries, then the inhabitants should be able to make room for them, by
destroying and killing up those wild and untamed beasts, which now do so
there abound.

4. It were good too, our Fish days all the year long, were better kept. For
it is certain, The more fish is spent, the more flesh is spared: and as both
flesh and fish will be thereby the better cheap: so Beeues, young Bullocks
will be the more saved, for the help and use of those which to store their
Plantations, shall want them.

5. Besides, Wales, and here of late, God be thanked, Ireland seem by the
great droues which yearly they send over, so well stored, that thence alone,
though England helped not, Provision enough might be had, for more kine and
young cattle of that sort, then easily there can be Transportation had for.

6. Lastly, As they that write of these Discoueries do relate, There be also
some countries nearer to some of our Plantations then either England or
Ireland, from which if men will seek for them, all sorts of tame and
profitable cattle that we can or do want, may at a very reasonable hand be
had.

If it seem hard and strange to any, to make Transportation of ^attell, and,
that in the Countries themselves are none naturally to be had: Let them be
pleased to understand that to be no new thing: and that where now they are most
plentiful, time has been, None, not one was to be found: but that such
cattle, as well as men; (for all came out of Noah's Arc, Genesis 8. 17.) were
brought and conveyed from place to place. And if they will but a little enquire
of elder men and times, they may learn; It is but as it were the other day
since some countries near unto us had no sheep, other no kine, other few
horses, and that at this very instant, France is willing to have from us our
horses, we from Wales their Burs, and from Ireland their Cowes. All which do
pass from one country to another by Transportation. And therefore men must be
contented, as themselves, to dwell where before they have not done, so to get
thither cattle, profitable cattle, where before they have not been.


Resp. The people of those Countries are rude and barbarous. 5. Object.



Enr. They that like to dwell alone, may. There are countries Answ.
found, and more to be found, I doubt not, not yet inhabited and actually
possessed by any people, nation, or state whatsoever.

2. They with whom we have to do, are not so rude as some imagine, I believe.
Most, if not all of them, specially they of Guiana, do show themselves, their
breeding considered, exceeding tractable, very loving and kind to our Nation
above any other: industrious and ingenious to learn of us, and practice with
us most Arts and Sciences: and which is most to be admired and cherished, very
ready to leave their old and blind Idolatries, and to learn of us the right
service and worship of the true God. And what more can be expected from them
in so small time and means? or what surer probability or hope would we have,
that we shall or may easily, and within short time, win them to our own will,
and frame them as we list? Verily I suppose, if all things be considered well,
and rightly compared, we have nearer home worse neighbors a great deal.

3. The Spaniard has reasonably ciuilized, and better might, if he had not so
much tyrannized, people far more savage and beastiall then any of these.

4. We ought to consider, that time was, the old Brittons the ancient
Inhabitants of this Land, were as rude and barbarous as some of these of
foreign parts, with whom we have to do. And therefore considering, Qua
sumus Origin nati, (for we are also their Offspring) we ought not to
despise even such poor and barbarous people, but pity them, and hope, that as
we are become now, by Gods unspeakable mercy to usward, to a far better
condition, so in time may they.


Resp. The Adventures are very dangerous, and liable to losses 6. Object.
of life and goods, to troubles manifold, so that they may well be called
Adventurers, that will hazard themselves in them.


Enr. Good words, I pray you. Answer.


1. Many forecast perils where they need not: and so, many times are more
afraid than hurt. As Solomon observed long ago, Prou. 22. 13. The slothful
says, A Lion is without, I shall be slain in the streets.

2. Our life and state is not without perils at home: and I tell you, if these
Adventures* as you call them, be not better followed than yet they are, they
will, and cannot but more and more increase.

3. No Action of such a weight and worth as these are, can be without some
perils, hurts* and losses, which yet must be adventured and endured in hope of
a greater good, and ampler recompense another way.

4. He is not worthy to receive such benefits as these Adventures may yield
him, that for fear of every inconvenience and danger, is ready to fall off,
and disclayme them. Neque mel* neque apes, says the old Proverb. No Bees,
(for fear of stinging) no Honey.

5. Of perils and misaduentures, some are merely Casual, and not to be
avoided, some are altogether needless, and might have been prevented. The
former of these must be borne with, as a part of that common calamity,
whereunto the life of man is subject, and of those crosses and afflictions
wherewith God does either try his Children, as Gold in the fire, or afflict and
punish them and others. For these, no man ought to be troubled and dismayed in
these courses, more than for the like in any other, nor dislike them one jot
the worse.

We find, when God would bring his own people the children of Israel into
that good Land, the Land of Canaan, which so often and so solemnly he had
promised to them and to their Fathers, he did it not without letting them
pass, and feel some perils by the way; as the stopping at the red Sea, the
pursuit of Pharaoh, one while the want of flesh, another while of water in the
Wilderness, the terror of fiery Serpents, and the assault of many and mighty
enemies, with other like. We find also, that he was much displeased with, and
sharply sometimes did punish those of them that murmured because of those
things, and would have returned back into Egypt, regarding not to proceed, and
accept that Land, that good Land, which the Lord their God had given to them
and their seed. And may not this teach us, That we must not look to have the
hand of Gods providence extended unto us without some dangers and encumbrances:
And that the Lord is not pleased with those that for fear of every mis-hap and
trouble, will be discouraged themselves, or will dis-hearten and discourage
others from such Attempts?

Christ likewise the Son of God, sending abroad his Apostles to preach the
Gospel, is so far from securing them of all troubles and dangers in their
endeavors thereabout, that he fore-tells them, He does send them forth as
Lambs among wolves. That they should be hated, persecuted, and put to death
for his sake, etc. But were the Apostles by this dismayed? Did they therefore
refuse to undertake their charge, and proceed in the work of the Lord? We
know the contrary. Notable to this purpose is the protestation of the Apostle
Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 6. 4. and 11. 23.


Resp. I pray you recite the very words, for I desire to hear what so great an
Apostle has said to such a purpose.


Enr. With a good will. Speaking there both of himself, and the rest of his
fellow Apostles and Laborers in the Gospel, thus he says: In all things we
approve our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in tumults, in labors.
By watchings, by fastings, by p^ritie, by knowledge, by long suffering: and a
little after, By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, as
deceivers, and yet true: as unknown, and yet known: as chastened, and yet not
killed: as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing: as poor, and yet making many
rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. And in the same
Epistle, Chap. 11. 23. opposing and contesting against false apostles of those
times, that sought to debase and disgrace him, thus he writes of his own
particulars: In labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prison more
plenteously, in Death often. Of the Jews five times received. I forty stripes
save one, I was thrice beaten with rods: I was once stoned: I suffered thrice
Ship-wracke. Night and day have I been in the deep Sea. In iourneying I was
often: in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils of mine own
Nation: in perils among the Gentiles: in perils in the City, in perils in the
Wilderness: in perils in the Sea: in perils among false Brethren. In
weariness, and painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in
fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Beside the things which are outward, I
am combred daily, and have the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and I am
not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? You have heard abundantly of the
sufferings, hear also the invincible constancy and magnanimity of this
admirable Champion of the Lord, expressed with his own mouth, Act. 20. 22. And
now behold, ^ go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, and know not what things
shall come unto me there, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City,
saying, that Bands and afflictions abide me. But I pass not, (for it) at all,
neither is my life dear unto me, so that I may fulfill my course with joy,
and the Ministration which I have received of the Lord Jesus, viz. to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God. And Chap. 21. 13. I am ready not to be bound
only, but also to dye at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus. Having
such Lights and Leaders for our example, shall we grudge and utterly refuse to
suffer any thing, to hazard any troubles, and to bear any crosses at all, (And
it is not possible we should meet with such a measure and heap thereof, as
they did by many degrees,) for the Gospels sake, and, besides all other good
that may come thereof, that we may help to enlarge the Kingdom of God, and
his Christ on earth? And thus much of the first sort of evil accidents and
mis-haps.

The other sort, which I called needless or wilful, by which I mean such as
men wilfully, through their own fault do cast themselves or others into, by
their evil managing of any such business, by rashness, disorder, ouer-sight,
or the like, ought not to be imputed to the Actions themselves, as which do
not necessarily draw any such after them, but to the Authors and Actors of the
same. As if men meet with dangers at Sea, by setting forth at unseasonable
times, in the Winter, in foul weather, or other like: If they be surprised by
an Enemy at Sea or Land, they going without sufficient forces, both of men, and
munition, for such an enterprise: If they be distressed with want of victuals,
and other provisions, when they set forth slenderly, poorly, and ill provided,
with other like.

6. These Actions, our Plantations, I mean, properly and in their own nature,
are liable to as few hazards and mishaps, as any such lightly can be.

For, first, Our Passage to any of the places intended, is very easy, open,
and clear, Sea-roome at will, and, if we take time and season convenient; as
nauigable and pleasant as need to be desired. Few Pirates on those coasts, and
fewer it is probable there would be, if some good course were taken for their
repulse and dissipation.

2. Our Access and Entry is free and facile for the most part. No man once
offers to forbid or hinder our landing there.

3. The people of those Countries, if any be, ready either for love and hope
of good from us, kindly to receive and entertain us, or for fear and
weakness of their own accord to ^lye from us, and betake themselves to more
remote and inland parts of those Regions, or to submit themselves tractably to
live under us.

4. The Countries themselves free, for the most part, of any noisome or very
dangerous either beast or Serpent: not infected nor infested, as some of this
Continent, which yet are, and long have been well inhabited, with the most
dreadful of these sorts, that the world does yield.

5. We need not make way for our selves into any one of them at all with fire
and sword, as either our progenitors the Saxons and Normans did into this Land,
or our later forefathers the English, into both France and Ireland. So that
every thing considered, We cannot well wish or expect, in these days to find
out, to have and gain any Country or Place for Plantation with less
troubles, fewer losses, and smaller dangers, if things be well handled, then
these we may. Nor is it likely, if we neglect and ouerslip the so fair and
many opportunities now offered us, that ever we shall have and find the like
again.


Resp. The profit is small, and little the good that is like to arise ^. Object.
of so great labors, dangers, and expenses. For whatsoever you, and some
others talk of great riches there, and that way to be had, we hear of none
that prove rich and wealthy there.


Enr. It may be so, and there are many reasons for it. Answer.


For, first: It is not long that any have been in any of these Plantations,
and there must be a time for every thing. They that will have come from the
ground, must tarry the ripening of it. It is not one years work or two, to
get a good state in Lands, and to get some store of wealth about a man in the
same likewise. They that go over to such a business, have many things to do
first, before they can have time to gather wealth about them; as to build, to
rid their grounds, to make fenses to destroy wild and hurtful beasts, to get
over good and profitable cattle, to plant and sow their grounds, and the like:
All which be matters of great labor, time and expense. We see in daily
practice with us, a man that is a Purchaser, till he has recovered his Fine,
and stockt his Living, cannot be aforehand and get wealth about him: nor can
they there, till they have done those and other like things, which are to them,
as it were, their Fine and In-come. It is well if seven, or ten, or twenty
years hence, happily in the next generation, men can attain unto riches. It
is enough for the fathers to take in the grounds, and settle the lands and
livings for them and theirs against the time to come, though for the present,
and for their own time, they hardly stand up, and meet with some difficulties.

2. Men there, can, making nothing of their grounds yet, farther then any can
themselves employ them to pasture or tillage. It is not there as in England,
where, if a man have little stock or employment of his own for his grounds,
yet he may let them out at a reasonable rent; but there, more then a man can
stock and till himself, lies still, and will yield him nothing at all. Make
it your own case. If you had the best Living in this parish in Fee simple, and
had little to put upon it, nor could get any to rent it, at your hands, could
you grow rich in haste? This is their case.


Resp. Your speech is very reasonable, I must confess: but go on, I pray you.


Enr. 3. All in manner that have gone over hitherto into any of these parts,
are poor men, men of small means, and therefore with little or nothing, it is
not possible they should in a little time attain to any store of some thing:
And the less possible, for that the benefit of their labors redounds for the
most part, not to themselves, but, as in regard of their great adventures and
expenses, reason is it should, to the benefit of rich men here, that have sent
them thither.

4. Diverse of them that have gone over, have been Bankerutps and Spendthrifts,
Idlers and Loyterers, who, as they thriued not in England, (for how should they
thrive that run thriftlesse and heedlesse courses?) so will they not commonly
in any Land. Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt: as says the
Poet, Weeds will be weeds, where-euer they grow.

When men of fashion and means do go over, that are able to set up themselves
and others, and that will be industrious to take the benefit of the time and
place, then I doubt not but it will soon appear what good may be done in
those places, and that men may, if they will, easily and quickly prove rich and
wealthy there. Then, and not till then, if riches arise not, let men blame the
places from whence it was expected they should arise.

6. The manner of proceeding in these attempts, may also be a great cause, why
men attain to riches there more slowly, then they might and should, if they
were otherwise managed.

As, First, If the Plantation begin with a small number, far too little for
such a business. For then neither can they be able to extend themselves far
into the Countries in a long time, and so not to find out the goodness,
sweetness, and benefit thereof: nor to set up all kind of necessary trades
and faculties among themselves, whereby they may be able to assist and set one
another a work.

2. If they that remove hence, go sparely and ill provided of cattle, corn,
and other necessaries for Plantation and Habitation, which those countries
afford not: impossible it is for them to make that profit, and get that
increase by their Lands and Livings there, which they might, if they were well
and thoroughly provided of such things at the first.

7. This is the only way which men in ancient time did find out and observe
to get riches and wealth withal, to increase and amend their estate by, when
as by multitudes of people their country was, as ours now is, so ouerlaid, that
they could not thrive and prosper therein. Neither were they ever lightly
deceived, but the event and computation did answer their intent and
expectation* And no doubt, if the like courses be now attempted, they may and
will, if they be well carried, produce the like, or rather better and speedier
effects to us then to them. For we have many helps for peace and war, for
shipping and navigations, for defense and fortification, for traffic and
negotiation, for building and habitation, for religious and civil
conversation, for skill in many needful arts and occupations, which they had
not, to further us withal.

8. Of all other means to get wealth and riches by, Husbandry (which of all
courses of life is that, which in those places must chiefly, and most of all,
be followed and employed) has anciently and worthily ever been accounted the
chiefest, best, and surest. Wherein, though it be somewhat more chargeable,
combersome, and for a time, uncomfortable, to enter into a void and desolate
country, ouergrowne with woods, thickets, and other like, yet who knows not,
what great odds and advantage to the getting of riches and wealth there is:
first, between the breaking up of such grounds as were never yet employed, but
having lien waste, untouched, and untilled from the beginning, have all their
sweetness and fatness in them, and the tillage and usage of poor and hungry
soiles, that from time to time have been turned up and worn out to the
uttermost: and then betwixt the having of great and goodly Lands, (for there
one man may easily have as much as ten or twenty have here) and of small and
simple Tenements?

9. When Brutus came first into this Land, who would have imagined it would
have proved so goodly, so plentiful, so fruitful, so rich, so excellent and
happy a Land, as we (God be praised for it) do find, and all the world about
us does know it is? And who but sailing along the Coasts of any of those new
Countries, or but going ashore here and there, not above a mile or two, happily
within the Land, can imagine, or conceive, much less, know and understand what
wealth and riches, what goodly fields and pastures, hills and valleys, mines
and metals, woods and waters, what hidden treasures and sundry commodities are
to be found, and had therein?

10. The name of a Kingdom is very great: and what should not, or heretofore,
what would not men do, to gain a Kingdom? By these means opportunity is
offered unto our Land, to our English Nation, to g^t and gain, to possess and
take, to have and enjoy, together with Plantation and Habitation for thousands,
and hundred thousands thereof, more then one or two Kingdoms, great and goodly
Provinces, that by Gods blessing and providence toward us, may in time be
united to the Crown, the Imperial Crown of this Land. Which by consequence,
(for what infinite store of riches and wealth, how many places of peferment and
honor, for hundreds and thousands of particular and inferior persons is there
contained and comprehended within a Kingdom?) must needs bring with every of
them severally, riches and wealth of great, and in manner infinite value and
estimation.

The English lost in France in the time of Henry the sixth, two several parts
of that spacious Country, that had been English near about three hundred
years before, that is Normandy and Aquitaine, in the former whereof (says an
English History, Normandy and Aquitaine in France lost, and when.
as minding to express the greatness of the loss by the particulars) there
were (then) an hundred strong towns and fortresses, one Archbishoppricke, and
six Bishopprickes, besides some other towns destroyed in the wars: and in
the latter, four Archbishopprickes, fifteen Earledomes, two hundred sixty
and two Baronies, and above a thousand Captainships and Bailiwicks.

Suppose we now the same had fallen out in our times, (and I hope I may without
offense make use of former and foreign things) would we not, or should we not
(think you) account it an ines^imable loss and damage to the Crown and
Country of England, worthy to be redeemed with hundred thousands of our money
and goods, and to be recovered (if it were possible) with thousands of the
lives of our men, and no small effusion of Christian blood? If now
contrariwise, we may in our days, not lose, but get; not hazard, but assuredly
have and gain, and that sine sanguine and sudore, even without blood or
blows, and without any waste or spoil of our treasur^ and state, (I will not
say the same that we had lost, but in stead (...)) some other Regions and
Countries, Territories and (...) for Habitation, as great, and (likely in time
to prove) as g^ (...), might not this be justly accounted a gain and good,
(...) ^sargement and increase to our Nation and Kingdom inesti^le and
exceeding great?

If the name of a Kingdom shall be^ thought too high and excellent, Note this*
too great and glorious for Cou^s so vaste and wast, so remote, and obscure as
those of our Plantations yet are, let them be vouchsafed the name but of
Dukedomes, as those I last mentioned, or Lordships, as Ireland for a long time
was, or by whatsoever other titles, parts or members of a kingdom, he shall
be pleased to style and nominate them, Quem ^enes arbitrium est, and ius and
norm^ loquendi, as one says, for so we have the thing, it is no great matter
for the name: yet, if there may be had, as the probabilities, possibilities,
and opportunities already had and made us, do plainly declare there may in one
place, a Country as great, at the least, as that of Normandy, in another
place, as that of Aquitaine, in a third, twice as much as they both, that is,
such a one wherein there may be in time erected, constituted and made (speaking
somewhat, thought not altogether according to the former proportions) forty
Earledomes or Counties, four Archbishopprickes, six and thirty
Bishopprickes, three or four hundred Baronies, five or six hundred towns and
fortresses, one or two thousand Captainships and Bailiwicks, ten or twelve
thousand parishes, and four or five hundred thousand families, shall it
notwithstanding be thought, that there is no wealth or riches, no place of
preferment, no hope of dignity or good there to be had?


Resp. If there be such Possibilities, yet before the Countries 8. Object.
themselves can be reduced to such a state, and such divisions settled therein,
as you speak of, great store of treasure and wealth must be spent, and many
years of time be ouerpast.


Enr. 1. For Expense, not so much happily, as one lingering Answer.
war, the event whereof is most uncertain must and will consume.

2. The Countries themselves will yield means and money enough, if they be
well handled, to defray or repay whatsoever shall be needful for the effecting
of all these with advantage.

3. The hazard and loss of life and limme is this way wonderfully saved and
avoided.

4. And for time, sooner happily this may be thus effected, at least, in some
tolerable measure, then a Country lost can be recovered and quieted. As we
may observe, by the children of Israel, who setting upon the Land of Canaan,
and that with a mighty army, not so few as an hundred thousand men of war,
and with more then ordinary, even admirable success, The Lord being ever with
them, yet were scarcely settled therein all the days of Joshua: and near home
too, in our neighbor Country. The Netherlands, which being revolted from the
Spaniard long ago, he has not been able in all our time, to reduce to his
obedience again.

5. And you know, a country being gotten by the sword, may be lost again by
the same. For, Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere parta tueri: There is more
ado to keep, then to get such a thing Of the which there is little or no
fear in the attempts that we talk of.

6. In a word, both the expectation and the expense for reduction of those
Countries to such effects, will, and may be speedily and abundantly recompensed
in the facility, liberty, and security of the getting, settling, and keeping
of them.

Wherefore, Rumpantur Ilia Codr^: Let froward Envy her self swell till she
burst again, and detracting Malice, or timorous Ignorance speak the worst
they can, yet all that will not be blind, may see, and whosoever will
understand the truth, may know, that there are Riches and Preferment, much for
the present, more for the times to come to be had, if men will but take them;
and to be gotten and gained, if they be but labored and searched for, in the
places and precincts of our present intended Plantations.

And now I think good neighbor Respire, I have for the satisfaction of you,
or of any not peruersly minded, sufficiently justified The Sum of this first
part.
these Proiects and Attempts of Plantations for the general, to be in
themselves honorable, needful, gainful and lawful: and for the particular,
to be neither so dangerous or difficult, nor so strange or incommodious, as at
the first show they may seem to be.


Resp. You have indeed, in mine opinion, spoken exceeding well to those
purposes. Your latter words bring to my mind that worthy saying of Solomon,
Eccl. 11. 4. if my memory fail me not. The words, I am sure, be these: He
that observes the winds, shall not ^ow, and, he that regards the clouds,
shall not reap: and your whole discourse makes me fear to urge you with any
more Objections concerning these matters, as which I see by your ready,
plain, and plentiful answer to these already moved, be to little purpose, and
will vanish, when they come to be sifted, as smoke before the wind. And if you
can yield me the like satisfaction in some other points, that I conceive very
necessary to be considered about these Actions, I shall like of them a great
deal better then ever I had thought I should; and be as ready to praise and
commend them, as I have been to dispraise and blame them. But therewith I will
not trouble you at this present, but defer it to another meeting, which God
willing, shall be shortly. For I shall not be in quiet, till I have heard the
uttermost that you either can say, or I am desirous to hear touching these
matters.


Enr. I am glad truly, that our little Conference has so much prevailed with
you. And I shall be ready, and because I find you so tractable and reasonable,
the readier, to give you the best satisfaction I can in anything else,
whenever you shall be pleased to that end to come hither again.


The end of the first part.
A PLAIN PATHWAY TO PLANTATIONS:

That is, A Discourse in general concerning the Plantation of our English
people in other Countries.

The second Part.



LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Marriot*

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VERY WORTHY, SIR GEORGE CALVERT, Knight,
principal Secretary to the Kings most excellent Majesty, Peace and
Prosperity temporal and eternal.
Right Honorable,
THe fame of your Honors most excellent and praiseworthy endeavors in
attempting, following, and applying of a Plantation of some of our English
Nation in that remote, and yet obscure, and desolate Country, the Country
commonly called Newfoundland, has encouraged and emboldened me, a stranger to
your Honor, but a well-willer to all such worthy works, to present unto your
Honor, and to publish under your Honors Name, some part of my plain and
impolished Labors, which for the furtherance and hasting on of those most
worthy, and at this present for our Country of England, most necessary
attempts of Plantations in far and foreign parts, but specially and namely
in Newfoundland, above the rest, I have adventured to offer to the common view,
in hope and desire somewhat thereby to move and stir up our people, chiefly
the poorer and meaner sort, (which, for want of Plantation abroad, are ready,
by want and penury, to pine and perish at home) in better sort to affect and
addict themselves to the same.

Which work of mine, though rude and mean, if your Honor shall, in
consideration of the matter and substance thereof vouchsafe to accept, and
think not unworthy of Passage abroad, as it shall notably protect my Labors
from the envious minds of the malicious, and the carping tongues of the
captious, so shall it stir up my self with all hearty affection, to rest
devoted to your Honors service and these employments, and to pour out my
deuoutest prayers to the Highest, the Lord of all, for your Honors all and
ever health and happiness.

Your Honors humbly to command, RICHARD EBVRNE.

THE PATHWAY TO PLANTATIONS. The second Part.
The Speakers be Respire, a Farmer. Enrubie, a Merchant.

Respire. GOD bless you, good Sir: according to your courteous Offer, I am
come again, in hope to be further satisfied by you, touching the Conference we
lately had in hand.


Enr. You are very welcome, Let me hear therefore, what it is that you desire
to be further satisfied in.


Resp. The Enterprises themselves (Plantations I mean) you have well showed
me, to be in themselves very commendable and good, and for our Land and Nation,
at this present exceeding necessary: yet, as I suppose, there cannot, or there
will not, sufficient and convenient means be had for the expedition and
performance thereof, as is requisite: as may appear by the ^ll success, the
giving over, or slow proceeding of such Actions heretofore from time to time,
to the notable hinderance of the Gospel, the great dishonor and reproach of
our Nation, and the extreme loss and disadvantage of the Undertakers and
Adventurers: and then to what end is it to take in hand impossibilities?


Enr. You say well: and therefore for speedy and due remedy in this behalf,
especially and above all other things, as wherein The best course to be taken
for Plantations, is by Act of Parliament.
alone, the true and perfect cure of those evils does consist, it were to be
wished, that by Act of Parliament, some good courses might speedily be taken
throughout the Land, by which it might effectually be accomplished. For
Plantations indeed are properly a matter of public and general, and not, as
the practice is with us, of private and particular Action.

If it seem to any a matter too mean, and unworthy a Parliamentarie
consideration, for my part I protest, I can in no wise be of their opinion,
unless I may plainly be taught, and informed, that it is no part of a Fathers
care, to place abroad his Children, as they grow up, but to keep them still
under his own Roof, till they eat him out of House and home: or of an
Householders providence to foresee, that his Meyny exceed not his means: or of
the Sheeph^ards duty, when his Flock is increased, to provide them larger
pastures: or of the Gardiners charge, when his plants and sets are over thick,
and do incomber the ground, to remove and disperse them into other plots,
where having more room, they may bigger grow, and better prosper.


Resp. Till that may be obtained, which all men know, cannot possibly be on a
sudden, and those attempts being now begun, do necessarily require speedy
and much supply, and continual furtherance, lest else, besides all other evils
that be ^all on us, which is written in the Gospel, Luke 14. 29. viz* having
laid such foundations, and being not able to perform them, all that behold
them, mock us, saying: These men, these Englishmen, began Plantations here and
there, and now are not able to make an end of any one of them; what courses
might there be taken for the speedy effecting of them in some tolerable
measure and commendable manner?


Enr. Till some good course that way, a thing in mine opinion much to be
desired, may be obtained and provided, if I might be bold to speak my mind
(and toward a common good, why should it not be free, and without offense for
any man as a well willer to so good a work to speak, since as it has been
well and of old observed, Aliquando est olitor opportuna locutus, A mean man
may sometime speak to the purpose?) I could be willing to acquaint you or any
other, with what inferior courses I have conceived might the mean while be
taken and followed, for the bringing of the same to some tolerable estate and
reasonable good effect.


Resp. I pray you let me hear them: for I hope, no man will dislike with any
man to put to his helping hand to do any good in this great work, which so
much concerns all: specially, when as you intend not to urge or bind any man
to your words, but leave it free to all men to accept or reject, as it pleases
them.


Enr. Trusting then of favorable acceptance I will speak What inferior
courses might be taken to further these attempt^.
what I think. Two things there be above all other most material and
necessary for such a business to be provided, that is, men and money, People
to go to the Plantation, and Provision to set them forth. Both which howsoever
to some they may be thought impossible to be had, I am persuaded, if good
courses for them might be used, though not without some difficulty (And what
high and worthy enterprise is there, that ever has without some difficulty
been achieved?) may sufficiently be obtained.

1 For Money: well known it is, that many Honorable and Money to be had.
other worthy Persons have this way employed much, and no First, By Voluntaries.
doubt intend to proceed accordingly.

2 It cannot be, but that some of those that adventure in person Secondly, By
personal Adventurers.
intending there to inhabit, do and will go some of them sufficiently and
many of them somewhat provided that way. Few will go with an empty purse.

3 For procuring what farther shall be needful, it seems unto Thirdly, By
general Collections.
me, it were very requisite, and a thing not very hard to be obtained by some
or other, that some Letters Patent under the great Seal of England, or other
like course might be set forth for some g^nerall and Yearly Collection or
contribution to that purpose: and the Briefes (Books rather) for it to be
directed either to the Lord Bishops of every Diocese, or to the Sheriff of
every Shire, by them to be dispersed into every Parish. For likely it is,
that many well-disposed able men would give to this great and worthy work more
liberally, then to others many of far less importance (and yet good sums
of Money, have thus been often collected) specially, if men may perceive, by the
removing and departure of any, it redounds indeed, as is pretended, to the
common good.

4 Probable also it is, that the Justices of every Shire, upon Fourthly, By
Hospital Money.
good intimation of the cause unto them, would be pleased to bestow some part
of that Money which quarterly at their Sessions is received by the name of
Hospital Money, toward the setting forth of some maimed Soldiers, or some
other poor of the said Country, yearly, into some or other of those
Plantations.

5 Neither is it improbable, that the Churchwardens and Fifthly, By Moneys
given to the use of the Poor.
Overseers for the Poor, that have (as in sundry Parishes within this Land
they have) several portions and sums of Money by well*disposed people in
their last Wills or otherwise, given and bequeathed for and toward the relief
of the Poor in their Parish, committed to their charge and custody, may be
persuaded and drawn, or otherwise caused to confer and lay out the said
portions or sums of Money or the greatest part thereof in this sort, to the
setting forth of some of the Poor of their Parish, Children or other, that
else must within the same continually be relieved and maintained.


Resp. That were very unreasonable and evil too, I think: for what consci^nce
were this, to sulsifie the trust reposed in them, and to defraud their Poor of
their relief?


Enr. No evil, no wrong, no defrauding at all, howsoever you upon the sudden
do so take it: but rather this were a ready way to employ it indeed to their
use, to whom by the Donours it was properly intended: whereas now, for the most
part, you shall ^ind, if you observe it well, such moneys and the profit
thereof arising, are converted to the ease of the Rich, and not to the relief
of the Poor. And at the best hand you can reckon it, if the Poor be thereby
any thing relieved, it is but ad diem, for the very present: but being laid
out in that manner which I mean and mention, the Poor and their posterity
too, yea, and the whole Parish from whence it is taken, shall thereby be
relieved, bettered, and benefited for ever.

But not to make a long answer to so short and shallow an Objection, whatsoever
any shall pretend against that I say, so long as I have the example of that
most holy and famous Doctor of the Ambros. de Offic. lib. 2. cap. ^7*
Church, S. Ambrose, on my side, who for redeeming of Christian Captives, brake
the very Vessels of Gold and Silver that were in his Church, and making money
thereof, employed it to that use, saying, The Sacraments need not Gold, which
were purchased for us without Gold: And Aurum Ecclesia habet, non vt seruet,
sed vt eroget: The Church has Gold not to keep it, but to lay it out to good
and pious uses. I shall not fear to answer the same. I will infer, if S.
Ambrose did well to employ Bona Ecclesiae, even the Treasures of the Church
upon redemption of the Poor, they cannot be proved to do ill, that shall
employ Bona Pauperum, the Goods of the Poor, their own Money, upon the Poor,
and to their own uses.


Resp. I see now I did mistake, and not you: and I hope you will ^eare with my
ignorance and rashness.


Enr. Your words offended not me any thing at all: for by your opposition no
hurt has risen to the cause. Truth is never better cleared, then when it is
somewhat oppugned and contradicted.


Resp. It seems so in this very case: for by your former speeches Sixthly, By
Moneys given to the use of the Church.
and example me thinks I do now see, that it were no fault, but a good and
pious fact, if such Moneys also as do belong to Churches, as here and there
somewhat to that use remaining, is yet to be found, were likewise employed to
this use we speak of, as which in good probability would be more acceptable
to God, to be bestowed in such a necessity, as this is, upon the Temples of
the Holy Ghost, then upon* Churches made of Lime and Stone, which without these
Moneys are and may be sufficiently repaired and adorned.


Enr. Your collection is good and religious. That must needs be true piety
which is coupled with pity, for God will have mercy rather then Sacrifice.
But let us go on.


Resp. I hearken when you will speak of the Lotterie, which you know was set
up in London, and in many places abroad in the Country many times for Uirginia,
as it was said.


Enr. 7. I dislike not the Lotterie neither, so as it were well Seventhly, By
the Lotterie.
used, and people had the wit, not to run out by it, to their undoing. But I
know it has lost the love of the Country, both for that it robbed the Country
of her Money wonderfully: for out of our Shire only, when it was here but a
few years ago, it is thought to have carried away many hundred pounds, so
that Money was never plenty here since, and for that we never heard of any
good that was done with it. If they that had the employment of it, had made
known unto every County (though severally) what had been gotten out of it
by the Lotterie that year, and offered to employ it on so many of the Poor of
the said County (if they could be gotten to go) as it might conveniently
suffice unto, it would have yielded the County good content for the present,
and have gained a better welcome to it self another time. But the matter being
used as it was, if any yet do like of it, they may adventure it again, if
they list: who, if they would give voluntarily, but the fifth part of that some
of them lost desperately that way, (for I know some my self that, by their
own reports, lost ten, twenty, yea, thirty pound a man) might be counted
good Benefactours.


Resp. Of the Lotterie enough: but besides, if you have any more to say, I pray
you proceed with it.


Enr. 8. If the former courses suffice not, I see not but that 8. By some
ratable imposition.
some ratable Imposition might be procured to be laid upon the abler sort, as
in time of war, for setting forth of Soldiers, to be employed upon such as
shall be transported, from those parts (the Parish, Tithing, or Hundred) where
it is raised. And I am verily persuaded there is not a Parish in the Land, that
would not willingly be at any reasonable charge for the setting forth of any
such poor body, as should either voluntarily offer himself, or by authority
be taken up, to go in that Action from time to time. In truth I have heard men
of good sense and substance say, they would be very willing to bestow out of
their Parish twenty nobles or ten pounds a year, toward the apparelling and
setting forth of some of their poorer sort, so as they might be assured they
should not, after a year or two, as from the Irish some have done, come home
again, and encomber them worse then before.

9 Besides, if it might be thought fit and obtained, that for 9. By base moneys
for those purposes and places to be stamped.
those Plantations some store of base Moneys, as of Brass, Copper, or little
better might be stamped (all English Coins and Plate of Gold and Silver, being
there and thence prohibited, unless and until the Countries themselves do or
shall hereafter yield Metal for them) I conjecture, how probably let others
judge, the use thereof would prove exceeding beneficial to this purpose.


Resp. That were a strange course indeed, and is it possible any good this way
might be wrought?


Enr. Very much I think. For thereby, first, The wealth of The use and (...)
of such money.
all such as pass over (any reasonable proportion in the Exchange both for
value and valor thereof being held) should instantly, among themselves, be
much increased. A thing so material as nothing more, for without infinite
store of Money can be no good Plantation any where.

Secondly, Such as pass over, should be occasioned to lade away with them
store of our English commodities for building, for household, etc. which happily
they would not have done, if they might carry with them their English Moneys,
and once having such things there, they will do them more pleasure and good,
then till they come there, they could presuppose.

Thirdly, Such as are there, should be the more occasioned to use all
industrious means to get up the commodities of those Countries, to barter and
trucke withal for such things as shall merchantwise be brought to them from
hence, knowing well that their Money will not much be regarded nor received of
our men.

Fourthly, It would make them delight the more in Tillage and breed of Cattle,
because Silver and Gold Coins the very begetters of hoarding covetousness
wanting, their chiefest riches must needs consist in Corn and Cattle.

Fifthly, They being rich within themselves (for such Money while it holds
value, is as good, where it is current, as any other) should yet be poor to
others-ward among whom it is not current, which would make them the less
desired of, and the less to fear any such as seek for spoil and prey.

Sixthly, By this means, we should often receive from them good store of
foreign Coins, received by them for Fish and other commodities sold to such
as come to trade there.

Seventhly, Moreover, Hereby the great hurt that some imagine is to be feared
by those Plantations in carrying away of our Gold and Silver, would easily, and
that both to our and their great advantage be avoided.


Resp. And in truth, many do complain of the carriage away of our Money out
of our Land, and I perceive by you, that it is likely a great deal of it goes
this way.


Enr. It must needs be so, if the works go forward in any sort: and then
note, whatsoever is gone over Sea that way, never returns again. We receive
back but either nothing at all, or else but some commodities of those
Countries, as Fish, Timber, Salt, etc. And therefore this is a thing in mine
opinion that must timely and carefully be looked unto, or else the Coin and
Treasure of our Land will, by these Plantations, if once they go well and
roundly forward, within a while be extremely spent and exhausted For say for a
trial or example, there should go twenty thousand, and each of them to
carry but ten pounds a man (a small reckoning and poor stock to begin
withal) yet that comes to in the whole, to two hundred thousand pounds. Now by
this, guess of the rest


Resp. This is very plain: yet men will hardly hear of this base money,
because of the strangeness and novelty of the matter.


Enr. If any think this matter strange, let him but enquire, and he shall be
informed at full, that at the first in all Lands, such coin was either only,
or most common. That it is not yet much above one Age ago, that in England it
self it was in use: that in our time Ireland had it: and, that at this day, if
Travelers tell true, Spain it self, for all her Indian Silver mines and
Golden mountains, upon good policy, is not without it. And if it were as
strange and new a course, as it is old and common, yet if necessity so
require, better it is, I think, to be used then some other more usual and
less profitable. But leaving that to judgment and consideration of the wise
and judicious, I profess, that for my own part, I do rest resolved, There
can no good Plantation be made by us any where, without the use, and great
store of such base moneys.

10. Yet I say further, if the continuance of Gold and Silver Tenthly, By Gold
and Silver Coins.
coins shall be thought more necessary for these employments, then I conceive
them to be, that such a course may be taken (the like whereof has often been
practiced in sundry kingdoms and and dominions upon less occasion then this)
that both our present coins may remain safe within our Land, and yet many
thousands of pounds in gold and silver may be conferred on those that shall
dwell and inhabit in those new Plantations, without any pound or penny charge
almost to those that shall the same, on them, for their enriching and
encouragement there, confer and bestow.


Resp. I do not well understand you in this: by better thinking on your words,
it may be I shall: but for your base moneys, I preconceiue one very great
inconvenience of it, whenever it shall be called in. The fall of money, as
Experience has proved in England many times here to fore, will be a great
prejudice and impouerishment unto all them on whom it does alight.


Enr. 1. That need not to be feared (unless the Countries An objection of the
fall of base money answered.
themselves happen to yield better metals) for many generations yet to come. 2.
That loss will be recompensed by the use thereof an hundred fold, before any
such fall do, or can come. 3. And it may, whenever it does come, so equally
be divided by times, that it may so easily be borne, that the posterities may
have little cause thereby to complain, that they bear some part of the
burden of their Progenitors. Commodit as quaeque sua fert incommoda secum. No
commodity but has his discommoditie with it, which must be borne with for a
greater good.


Resp. I cannot dislike that you say: Proceed, I pray you.


Enr. If, either order might be taken, or people be persuaded, 11. By frugall
expenses in Diet, etc.
that they which go over might leave behind them, that (I will not say
Superfluity and Excess, which both the place and plenty wherein we live (God
be thanked) do, and happily may afford us, but that) Uarietie, Costlinesse,
Stateliness, Delicacie, Bravery and Abundance in Apparel, Diet, Building, and
all other Provisions, which here many do use, it cannot easily be estimated,
how much it might avail to the speedy furtherance, and cheap setting forth of
these worthy works. Frugalitie and Parsimonie, like that of ancient times,
will better befit the infancy and vprisings of any commonwealth which ever
have been, and necessarily must be, or else they will never frame well, rude
and plain. It was never better with Rome it self, (whose best men, says one
of their best Authors, in priuatis rebus, suisque sumptibus minimo contenti,
tenuissimo cultu viuebant, etc. In private estates, and matters of their own
charges, contented with a very little, did live with very slender provision)
then when her Consuls and Dictators were taken from the plough, and her
Senators served at the table in earthen plate: and never merrier in England,
then when Farmors would wear none other then their own home-made cloth; when
Gentlemen delighted to have plenty, rather then dainty, at their tables, and
the best Housekeepers held them rather to their own country yield, then to
foreign and far fetched provision.

Some be of the mind. That though all other means failed, if they alone that
roist and riot out their goods and wealth in An extrauagant.
pride and vanity, in drunkenness and gluttony, and other like disorderd
courses: And many there be, (woe be to them therefore, as witnesses the holy
Ghost, Esa. 5. 11. and 22. and cap. 22. 13. Ezekiel. 16. 40. Luke 16. 19. and
other places more.) that indeed do so lavish and waste that they have, by such
intemperate and deuillish courses, as if they were nati consumere fruges, had
no other thoughts but how to havoc and spoil, and made that the very end of
their life here, to see the end of all before they go hence: If these, I say,
could be either persuaded or compelled to bestow that, or but half that, (so
luxurious is our land become) which so prodigally and profanely they profuse
and spend upon this pious, good, and necessary use, that that alone, would
abundantly suffice to supply all the wants of this work, and to bring it to a
speedy and an excellent end. But since there is little hope that they which
will not see their own shame, and foresee their and theirs undoing and
overthrow, should have any mind or care of others (of the common good) I will
not vouchsafe the Observation thereof any number in my Account, but leave it as
an Extranagam, to themselves and others, not denying yet, but that sometimes,
Quo minime credas, Gurgite piscis erit: where is least hope, there may be some
help. 12. By the godly parsimonie of the richer sort at home.


12. But if the richer and better sort of our people, men of good place and
fashion, whom God has blessed with plenty and abundance of worldly wealth, and
great store of riches, could be pleased and induced out of their gratuitie to
God, and love to their country and poorer brethren therein, to pare off a
little of their super^luities and delicacies, which from their tables, and
their apparel, etc. might well bespared, and bestow and employ it upon such
good uses as these, the helping and setting forth of the poorer sort, the
ridding and clearing of this their own country, which they see ouer-laid with
mulritude, and the planting and inhabiting of other Countries, I suppose
without any damage and want to themselves, they might do a work acceptable
to God, beneficial to many, and to these works of Plantations much available
and helpefull. I have read of the La^edemons, a people among the heathen of
special note for their virtuous and good conditions, that understanding
Lacedaemonians.
some of their neighbors in a time of famine to be in great want, pitying
their distress, and having no other ways where with to relieve them, they did
by a general consent save one meal apeece, and sent that to their needy
neighbors, who found themselves thereby wonderfully refreshed. I would not
wish that any should pinch his body, and eat a bit the less, or wear a
garment the worse for this matter: it would abundantly suffice, and rise to a
great account, if those that are able, and do abound, would spare, I say not
one meal in a week, not two in a month, but and it were, but the value of
one weeks expenses in a whole year, which without any feeling or sign at
all, as it were, might easily be deducted from the whole, and their bellies
nothing the less fed and filled, nor their bodies any thing the worse clothed
and covered. Saint Paul in his time found the Macedonians so ready to well
doing, that in their poverty, yea their extreme poverty, their rich
liberality abounded even to strangers, and I hope it is not out of hope that
our rich English people in our time may be induced and moved out of their
superfluity and great abundance, to confer somewhat this way on their near
neighbors and native countrymen.

Some of these, or rather all these courses put in practice, for Singula si
valiant, iuncta necesse iuueent, it cannot be there should want in common
purse, money and means, (for what can want, where money wants not?) for
thespeedy and ready expedition and accomplishment of these worthy exploits.


Resp. Your conceits for raising of money seem to me, to be exceeding good and
sufficient: but I think, you cannot as easily conceive like means for getting
of people to go to these Plantations.


Enr. For getting of people to be transplanted, the intended To procure people
to go, what means might be used. 1. By Proclamation.
Project I see, is, That none be constrained thereunto, but only such
admitted, as of themselves be willing, and do offer themselves unto it. Which
holding, it seems to me it were good.

That either by some Proclamation, or Escript in print, notice of the intended
Plantation, together with some There is a president of this form set forth by
Robert Harecourt Esquire, in the end of his Deseription of his voyage to Gu^ana.
declaration of the benefits, commodities, and privileges which they of every
quality, that will go over to inhabit there, specially the three first years
shall receive and enjoy, were given throughout the Land, as well in every This
I see is now reasonably well performed by Captain R. (...) who has obtained
his Books to be dispersed into all parishes: saving that his project is for
one only plantation, viz. N^wfound Land, but that I intend should be for all,
or one after another successively, as they go on, and with more Authority.
parish Church, as in every market town, to try who will be willing. For now
many hear not of it at all, many, because it is but a Rumor, believe not the
report thereof, and in a manner all, because they have no certain
intelligence, either of the present state of the Country to be planted, or of
the benefit there to be had, and of the manner of proceeding therein, regard it
not. This way present trial would be made, who would give in their names, to
that end: and if the Inland do not, yet the Seacost towns like enough would
somewhat hearken unto it.

2. Thereto it would also further much, I suppose, if therewithal some good
order might be settled in every City and Haven town within the Land, whether
they that dwell near thereto might repair, for Conditions and Agreements
about theirhabitation otherwhere, and Transportation thither. When men must
seek for very notice only of these matters 100 miles or more, it makes them
weary to think of it. All the helps that can be had, for easy, safe,
certain, and commodious notice and removing, will be all little enough, and
exceeding requisite and behoouefull.

3. Likewise, if order could be taken that the removing of those that depart
hence, might be principally made in some parts of the Land one year, and in
some another, that so all that upon good notice thereof had and taken, be fet
therehence to be removed, might be removed all together at once, or at twice at
the most: This, probable it is, would cause many to be more willing, then
otherwise they will be, to depart hence, while they shall see some good store
and company of their kinsfolks, friends, neighbors, and acquaintance, to go
away together with them. For, going into a strange place, men cannot but as it
were naturally desire both to go, and to be there with such as they know
before and are formerly acquainted with, rather then with mere strangers; and
be fearful to commit both themselves and all that they have, wholly, to those
that they never saw before.

Fourthly, This could not but be a good motive and encouragement Fourthly, By
provision supplied.
to many, but a far greater this, if special order shall also be taken, that
those that shall depart hence, be supplied most carefully and sufficiently with
all kind of provisions fit and necessary for the life of man, which those
parts and Countries yield not; as Food and Apparel, Corn to sow and plant,
Cattle great and small for breed and other uses, Iron, edge-Tooles, Armor,
etc. that so having all such necessaries duly and ordinarily brought unto them,
they may have every thing in their Markets to be bought and sold, somewhat
like as they were used to have them here in England.

And this must be continued not for once or twice only, nor at an Harbor or
two, but in every part of the Plantations, and from time to time, till the
Plantations shall be able of themselves to stand up, and continue without them.
If people may perceive such order to be settled, and like to be carefully
observed* as it will well comfort the friends of the departed that remain here
behind; so it will both comfort and encourage those that shall depart hence,
seeing themselves well to be provided for, and not left, being once removed, to
all adventures and uncertainties.

This matter is of that moment, that it is the first thing and the greatest
that troubles the mind of any, when speech is made to them of departing hence
into any new Country, of dwelling in a foreign Land: What they shall do
there? How they shall live when they come thither? And it takes that deep
impression in the heart of many, that unless they may foresee a clear and
evident resolution thereof, there is no more possibility to persuade them to
remove, then to run themselves into the Fire, or cast themselves headlong into
the Sea. This doubt therefore being once well cleared, and people made to see
that they shall not need to fear this way, people will be three times more
willing to go then yet they are.

It is not all one for men to go into any of the present Plantations, as it
has been to go into Ireland, whither if any could go provided of Money in
any measure, he needed nothing else. For there he was sure to have any thing he
needed for his Money, at a better and cheaper rate then in England. But in
these places he must have all things either carried along with him, or brought
thither after him, and that at a dearer price and higher reckoning then in
England.

People of our breed cannot live as the Saluages and Natives there do, that is,
more like beasts then men. Whatsoever therefore those Countries yield not, and
people in these have been used to have, must most carefully be provided them,
lest left destitute that way, they seem as cast out into wild and forsaken
wildernesses, and exposed to famine and other miseries too grievous to them to
bear.


Resp. I have heard, that our men have in some of our Plantations felt much*
extremity this way.


Enr. If any such disasterous accident have befallen any, I wish the notice
thereof buried in the Gulf of Obliui^n: and for my part I neither will revive
the memory of any such, nor by my good will, hear it recited by any, because
I know, it will inflict such a wound in these actions, as will not be healed
again by the plaster of five times as many good events.


Resp. I think so too: For except a man be of a very dull apprehension, he
will quickly thence conclude, that men were better to abide and live in
poverty, yea in beggerie at home, then to perish and dye by penury and
misery abroad. And indeed, no man can say, but that better it were, that men
were not removed at all, then not seconded and supplied at all. Bona been, Good
actions be then good, when they be handled and acted in a good sort. But hoping
that future times may bring forth fairer events, and former perils (if any have
been, for more may be told, then is true) produce greater carfulness and
diligence, for your courses mentioned, though, I like them well, yet I cannot
believe they will be sufficient to work your intended effect.


Enr. 5 If these courses suffice not, as I believe also that 5. By Vagarant
Persons.
they will not (for so are men, Englishmen especially, and of them, most of all
the Inland sort, wedded to their native Soil like a Snaile to his Shell, or
as the Fable is, A Mouse to his Chest, that they will rather even starve at
home, then seek stoare abroad) me thinks it might be good, that strict order
were taken, to take up all such vagrant persons, as now contrary to the
Statute wander about the Country loitering, begging, etc. of which sort many
are strong and able persons, such as could and would work and labor well, if
they were well ordered and employed. And that such, I mean the strong and able
ones, were set forth at the common charge of the place, either where they are
apprehended, or ought to be relieved.

Sixthly, To these might be added such as are imprisoned and 6. Prisoners.
convicted for any small offenses, not deserving death; as for picking, and
stealing, Sheepe-stealing, etc. and some too of an higher degree, if the
Magistrate shall see it good. Of these many commit such crimes, for very need
and pure hunger (For what will not Necessity, which knows no Law, and Hunger,
which breaks stone walls, enforce men unto?) who no doubt being first
chastised, and then well governed, and of better means provided, may prove
honest and good men and women afterward. Let no man despair, no not of such,
remembering and considering well what the Apostle says of and to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor 6. 9, 10, and 11. and Tit. 3. 3, 4. and Gal. 6. 1. And what
is written of those that followed David, before he came to the Crown, 1. Sam.
22. 2. which for breuities sake, to recite and apply, I purposely forbear.
These of both sorts, might be kept in some Houses of Correction next adjoining,
till they can conveniently be shipped away. This course well observed and
continued two or three years, would so purge the Land of evil weeds, as Galen
never better purged his diseased Patients, nor Hercules the Augean Stables.


Resp. I hearkened when you would reckon up maimed and aged Soldiers, of whom
the Romans in their Colonies, as I have heard, made great reckoning.


Enr. 7 It may be: but the state of our Plantations and Seventhly, Maimed
Soldiers.
their Colonies be very different. They provided in theirs liberal
maintenance for such as could not labor, but we provide room in ours for them
only that can labor Maimed Soldiers are oftentimes not serviceable, and
therefore will be a burden to the whole where they come. If any of them be fit
for labor, and able to do themselves and the Undertakers good, I doubt not
but that they which are to provide for them allowance at home, will be as
willing and ready to provide it for them otherwhere also, if they may perceive
it to be more beneficial for all parties. And in this time of our long
continued Peace, God be thanked, the number of them is not increased, but
decreased to a small account. When occasion does so require, and opportunity
serve, there is no doubt but that way, they also may be provided for, and help
to make up the number.


Resp. Proceed, I pray you, with the rest.


Enr. 8 There is yet a better course and a readier then any Eighthly, Cottagers.
of the former, and that is, Whereas there be infinite store of houses, erected
in corners and waste plots under Hedges, and by the highways sides, contrary
to the Statute of 31. Eliz. 7. if due order might be taken, that by a certain
day in every year (for all, as euacuation in dangerous Apostumes, cannot be
done at once) a certain number, as a third or fourth part of them, designed
for the purpose, by time, by lot, or other like means, might be quite taken
down, and utterly razed for ever, the Inhabitants enjoined by that day to
provide for themselves otherwhere, such Houses as by Law ought to stand, or
else to depart the Land, to some or other of the places to be inhabited,
assured there to be provided for in a far better sort.

9. To these ought to be added another sort no less combersome Ninthly,
Inmates.
to the Land, viz. Inmates, I mean such, as being in no possibility of the
reuersion of the house wherein they dwell, or of any other legal Tenement,
do, contrary to the Statute likewise, thrust into houses with and under the
right Tenants. Of both which sorts, together the Land does so superabound, that
in many parishes, I speak but what I know, they are half or more then half
so many as the right Tenants, and legal Inhabitants are. The riddance of them,
would be an inestimable clearing of the Country of many an untoward generation,
and a notable disburdening of many a parish of intolerable and annual expenses.


Resp. These, above any other, I could wish were rid out of the Country: I and
such other poory husbandmen, do live much the worse for them. And our Land, I
am persuaded, can never thrive, so long as these Drones do (...) it.


Enr. Indeed they are a superfluous Multitude, and fittest of all other to be
rid away: as who, not only in regard of their personal estates, have for the
most part little here to trust unto: but also, are for their bodies and
breeding, best able, a thing very necessary in these intendments, to endure any
hardness or labor by Sea or by Land, within doors or without. Whom therefore
it were no reason, either foolish pity of the Governors on the one side, or
covetous favor of greedy Landlords on the other side, should any longer here
retain, to their own, and the whole countries great hurt and incombrance.

The States of our Land, in making of that Statute, do show sufficiently that
they both found then, and foresaw, that much hurt did and would accrue unto
this our Land by this superfluous crew, who if they had as prudently taken
order for their placing elsewhere, from time to time, as they grew up, as they
did prouidently enact the not placing of them here, long or this we should
have had some or other New England filled with thousands of them, made as rich
and happy by transplantation, as now they are poor and needy subjects to our
King by their commoration: and we should not, as now we are, be pestred with
their abode among us.

To forbid them to build here, and not to appoint them place to build and plant
in elsewhere, unless they could have forbidden them to be bred and to breed
and increase any where, was to as little purpose, as for a Physician to show
his patient the disease, but to prescribe or give him for his disease no
remedy.

10. If all these courses sufficed not, and yet I am persuaded 10. Soldiers,
in garrisons.
verily the former yield might quickly be of young and old an hundred thousand
at the least, I see not any sufficient let or just cause, why beyond all these
both Souldierlike, a good great press might not be made of some thousands
yearly of persons fit to be removed, which being once transplanted thither, as
soldiers into Garrison, might so be severed, as might seat them for
habitation, and set them (being not loyterers and thriftlesse fellows, but men
of employment, handicrafts, laborers, etc.) while wars let not, to service
and employment for the common and their own private good: and also Servant
like, a good And servants.
number of poor men's children, both boys and maids, but maids especially of
nine or ten years old and upward, be taken up, which according to the Statute
of 43. Eliz. 2. and 1. Iam. 25. might be placed as servants or apprentices with
such as go over to inhabit there.


Resp. If there should be so great a number, and such kind of persons as you
intimate, it cannot be but that many idlers and unprofitable persons will go
among them likewise, which likely it is will do more harm then good: would
you then have no respect to be had to some rather then other to go?


Enr. It is true that as it is here at home, so it will be abroad. In a
multitude there will ever be some that are but unprofitable, yet would I have
none to be left out (so as they be serviceable and not maimed and utterly
unable) that can be had, because there is some hope that Necessity, Occasion
and Opportunity may make many of them to leave loytering there, that here
happily have nothing else to do: and for that their very presence and number
cannot but be some comfort and strength of the Plantation.

But withal, and above all, special regard ought to be had, to draw thither
(as I have before once or twice insinuated) men of special and present
employment, that is, men of such Trades, Faculties, Sciences, Handicrafts,
Occupations and Employments, as are most necessary for a present and vprising
common wealth; such, as without whom, there can be no commodious or good
dwelling or living at all for men, men of our breed and manner of Living any
where. For man's life you know is such as cannot stand in any good sort without
the help and supply of many very many other men besides himself.


Resp. What sort of persons are those whom you take to be so necessary, that
without them there can be no good Plantation or Cohabitation for men, men of
our breed any where?


Enr. They are these, and the like. Armorers, Bakers, Barbers, Diverse sorts of
m^necessaryn for a Plantation.
Bookesellers, Butchers, Bowmakers, Brewers, Bricklaiers. Carpenters,
Chandlers, Clothiers, Coopers, Cutlers. Diers, Drapers Feltmakers Fishers,
Fletchers, Fowlers, Fullers. Gardiners, Glasmakers, Glasiers, Glouers, Grocers.
Hatters, Horners, Husbandmen, Inkeepers, Ioyners. Laborers, Lymeburners,
Linnen-Weauers. Masons, Mariners, Merchants, Millers, Mill-wrights. Nailers,
Netmakers. Parchment makers, Pewterers, Phisicians, Potecaries, Pointmakers,
Printers. Ropers. Sadlers, Sailers, Saltmakers, Sawyers, Siueyars, Shearmen,
Shipwrights, Shoomakers, Smiths, Soapemakers, Soldiers, Surgeons. Tailors,
Tanners, Thatchers, Tilers, Turners. Vintners, Vpholsters. Wheelewrights,
Wherrymen, Wollen-Weauers, etc Of all these sorts of persons there must go
some. Some of other sorts, as in a common wealth furnished there are many, may
be expedient likewise: but these are all so necessary, that it is hard to say,
which of them all can be spared, and need not presently to be had.


Resp. But most of these sorts of people are so well set a work here in
England, and so necessary for our commonwealth, that few or none of them will
be induced to go hence, and seek their fortunes other where.


Enr. Nay, rather they are so ill set a work here, that many of them have as
much need as any other to seek work, employment and dwelling otherwhere. For
there be so many of all Trades, Sciences, and Occupations, that one cannot
live for another. They that be workmen do often loyter for lack of work many
days and weeks together: and when they can have work, are feign to do it
better cheap then they can afford, and were wont to do. So it is with
Shopkeepers, they har^ly can find any place where to set up Shop, all places
being already full and ouerfull. Little utterance of their ware can they make,
and are often informed to take money so much underhand, that they can hardly get
or save thereby.

2. If their own distress and present evil state will not prevail
sufficiently with men of these qualities to move them to go, considering that
such must be had, and of some sorts of them great store: (for without the^ no
Plantation at all can any where be made:) such courses may, and must be taken,
partly by the bettring of their estates there, with promise and assurance of
some good portions of lands, houses and benefits* if they will go, and partly
by impairing of their estates here, with less work, and worse utterance, if
they will not go, as may make them either willing or at least content to go.


Resp. You have spoken much concerning people to be had for a Plantation, that
for this matter, I think you have no more to say.


Enr. Yes, very much. For all these hitherto mentioned, though they be a
multitude indeed, and enough to make a very large Plantation out of hand, yet
without others conjoined with them, will they be for the most part, but a rude
and silly multitude. You have forgotten it seems and so had I too almost, and
no marvel, for I find them of others but little remembered, one sort of people
most needful of all others to be had; I mean Ministers of the word of God.
For whom, if care be not taken, 11. Ministers of the word.
that they may be had, and being had, that they may forthwith and condignly be
provided for, which is, after the example of God himself, who in dividing the
land of Canaan, laid out the Lot of Leui with the first, and that a fair and
goodly one too, as you read Number* 18. and 35. in vain may we look for any
notable blessing from God upon the Attempts. If they be altogether omitted and
neglected, or shifted off for the present with fair words, or led on a little
with beggarly stipends, (a profane kind of pay, and not made partakers, and
that in ample sort, with their people, of such means as they do live upon,
viz. Trade, How they may be provided for.
Turfe, and Tithes, farewell good Ministry there for ever: Their portions once
seized and settled in the hands of lay men, as too much experience shows here
at home, will never in good and due manner and measure be gotten out again.
Wherefore as it is necessary and fit, that the countries be presently distinted
into parishes, so withal, and more then so necessary and fit it is, that the
Ministers part be allotted and laid out with it. A thing at first, before
proper and private rights be settled, as easy (I hope) to be had, as to be
asked for: which how much the better it is effected, so much the better, and
the more, be we well assured, shall the work, the maine work prosper and
please God.


Resp. But do you think it not lawful to provide for the Ministers of the
word, otherwise then by tithes, which many will hardly yield, now in the time
of the Gospel, to be due to them by Gods law.


Enr. Whether Tithes be due, De iure diuino, I leave to Divines. But taking
that only which all be agreed upon, that is, that the Minister must have a
very competent, liberal, and certain Maintenance, which cannot be less then
the Tenth. For allotting thereof whether they shall like better to follow the
example of our own Progenitors, the ancient Inhabitants of this Land, who
imitating God himself in his practice before touched, as we may see with our
eyes every where, though a great part thereof be now taken from the Church by
impropriations, and abridged to the Church by Customs, Prescriptions, and
other like, did not account the Church to be sufficiently provided for,
unless, besides Tithes and Oblations, it were endowed with some fair portion
of good and convenient ground called the Glebe, or in stead of both, both
Tithes and Glebero allot and allow the Church a full Tenth of Ground only, I
mean the tenth part of every man's Tenure, as he that has a thousand Acres of
ground, to allow an hundred of them to the Church, and so to pay no tithe at
all, as which would be more troublesome to the Minister to gather, and more
grudging and laboursome to the parishioner to lay out, as we find by daily
experience here in England, I see no great cause why any should refuse or
dislike it. For either way the Minister may have a very sufficient stable and
certain maintenance.


Resp. This latter way, Ministers of Churches shall be too much encombred with
husbandry, and distracted from their studies.


Enr. They may easily avoid that, if of the whole, they reserve out for their
own Table, a reasonable quantity only, as their Glebe here in England, and
divide the rest into Tenements, which they may let to other men, that may yield
them rents and fines, as do Tenants here in England to their Landlords: after
which sort also there be in England, some lands belonging to Benefices with
Cures.


Resp. I have made you digress a little too much happily, by my so many
questions. I pray you, therefore, now return to that you were saying.


Enr. Besides these, Ministers of Churches, whether it shall not be requisite,
that as great a number almost of other Scholars, 12. Other scholars for
teaching of youth.
for the teaching of children, and training up of youth, as well in the
Languages, as in all other good Literature, be likewise procured and sent
forth: (for as it is not fit, so indeed it is not always possible, the
Ministers alone should undergo this charge also.) I leave it at large, to every
man's consideration.


Resp. That such men, viz. Ministers and Schoolemasters should be had, it must
needs be granted to be most requisite and necessary: but I believe it will
not be very easy to procure them. For Scholars now a days are most of them
of a tender breed, and such as will hardly brook the Seas: and England is
provided of many good means of Maintenance for them, and therefore they will
be loath to seek after less, and worse otherwhere.


Enr. To furnish the Ministry and Schools, the Universities of our Land,
solicited thereunto, cannot do l^sse then send Means that may be used for
procuring such men to go.
forth either of them yearly some few, and it be but two or three apeece. And
there are few Diocesses in the land besides, which having in them diverse
sufficient and able men in those functions* not yet in any measure competently
provided for; may not also do the like. And fit and necessary it is, that for
the encouragement of men at the first, to these employments, there should
somewhat more then ordinary shares, as I may say, that is, some what more then
what will hold but while their breath holds, be proposed and offered to men of
that rank? For in them also the old saying happily will be found true,
Ducimur omnes pr^mio.

2. If neither desire to further Christ's kingdom, nor to seek their own
preferment, can prevail with any so far as Sua Sponte, to give themselves to
so good a work, I see not why, the Church it self, or, the Bishop himself,
should not be thought to have authority and power enough to thrust forth
Laborers into this Harvest, and to lay this charge upon such as shall be fit
for it, inioyning them to go in the Name of God, as was done*

Act. 8* 14. and 13. 2. and 15. 22. and Galat. 29.

3 Such course and care may also be had at the first in division of parishes,
that all parishes being made of a competent largeness (and not as here in
England too too many are, so little that theyyeeld the Minister neither one
quarter of a comfortable and goodly congregation, or auditorie nor one half of
a co^petent and honest maintenance) both the fewer Ministers may suffice, and
they that be, may have competent and commendable allowance to live upon for
them and their families.

4. Also it must be considered, that if Scholars, that is, Graduates, and men
of note for learning, cannot be had, it may suffice sometimes that such be
invited to the Ministry, as are of mean knowledge, so as they have good
utterance, and be of sound and honest life and conversation.


Resp. I did little think that you would have thought any such fit for that
place.


Enr. Why not? In England it self we are feign sometimes to receive such into
the Ministry, and I believe so it will be as long as England is England: much
more may it be borne within the infancy of a Church, where neither Schools,
nor other means for learned and able men are yet planted Better such then none.
Ruffin hist. Eccles. lib. 1. cap. 9.


I have read in an ancient Ecclesiastical History, that on a time there were
two lay men that made a voyage unto the Indians, and remaining there a good
while, they did in the best Socrat. hist. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 15.
manner they could, inform and persuade many of them to the Christian faith,
and found the people very tractable. At length returning home, one of them,
whose name was Frumentius, coming to Alexandria his city, goes unto the
Bishop of the place, which at that time was Athanasius, that renowned Clerk
surnamed for his great learning and sincerity in faith Oculus mundi, the eye of
the world, and acquaints him with the matter, praying him withal, that he
would send a Bishop and other Teachers thither, that might go forward with
that work of the Lord* of which he said, there was great hope. Athanasius
having called together for that purpose the Clergy of his city, considering a
little of the matter, stands up and says; And where shall we find such a man,
so fit for this employment, as your self (Frumentius) are, in whom is the
spirit of our God? and thereupon presently all the rest approving it, he made
him a Minister, and a Bishop, and sent him back (with others) forthwith to
furnish what he had begun, and the Lord made the work to prosper in his hand,
confirming the word with many signs and wonders following, says the History.

By this story you may see, that holy men of God, even in the primitive Church,
did not stand much upon it, to admit mean men, and not professed scholars
only into the Ministry, where they saw other gifts correspondent: and
withal, that Bishops used in those times, and had power and authority, to
send forth men into foreign countries, to preach and plant the Gospel. And of
these kind of men let this suffice.

13. But then farther, besides these last mentioned, and above 13. Men of name
and note to be Governors, etc.
all these hitherto spoken of, I add, there must be, by some means or other,
drawn and induced to go, as Governors and Leaders of the rest, some store of
men of Name and Note, men by whose power and authority, greatness and
gravity, purse and presence the multitude before mentioned, may be encouraged,
ordered, and guided. Common sense and reason can sufficiently inform every
man, that no body can consist without a head* nor Army without a General, no
company without a Conductor, and no society without a Ruler. And Nature her
self teaching the Amazonian Bees, not to swarm without their Lady, and the
Cranes not to fly without their Leader, may easily teach us, that we shall
transgress the very order of Nature, and neglect that instinct which is
ingraffed in all, if we shall make such a remouall without the conduct of such
men, as for their place and power, birth and breed, may be fit to order and
rule, to support and settle the rest And if men of this rank would once
roundly set their foot to this way, and their hand to this work, as Moses did
with the Elders of Israel toward the Land of Canaan, Aeneas and the noble
Trojans into Italy, and Brutus and his Allies for this Land, it were not to be
doubted, but their example and industry would more prevail in one year or
two to draw multitudes with and after them, then all the proiects hitherto,
without such attempted, have procured.


Resp. If men of place and authority in the Temporal State (for of them only
you seem to speak) be so necessary unto such a work, as you seem to imply,
me thinks it should be as necessary likewise, that there should go some, that
may carry like authority and place in the estate Ecclesiastical.


Enr. I am of the same mind also. It cannot be but requisite 14. And that in the
Ecclesiastical estate as well as in the temporal.
and necessary, that as well for the governing of Ministers themselves
already made, as also for the ordering or making of more where need is, for
the Institution of them to Churches, for the Division of Parishes, the
endowing, erecting, and consecrating of Churches, and other like Episcopal and
Ecclesiastical duties and emploiments, which must be followed and exercised
instantly, if we mean to make a Christian and Religious Plantation indeed,
there should go some one or more, according to the greatness of the
Plantation, to be Bishop there, and some others besides, that shall exercise
under him or them Ecclesiastical authority and jurisdiction, lest faction and
confusion, like Tares among the Wheat, grow faster there, then Religion, Order,
and Peace of the Church.


Resp. Now I suppose, you have said enough for this matter more it is I am
sure, then ever I heard in all my life, and so much as makes me think
certainly, that if in such a sort, as you have employed, and with such persons,
a Plantation were set forth, then it would prosper indeed.


Enr. You think I have said all in all, that can be said: but I tell you,
there is one thing yet unsaid, which (in mine opinion) is more material then
any one thing whatsoever hitherto mentioned. That indeed which must and would
give life to all the rest, and without which, the whole attempt wheresoever it
be, seems to me, to be like a building on the sand, which you know will in the
end have a fall and the fall thereof will be very great, Mat. 7. 27.


Resp. I long to hear what that should be, for I can conceive nothing to be so
much yet wanting to this work. I pray you hold my thoughts in suspense no
longer.


Enr. This it is* That his Majesty would be pleased to entitle The fifteenth
and chiefest of all, is, That his Majesty would entitle himself King of that
Country in which the present Plantation shall be.
himself King and supreme Governor of that Country, wherein the Plantation
shall proceed, as at this present of New Foundland; that so they that plant
and dwell there, may know directly and expressly under whose dominions they
dwell, and so rest thereby assured of his Regal protection and defense upon
all occasions as well as if they remained in England. This, this obtained,
would encourage and embolden many that now doubt and fear, to go willingly,
and to adventure goods and life therein resolutely. This would make them
joyful and iouiall to proceed, who now are doubtful and fearful, as those
that cannot tell in whose Land, and within whose kingdom it is that they shall
dwell there, and that would be loath to dwell but within his Majesty's Dominions.


Resp. That is known sufficiently by his Majesty's Letters Patents, granted to
sundry honorable Personages and other, that send thither.


Enr. It is known to them that have the Patents, but it is not known to all
them that should go under the Patentees. It is also well known by common fame
and rumor, but it is not so well known, as if by Proclamation it were
published in every Town and City; not so well, as if in every Church, he
were prayed for by the Name of King of that Country, as well as of England,
France, and Ireland.


Resp. This must be a matter of great moment, out of doubt. It puts me in mind
of somewhat that I read a great while ago in our English Chronicles, in the
time of King Edward the third, viz. How that when he made claim to the Crown
of France, to which he was the next lawful heir and successor, yet all his
certain right and just claim notwithstanding, some of his Allies and
Confederates beyond Sea (being but voluntaries) refused to assist him in Arms,
unless he would first, and until he did take on him the style and Title of
King of France.


Enr. By that you may perceive, there is something in this particular, more
then many do conceive. And now touching these two maine points before
mentioned, viz. the procuring of Men and Money to such a business, as we
entreat of, let this suffice.


Resp. And well it may: For unless it be, as you said before, by Act of
Parliament, which alone is able to settle an absolute course for these
excellent designs, this is as much, I think, as by most inferior courses can
well be effected: but yet for my further satisfaction, let me, I pray you be
bold to move unto you, a doubt or two more, that come to my mind.


Enr Do you so: I shall do the best I can to put you out of Certain
objections answered.
your doubts.


Resp. The course you intimate, is a matter of great expense. 1 Object.



Enr. It is indeed: But thereof say I, First, Many a particular Answ.
will bear and disc^arge his own: other-some, a great deal of his own part.

Secondly, A great part of the expenses will soon be repaid again: some, in
the Commodities thence returned: some, in the easement and disburdening of
their wonted charge and incombrance here at home.

Thirdly, People cannot live any where without expense.

Fourthly, Be it a matter of some good quantity, that must arise out of the
Common Purse, is not our whole Land able to bear it? Suppose there should go
ten or twenty thousands yearly for a time unto our Plantations, what were
that, with the help of particulars, to Englands Purse? If in time of war, it
were able without any grieuance, almost any feeling, to maintain six or
seven, yea, ten or twelve thousand Soldiers in the Field the whole year, from
year to year for a time; as easily might it be able, or else I am much
deceived, to transport, and that with very competent provision yearly, twice
as many thousand persons at the least, into those Plantations.


Resp. The removing of so many, may seem superfluous. 2 Object.



Enr. I will not say, but I may be deceived: But surely in my Answ.
conceit, It were necessary that there should go rather more then fewer then
I have said. My reasons are:

First, The multitude that abounds in our Land, is so exceeding great, that
without great riddance, the benefit thereof at home, will be little seen, and
less felt. For more will yearly arise then are removed. To draw out a
proportion somewhat fit in this case; there are in England only at this
present, eight thousand Parishes at the least, as I conjecture, and certain it
is, as all the Church Registers in England, I think, will justify, there are
more borne every year, then buried. Say, but two in a Parish one with
another, and that is with the least, I am sure, yet that amounts to sixteen
thousand in one year. The increase being such, what decrease there had need be
made to bring the whole to abide somewhat equal, may soon be perceived.
Farther, let men look back to the beginning of the late Queens reign, or
there-about, and see in what state the Land stood then for people, and he shall
perceive, that even then it did begin to exceed: so that unless it may again
be reduced to that mediocritie at least, and there stand, it can be in no
tolerable estate. This cannot be effected, but by such a number at least,
removed as I have intimated.


Resp. Indeed within my remembrance, that is, within these forty or fifty
years, our Parish is increased in such a sort, that there be now almost twice
as many Houses in it, as once there were, and these newly increased, but
Cottages most of them set up in waste places of the highways: the Inhabitants
whereof, are nothing but a burden unto us, and do very much trouble and
annoy us, that be the ancient Tenants, and true Householders: and I perceive
that the removing of one or two of them, were to little purpose. The greatest
part of them, or rather all, if it were possible, must be rid away, or else we
shall be little the near for it. And so it had need be, in your understanding,
the whole Land over.


Enr. You conceive me aright. Secondly, Farther, the Plantations now in hand
are diverse: these all cannot be settled in any form, nor brought to any good
estate, without the like numbers transported, whereby they may be enabled in
every of them: First, To occupate or take in forthwith, such a large continent
of ground, as may be fit for settling the bounds of their Plantation there.
Secondly, That they may be able to be^in their Cities, Towns, and Parishes, in
such reasonable spaci^snesse, as may become so worthy an attempt: which cannot
be, unless their number be such, that they may have to begin withal, for
every City they build, a thousand; for every Market Town, an hundred; and
for every Country Parish, twenty or thirty Households at the least. Which
begun with such convenient distance, and sufficient amplenesse of ground
annexed, may admit in time, a double or treble increase. And thirdly, To have
and set up among themselves, all manner of Sciences, Trades, Handicrafts, and
Employments necessary and convenient for the cohabitation and life of Man.


Resp. This would require a greater number then yet you have 3 Object.
spoken of, I think: so great out of all question, as in all England is not to
be had.


Enr. I am not of your mind: Few men do well consider Answ.
what a number for such a purpose in all England, is to be had, if there were
once good courses taken for the having of them. For my own part truly, I am
fully persuaded, That there are few Towns and Parishes in England, but have in
them of all sorts How great a number in England may be spared for Plantations.
one and other that might to such a purpose be spared, enough to make and plant
in such a sort as I have said before, as great a Town and Parish in some new
Plantation, as that within England, in which at this present, they do dwell
and abide. A number I suppose sufficient presently to furnish at large, more
then all any one Plantation that is now in hand.

Thirdly, The attempts, at the beginning specially, cannot but be liable to
some dangers of the Enemy. If then their number be but small, and they go
forth, as hitherto by scores or hundreds, Alas, what strength can they be of,
either to subdue the Borderers, or resist the Inuaders? The Adversary may wait
a time at his best leisure, when they are grown a little worth the rifling, to
displant them of their seats: and as to the French, in Terra Florida, the
Spaniard did, to dispatch them of their lives. Whereas, if they go out by
thousands, or ten thousands, as all good Plantations should, and ever have
done. First, They shall be able to withstand, and (if need be) to subdue the
Naturalls adjacent: and then within a few years, partly of themselves, and
partly by the assistance of their Confederates, which the stronger they see
ours to be, the firmer no doubt will they be unto them, they will by Gods
blessing and aid, be so well fortified by Land, and provided by Sea, that they
shall as little need to fear any foreign forces there, as we, God be praised,
do here: and happily, grow no less famous for martial and civil policy
both, in that Continent, then our Nation is in this.

Fourthly, Now it is a fit time, and we are well at leisure for such a purpose,
to attend such an employment, whereas, if any trouble, if any wars, by Sea,
or by Land, should arise us here, (And do we think, or are we sure, these
Halcion days* will ever hold?) we should have neither time, nor means to
spare, to prosecute any such business abroad. As therefore, a man that will
build a great House, must follow it closely, while the Summer lasts, and the
weather is fair, lest the Winter come on, which will both hurt and hinder his
work: so, it is good for us, in this fair time of Peace, and Summer like
weather of leisure and liberty, to follow these businesses with speed, lest in
time we say: Had we thought this. We know, Post est occasio calua. This is a
point of that worth, and weight, that it alone, me thinks, should be enough to
stir up all England, to take heed that she do not sit still, Judge. 18. 9. and
let it slip out of her hands. For, as says the Poet:

Nec quae praeterijt, cursu reuocabitur vnda:
Nec quae praeterijt, hora redire potest.
That is:

Nor can the tide that is eb'd and gone, int's proper course revoked be:
Nor can the time when once it is past, return again, we plainly see.
Fifthly, If this work should be intercepted by any unexpected accident,
before it be brought to some perfection, that is: That the present Plantation
may, if need be, for a time subsist of it self; in what a misery should they
be (poor wretches) that have adventured the first attempt? And (which God
forbid) who can tell, if we dally and delay, and make not greater speed
thither, and thereabout, then yet we do, whether some other Nation, of better
spirit, and worthier resolution, may not, to our great shame and confusion,
step in before us, and stop the gate against us?

Sixthly, Besides, the setting forth by great numbers, is no small
encouragement unto them that do go forth for the present, and a notable
inducement to others, as unto a hopeful business, to second them from time to
time hereafter: whereas, on the contrary (as experience plainly proves) this
going forth by handfuls, discomforts them that be sent away, emboldens the
Adversary, dis^redites the Action, and (But who can reckon up all the evils
thereof?) discourageth every one that hears thereof, to adventure either his
person, or his purse in it; as doubting lest the attempt come at length, as
other-like heretofore have done, to just nothing: and that they which are
thither gone, are, as banished or condemned persons, but cast away.

These causes and reasons considered, I rest confident that it is necessary,
there should into these Plantations be removed, yearly for a time, ten or
twelve thousands at the least.

Whom these satisfy not, I might send to the Bee-hiues, where they may
observe, that the smallest swarms do seldom prosper, but the greatest never
lightly fail: or to the Locusts of the Earth, in whom Solomon, Prou. 30. 37.
notes this for a point of their excellent wisdom, that they go forth by
heap^s, or great troops. But not resting thereon, though these natural
experiments are not to be despised, I will remit them to one of the greatest
Politicians that ever was among men, I mean Moses, a man full of the Spirit of
God, and all wisdom, who conducting the Children of Israel to the Landward of
promise, a Land formerly inhabited, a Land already builded and planted, a Land
reasonably well cleared of Woods and wild-Beasts; yet tells them (whose number
was not small, as this one instance may declare, viz. that when they came out
of Egypt, there were of them, men, besides Children and Strangers, Six
hundred thousand, and this withal, that when they passed into the Land,
forty years after, under the hand of Joshua, out of two Tribes and an half,
that dwelt on this side Jordan, there went, forty thousand men of war to
assist the rest) that therefore the Lord would not destroy their Enemies all at
once, but by little and little, lest the wild-Beasts of the Field should
increase upon them, Deuter. 7. 22. Whence they may gather, That if so great a
multitude were, in Moses opinion, with the least, to inhabit an empty Land,
of no greater Continent and spaciousness then that was, and it were but for
fear of the increase of the wild-Beasts against them, and therefore upon good
policy, and for a time, it were better some of the men of that Land, the
former Inhabitants, were suffered to remain among them, till themselves were
more increased, then may not so small a number, as we commonly send into our
Plantations, suffice thereto, and that some greater number then any yet I have
intimated, rather then a less (all things considered) were rather more
requisite and necessary.


Resp. This, the removing of so great a number, will be a great 4 Object.
weakening and impouerishing to our Land.


Enr. No, none at all. For first, The strength of a I and, consists Answ.
not so much in the number of people, as, in the aptness, and ableness of
them unto service. Now, whosoever will not be blind, cannot but see, that this
multitude, whose remouall should chiefly be intended, is neither apt, for want
of education, being of the ruder sort; nor able for want of means; being for
the most part, of the poorer sort, to strengthen us. There may be more doubt of
them rather, lest in time of Peace they raise tumults, and fall to vproares for
their bellies sake, and in time of War lest they join with the Enemy, and
take parts against us, for our pillage and livings sake: then hope that in
Peace, they will enrich and benefit; or in trouble, assist and strengthen our
Commonwealth and Country.

2. If Number only be respected, it will no whit be empaired, but rather
bettered, not diminished, but augmented, in that so great a Multitude of us
being planted otherwhere, shall become, as it were, mother England, ready, and
able upon, all occasions, to join with this. Indeed, if such a number and
multitude, as is needful to be removed, should either die in our Land, or be
translated out of our Land, into some other Princes dominion, the want of them
might happily be some loss and lack unto our Land: yet when for forty or
fifty years ago it was not so ouercloied and pestered with multitude, as now
it is, it was not found, God be thanked, to want strength: but abiding still
subjects to the same king and members of the same dominion, being made by the
benefit of Plantation more available to the one, and serviceable to the other,
then before, so far is it off, that the absence and want of them shall
weaken, that out of all doubt it shall notably strengthen our Land.

3. As for the impouerishing of the Land this way, there is thereof, nor
probability, nor possibility, seeing the greatest number of them, whose
Transplantation is most necessary, are they that above all other, do for the
present, by their abiding here impouerish and beggar it. For on them is
bestowed yearly, the greatest part of all that money, the sum where of is
almost inestimable, which is by Overseers and Churchwardens, in every several
parish of the Land collected and distributed. And whereas, of this sort of
people, this superfuous number, there are increased among us, out of all doubt,
here in England alone, within these fifty years, not so few as an hundred
thousand (I say not persons, but) families, I presume, if view thereof were
made, it would appear, that among them all, there would hardly be found one
thousand of subsidy men, as you may perceive by the state of our own parish
and others neere-adioyning, wherein if there be now any more subsidy men then
were in the Queens time, they are such only, as are of the ancient
inhabitants, and tenants, and not one, or scarce one of the late and new
increase.

4. If there do remove hence any of the better and richer sort that shall, and
may carry some store of wealth with them, as there must, if ever there be any
good Plantation indeed any where, yet the number of them, both will, and need
be but few in respect of the rest: and whatsoever the Land is damnified by that
they carry with them, it will soon be recompensed, partly by their absence,
partly in the estates of those which shall be, by having their livings and some
other of their means enriched and bettered by their remouall, and lastly, by
the commodities and benefits which from and by such cannot to this Land but
redound again out of the Plantations.


Resp. But the revenues of the Crown must needs be, by this means, extremely
spent and diminished.


Enr. That the revenues of the Crown of England should thereby be exhausted or
empaired, seems in mine eye so improbable, that altogether contrariwise, it
seems, and must needs be, the readiest way, and surest course that can be,
exceedingly to augment the same, both at home and abroad.

At home, in that they which remain behind, shall (the Land being thus
disburdened and cleared) the better reap to themselves the benefit of the
Land, and so grow and increase in wealth, that they may be enabled to pay to
his Majesty with the more ^ase and alacrity, and in more quantities his dues,
and impositions: whereas now, what by the great charge they be at for releeuing
many of these, that now encomber their parish on the one side ( a charge not so
small in many parishes yearly, as their part of one whole Subsidy to the
king) and what by the extreme fines and rents whereto their livings, and the
high prices whereto all things to live by, through the excessive multitude of
people in our land, are rackt and raised on the other side, even they that have
reasonable good livings and means, are so kept down, and, as it were, eaten
out, from time to time, that they are worse able now, then either they, or
their predecessors, for thirty or forty years past, either to keep house,
or pay impositions and duties required.

Abroad, while as probable it is, that by the good of Plantation, they which
go away from hence very poor, may within a little while become very rich:
they that here were but needy and of mean estate, may there arise to be, as we
term men of substance and good ability, Subsidy men themselves, and so yield
profit, and pay to the Kings Coffers in such store and plenty, that, by Gods
blessing attending on men's endeavors, the income thereto from such only, (that
I speak nothing now of what may in great probability arise by those great
hopes of pearl, metall-mines, etc.) may within a little time equal, if not
surmount the present revenues which now all England yield, whereby, by the
help of God; (for of the event, if the fault be not in our selves, there is no
doubt) his Majesty shall have less cause then hitherto, to be either
chargeable or beholding to his subjects at home, and yet be as rich in
treasure, and as well stored in money and means for wealth, as any Monarch in
Christendom.


Resp. I have heard some men better learned then my self say, That the truth
is never better cleared and manifested, then when by adversaries of the truth
seeking to darken it, it is oppugned and contradicted, which I see verified in
our Conference. For the longer we talk, the more I find mine error and
ignorance; and the more I object against you, the better appears the
soundness of your opinion about the things we have talked of.


Enr. Whether you spoke as you did, of Ignorance, or for trial, to prove what
I could, or would say in these cases, it is not greatly material. I have
spoken nothing, I hope, but what is ^it and probable in the cause, and the same
in such sort, as may suffice to satisfy you, or any other that will with
verity and probability be satisfied in these points; and therefore I trust,
that you will take all that I have spoken in good part, as proceeding from a
mind that would willingly gratify all, but offend none.


Resp. You have in truth satisfied me to the sull, concerning those The sum
of the second part.
things of which I desired a Resolution, and did somewhat doubt with my self,
that it was not to be had. For now I perceive, that to make a good Plantation,
store of people to inhabit, and store of Provision to enable them to inhabit
it, are necessary. I perceive also, that our Land is able to afford both, both
People and Provision plentifully, if good courses might be taken for procuring
them. Wherefore, as I cannot but acknowledge my self much beholding unto you,
for that you have brought me out of error into the truth, as out of darkness
into light: so I cannot but prosesse, that I now wish with all my heart, that I
might live to hear and know these or some of these worthy, commendable, and
necessary Proiects brought to some good effect, and will from henceforth be as
ready to encourage and persuade others thereunto, as I have been heretofore to
discourage and dissuade them therefrom.


Enr. If you be so well minded, whereof I am very glad, then you have done
contradicting, and I shall not need to bethink my self of any further answers.


Resp. I have done obiecting and opposing: for I perceive, it is to (...) and:
but if there do come any thing into my mind concerning these proiects,
wherein, I shall need some better information then I can gather to my self, I
will make bold to come unto you once more, but that shall be, not as an
opposite and gain-saier; but as a Scholar that desires to learn, that so I
may have mine own mind and understanding so well informed and prepared, that I
may be able to confer with, and, if need be, to inform others.


Enr. Come and welcome, whenever you see it good*


The end of the second Part.
A PLAIN PATHWAY TO PLANTATIONS:

That is, A Discourse in general concerning the Plantation of our English
people in other Countries.

The third Part.



LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Marriot.

THE PATHWAY TO PLANTATIONS. The third Part.
The Speakers be Respire, a Farmer. Enrubie, a Merchant.

Respire. ONce again M. Enrubie I am come to trouble you a little: For by
often thinking, and as it were meditating upon these new and notable businesses
of Plantation, which I hope will, and wish may take good effect, some things
are come into my mind, that need a better wit and understanding then mine, to
open them to me. I pray you therefore a little to instruct me therein.


Enr. With a very good will. I will do what I may. Ask me what you will.


Resp. The great and goodly works that we have talked of, I see to be
exceeding good and necessary for our people, and means enough to be had, for
setting them forward. What therefore may be the reason they go on no better?
Causes why our Plantations proceed no better.



Enr. There may diverse reasons or causes thereof be conceived. The maine or
principal whereof, in my conceit is this. There wants among us a general
and settled resolution to First, want of a general resolution.
proceed with them.


Resp. What might work such a Resolution?


Enr. A like knowledge and persuasion of the Necessity, Ability, and
Opportunity that our whole Nation has thereunto.


Resp. I pray you speak somewhat of each of these severally.


Enr. I have reasonably well done it already, if you call to mind, what has
passed between us in conference. For in our first days Labor, I showed you
manifoldly, that a Plantation is for our Land, at this present time, very
needful. And indeed, it is so needful and necessary, that unless God take
away the present necessity thereof by war or pestilence, or both, if it be not
this way remedied, this Land cannot but shortly come, for want thereof, to
very great misery and evil.

And at our next meeting, I showed you; that there are both people enough, and
means for provision enough, to perform such a business, and that in a large
and ample, both manner and measure, if good courses be taken for it
accordingly: which can be best done by some Act of Parliament, if the Estates
of the Land might be pleased to take this matter into their consideration, as a
matter that highly and nearly concerns the common good at this instant
Matters of ten times less moment, are ordinarily vouchsafed the help and
authority of that most high and honorable Court, and therefore great hope we
may conceive, that in due time, which is even now, this also shall.

For opportunity I take it, it has passed between us in our whole
conference, as a matter granted, that there is opportunity thereto offered us
abundantly, because (as it is most certainly known, and out of all
controversy) there are sundry Places and Countries, where Plantations may be
made, and our people may inhabit, if they will.


Resp. What take you for a second cause?


Enr. The want of some good order and course for such a purpose, such I mean,
as may be settled generally all the Land Secondly, The want of some good course
for it.
over, by Regal and Legal authority, and not by private agreements and
directions only, which if I be not much deceived, will never effect such a
work while the world stands.

The ancient Romans well understanding this, never therefore attempted the
plantation of any one Collony, or City alone, or of any of those lands they had
gotten in war, but that first there was L^x l^ta, a special Law, or public
Decree, much like an Act of Parliament with us, made for it, the titles whereof
were, De Colonys ded^cendis, De Agris diuide^dis, and other like.


Resp. The Kings Majesty permits any that will to go.


Enr. 1. First, that is more then we do know, whatsoever folk do say. 2.
Experience does show, there must be used to the through effecting of any such
att^mpt, a Coacti^e as well as a Permissiue power. It is not an easy matter,
scarce to be hoped for in these days, and in our land, to make (if need should
be) any great army for the field, much less to get Voluntaries enough for a
Plantation, considering that it is easier to get careless young men and single
men to go out of their Country unto a warfare, then to get settled Householders,
and whole Families, men, women and children, to go into a strange country to a
plantation and habitation.


Resp. What may be a third cause?


Enr. The want of industry and inclination to labor and take 3. Want of
^dustry in (...) people.
any pains, in our people: who at this present are so ouergrowne, as I may
say, with that pestiserous w^d Idle^esse, and so given to immoderate ease and
quietness, that it is not possible almost to move them to hear of any
Plantation, which they conceive cannot be effected, as indeed it cannot,
without much labor and pains taking, without industrious endeavors and much
diligence. It is reported by Authors of good credit, of (...). in (...)*
Hannibal that Hammer (as I may well term him) of the Romans, That his army and
soldiers were more hurt and disabled to martial affairs by his suffering of
them to lie and live in Capua, a City of Italy, but one half year in
idleness and luxury, then the whole Host of the Romans had done in some whole
years before. We must not greatly marvel, if our so long continued rest and
peace from wars and warlike employments, our unspeakable idleness and
dissolute life, have so corrupted and in manner esseminated our people
generally and for the most part, that they cannot endure the hearing, much
less the doing of any laborious attempts, of any thing that shall be troublous
or any whit dangerous unto them.


Resp. What remody may there be for this perilous disease?


Enr. None, or at le^st none better I think, then a Plantation, as I showed
you the first day at large.


Resp. Have you any other cause to allege for our backwardness this way?


Enr. Yes. The immoderate love of our own Ceuntry. Every 4. The immodeiate
love of their own Count^y.
man almost is so, as I may say, (...) therewith, that it is almost impossible
upon any advantage to get them out of it.


Resp. And blame them not. You know (I am sure) the old saying, F^mus (...)
alieno luc^lentior: The smoke of a man's own Country is cleerer in his eyes,
then the fire of another. And you have read bow the children of Israel having
dw^lt in the land of Egypt, some two or three hundred years, whereby it was
to them their native Country, that albeit they were therein most cruelly
oppressed by the Egyptians, yet when Moses came to deliver them, they were not
easily drawn to go out of it, and that to a good Land, a Land that flowed
with milk and honey: and how once or twice, being well on the way, they were
ready to make head to have returned. And therefore no great marvel if our
English people be so loath to go out of a good land, so good a land as England
is, a land to which scarce any in Christendom is comparable, and to go into
they know not what wild and desol^te Countries.


Enr. That you say were somewhat to the purpose, if it were purposed that they
should remove which do enjoy and eat the good and fat of the land. But seeing
they are either chiefly or only intended to be removed hence, that have
nothing here but need and misery: they that have not a foot of ground to rest
upon, nor a house to put their head in: they which by the extreme dearth and
want of necessaries for man's life are ready to pine and perish; they have
little reason to be so in love with that Country, that is so much out of love
with them, that she seems rather a stepdame then a mother unto them, and to
refuse and forsake that Country which will be to them a kind and loving
Mother indeed: that Country that is ready to receive them with both her arms:
that Country where they may (if they will) have abundance of that which here
they want, that Country which will vouchsafe them such livings and means to
live by, as they are sure in England they shall never attain unto* as if they
had never heard, that vbi^nque been, ibi patria: wheresoever a man is or may be
best at ease, it is best to account that for his Country: and that it is but
mere vanity for men to prefer the soil of any Region before themselves.

In a word, all that you say or can say for this point, is as far out of the
way, as if you would say, because children have been borne and bred up in
their fathers house, therefore what need soever they have, and how bad
maintenance and keeping soever they have there, yet they ought not, nor have
they any reason to go out of that their fathers house, and to pass into other
elsewhere, tanquam in Colonias, as into new Colonies or Habitations, there to
be provided for and to live in far better sort.


Resp. I see mine oversight, and that all this has formerly been touched, but
that either ignorant corruption or partial affection so blinded and ouer-ruled
me, that I could not so well perceive it as now by this your Repetition and
Recollection thereof I do.


Enr. Of this matter then let this suffice. And if you have any thing else to
enquire of, proceed unto it if you please.


Resp. I have heard both you and others say, there be diverse Plantations How
many Plantations now in hand.
now either already in hand, or to be taken in hand, if we will: and I pray you
tell me by Name, what, and how many they be?


Enr. They are these, as near as I can remember, Newfound land, Summer
Islands, Virginia, Guiana, New England, and as I hear of late, New Scotland too.


Resp. What so many? Then there cannot want opportunity of plantation for our
people, if we be not wanting to it. And God forbid that so great an
opportunity, or rather so many, and all so fair opportunities (for that also
you have already showed) should be ouerslipt and neglected. It may be feared
if they should, God would not be pleased therewith. For what can be do more
for us, then to make us so many and so fair offers for our good from time to
time, as one that loves our Nation, if we will see it, and is willing, by
spreading of it into sundry parts of the world, to make it famous and great
upon earth?


Enr. You say very well. Happy therefore shall we be, if we make use of it.


Resp. But now I pray you tell me, what manner of countries those are?


Enr. I have already done that also, if you remember well our first days
labor, by showing what good is in them to be h^d; and by answering your
Objections pretended against them, as if they were not worth the accepting.


Resp. I remember that well. But my desire is, that you would relate unto me
the state of those Count^ies particularly one by one.


Enr. That were an endless and a needless labor. Endless, for that it would
require more then one or two days time thereto: and needless, for that it is
already done, better then I can do it again, in several books or
descriptions of those Countries set forth by other men, such as have either
found out the Countries themselves, or desire to farther our Plantations
therein: unto the which let it suffice that I remit you, as by which you may be
satisfied for this point at full, and that at your best leisure.


Resp. That is a matter of cost to buy such books.


Enr. A little money will do it. I do not think but that you spend more a
great deal in any one year in idle and unnecessary expenses: which you may
spare to lay out on these good uses. The Books are delightful of themselves,
as all historical treatises commonly ar^, and so will be a good recreation
when you have been wearied other ways. Also they will often put you in mind
of these things, whereas my relation will be but once: and when you have read
them over and over, they will serve for your children and others, to exercise
them to the reading of English as well as any other books; the sacred
Histories and books divine, that season the soul as well as the understanding
with piety and godliness, always and only excepted.


Resp. The Countries being so many, is it intended that there shall be
Plantations in them all by the English?


Enr. What is intended I cannot tell. But this I can tell, somewhat to that
purpose is or has been attempted in them all.


Resp. But it is not possible, they should all be finished, is it?


Enr. Whether it be possible, God knows, but surely in mine opinion, it is
somewhat unlikely. It is not good to have many works, great works in hand a^
once. It were better happily, that some of them were quite given over, or at
least deserred till some were either finished or brought to some perfection.
Vis vnita, the old saying is, fortior. Forces united must needs be the
stronger, and dispersed the weaker.

A time may come for the filling up, and full storing of them all. For if God
vouchsafe to continue our health and peace in this land, as now of long time he
has done, there is no question to be made of it, but that were all presently
removed, that our Land is able to spare, which doubtless are many score
thousands, yet within few years, it will look again for a new removing place
for those which out of its yearly increase will be sprun^ up. And therefore it
were not amiss, but a thing to be wished and endeavored, that though the full
finishing of some one or two Plantations be chiefly for the present followed
and intended, yet upon a provident, or (if I may so speak) a preuident
consideration of our occasions and wants for time to come, some both Possession
and Plantation might be continued in all those Countries, which by Gods
special favor to us ward, do at this present rest, and remain as it were
offered to and into our hands.


Resp. And which of all these seems to be most likely to be the best, to be
set forward before the rest?


Enr. Diverse men no doubt will think diversely, as either Which of them seemet^
best to be se^ forward^.
their affection carries, or their reason persuades them. Disliking therefore
of and detracting from no man's, but leaving every man to his own, as I desire
they will me to mine, this is mine opinion, that if the Plantation proceed by
hundreds, Guiana is the best; if by thousands, New foundland is best.


Resp. I conceive not the reason of this difference, which yet I persuade my
self, you do make upon good reason.


Enr. Any that understands either the state of those Countries, or the true
nature of a Plantation, would easily understand me.


Resp. Help me to understand it also.


Enr. It is this. If we seek for riches, for good Merchandises, and goodly
Commodities to be brought hither, the richest Coun^ry, and the wealthiest for
^he present, that also whence with ^ewest hand^ it may be returned, is the
best: Such is Guian^. If we seek for room for our over swarming multitudes of
people of many sorts to be placed in, the most desolate and emptiest Country,
voidest of inhabitants, and nearest and easiest for transportation, is the
best: Such is Newfound land. And again, if we plant by Composition, Guiana is
fittest: if by Preoccupation, (for a fitter English word on the sudden I find
not) Newfound land is best.


Resp. I pray you explain your self again a little better; for what How many
ways there be to make Plantations.
you mean by planting by Composition and Preoccupation I understand not.


Enr. Then are you little acquainted with these courses. The meaning is this;
We plant by Composition, when seeking to gain a Country already somewhat
peopled and reasonably inhabited, as is Guiana, we do upon fair conditions,
as by profering them defense against their enemies, supply of their wants,
namely Apparel, Armor, Edge-tooles, and the like, allure and win them to
enter league with us, to agree that we shall dwell among them, and have Lands
and other Commodities of them to our content. We plant by Preoccupation, when
finding a Country quite void of people, as no doubt in America yet there are
many, as was the Barmudas, now called Summer Islands, for few years past, and
as is at this present, for the most part, Newfound land, we seize upon it,
take it, possess it, and as by the Laws of God and Nations, lawfully we may
hold it as our own, and so fill and replenish it with our people. In the first
manner a few people may suffice, but to the latter, many, very many are
necessary.


Resp. This is very plain. But why speak you nothing of planting by Invasion,
which some men think to be as it has proved to them that have used it, the
richest, the readiest and the speediest course of the three?


Enr. First, because we need it not. There are Countries Plantation by
Invasion disliked.
cnow besides (and such are all those now in hand) in which we may safely
plant, either by our selves, or with others, without any Invasion or war at
all.

Secondly, if we needed it, or any would go that way to work, yet our people
generally will not endure it. We see they can hardly, nay, they cannot be
gotten to go and plant themselves where they may do it with all ease and
freedom that can be, and therefore there is no probability, they will once
move a foot, to go and seek out a Country by the sword.

We read, Ex. 13. 17. that God, when he brought the children (...) 13. 17*
of Israel out of Egypt, would not carry them into the land of Canaan by the
way of the Philistines Countries, though it were the nearer way a great deal,
lest the people should repent them when they see war, and turn back into
Egypt: but God made the people to go about by the way of the Wilderness of
the red Sea. Teaching us therein, how fearful people naturally are of war,
as willing rather to forgo even an exceeding good Land, as Canaan was, rather
then to go into it by the sword: and that God himself dislikes not such a
fear.

Thirdly, that were a double charge. For so our people must go first, they
that are men only, as an Army of Soldiers to subdue the Inhabitants and take
the Country, and then after to go, men, women and children, to inhabit, and
keep it, if they can. For many times in such cases, the event of war proves
uncertain, whereas going where needs no Invasion, they may make theirfull
remove, young and old at first, and rest secure of settling there.

Fourthly, and for mine own part, I do not like it. I nor am, nor can be
persuaded, that it may be lawful for one Nation to fight against and destroy
another in that sort, and upon no better title then the desire of their lands
and goods, to bereave each other of their rights and lives.


Resp. Indeed the Scripture says, all the whole Heavens are the Lords, the
earth has he given to the children of men, Psalm* 115. 16. Psalm (...)*
By which words I gather that whatsoever Country any people do possess and
inhabit, it is Gods gift unto them. God has (...) and bestowed that on them
for their portion. Which being so, ^t seems to me to stand with reason and
Religion both, that eu^ry people whatsoever they be, should be permitted
quietly and peaceably to hold and enjoy their own Country* and that it ought
not of any* by violence to be taken from them: we must do to all men, Jew or
Gentile, (...)
faithful or unfaithful, as we would be done unto: and therefore I cannot but
like well of your opinion in that point.


Enr. Examples there are I grant many in sundry Histories to the contrary, but
you know the old rule, Viuitur legibus, non examplis: We must live by laws,
and not by examples. And therefore till we find better proof then practice,
and further warrant then, Thus and thus others have done before us, I hold it
not safe to do the like.


Resp. I see that Invasion is neither the best, nor so much as a good course
for Plantation. And therefore I marvel how they either are deceived, or do
understand themselves, that say, as I have heard some, that seem to be of good
understanding this way, Invasion and Plantation are cosen gormans, and so like
one the other, that a man may take a pattern for the one from the other.


Enr. They that so say, and I am one of them, have very fair probability of
that they say, as I suppose.


Resp. I am glad then* that I made mention thereof* since you are of that mind
also: for now I hope I shall be made to conceive how that may be. I pray you
therefore declare it unto me.


Enr. I will, but briefly, lest I make you as weary to hear, as Wherein
Invasion and Plantation are somewhat like.
you seem willing to learn. Thus it is.

There be five things wherein these two actions do very much accord, and which
the one must use as well as the other, or else they cannot prosper. The first
of them is Discovery. The party 1. Discovery.
inuading, or they that will invade another Nation or Country, must first of
all make a perfect Discovery thereof, that knowing the situation of the place,
the largeness or quantity, the state and quality thereof, the alliance it has
with other people, near or far off, weak or strong, and other like,
accordingly they may prepare for the attempt. The same must they do, that will
plant in another Country. They must know certainly the situation of it, the
largeness and quantity thereof, the nature and quality of the Soil, the state
of the Climate, the temperature of the Air, the easiness or difficulty of
access and entrance unto it, the most convenient places for erecting Cities,
Towns, and Fortifications there. Also whether it be inhabited already or not,
and how much, and in what sort. What kind of people they be, likewise what
Borderers and Allies unto it, what fruits and commodities there, or likely
there to be had, what dangers or inconveniences there to be feared, with other
like. For according as they have notice of these particulars, they may and must
proceed.

The second is, people to make the attempt withal. They that 2. Number of
people*
will invade others, must be sure to raise an Army so great and good, as in all
probability may be able either for number or valor, or both, to match and
ouer-match the party invaded. And they that will plant other-where, must raise
such a multitude, as in all probability may be able for number and industry,
in some measure to take up and inhabit the Country they go to. To go down
as Jacob did into Egypt with seventy souls, and within a few scores of
years, to multiply and increase unto six or seven hundred thousands and above:
and to give an onset and prevail, as Gedeon did, with three hundred half
armed men, upon two or three hundred thousands of well appointed Soldiers, is
a matter of Admiration, showing us what God can do, not of Imitation, what we
may or must do.


Resp. What number of people, or how many thousands may there What number of
people may suffice to begin a Plantation withal.
suff^, or be necessary for us to begin a Plantation withal?


Enr. That cannot regularly and certainly be determined. For as to invade a
Country withal, the Army must be more or less, according to the state and
strength of the Country or party invaded: so to plant a Country withal, the
multitude removing must be great or small, according to the greatness or
smalnesse of the Plantation, and the facility or difficulty of planting, by
reason of either open enemies, or suspected friends, with other like
circumstances and occurrents. This is as much as can be said: That without a
number somewhat great, no good Plantation Roman Colonies.
can be made at all. And though for mine own part, I will speak of no
certain number, yet this much I will tell you, That I find that the ancient
Romans, who were a people of great policy, and planted many Colonies, when
they sent forth any number of people, and it were but for one Colony (that is,
but one City) alone, did never send forth a less number then three thousand,
more of tentimes. And they were so precise upon the point (as they that knew
well, without a number somewhat great, their Colonies could not possibly stand
and prosper) that though they planted diverse Colonies in one year, as sometimes
they did, yet they failed not of that number, that is, to send forth to every
several place three thousand a piece at the least. By which practice of
theirs, I leave it to you and others to judge, what it is likely they in their
policy could have thought to have been a sufficient number, to send forth to
plant a whole Country withal, wherein they were to settle and employ diverse
Cities, Towns and Villages at once: and do rest the more confirmed, That I am
not in an error when I do intimate or move that into our Plantations, being so
spacious and ample as they are, our people should go forth by thousands, and
not by hundreds.


Resp. What is the third thing wherein these Actions be somewhat like*


Enr. The third Resemblance is Provision for the people* ^. Provision.
They that will invade others, must provide and take such order for Provision
for their own side, that they want not necessaries for victuals, for Armor,
and other like, which in all men's opinion, are the strength and sinews of
war, lest they be enforced to give over the Attempt with loss and infamy,
or be pressed with famine, and endangered with sickness and mutinies, which
commonly attend the same. And they that will plant other-where, must be sure of
Provision, both of victuals for themselves, and necessaties for building and
other uses, till they be settled and have of their own there.


Resp. This is it, as some think, that marres all. For as it is thought, there
is no possibility to have Provision for such a multitude or great number of
people, as must or need to be removed. And indeed how can it be possible, that
ten or twenty thousand removing in one year, they can have along with them* a
years, or (which is the least that may be) but half a years provision, which
may sustain them till the Country it self can succor them?


Enr. You and they too are very much mistaken. For as to an Army of thirty or
forty thousand Soldiers, Provision must be had for them all the time they are
abroad, but it is not of necessity, that they must carry it all with them at
the first setting forth; it is sufficient, if order be taken how it may be
brought unto them by Sea or by Land, from time to time, weekly or monthly,
(...), and can best be performed: And even so it is for a (...) removing into a
Plantation. And this I hope you (...) is possible enough to be obtained and
done: and this (...), if you understand withal, that into any of the Countries
to be planted, our ships may easily make two, three, or four voyages in a
year.


Resp. I see that as the Proverb says, There be more ways to the wood then
one. Proceed I pray you to your fourth Affinity.


Enr. That is Celeritie. In making an Invasion, there is nothing 4* Celeritie.
more requisite for many causes, then that it be done, when it is once intended
it shall be done, with all speediness and celeritie: A point wherein the
ancient Roman Captains commonly excelled and ouer-reached all other, and
their Iul. Caesar them all: and a thing which oftentimes stood them more in
stead then any other project or course they could devise. And surely in making
of a Plantation, I think it to be none of the least points to be observed, for
many questionless, are the commodities thereof. Nothing is more dangerous then
a lingering war: and nothing more discommodious then a slow Plantation.


Resp. What Celeritie think you needful to be used in that case? What
celerity needful in a Plantation.



Enr. Such, that the whole Plantation might in some reasonable measure be
finished in two, three, or four years at the most.


Resp. That seems a thing altogether impossible.


Enr. Why so? Is it not possible (for examples sake) think you) that if we
should make a Plantation in Newfound land* there might be sent thither the
first year so many as might in habit it all along one side thereof, and ten or
twelve miles into the Land: the like on the other side the second year: and
the third year ten or twelve miles farther on both sides; the rest remaining
void, in the midst, may either be filled up in the fourth year, or (if it be
not much, and who has yet related the breadth of that Country from Sea to Sea?)
remain for the spreading of the first number as they do propagate and
increase. All which to do, will not require so great store of people as some
happily may imagine, considering that the Parishes there cannot at first be
half so thick, and need not be one quarter so full, as they be here.


Resp. I do not see but that it is possible enough such a thing might be. For
we have both people enough and means enough to set them forth withal, for such
a speedy Plantation.


Enr. Such celeritie used, would make a better Plantation any where in three or
four years, then is likely to be made by any course that I can hear of yet
used in three or fourscore years. 2. It would be marvelous comfortable and
profitable to the people removed. 3. It would secure the Plantation from all
enemies that shall either envy it, or endanger it. 4. And it would set us at
liberty for another Plantation other-where: which so well and roundly finished
in one place, would be a notable pattern and encouragement to any to
participate in some other.


Resp. Now proceed, if it please you, to your last Resemblance.


Enr. The fifth is Policy: which in both these Cases must much 5. Policy.
be used. There must be policy for the getting, and policy for the keeping of
that which is gotten. For getting victory against those they did invade, good
Martial Commanders, whose desire and endeavor has ever been to perform more
Concilio quam vi, by policy and good advice, then by power and force, have used
in former times a threefold policy, Honor, Preferment, and Reward. 1.
Honor, He that first climbed the walls had his Crown. 2. Preferment, He that
showed most valor, was ever advanced to higher place and office in the Camp
and Army, and sometimes to encourage them all. 3. For their Reward, they gave
them the spoil of the enemy. The whole booty was theirs if they could win the
Town. The like must be used in a Plantation. That the better sort, men of
dexterity, industry, and understanding, be preferred to places of Pre-eminence
and Authority: and that all that will adventure to inhabit the Plantation, be
vouchsafed by a liberal distribution of the Lands and Commodities of the
Country planted unto them, riches and means for them and theirs abundantly
and gallantly to live upon. Such liberality and advancement will encourage men
to go, and will quickly make a good Plantation, which Covetousness and
neglect of persons will never do.

2. For keeping of that they have gotten, Martial men do use a twofold
policy, viz. to strengthen themselves, and to weaken the enemy. 1. They
strengthen themselves by making fortifications and settling garrisons, if need
be, to keep the City or Country gotten. 2. They weaken the enemy, by taking
from them their Armor, that they shall not be able to resist, though they
would, and by taking of them their children and others for Hostages, that they
may not dare to resist though they could. And they that will make a good
Plantation must (as occasion shall require) use the very like.

And whereas the people of those parts are all, or for the most part destitute
of Armor, and unskillful in feats of arms, by all means it is expedient so
to keep and continue them. For seeing they do, for the most part, in number
of persons, and strength of body already exceed us, if we suffer them to have
armor, and inure them to use it, probable it is that within a little time,
they will in valor too excel us, and so beat us with our own weapons. These
be the things wherein betwixt Invasion and Plantation, there is so much
affinity. To which I might add two more, Equity and Authority, without the
former whereof, an Invasion is not bellum, but Latrocinium, not a warfare but a
robbery, and Plantation, not a lawful Possession, but a cruel Oppression: and
without the latter whereof, neither can an Army be levied for Invasion, nor
will a multitude of people be gotten to set forth for a Plantation. But I pass
by these, both because of the one I spoke but little before upon another
occasion, and of the other, needs no question, seeing it is out of question,
that all the places and Countries intended for Plantations by us, are such as
in all equity we may, by the Law of God and Nations enter upon.


Resp. Your speech has satisfied me very well: but if you would be pleased for
your later point of Policy, to add some particulars how it might well be
practiced* you should give me much more content. For it is a thing that I
desire much to hear.


Enr. That would I do also, were it not that I doubt lest howsoever you may
accept it, yet some other (hearing hereof) would say unto me, as Apelles to the
Shoemaker, Ne Suitor vltra Crepidam: No man should intermeddle but with that
which belongs to his own profession: or which is worse, That I have cut large
thongs out of other folks leather. Wherefore for that point, let me desire you
rather to hearken as I do, to hear the words or voice of him or them that
shall say, Thus and thus it shall be. This and that they shall have that will
adventure, and having said it, have power what they have spoken in words to
perform and make good in deeds, then to press me to say what may or might be
done, that am not able to say or assure any man, that ever any such thing shall
be done. Farther, this would require a more large Discourse by far, then the
breuity which I promised and intended will admit.


Resp. Let that matter go then* and now tell me I pray you, whether Whether is
better to plant in an Island or in a Continent.
it were better that a Plantation be made in an Island, or in a Country at
large, that is no Island?


Enr. That I cannot certainly tell you. For in several respects, either of
them may be better one then the other. As in respect of certainty, celerity,
facility, and security, it is better to plant in an Island, so it be somewhat
large, then in a large Continent. But in other respects, as for Opportunity to
enlarge the bounds of the Plantation, for variety of Commodities, which a large
Continent may rather yield then a lesser Island, for vicinity unto other
Countries, and for league and amity with neighbor Nations, and other like, it
may be better ( Cateris paribus) other things being suitable, to plant in a
spacious Continent, then in an Island.


Resp. You said but now, of such Countries as are deuoid of Inhabitants, you
thought New found land the best for a present 'Plantation, what moves you to be
of that mind? for I hear that some do dislike it very much.


Enr. I can give you no reason for it out of my own experience, Mo^ues for a
present Plantation in New found land.
for, as you know, I was never there. For that point therefore, I had rather
refer you to Captain Ric. Whitbourne, I mean to hi^ book of the Discovery
of that Country, which he has lately set forth whereby you may for that matter
be satisfied at large.


Resp. But in the mean time, till I can g^t that Book, and be at leisure to
(...) it, you shall do me a pleasure, if you will in brief relate unto me,
what you have observed out of it to that purpose.


Enr. That I will do willingly. The sum is this. First, it is the nearest
place that now is to be planted, not above 14. or 15. days sail with a good
wind: whereas Virginia, and some of the rest, are twice as far at the least,
and more dangerous for passage.

Secondly, it is the safest place for Plantation, as which is out of the Road,
as I may say, both of the Spaniard to his Countries and Plantations, and also
of Pirates at Sea, who are most for the Straights. And, if need should be,
whither soonest, [ viz. within a few days warning, they there may have succor
from England, and England again from it.

Thirdly, It is the cheapest and readiest for passage and transportation, both
of men and means of all sorts to plant with, both because our ships do
yearly and usually, two or three hundred sail of them go thither on fishing
voyages, and that most of them but half laden, and some with no lading at
all: and by Plantation no doubt more may and will.

Fourthly, it may soonest be finished, and so we freed again for some other
Plantation, because it is but an Island of no great content; not so big as
England, but near about the greatness of Ireland.

Fifthly, the Country it self is healthy and temperate, very agreeable to the
Constitution of our English bodies, as which is very near in the same
temperature for heat and cold, that England is, rather warmer then colder, as
which lies above four degrees nearer the South then England: and is encumbered
with no noisome beasts or vermin whatsoever.

Sixthly, the soil of the Country is very fat, rich, and good: fit for pasture
and tillage, equal to most of our grounds in England.

Seventhly, the whole Country is rich, viz. the Sea coast with fish beyond
measure, as where our Nation and some others have fished these fourscore
years, and where there is never like to be an end or want of that Commodity.
The Land stored with beasts, birds of the field; fish of the rivers,
water-fowle, wood, grass and fruits of the earth, etc.

Eighthly, the Country, for the most part, is utterly void of all Inhabitants,
Saluages or other, so that there is no fear of Enemies in it, nor of
Corruption of Language or Blood from it. Little Armor will suffice there for
offense or defense.

Ninthly, It lies very near unto some parts of America, as near as does
England to France, and therefore may be a good means for our possessing of
some other and nearer parts thereof, then any we do yet, and for conversion of
the people thereof to the Christian faith hereafter, and for our present and
continual having of such Commodities, as those parts may, and do afford.

Tenthly, it is not far also, viz. not a days sail from an Island called the
Bank, an excellent place for fishing all the year: and not above four or
five days sail from the Islands of Flowers and Azores, which are very rich and
well stored with Wheat, Beeues, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, Hens, and many other good
commodities for a Plantation, which from those parts may be had, easier, sooner
and cheaper then from England.

11. It is a Country very strong by Nature, as which is stored with many goodly
Harbors so well made and fenced by Gods handy-worke, with Rocks and Cliffes,
that a little Fortification will make the whole, being but an Island, and that
not great, inuin^ible by Sea.

12. It may be a means to increase the shipping of our Land, which is as it
were, the wall thereof, wonderfully, and withal our Seamen and Soldiers, for
services by Sea, and so to gain us in time the freedom, sovereignty and
safety of the Seas beyond all other nations whatsoever.

13. It is likely to yield us many rich and necessary Commodities for our Land,
which now our Merchants do fetch as far or farther off, at a dearer rate, or
with more danger a great deal, then there or thence they shall.

14. Being first and forthwith planted by us, it may be a means of the
furtherance of the rest of our Plantations intended, which from thence may have
many supplies: and which may serve for a resting place for the refreshing of
those that go to or from them: this being as it were, in the midway and high
way to them all.

15. It is very necessary for our Land, because if it should (through our
negligence and backwardness) be intercepted by any other Nation, it would be
as ill a Neighbor to England, as being accepted by us it may be a good. And
namely, it would hazard the destruction and overthrow of all the rest of our
Plantations, which can hardly stand without this, and the loss for ever of our
fishing voyages there, which these fourscore years we have frequented and
enjoyed: which loss alone, would be even the undoing of many of our Sea-cost
Towns in England, that do now live much by them.

16. Last of all, diverse honorable and worshipful persons have already begun
several Plantations in that Country, and so laid the foundation of so famous
and notable an attempt, as all after ages shall have cause, I doubt it not, to
commend their valor, and honor their memory. With whom, ^f others, or, which
were much to be wished, if our whole Land would join, the work could not, by
the blessing of God, upon so blessed araction, but luckily and speedily prosper.


Resp. Who, I pray you, are those worthy persons that have made the first
adventure of planting there?


Enr. They are these. First, the right Honorable, Henry The name* of such as
already have begun a Plantation in Newfound Land.
Lord Carry, Viscount Falkland, and now Lord Deputy of Ireland, has begun a
great and fair Plantation there some few years since: and is well pleased to
entertain any such as will adventure with him, either in purse or in person,
upon very fit and reasonable conditions.

Secondly, the right Honorable, Sir George Caluert, Knight, and principal
Secretary to the Kings most excellent Majesty, has also a very large and
goodly Plantation there, which though it be as yet but in the Infancy, viz. of
not above 5. or 6. years undertaking, yet does it already well flourish in a
place well fortified and secured: wherein are some hundred people or thereabout
in habiting and employed in building of houses, ridding or clearing of grounds
for pasture, arable and other like uses: and in making of salt for the
preserving of fish and diverse other services. And his Honor is likewise well
pleased to entertain any that will either aduen^ure with him, or serve under
him upon very fit and fair conditions.

Thirdly, Master John Sla^y of London, Merchant, and some others with him, have
maintained a Colony of his Majesty's subjects there for diverse years past.

Fourthly, diverse worshipful Citizens of the City of Bristoll, have undertaken
to plant a large Circuit of that Country, and have had people there inhabiting
these 5. or 6. years with good and hopeful success.

Fifthly, Master William Vaughan of Tarracod in the County of Carmarthen,
Doctor of the Civil Law, has also done the like: and has within these two or
three years last sent thither diverse men and women that do inhabit there,
and prosper well.

Sixthly, some other worthy persons there are that be adventurers in the said
Plantation, whose names yet I know not.

By all which you may understand that there is already a fair beginning of
this worthy work: and that they which henceforth shall go thither, shall not
be the first that shall adventure to dwell there. Which considered, may be a
good Motive to others to follow them and to join themselves unto them, assured
by the manifold experiments of those many and worthy persons, as have already
adventured their fortunes and means there, and that in several and far
distant parts of that Land, that the Country is very habitable and good for a
present and speedy Plantation.


Resp. These be good Motives indeed, for the advancement and hasting of this
Plantation. And I like them so well that if I were but twenty years younger
then I am, I think I should be like enough to see it my self: and that now I
cannot, yet I shall be willing, if I once see the same well set forward, what I
may to animate and persuade others, my Children, Kinsfolk, Friends, Allies and
Neighbors thereunto, as unto a place and action that is likely to prove
greatly to the good of all them and theirs for ever, that will engage
themselves therein.


Enr. So doing, and but so doing, you shall do well. For assure your self,
you shall thereby much further the honor and glory of God, benefit your native
Country and people, do good service to our renowned King and Sovereign, and
highly gratify all those that have undertaken so honorable and excellent, so
necessary and difficult an enterprise. But now answer me one question, as I
have done many to you.


Resp. I will if I can: what is it?


Enr. What lets you, notwithstanding your age, but that you Excuses and delays
for not going in^o a Plantation answered.
may go also your self and see it, and inhabit it too, if you please, as well
as if you were 20. years younger then you are?


Resp. Being so far stricken in years as I am, I am not very willing to
travel into other Countries; but am content and desirous too, to end my life
at home, and let them that be young, strong and ^y go: for they are fit for it.


Enr. You are not so old and broken with age, that you may 1. Agedness*
say as father Barzillai did to David, 2. Sam. 19. 35. when he offered him more
then an ordinary favor: I am (said he) this day. fourscore year old. I
cannot discern between good and evil: nor has thy servant any taste in that
he does eat and drink^. I cannot hear any more the voice of singing men and
women: and I shall be but aburthen to him that would pleasure me. If you be
come to this state, you shall by my consent have A placard of ^ase to abide at
home, or Bill of Dotage* to trouble you no farther.


Resp. Truly I cannot so say: I am reasonable strong and healthy yet: I could
rather say almost as old Caleb did to Captain Joshua, Josh. 14. 6. As strong
as I was for 20. years ago, so strong well near am I yet, I thank God, and
am as apt and able for travel and employment. My senses are good, and my ^ic
sight serves me almost as well as ever it did.


Enr. Then are you as fit to go in such a business as ever you were, and
fitter too in some respect by your age. Your age has taught you experience and
discretion how to behave your self, and help to manage such a work better
then younger men, that have had no time to gather observation in the world.
Your age will cause, that for your gray hairs and gravity you shall be
respected, reverenced and obeyed far more then young men, who being for the
most part unskillful, will get contempt. And lastly, your personal example
will five times more prevail to persuade others to go, then any verbal
Arguments that you can make. But say once you will go your self, and which of
your children will not be ready to run with you? but as long as you abide
behind, you shall not easily get any one of them to go by himself. The like
shall you find in other your kindred and acquaintance.


Resp. But it is not an usual thing for old men to go in such imploiments.


Enr. Therefore they prosper much the worse. They send 2. Not usual for old
men.
out a few young and single men, that have little or no experience in the
world, and so are readier indeed and likelier to overthrow then to uphold a
Plantation. But thus it should not be, nor has it been in former times. Look
but into the Bee-hiues when they swarm, and you shall find, as one faith
well, That the swarm is as old as the stock, that is, that there are in
Butler in his feminine Monar. cap. 5. Number. 3.
it as well old Bees as young. And if you will have better proof, call to
mind the sacred Histories of blessed father Abraham's life, what age he was
of, when he left his Country, his kindred and his fathers house, and went to
dwell in the Land of Canaan, and you shall find I warrant you, that Genesis 1^.
4. Exodus 7. 7.
he was threescore and ten year old at least, that is elder a good deal then
you are yet. And was not Moses fourscore year old, and his brother Aaron
fourscore and three when they lead the children of Israel out of Egypt, and
Joshua 80. year old when he conducted them into the land of Canaan? And we may
be sure that in that great multitude of 600. thousand at the least, that
removed, there were a number of aged people both men and women. So that you may
see, it is no strange thing for those that are well stricken in years, to go
and seek new Countries.


Resp. Old men be sit to go, but young men me thinks, be fitter, because they
have none but themselves to care for.


Enr. Therefore are they the less fit for a Plantation, and old 3. Young men
and single not so fit as elder and married men.
men fitter then they, not only because of their better experience in the
world, their gravity and authority, as I said before, but also because they
have families, and so children under them, which will help to fill the
Plantation apace. But young men and single men, besides the want of experience
in them, they can do little good to the Plantation but in their own single
persons at most. Being unmarried, if they continue so, they will hur and hinder
the Plantation thereby, which will be no less hindered by the unmarried there,
then our land is hindered by the (poor) married here. If they will marry, they
shall not easily find with whom, unless it be with the Natives of those
Countries, which happily will be nor handsome nor wholesome for them, certainly
profitable and convenient (they having had no such breeding as our women have)
i^cannot be. And when they are married, long it will be before my fruit of their
marriage can be up to yield any force or enlargement to the Plantation: whereas
if such as be already married go over, they having children, some more, some
less, of different ages and growth, they also will be able and ready in a
little while, some one year and some another, to enlarge and fill up the
Plantation, by addition of new families, as it were little new Colonies, every
where. Further, whereas young and single men when they come there, upon any
little dislike, will be apt and ready to return and forsake the place, and so
coming home again to discredit the Action, married men and housekeepers must
and will abide: and if happily upon any occasion, the man himself come over into
England now and then, yet he leaves behind him such a pledge and hostage, I
mean his Wife, Children, and Family, for his return, as may well assure the
Country that he will not fail, because that now is absolutely his home and
proper Habitation. Lastly, (...) any enemy shall assault them, who is likely to
stick close to him, the married that fights proaris and focis, as they say, for
God and his Country, for his Wife and Children, with whom and for whom he must
and will live and die, or the single man who fights or rather shifts for
himself, and therefore will soon either yield or run away, as he shall
perceive to be most for his ease and safety? In good policy therefore I
suppose, it were good and fit that such, that is, married folks, and such as
have families, above others should be procured and invited to go, yea and with
some augmentation and reward in Lands or other benefits, above single persons,
be induced, encouraged, and as it were hired thereunto.


Resp. I doubt, because I was never at Sea before in all my life, that I shall
not be able to endure the Seas.


Enr. 1. The voyage or journey is not long, not above foureteen 4. t^uell by
Sea.
or fifteen days sail with a good wind: or if any cross wind come, not
above twenty, or one and twenty days commonly.

2. What hardness or difficulty is there of traveling by Sea, more then at
Land? It is rather the easier and pleasanter of the two; unless God send any
great tempest, which is not very usual all the Summer season, it is of the
two, the more pleasant and easy: For there you may sit in your chair, or lie
in your bed at will, and pass along as delieately as, or more delicately, then
do our Gentlemen that ride in their Coach: and be at your ways end before
you be either aware or weary.

3. Why should you not endure the Seas as well as do Princes, Noble and
Gentlemen and women both, that be of a more tender and delicate breeding and
constitution of body then you by far, who yet, as no doubt you have often
heard, do yearly and ordinarily pass the Seas to Countries far and near.


Resp. I have no need to go: The intendment is for the poorer sort of the Land
that have n^thing to trust to, and for my part, I thank God, I have a Living
t^t is able reasonably well to help me and mine.


Enr. 1. The less need you have to go, the more is our 1. Of them that have
livings here.
Country here beholding unto you, if you will go; and the more shall the
Country there be beholding to you, if you come thither. For the coming in of
one or two that have some good means of their own, to bring with them is
better for it, then of five or six that come with little or nothing. 2. The
Intendment is for any that will go whosoever. The poorer sort, because they
are likeliest to be gotten, though they be chiefly, yet they are not only
intended. 3. And the living that you have here, how long will it hold?


Resp. As long as my life does hold, but no longer I grant. But if God give me
time to live a while, I hope I shall be able to do somewhat for my children
too, and see them all reasonably well provided to live, when I am gone.


Enr. But by your own saying, if you should die within a little while, (and
what Charter have you of your life more then other men?) You must needs leave
them ill provided for, and most of them either to the mercy of the world, which
is little, or to the courtesy of their friends, which happily will be lesle.
And what need this, when by your removing you may provide for them your self,
and see them in that good state, that they need not be beholding to any others,
but rather able to help others.

4. Farther, the best provision you can possibly provide them here, if you
might live yet these twenty years, can be but for their own time: but
removing as you may, it is very probable, having that means which you have
now, you may be able to settle both your self and every one of them, though
they be half a dozen, or half a score of them, in as good a Living or
better, as your Farm that you now dwell upon, for you and yours, and for them
and theirs in perpetuum, for ever.

5. Consider also. 1. That it is so hard a matter to place abroad a child well
here, that the placing but of one of your children, may bring you so far
behind hand, that you may not be able to do any thing for any other of them
in seven years after, there they may all be provided for in some measure
presently. 2. How grievous and reproachful a thing it would be to your
children, if having lived well in your time, they should come to live in a
poor, needy and beggarly fashion. To arise from a poor estate to a richer,
is commendable and delectable: but to fall from a good estate to a worse, of
all gricuous things it is one of the most gricuous and misorable. 3. Whether it
be not an evil thing and unadvised to put that upon uncertainties, which a man
needs not, but may be assured of, and put out of all doubt.


Resp. What certainty can I have of my life there, more then here?


Enr. None at all. But of good estate and provision for you and yours exceeding
much more. For whereas though by the course of Nature and present state of your
body, you may happily live yet these ten or twenty years, yet that is exceeding
doubtful and uncertain. For of one that lives to that age, there be an
hundred that do not: but that you may live yet ten, or twelve, or twenty
months to an end, there is great probability by the help of God: and within
that time you may have gotten and settled a good estate in a Plantation to you
and yours. For if you live in the Plantation but one month more, if you but
once remove hence, and be but on shipboard for the Plantation, though you die
before you come there, (for I suppose such order will be taken, if ever there
be good order taken for a Plantation) you and yours shall enjoy, and be assured
of the benefit thereof, as well as if you had lived therein seven years.

4. Last of all consider you well, that the Apostle and Nature too, (for he
speaks according to the Law of Nature) says, Fathers must lay up, that is,
provide the best they can for their ^. Cor. 12. 14.
children, against the time to come: and again, He that does not ^. Tim. 5. 8.
provide for his own (meaning no doubt, if he may do it, and have good and
fit opportunity thereto, as you now have) and specially for them of his own
house, he denies the Faith, and is worse then an I^fidell.


Resp. You press me exceeding hard upon this point, and do enforce me in
manner to consider, which I will do, God willingly, more deeply upon it.


Enr. It was necessary to press you hard upon it, for this is a starting
hole, out of the which I knew well enough you would not easily be beaten.


Resp. You run away upon these points I see, as fast as lusti^ Horses do
with an empty Cart: but I have somewhat yet behind that will lade you better,
and find you more to do, or else I am much deceived.


Enr. What is that? Let us have it for Gods sake.


Resp. It is not a thing usual for such to go as have good livings 6. It is
not usual for men that have livings here to go.
here of their own, as I have; but for the poorer sort only, that have none
at all, and therefore what reason have I to break the custom?


Enr. Is this the point you thought would plunge me, or set me a stand? This
something is as much as nothing.

1. Now adays indeed, and with us, it is not very usual. But in ancient
times, when Plantations were better followed then now they are, it was very
usual, as you may see in the persons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were
all men of great state, and in the men of Joseph, Josh. 17. 14. and in the men
of Judah, ludg. 1. almost thorowout. And as I could show by the practice of The
manner in ancient times, how to raise people for a Plantation.
many Nations, who used when they intended a Plantation, to consider what
number it were expedient for them to remove, and that was usually one half, a
third or fourth part of the whole, both great and small, and then to cast lots,
and as the lot sell so they went away, were they rich or poor, whether they
had Livings or not.

2. If the custom be otherwise now, that custom may and must be broken,
because it is not good: All good Laws and Policy intending always this, that
Customs which are good and landable only, should be kept and continued: The
other that are not such, as diseases, though of long continuance out of the
body, should be expelled. Now certain it is such a custom, that is, that
none but the p^oter sort should go over, and none of the better sort that have
any Lands or Livings here, would prove very hurtful and pestiferous to the
Plantation. For who shall be Governors and Rulers in the Country, as I said
the last day, and all men know some there must be? What, poor, needy, and
ignorant fellows, that have neither learning nor understanding to such a
service? Does not very reason show, that there must go some of better breeding
and experience, Gentl^men at the least? And if of them there cannot, as it is
likely there will not en^w be invited thither for such employments, what supply
can there be, unless sundry others of a next degree unto Gentlemen, that is,
Yeomen and Yeomenlike men, that have in them some good knowledge and courage be
there to be found, who may in defect of better men, be advanced to places of
preferment and government there, and happily approve not altogether unworthy
thereof?

Further, what shall the poorer sort do there by themselves without some, and
that some store of others better stored in money and means then they, that may
employ the poorer sort, and set them on work, whereby they may be able to get
money to sustain them and theirs?

3. And even in our times, it is not so unusual a thing as you seem to
understand it to be: for you may soon learn, if you will but a little
inquire; That in our time also, diverse men that had reasonable good means and
Livings here, have removed into Ireland, and planted themselves there to their
great good and preferment. And thus you see that the cloak you have made you
of usage and custom, will do you as little service to cover your
backwardness, as Adams and his wives aprons made of Fig-leaues to hide their
nakedness.


Resp. If that be but bad, I have a better. My wife will not bear 7. Women are
vnwil^ing to go.
to go any whither beyond Sea, and therefore for her sake, though I were
willing my self* I must be content to abid^ as home, and end my (...) in
England.


Enr. This indeed is somewhat; I hearkened for it long since. I know it is a
point that pincheth many, and makes them more unwilling then else they would
be. Women be unwilling, and their wives will not endure to hear of it. Yet
this knot is no^ so hand twisted, but that it may be vn^wined I hope. Or, if it
be ^ (...) knot, yet the sword of Alexander can h^w it in pieces. To this
therefore I say thus:

1. Women also have understanding, and many of them do unfeignedly fear God.
And therefore being well put in mind of their duty, which is, To forsake
father and friends, and to clea^e unto their husband^, and that so inseparably,
That nothing part them but Death, it is not unlikely, but that at length they
will yield, and not utterly refuse that which they cannot lawfully refuse, how
hand soever at first it seem to them to be, and how lo^h soever they are to
do it, if they might lawfully leave it undone.

2. They also do naturally and ^enderly love their children and posterity,
and wish and desire their good. Probable it is therefore, that when they shall
thoroughly understand, that such a travail may, nay will certainly be a means
to provide good estates for them and theirs for ever, such as by no
possibility nor probability are here to be had, they will be persuaded at
length to adventure as the hen to save her chickens, and the Pelican to feed
her young, if need should be, their life and blood.

3. When the examples of worthy Matrones, women of Examples of Women.
fa^e greater esteem and estate then they, that have done the like* as of the
Lady Sara in accompanying Abraham from Sara.
place to place till her dying day, and that sometime with the peril of her
life and her chasti^ie: of Mistress Rebecca in fo^saking Rebecca.
her fathers house and all her friend^, to go^ out of M^sopatamia into the Land
of Canaan, to be wi^e to a man that she had not seen, to Isaac, the son and
heir of Abraham, before named; and of Rahel and Leah, the daughters of Laban,
Rachel. (...).
that were ready to go from their fathers with Jacob their husband they knew
not whither, and others any that in s^red Histories are mentioned, i^ is likely
they will not think themselves too good to do the like, nor be afraid to
imitate them in this fashion.

To these worthy Precedents I could add out of humane Histories not a ^ew,
worthy imitation and commendation in this case: as namely, Queen Elianor, wife
to King Edward Queen E^anor.
the first, King of England, who, her Husband going a long and very dangerous
voyage of warfare, viz. into the Holy Land, would by no mean^s be persuaded to
tarry at home, but would needs accompany him, s^ying, Nothing must part them
asund^r, whom God has joined together: And, The way to heaven is as near in
the Holy Land, as in England. And that, worthy Spartan Dame, the wife of
Panteus, a Noble Plut^rc. i^ (...)
man in Greece, who being retained by her parents, and other friends by force,
that she should not go with her husband into Egypt. within a while after
secretly stole away by night, and got shipping to carry her to her husband,
with whom she continued there cheerfully, and contentedly till his dying day.

And it cannot be, but that when they shall see some, and hear of more of
their own Neighbors and Country folks, English Women as they are, that do
and will go the same voyages, their example and present practice will be such
a special Motive even to those that be very unwilling, either to accompany or
follow them, assured they shall do no worse then they do, as there will not
need many more arguments thereto.

4. There be also diverse and sundry causes in consideration whereof, as S.
Paul* 1 Cor. 7 6. in one case allows, by consent 1. Cor. 7. 6.
of both parties, some of them may be borne with for a time, and permitted to
remain behind, that at the second or third r^turne of their Husbands, all
impediments that at first hundred being removed, they may go^ over with them
also* without any farther delay.

Fifthly, if any be utterly so obstinate and froward or selfewilled, that no
reason, no persuasion, no example seen or heard of, no respect of duty will
prevail with them, there is farther remedy to be had, that is, that on them
be inflicted ' Paena Desertricis, such punishment as is fit for those that
utterly and wilfully forsake their husbands.


Resp. What penalty or punishment is that?


Enr. That I leave to those that have authority, as to inflict it, so to
appoint it, as they shall see instant and necessary occasion to require. A new
kind of sin, may have a new kind of punishment, as often, Ex malis ^oribus,
bon^ leges: Of evil manners have risen up good laws.


Resp. You have pressed me so far, and by your speeches prevailed with me so
much, that I have nothing more to say for my self why I should not go,
unless I should say that to you, which some have said to me of late: but I am
loath to do it, lest you should be offended.


Enr. What is that? let me have it I pray you in any wise: For it shall not
offend me, I warrant you.


Resp. Seeing you so earnestly and effectually move me to go, Why do not you
your self go also? you that so fame would have others to go, should also go
your self.


Enr. You shall have my answer thereunto very willingly: that so you may the
better be able to answer those that go about that way to stop your mouth, and
make stay or delay for themselves.


Resp. That is the end for which I purposely and principally move the question.


Enr. My answer is this. First, though it be not of necessity that every one
must go himself, that persuades or moves others thereunto: For Plantation
is no matter of our Faith and Salvation* There may be as great reasons and just
occasions, why he should not go, as why they, others whom he persuades, The
Author ^mselfe does purpose God willing to go into one or other Planta^ion.
should go: yet because no man shall take any exception at all against m^, or
my persuasions that way, I say, I do purpose. God willing, to go. And I shall
think my self happy, if I may be one of those that may lay the first stones
of such a building, and spend and end my days in being on^ Instrument among
the many thousands of our English Natition, that shall betake and bestow
themselves in such a manner to the enlargement of Gods Church, of the Kings
dominions, and of our own English habitations. But I say withal: Secondly, I
cannot go as yet, because I have not my means and estate so settled and
provided, as it is fit for one that will go well. Thirdly, if I go, it shall
be (partly) in hope by Gods merciful providence toward me and mine, to better
mine estate, and to do good, as to others, so specially to those that are mine
own, or do otherwise depend upon me. And therefore I have no reason to go,
till I see some good likelihood of probability and assurance that it may and
will be done. Fourthly, I will not go, by my goodwill, till I find some good
course taken for a good Plantation in that place or Country, wheremy desire and
purpose is, above any I hear of yet, to plant my self. When some such course
shall be taken and followed effectually, I will not (God willing) be one of the
last, that shall make use of it. Fifthly, I suppose I ought not either to tempt
God, by going without good and necessary means; nor seek my own destruction
by running before I am sent in good order: And therefore expecting a convenient
and appointed time, it is enough that I do for the present prepare my self to
be ready prepared against that time, and having my mind and affection settled
that way, do hearken as the good Soldier for the sound of the trumpet to the
battle, for the publishing of that decree, that may rouse up all England to
such an attempt and expedition.


Resp. I like your answer so well, that besides other good uses which I shall
make of it the while, by Gods help, whenever you shall go, (for I see you
will not go but upon good ground.) You shall have me ready on reasonable
warning to bear you company. And many will accompany him.
And I do not think, but that you shall have many more of our Neighbors and
Acquaintance, that will do the like.


Enr. The more the merrier, by the grace of God. And I pray God of his love and
goodness to our Nation, and for the furtherance and increase of his Gospel,
to vouchsafe to these actions, and to all that shall go in them, a happy and
speedy proceeding: ^fid to us in particular, i^ it be his will that we shall
be partakers in the same, a joyful and good success therein.


Respire. AMEN.


The end of the third and last part, An^o Domini 1624.

