A HEAVENLY HYMN TO THE KING OF HEAVEN.

Presented in a Sermon, by James Eglesfield, Mr. of Arts in Queens College in
Oxon late Vicar of Chenton in Sommerset.

LONDON. Printed by John Dawson, for Francis Eglesfield and are to be sold at
the sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE DAVID Lord BARRY Earl BARRIMORE.
Right Honorable.
THe deep obligations that your Honors many favors have already bound me in,
and my grateful inclination to an expression of them, engage me to the tender
of this humble present. It is not clothed with any abilities worthy your eye,
but if you please to cure the defects by a noble acceptance, you make me ever
as much yours as this was mine, before I presumed to own it on so honorable a
Patron. Pray take my weak labors and with it me; I have my aim if it bring
to your honor as much comfort, as it carries from me zeal; and God grant that
you may gleane something out of this short Sermon that may be as high as my
desires for your salvation. Let me say to this as the Poet said to his Hei mihi
quod domino non licet ire tue. But there is no obscurity, no dangers, or
adversity, that shall be able to restrain my prayers for multiplying
blessings on your honor in all things external, internal, eternal, That you
may do all things well, to the glory of God, benefit of your Country, comfort
of your soul, and honor of your name, as shall still befit

Your Lordships humblest Servant, JAMES EGLESFIELD.

A HEAVENLY HYMN TO THE KING OF HEAVEN.
MAR. 7.37. Fecit omnia been.

He has done all things well.


THe finger of the Deity in the manhood of Christ, by a word powerful, and a
power wonderful, drew the world in love and admiration after him; his Doctrine
undeniable, his life unblameable, his words, wonders unculpable; all conspiring
in one, with united force, forced all with their tongues as with trumpets, to
sound his fame in this famous confession; suitable to none but him alone who was
the divine Omnipotency, Fecit omnia been. And therefore the Evangelist
premiseth (...), his words, and his works, as the impulsive causes president
and withal annexeth (...) admiration, and commendation as the effect
concomitant, whilst the Savior of the world, voce operante, et opere vocali by
words working and works speaking drew from an earthly multitude this heavenly
Hymn to the King of heaven (...). Pointing (as it seems by the judgment of
diverse as well the ancient as modern Interpretors) unto Christ, as the same
Creator, that in the infancy of the world beheld (reveiwing all his works)
that they were, valde bona, and now the Redeemer, Fecit omnia been. Each word
of my Text favoring that Allusion (...). Non fictor non entium, sed factor
omnium. Fecit, he made for he is actus purus; fecit omnia, for he is agens
omnipotens, fecit omnia been, for he is bonus in Concrete, et bonitas in
abstracto. He that is the perfect Unity, and Unity of perfection fecit, has
done, agendo quiescens et quiescendo agens, not only in intention, but in
actual and complete perfection. He has done all, for he is all effective,
producing effects not defects, good not evil, Entia, and therefore bona. All
things being an infinite Agent both extensive in the quantity, for he has done
all: and intensive in the qualtity, he has done all things well. Oh the
height the breadth, and depth of divine power, and powerful divinity ^able to
make the swiftest stream a standing poole, and the most vocal tongue of man to
shroud it self in silence. Thus having discoursed of this Scripture, let it be
your bounty to lend a while your patient attention, whiles in a word I shall
determine the words of this verse to contain three general parts.

First, the peoples breaking forth into Admiration, in these words, They were
astonished above measure.

Secondly their breaking forth into the highest stream of Commendations, He
has done all things well.

Thirdly, the reasons, by illustration in the instances, He has made the
deaf to hear, the blind to see, etc.

The Sum of which inference to the immediate premises, I take to be this: In
speaking, living and miracles doing, He has done all things well.

Herein two principal parts commend themselves to your consideration.

1. The Agent, He, 2. The Action, has done etc.
The Agent being Christ Jesus, not only Man but God, of whom also our best
ascertained knowledge is but a posteriore per effectus, and not a priori per
causas, I will first propound the Action, and thereby infer the Agent to be
vnmatchaable.

In the Action.

1. The Matter. He has done all things.

2. The Manner. Has done all things well.

The Matter for which the multitude blazed his honor was 2. fold his words and
his works. His words both (...) so deep, so profound, the greatest Elephant
may swim, and (...) so perspicuous and shallow that lambs may wade. His
works in this place specially intended Are Conversationis et Conservationis.

Of Conversation, for he lived Agnus sine macula, Lilium sine spina, Homo sine
culpa; and of Conservation, or Restoration, by Miracles; he made the deaf to
hear, the dumb to speak, etc.

Christ in all his doctrine with a superlative reach of wisdom, transcending
all humane science, is neither as that Grecian Heraclitus who left his
learning in a cloud of obscurity, invisible; nor as that fordid Messian whose
fatty phrase (as Tully terms it) made his speech unsavory; but in one and the
same word he is (...) and (...) so sweetly matching profoundnes and plainness,
ut habeat in publico vnde par vulos nutriat, et servat in secreto vnde mentes
sublimum admiratione suspendat, that outward perspicuity may be milk for
babes, and inward mystery may be meat for the maturest and ripest wits.
Therefore Saint Augustine in his Epistle to Jerome, prefers the worthiness of
the Gospel before the Grecian principles, and says well and wittily, that
Incomparabiliter pulchrior est veritas Christianorum quam Helena Graecorum.
Arts and Sciences are but the birth of Man's brain, but here is the Kings
daughter the Lady of learning, at whose beck the greatest and foundest Axioms
of humane wisdom must bow choosing rather to believe then dispute, where
divine precepts grounded upon the Rock Christ Jesus surpasses all humane
knowledge with a 3. fold excellency, Verity, Unity, Efficacy. Christ is not
only true, but truth it self; without fraud either active that he should
deceive, or passive that he should be deceived, therefore in contemplation
worthy, worthy the Gospel. The Gospel of Christ being the most absolute
Lesbian rule whereby we must square out all our actions, that we, as He, may
do all things well. According to that of Saint Ambrose, Omne verum est a
Spiritu sancto, for this vna veritas is both formalis, effectiva, exemplaris.
Formally true in its Efficient, from which all Truth flows; exemplary which
must be our imitation in which steps, whosoever will not err must walk.
Philosophers may slatter themselves, but all that they find is loss. It was
Saint Paul's resolution, I account all the world as dung; having like Owls a
glimmering in the night of Nature, but beetle-blind in the daylight of Grace;
trusting more to their conjecturall notions, then to the infalible evidence of
the Spirit of Truth.

The Ethnicks are in Vmbra, the Jews in nube, the Christians only in luce,
per verbum effusum et infusum, outwardly preached and inwardly inspired, so
that of the word of Christ, as the only divine Philosopher I may conclude quod
falsum est philosophicum non est. The next is so affined to this that it
follows of force, if his word be true then is it one. Verum et unum
convertuntur. Vna est dilecta mea. God is not as man who affects variety to
pleasure, more then unity to profit, himself being the beginning of Essence,
Iam. 1.17. and his word and knowledge are both unchangeable, for with him there
is no shadow of alteration.

Therefore Varroes threefold theology whereof Augustine makes mention in lib.
6. de civitrte dei, Fabulosa ad Theatrum, naturalis ad mundum, et Civilis ad
Vrbem, vainly divided, argues but a lying vanity, departing from the unity of
perfection to the multiplicity of confusion: but in the words of Christ are no
idle Platonicall Ideas, Pythagorean dreams, or natural conclusions, but
supernatural revelations, and that not ad urbem, but ad orbem, nam bonum est
diffusivum. And yet the sound and voice of the Turtle, that goes through the
world, agrees in one vni-sound of the truth; nam multa candelabra sed lux vna,
says Hugo de Arca No^. One Sun of truth whose beams are fired in all
nations, verbae innumerabilia, et vnicum tantum verbum omne. This verum unum
and vnicum verbum, is (says mellefluous Bernard) non loquax sed efficax, non
sonans sed penetrans, in sound little in substance great and admirable: not
word in the ear, but sword in the heart to wound the souls of men with a love
of their God. And that with a threefold grace; surpassing the grace of humane
discourse in that it is deliciosum ad saporem, solidum ad nutrimentum, efficax
ad medicinam: to the taste delicious as the Manna of Angels, and honey of Canaan
for nutrition sollid, esca animae, panis sapientiae, for medicine excellent,
omnes viciosos sanare, bonos adjuvare to the sick soul a restorative
consolation, to the sound a preservative instruction. The Gospel cures what
nature mis-guides, the efluence of the word, with the influence of the Spirit
leads Christ's Sheep from the night of Error to the light of the Truth, from
the thrall of sin to the throne of Grace; for Christ has not only as Moses
and men, a chair on Earth, but a throne in heaven, and power over all people:
he speaks and speedes, making his word to the Elect, the savor of life unto
life, to draw his Saints from Earth to heaven, from the world to God, a mundo
sensibili ad mundum intelligibilem, therefore the people admiring his wisdom
bare record to his word that in his dispute and discourse, He had done all
things well. He was not like the Dove with silver wings and feathers of Gold,
that brought into the Arc of the Church, nothing but a leaf in her mouth, but
like the true spies of Canaan, with clusters of Grapes, plenty and abundance of
substantial doctrine to give men a taste how pleasant the Lord is, and how
pleasant the land is that flows with milk and honey. Thus admirable was that
sweet singer of Israel, that came in humility with a fishers phrase to fish for
souls, favus distillans labijs eius, summa gratia summa eloquentia, with
fulness of grace, full of grace were his lips and riches of Eloquence, for never
man spoke like him, moving the multitude like clouds of witnesses to confess
unto the world, that he was Vere propheta John. 7.40. deceit and guile were not
found in his mouth, and veritas prophetica in whom all the promises of God by
the prophets were yea and Amen, 1 Cor. 1.20. and ipsa veritas ipse Propheta
(...) Ioh. 14.6. Not only as Moses a Prophet among his Brethren, Deuteronomy. 18.17.
or as Isaiah a prophet, or as David a Prince and a prophet, not only as John
Baptist the greatest among the sons of men, Mat. 11. but by the multitude of
the sons of men, confessed to be the sacred Son of God, the Prince of
Prophets, the inspirer of men and Angels; to whose omniscience the people and
multitude ascribed the honor of Omnipotence, to do all, and of essential
goodness to do all thing well. Fecit omnia been etc.

And thus from the wisdom of his words let us come to the power of his
works, Conversando, et conservando, consisting in his own conversation, and
others Preservation.

The providence divine ordained three means to open unto men the way of truth.

Verbum praecepto, Christum exemplo, Spiritum sanctum inspiratione; the Word to
speak, the Spirit to persuade, and Christ himself to lead to the way of life.
And this Saint Augustine says upon the first Psalm, venit non stetit in via
peccatorum he came but stood not in the way of sinners: for he was a Lilly, not
inter spinas, sed spinas non habens, quia peccatum non focit, Jacobs lambs
were spotted, but he only immaculate. The Lamb of God came without sin, to
take away the sins of the world. In terris visus est vt esset exemplo, in
coelos levatus est ut esset patrocinio; hic informat ad vitam illic invitat ad
gloriam, says Saint Bern. sup. natal. Sanct^ Victoris. He dwelt amongst men by
exemplary president of perfection, to lead his Saints Militant; he ascended the
heavens to crown his Saints victorious in the Church Triumphant. That he never
stained his honor with sin Aquinas assigns a threefold demonstration.

First the end for which he became Flesh; to satisfy the wrath of God for the
sin of Man.

Secondly to prove the verity of his humane nature, and

Thirdly, that every action of his should be our instruction. If he had been
a Sinner, he could not have been a Savior of others, no not of himself, for
the soul that should have sinned should have dyed, Ezekiel. 18.24. Nor should his
trangression have proved his humane nature, but natures corruption, sin being
not created of God, but suggested by the devil: And last of all how should his
life have been a light unto our feet, and a lantern unto our paths, if his
works had been the works of darkness? and therefore came he not infected
with Original, and lived unblemished with actual sin, in all conversation
according to Law. First that he might approve, a^^ withal fulfill it, and end
it. Secondl^ to take from the Jews all occasion of o^loquie. Lastly, to
enlarge the souls (...) his servants from the curse denounced (...) against
offenders; that they which belee^ved might be received into the adoption o^
sons and be made heirs of God through Christ, Gal. 4.5. Who is
all-sufficien^ for a great work, so excellent, requiring an emminent agent,
and the highest perfection not comparative as man, but absolute as God? Only
he in whom the wisdom of the Father and the fulness of the Godhead dwells
bodily. He, that one and the same with Ens primum absolute perfectum,
containing all perfections, uncreated formally, and created eminently and
effectually; having all natural, morrall and Transcedent sufficiency above all
the sons of men: so that his soul could not be defiled with sin by reason of
a three fold supportance.

First the fulness of grace, as the God of grace and goodness.

Secondly the consummation of glory, as the King of glory.

Thirdly the Unity of the Union of the Deity and humanity in one person.

What others received secundum similitudinem, he had secundum essentiam, say
the Schoolmen. Men by participation, he by possession; men receiving, Christ
containing the fulness of grace plenitudinem numerositatis et perfectionis, in
number without number, perfection without limitation or measure; and therefore
his grace by conjuction the eternal word, exceeded all the endowments
conferred upon man, with a threefold eminency.

First the habits of Virtues inward.

Secondly the transcient actions outward.

Thirdly the effect consequent, in infinite mercy purchasing life for all,
though all had deserved death. Here then Sin in no sort could enter, for his
words, his works himself and his soul, were full of Grace, and intus existens
prohibet alienum his righteousness could never be eclipsed where the Deity
displaying in his holy conversation, his glorious beams, did shine and break
through the clouds of his humanity, that all might see light, to the right way
of Salvation, by following his steps, who is the Way, the truth, and the life.
Ioh. 14.6.

Saint Bernard smelling the sweet savor of his Saviors garments, the garment
of Salvation, and robes of his perfect righteousness; the odor of his name
smelling like a field whom the Lord has blessed: he compares him to a
slourishing Vine, decked with the beauty of the best flowers. Viola humilitatis,
Lilie castigatis, Rosa passionis and charitatis.

His humility suited to the Violet, respectu modicae saturae, situs humilis,
dulcis odoris: his low stature in the state of a servant, his humble seat, on
his footstool upon earth, though he was the King of glory, whose throne is
above the Heavens, and his name a sweet odor, nam oleum effusum nomen ejus.

His chastity, referred to the Lilly, in that it is alba, splendida,
tractabilis: his whiteness, purity, and alacrity to do^ good; his cleerenesse,
amiable in countenance, intuens omnes front serena, his meekness tractable,
as the Lilly palpable.

But of all that Rosie-red of his bloody passion, which gave unto the world
that sweet savor of Salvation, in which with the rarest clause, he concluded
all with an action of observation, admiration, and imitation: nam perdidat
animam ne perdiderit obedientiam, he lost his life to save his obedience,
approving himself the spotless Lamb of God, both in his ingresse to the
World, conceived of a Virgin by the power of the holy Ghost: In his progress
in this World, the beams of his holiness dazeling with amazement the eyes of
the beholders: and in his egresse out of this World, though he were condemned
with a jury of Jews, (a Jewish jury) as a malefactor; yet both Pilates
unanswerable interrogation at his death, What evil has he don? and the
peoples affirmative testimony of his innocence in his life; concludes that he
both in his life and death, was the Lord of life, the everliving God, the
anchor and author of all our welfare.

Because he has done all things well; let therefore all the flocks of Jacob
follow the great and good Shepherd of their souls. Viam precepto docentem,
exemplo ducentem, if the way be long by precept, he has made it short by
example; and therefore says Lactantius, si precipientem sequ^ non poteris,
sequere antecedentem, so trace him in his footsteps, that thou may follow
him into the celestial Paradise of Heaven, where he himself is gone before
to prepare a Mansion for thee.

Let thy life be like the Kings Daughter glorious within, with a good
intention, and fair without, with the beauty of holiness, in heavenly
conversation; light thy lamp, prepare thy self by addressing thy soul in
marriage garments, the robes of righteousness, to meet the (nay thy)
Bridegroom Christ Jesus in the clouds, by walking as himself, has left
himself for an example, whose praise is in the Gospel, non plausu vanitatis,
sed judicio veritatis, non precario, sed merito; for fecit omnia been.

All time, and tongue would fail me, if I should seem to tell all, for he
has done all, he has done all things well. I will therefore pass with the
time, from his works of imitation, to his wonders, which out of the depth of
admiration, in this multitude drew commendation. He has done all things well,
for he has made the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, which are opera
conservationis and restaurationis.

Christ Jesus the Wonderful, filling the world with his Wonders, made his
miracles to the diseased and possessed a restoration, to show himself that
great Physician that came down from heaven (says Augustine) and that good
Samaritane to cure our maladies. To the dead, vivification, to show himself
the resurrection and the life. To all, the confirmation of his Word, and
manifestation of his Deity, and humanity.

In the precedent miracle in this Chapter mentioned, when he put his finger
into the deaf man's ear, and restored him to his hearing; there was digitus
Deitatis and digitus humanitatis, the one by touching, showing his real
humanity; the other by effectual working, his All-sufficient Divinity.

The humane nature was but the efficient instrument, the Divine, the effectual
Agent, una succubuit injuriis, altera fulgebat miraculis, the malady was cured
by the one, the miracle showed by the other; both working together
miraculously; not only mira, things strange to the vulgar apprehension, but
miracula, far surmounting the power of man's hand, both in the matter, and
manner.

In matter, in such mavelous variety, extending unto spiritual substances,
according unto that of the Prophet Zac. 13 2. He shall cause the unclean
spirits to depart the Land; accomplished when the Prince of this world was cast
out, Ioh. 12.31.

Heaven, Earth, and Hell confessed him the Wonderful; for at his passion the
Sun did hide his face, the Earth was moved, the Devil trembled, to see death,
and hell led captive in triumph.

Logical maxiomes fell down before him, like Dagon by the Ark of God; for
the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, the lame walked, and the dead revived, all
conspired against Logicias, to prove a regresse, a privatione ad habitum.

Neither is his wonderful power so clearly expressed in the matter, as in the
manner of his working: solo verbo, temporis momento, fine medio, and actu
completo; by a word, dixit, fecit, jussit, gessit, a word, and a work; nay,
and a wonder in an instant. His actions being contra, preter, and supra
naturam, and therefore not circumscribed as ours, within the difference of time;
nam qui fecit tempus est supra tempus; but in complete act, not by degrees
growing to perfection, but in a moment, having both inchoation, and
consummation, and that modo sine medio, without help, or use of men or
Angels, or any secundary causes, Nam causa, prima non astringitur secundariis;
by the miraculous proceeding without manner, above, and without means.
Architas, and Archimedes, and all the greatest Artists are debarred from that
honor, though to be admired for their rare inventions.

Zoroastes, Apollinus, and all the crew of Magicians cannot compare with his
works; for all their exploits at which the world wondered, by their
investigation of sympathy, and antipathie, and other power of peculiar
natures; or else by delusion, invocation, or incantation of the hellish family,
(their familiers.)

Nay the Devils themselves cannot parallel this part; for although they can
work above the capacity of man in imaginary appearance, yet not in real
existence; or if really, it is by application of natural means, yet any thing
simply miraculous they cannot work or perform, requiring an action beyond,
beside, the course of nature, universal, under whose laws the virtue and
power of creatures is limited with a nihil ultra.

Only the man Christ, though as man finite, yet as God infinite, he does
infinita, modo infinito; and that with a threefold excellency.

First, because he is the first of all other.

Secondly, because he is unlimited.

Thirdly, because he is not restrained to time, place, matter, or definite
manner in his actions; but absolute, and transcendent above all limitation,
according to that of Job. 5.9. He does things great, unsearchable, and
mavelous without number, magna quantitate, inscrutabilia profunditate, all
with a royalty reserved unto himself, above the Prophets, Apostles, Saints, or
Angels; they working wonders as Ministers, He, as Master: they first praying,
He, commanding; they by participation, He, by possession; they by grace, He, by
nature; they by virtue derived of another, He, by himself absolute, per se,
non ase: for of his Father is given him all power in heaven, and earth.

Lastly, the end determining the act, does make his wonders more honorable, as
being no ways intended for humane applause, nor to detain men in admiration
of idols, as Satan's works of wonders; but to draw the world with the Spouse in
the Canticles, from the darkness of nature, to the bright light of grace,
that all might see the salvation of God.

In there-view now of this evidence, three sorts of men are to be condemned.

First, those refractory spirits which deny his miracles.

Secondly, those phanaticall fancies which esteem them delusions, rather done
in an imaginary appearance, that real existence.

Lastly, those blasphemous creatures which traduce his name, horresco referens.
I tremble to utter it, that he was not Pastor sed depastor, non Ductor sed
seductor po^ puli; against all which, the people unanimously conspired with one
heart and voice, saying, fecit omnia been.

Well, let the Atheists scoff, the Jew blaspheme; but let us fall down in
admiration before this wonderful Redeemer; let him be to other filius fabri,
bu^ to us his works witness Faber mundi nam fecit omnia.

Neither is he only eminent above all the Sons of men, in the quantity of his
works, that he has doneall, but most in the quality, that he has done all
things well. The Phaenix of Philosophers not able to discern by the eyes of
reason, that quaedam posse est impotentiae, did attribute to God, a power of
doing evil: but better says the divine Philosopher, male quaerit unde malum
efficiatur.

Augustine affirms that there is no efficicient, but deficient cause of evil;
and therefore my Text renounceth all imperfection from Christ, as the most
absolute Lord, full of all power, full of all perfection, and declares to the
world in a word his excellency, He has done all things: The adjacent particle
been, excluding all defects, all excess (both by which the virtue of
perfection is mutilate) includes all sufficiency: So well guided by wisdom,
that in all his works, envy cannot once tax them with claudication, either
in the inward substance, or outward circumstance. Here is more then Aristotle's
just man, doing justum just and bonum been, for he is essential goodness,
immense magnus sine quantitate, He has done all things, and immense bonus sine
qualitate, he has done all things well.

Whatsoever the exquisite Moralist can demand to make a man transeunt, it is
concurrent in this Center, above the degrees of comparison. In others they
desire, in him they cannot but admire his Scire, velle, and posse: his
knowledge omniscient, his will ready simply to goodness, his power
omnipotent: the beams of his wisdom shine clear in his Word, his Goodness
in his will, his sacred conversation on earth did demonstrate, his power in
miracles displayes it self like a light on a hill. In all and every of his
Works, all these three are inseparable companions; if he had done all of
constraint, the honor had belonged rather to the Cogent, then the Agent. If of
ignorance, then Fortune, or Fate, or the worthiest sovereign Providence had
withdrawn the commendations; or if like Jacob, halting of a thigh, he had
failed in his proceedings, he had not done all things well. But he has not his
praise by favor, but merit; for he did all things sponte, scienter,
constanter. Freely, for who could command the transcendent Majesty, subject to
none? wittingly and in wisdom, for nothing is hid from the All-seeing eye of
the Deity, and that without wavering; not variable as a mortal man, but as the
celestial Orb above the Moon, with an uniforme motion, rejoicing like a
Giant, to run his course. The end, the perfection, all the continuance of his
works, will witness how well he has done his office. The end, is to glorify
his Father, to confirm the truth, to redeem the distressed sinner. The
perfection of his actions was complete, both in substance, and in circumstance,
bonum, and been. And not like a flashing flame for a time, but like the Sun, he
finished his race; approving himself to be the bottomless well of
profoundest humility. Here with the woman of Samaria, I acknowledge the Well is
deep, and I have nothing to draw withal; therefore with touch and taste, like
Gide^ns Soldiers, who did lap, and not drink of the waters. Leaving the Well,
I come to the Wellspring, from the action, to the agent; in the original
concluded in the last word (...), in our Translation expounded, He, in both
one, first, and last; a, and ^.

In imitation of himself, I have kept himself, as the best wine last. In the
former part you have seen the beams, here is the Sun, lux: there the River,
here the Fountain, there the fruit, here the Tree, a tree of everlasting life;
which Hilary desiring to manifest unto men in the Paradise of the Scriptures,
observes five means. First his Name, that he is (...), and (...), anointed
with the oil of gladness above his fellows. Secondly, by his birth, not by
generation, regeneration, or adoption, but by the power of the holy Ghost.
Thirdly, by his Nature, one with God. Fourthly, by his power over all things.
Fifthly, by his profession, that he is the Way, the Truth, and the life: But my
Text points out two more guides to find out this Agent; his Words, and his
Works: like the two Doves of Venus, leading to a golden branch, not as that
for Aeneas, to descend to hell, but with Enoch, and Elias, to sore aloft to
Heaven.

In his words, never any spoke like him; Vox hominem sonat o Deus certe, God
speaking in the form of man, nay God speaking, not man. His works enforcing
the very Jews to confess, and say, truly this is the Son of God. Ask his
words, and they will answer as himself did to the woman of Samaria, He is the
Messiah that speaks unto you. Ask with John Baptist, Art thou he that should
come, or look we for another? why his Works bear witness the Savior is
come, for the dumb speak, the deaf hear, the lame walk. If we consider
these helps, they will plainly descry unto us the print of the Deity, and
distinguish the Creator, from the creature. First, via eminentiae, he is
eminent above all the Israelites; not only as Saul, higher by the head, but as
omnipotent to impotent, an infinite, to a finite agent; whose power is
boundless, for he has done all.

Secondly, via negationis, for in his works he never stained his honor with
any imperfection: Solomon in all his royalty was not clothed with one of
these, for he has done all things well.

Thirdly, via causationis, for only God is omnipotent to do all: So that with
Greg. I may say; He is God, not only Nuncupater, as Moses to Pharaoh, Deus
inter omnia, but Essentialiter, Deus super omnia ille opifex mundi melioris
origo: and not only God, but man, aequalis patri novum creans mundum, minor
patre perditum reparans mundum, minor patre in forma servi, aequalis in forma
Dei. That he was not God alone, his sighing, weeping, speaking affirm; that he
was not an imaginary body, as the fantastical Manichees dreamed, his eating,
drinking, sleeping, touching, witnesses: all which are affections of a body
natural. The Heretics that held him mere man, his body palpable confounds:
The Arrians that held him a mere created Spirit, a Spirit not having flesh and
bones; all his words, works, and wonders declare, proclaiming to all the world
that he is the promised Messiah, in whose Person, Deity, and humanity are
united: so that of this Agent, with Thomas I may conclude; he is Homo Deus, and
Deus homo.

In the matter of his actions, I admire the breadth, that he has done al; In
the manner his depth, that he has done all things well. This sacred King of
Glory, that he ought to be had in remembrance, and sought out of all that love
and desire his second coming, has done all things well; not only to approve
himself the unmatchable God, which is essential goodness; but likewise by
precept to command, by practice to lead, and by miraculous actions to draw men
on earth, on the way to Heaven; leaving them his Word for their instructions,
his works moral, for their imitation, his Word a light, his life a lantern,
Christi vita morum disciplina.

Peter must come, Zacheus must run, and all his Disciples with an inward
affection, and outward conversation, must follow the steps of his most sacred
uprightness: for as Mariners by Sea avoid the Rocks, directing their course
not by dark earth, but by the light of Heaven; so men who pass in the barque
of their bodies through the waves of this world, to the shore of rest, cannot
escape the sands of sin, but by Christ Jesus the only bright light, the
undoubted star, the stern of the Church militant here, and the haven of the
Church Triumphant in Heaven. Wherefore let all the blessed Saints who set sail
for the salvation of their souls, esteem his words as the words of truth,
imitate his works as perfect holiness, with reverent admiration, recounting
his wonders as effects of his Deity. To inform the ignorant, there is verbum
sapientia, to reform the ranging sinner, there is vitae innocentiae, to turn
our hearts to the living God, there is digitus divinae potentiae. In the glass
of his Word, see the face of your souls; it is speculum animae; follow his
life, it is viae vitae Augustae, although Augustae, haec iter est serpens ad
magni testa tonantis. In the re-view of his wonders, take an heart inflamed
with Thomas, and confess, my Lord, and my God; only beware of two dangerous
rocks on which many have made shipwreck of their souls; the one, partial
conceit of their own perfection, here fell the Pharisees; the other,
irreligious Atheism, which presses the souls of licentious Libertines into
Hell; but trace thou virtue in the golden mean, imitating him in well-doing,
who did all things well. To do all things well, is the Royalty of God, but to
do nothing well, is the badge of the Beast, and those who become like the
beasts, must perish. Let no man boast of perfection, least pride be his ruin;
nor sell his soul to sin in the sight of the Lord, least the gates of hell
prevayle against him, but keep the middle way; from thy natural imperfection,
strive to heavenly perfection; be watchful over thy ways, yet humble in thy
thoughts, Heaven has only good, Hell only bad, the earth a mixture of both.
If the Brownist could do all things well, he were to good for the earth; the
careless carnal Epicure does nothing well, therefore he is too bad for
heaven: The lukewarm Newter, like the Stoics (...), who is indifferent for
good, or evil, is fit neither for heaven, nor earth; only those Christians
are as Benjamin, filis dextrae, and true Israelites without guile, which are in
the valley of vision; ascending, and yet not ascended; growing up in grace as
plants of Gods right hand, bringing forth leaves of good words, and fruits of
good works, not seeking for humane applause without, or self partial conceit
to please themselves within.

Let all therefore from the greatest Noble in Israel, to the poorest worm in
Jacob that dwells in the dust, strive with heart and hand, in imitation of
his Savior Christ Jesus, to do all things well, that it may go well with them
in the day of the Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

