CEPHALVS and PROCRIS.

NARCISSUS. Aurora musae amica.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1595.

To the Right worshipful Master Thomas Argall Esquire.
Dear Sir the titles resyant to your state,
Meritorious due: because my pen is statelesse,
I not set down, nor will I strain it forth,
To tilt against the Sun, with seeming speeches,
Suffizeth all are ready and awaite,
With their hartes-soule, and Arts perswasiue mistress,
To tell the lovely honor, and the worth,
Of your deserving praise, Heroicke graces:
What were it then for me to praise the light?
When none, but one, commendes dark shady night.
Then as the day is made to shame the sinner,
To stain obscurity, inured supposes,
And mainetaine Arts inestimable treasure,
To blindfold Envy, barbarism scorning.
O with thy favor, light a young beginner,
From margining reproach, Satyricke gloses,
And gentle Sir, at your best pleasing leisure,
Shine on these cloudy lines, that want adorning,
That I may walk, where never path was seen,
In shadie groves, twisting the myrtle green.
Thomas Edwards.

To the Honorable Gentlemen and true favorites of Poetry.
IVdiciall and courteous, least I be thought in this my boldness, to Imitate
Irus, that cared not to whom he barred his nakedness, so he might be clothed.
Thus much under your favors I protest, that in writing of these two imperfect
Poemes, I have ouergonne my self, in respect of what I wish to be performed:
but for that diverse of my friends have slak't that fear in me, and (as it
were) heau'd me onwards to touch the lap of your accomplished virtues. I have
thus boldly, what in a year been studiously a doing now in one day (as our
custom is) set to the view of your Heroicke censures.

Base necessity, which scholars hate as ignorance, has been Englanddes
shame, and made many live in bastardy a long time: Now is the sap of sweet
science budding, and the true honor of Cynthia under our climate girt in a robe
of bright tralucent lawne: Decked gloriously with bays, and under her fair
reign* honored with everlasting renown, fame and Majesty.

O what is Honor without the complementes of Fame? or the living sparks in any
heroicke gentleman? not sowzed by the adamantine Goate-bleeding impression of
some Artist.

Well could Homer paint on Ulysses shield, for that Ulysses favor made Homer
paint.

Thrice happy Amyntas that bode his pen to steep in the muses golden type of
all bounty: whose golden pen bode all knights stoop, to thy O thrice
honored and honorable virtues.

The tears of the muses have been teared from Helicon. Most have endeavored to
appease Jupiter, some to applause Mercury, all to honor the deities. Jupiter
has been found pleasant, Mercury plausiue, all plyant; but few known to
distill Ambrosia from heaven to feast men that are mortal on earth.

How many when they toss their pens to eternize some of their favorites, that
although it be never so exquisite for the Poem, or excellent for memorial:
that either begin or end not with the description of black and ougly night, as
who would say, my thoughts are obscured and my soul darkened with the terror
of oblivion.

For me this restes, to wish that such were either dum and could not speak, or
deaf and could not hear, so not to tune their stately verse to enchant
others, or open their ears to the hurt of themselves.

But why temporize I thus, on the intemperature of this our clymate? wherein
live to themselves, Scholars and Emperors; esteeming bounty as an ornament
to dazell the eye, and telling to themselves wonders of themselves, wherein
they quench honor with fames wings, and burn majesty with the title of
ingratitude, and some there are (I know) that hold fortune at hazard, and trip
it of in buskin, till I fear me they will have nothe but skin.

Silly one, how thou tatlest of others want? is it not an ordinary guise, for
some to set their neighbors house on fire, to warm themselves? believe me
courteous gentlemen, I walk not in clouds, nor can I shro'dly morralize on
any, as to describe a banquet because I am hungry, or to show how coldly
scholars are recompenst, because I am poor, only I am urged as it were to
paraphrase on their doings with my pen, because I honor learning with my
heart. And thus benign gentlemen, as I began, so in duty I end, ever pressed to
do you all service.

Thomas Edwards.

CEPHALVS and Procris.
Fair and bright Cynthia, Jove's great ornament,
Richly adorning nights dark firmament,
Scoured amidst the starry Canapie, A pariphrisis of the Night.

Of heavens celestial government, well nie
Down to the ever ouer-swelling tide,
Where old Oceanus was wont to abide,
At last began to cry, and call amain,
Oh what is he, my love so long detaines!
Or is it Jove's pleasure Cynthia shall alone,
Obscure by night, still walk as one forlorn:
Therewith away she headlong posts along
Salt washing waves, rebellious clouds among,
So as it seemed minding the heavens to leave,
And them of light, thus strangely to bereave.
A description of the Morning.
With that Aurora starting from her bed,
As one that stands devising, shakes his head,
Not minding either this or that to do,
So are her thoughts, nor quick, nor ouerslow;
Phoebus half wroth to see the globe stand still,
The world want light, a woman have her will:
To post forth began another Phaeton,
And swore once more, he should the world upon,
Or as it is thought to try th'aduentrous boy.
Yet some suppose, he meant upon this day,
A Sympathy of sorrows to advance.
The boy thus proude-made, hotly began to praunce,
And now heavens coape, Jove's palace chrystaline
Down dingeth Atlas, and straight does decline
In such abundant measure, as it is said,
Since that same day the light of heauen's decaide,
A metamorphosis on earth mong'st men,
As touching constancy has been since then,
And this is true maidens, since that same day,
Are said for lovers never more to pray.
But to return, Phebe in million tears,
Moanes to her self, and for a time forbeares,
Aurora she her swift bright shining rays,
On Phoebus charyot toss, and often assayes,
With her sweet looks, her fathers wroth to appease,
But all she does, he tells her, does disease,
Like to the uncorrected headstrong child,
That never felt his parents strokes but mild,
Grown up to ryper years, disdaines a check:
(For nature ouergon comes to defect:)
So now Aurora having felt the pride
Of heaven and earth, turning her self a side,
Rapt with a sudden ecstasy of mind,
Unto her self (thus said) Goddess divine:
How hapt that Phoebus moved amid his chase,
Should such kind friendship scorn for to embrace,
I will no more (quoth she) godd it along
Such vnaccustom'd ways, ne yet among
Such as is Titan, better fittes it me,
With Vesper still to live, then such as he,
Though well I wot, honor is set on high,
Yet gentle Humility, is best say I.
No more she spoke, but like the swelling tide,
That having passage skymes, scorning a guide,
Until the vaste receipte of Neptunes bower,
Kills the hot fume, even so, away she skoures,
Lawless as twere sans thought or any dread,
Like to banditos mong'st the mountain heard.
And now upon her gentle lovely Aurora filia Titanis and Terrae.
mother,
Bright as the morning, comes the mornings honor,
All snowy white, save purpled here and there,
So beautiful as beauty might despair,
And stand amazed, noting her wanton eye,
Which at a trice could all the world epsy,
Upon her head, a coronet did stand,
Of several flowers gathered by Titan.
An imitation taken from the Thracians called Acroconiae that usually wear
long hair down to their wastes.
A vale she wore down trayling to her thighs,
The stuff whereof, I guess, of such emprize,
As Gods themselves are doubtful of the art,
Seeming as air with otomie dispersed,
Her hands, a meny Poets Dead as me^.
dead and gone,
Have heretofore (excelling) wrote upon.
It shall suffize Venus does grace to her,
In that she waits before, like to a Star,
Directing of her steps along'st the zone,
Never overtaken by the Horizon,
Ne yet in danger put of any Lake,
The frozen Pole she warnes her to forsake:
And all Pleiades the seven stars, supposed to be the daughters of Licurgus.
Licurgus daughters Dion noates,
Base in respect of duty, and out-coates,

