THE CHURCHES GLORY SHOWED FORTH IN A SERMON. Preached at the HAGHE. Before
their Majesty's THE KING and QUEEN. of Bohemia.

By J. E. Preacher to the Company of English Merchant Adventurers in Hamburgh.

Ecclesiae non jungitur qui ab Evangelio separatur. Cypr. de lapsis. TO HER
MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF BOHEMIA. etc.
MAny commend the Churches glory, but few imitate it, because they never truly
knew it; somewhat they have read, and heard of it but never truly saw it, for
with carnal eyes they behold her spiritual beauty and cannot discern it. An
ignorant person looking on the picture of Helena drawn by Zeuxes, said, that
she seemed not to him to be so fair. Nicomachus, the Pamter answered him, Take
my eyes and you will Sum meos oculos and De am judicabis.
think her a Goddess. The best way to judge of the Churches glory is to get
it, and within our hearts to feel it, Rev. 2. 17.
none knows the new Name that Christ writes on his, but he that receives it
Whosoever has once felt within him, the excellent and unspeake able benefit
of the pardon of his sins, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, power
of faith, quiet fruit of patience, comfort of obedience yea the sweetness of
the very tears of repentante, with other parts of the Churches ornaments, will
say with Peter when he saw but part of Christ's glory in his transfiguration
Mat. 17. 4.
It is good being here and with the Rev. 12. 1.
Woman in the Revelation, clothed with the Sun, viz Christ's righteousness,
tread the Moon, viz all earthly changeable gloryes under feet.

And though your Majesty knows more of the Churches glory by your inward
feeling of it, then I can discover, yet in all dutiful acknowledgment of your
Majesty's favors and gracious countenance of my Ministry, with an hearty
desire to do your Majesty any good service, were it but to bring Pinnes to
the Temple, in the least to further your spiritual dressing and glory, I am
bold to present to your Majesty's view this small treatise of the Churches
glory. And what you were pleased once to hear (being called by your command
to preach) vouchafe I humbly desire now to read. Being confident of your
Majesty's gracious acceptance hereof for the matter sake, (though not set forth
with show of words, which the truth needs not, the Churches glory being
sufficient of it self to commend it, plain work being best and most in use,
and curious wrought plate not regarded,) I commend your Majesty to God and to
the word of his Act. 20. 32.
grace which is able to build you up and to give you an inheritance among all
them that are sanctified, 1. Pet. 1. 4.
an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away reserved in
heaven for you.

Your Majesty's most obliged Chaplain. JER: EL-BOROUGH.

THE CHURCHES GLORY.
Psalm. 45. v. 13. The kings daughter is all glorious within.
IT is uncertain, who made this Psalm, but certain that he was a Prophet
and holy man: for S. Peter 2. Pet. 1. 20
tells us that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretaetion,
but holy men of God spoke as they were inspired by the holy Ghost.

It is also certain, that it was made concerning King Solomon and his
Queen, to set forth the glory of his kingdom.

But most certain, that the author looked higher then Solomon, and his
Queen, and chiefly intended by them, and their outvvard great vvorldly glory,
to express the inward and spiritual far greater glory of Christ and his
Church; for neither Solomon or his Queen in all their glory were clothed like
one of these. And that this was the Prophets scope appears by some sayings in
this Psalm which cannot be attributed to Solomon but to Christ: as v. 6.
Thy throne O God is for ever and ever for though Kings in the word of God
are called Psa. 82. 6. 2. These 2, 4.
Gods (in respect of their office, not their nature for Psa. 82. 7.
they shall dye like men) yet this word here, God, is spoken of the son of
God, as appears plainly, Hebr. 1. 8. Unto the son he says, Thy throne O God
is for ever and ever as also Solomon's throne was not for ever but Christ's.

Moreover it is v. 16.
said In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children whom thou may make princes
in all the earth: but this is not true of Solomon, for Rehoboam his heir was
so far from enlarging his dominion on earth, that he lost the greatest part
of his fathers kingdom, neither read we that any of the rest of his
children ever attained to that Kingly glory their father had: but this is true
of Christ and his Church for in stead of the fathers, Abraham Isaac and Jacob
etc. they had children Peter, John, Paul, and other Apostles, who spiritually
overcame al nations by the preaching of the Gospel; so whereas Christ set up
his throne only in Judaea in his life time as King of the Jews these
children enlarged his dominions to the uttermost parts of the earth. And since
the Mat. 12. 42.
Queen of the South came from the uttermost parts of the earth to behold the
glory of King Solomon, let us also come with our best attentions to behold
the glory of the King of Solomon, and his Queen, for behold greater then
Solomon or his Queen are here.

The Parts of this Psalm are two.

The 1. concerning Solomon. this is the literal sense.
The 2. concerning his Zueene.
The 1. concerning Christ. this is the mystical sense.
The 2. concerning his Church.
v. 2.
beauty. fairer then the children of men. for his ibid.
eloquence, for his v. 3.
power.

for his virtues of truth, meekness, v. 4.
righteousness.

For his v. 8.
riches in his costly garments. his ivory palaces.

All which were but types of the far exceeding spiritual beauty,
eloquence, power, graces, and riches. of Christ. For Cant. 5. 10
he is white and ruddie the chiefest among ten thousand Ioh. 7. 46.
never man spoke like him; Mat. 28. 18
all Power in heaven and earth is given him: Ioh. 14 6.
he is the way and the truth: we must Learn of him for he is Matt. 11. 29
meek and lowly: his name is the Lord our Ier. 23. 6.
righteousness; he is perfumed with Cant. 3. 6.
myrrh and frankincense and all powders of the merchants: heaven is Is. 66. 1.
his throne and the earth his footstool.

Happy woman may some think that has such a husband as Solomon more happy
soul that has Christ.

1. instructed 2 come^ded

Instructed, v. 10.
to forget her own people and King Pharaoh her fathers house and the reasons
hereof are three. 1. for then the v. 11.
King her husband will desire her beauty and love her.

2. He is her Lord and she must worship him, in respecting him more then her
father, and be ruled by him.

3. though she leaves the glory of King Pharaohs court, yet she enjoyes the
glory of King Solomon's, and shall live in as great honor and magnificent
pomp as ever she formerly did, for the daughter v. 12.
of Tire and the rich among the people shall entreat her favor. So the Church
of the Gentiles (of which this Gentile Queen might be a Type) must forsake
the idolatry, and superstitious vanities in which she was brought up, and
embrace the true faith of the Gospel, and the right manner of worshipping God,
as her Lord and husband Jesus Christ would have her do, who will then
delight in her, and her condition shall be more honorable then ever before, for
Isa. 49. 23.
Kings shall be her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers, they shall
bow down to her with their faces, toward the earth.

the Kings daughter. 2. by her qualification, she is glorious. 3. by the
amplification of her glory First in respect of the universality, all glorious.

Secondly in respect of the sincerity, within.

The Kings daughter is all glorious within.

By the King is literally meant Pharaoh King of Egypt, by his daughter,
Solomon's Queen, for he 1. Kings 3. 1.
married Pharaohs daughter.

But mystically by the King, is meant God, by his daughter, the Church, the
spouse of Christ: which sense being chiefly intended (as J have formerly
shevved) by the author of this Psalm, J will also follovv, in the handling
of these words.

Tbe King.
That God is a King I think none will deny it, except Athiests that deny
God though too many in their rebellious deeds seem not to acknovvledge it.
King David says he is a Psa. 95. 3.
great God and a great King above all Gods. not as other Kings of particular
countries, but a great King over Psalm. 47. 2.
all the earth. King Nebuchadnezzar confesses him of a truth to be a Dan. 2. 47.
Lord of Kings yea the King of heaven. other Kings are borne, or 4. 37.
made Kings, but he is an 1. Tim. 1. 10.
aeternal King, others are subordinate, for by him Prove. 8. 15.
Kings reign but he is a supreme and absolute King, others mortal, but he an
1. Tim. 1.
immortal and Ier. 10. 10.
everlasting King. He has made all things in heaven, and earth, he governes
all, and when he please he can destroy all, therefore ye is King of all.

Dan. 4. 37
that walk in pride he is able to abase even him who was a 2. 37.
King of Kings, Nebuchadnezzar, who was driven from men among the beasts of
the field to 4. 32.
eat grass as oxen till he knew that the most high rules in the kingdoms of
men; therefore Ier. 10. 7.
who would not fear thee O King of nations. Be wise then O the Kings be
instructed ye that are judges of the earth (is the counsel of a Ps. 2. 10. 11.
King) and this is that they should learn to serve the Lord in fear, for the
Pro. 9. 10.
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

It is good counsel that S Bernard gave the Lewis 7.
French King, that he should remember that God his Creator gave him that great
and honorable charge, not to govern after his own pleasure, but for Gods
honor, to whom he was to give an account whensoever God should demand it.
L' history de France, par Seigneur du Haillan. p. 692.
S. Paul Col, 4. 1.
counsels masters to give their servants what is just, and oequal, because
they also have a master in heaven, and for the same reason should Kings (whose
name in Latin Reges a recte agendo vocati ideoq recte faciendo regis nomen
tuetur, peccando amittit lib. de sum. bon:
Isidore thincks to be from well doing) govern their subjects with justice and
equity for they also have a King in heaven.

the Pro. 16. 14.
wrath of a King is as messengers of death how much more is ye wrath of the
King of Kings; We fear the^ that can kill the body, much more is he to be
Mat. 10. 28.
feared that can destroy body and soul in hell we fear Kings on earth
because of their power, much more should we fear him from whom Kings have
Romans 13. 1.
all their power, for the powers are of God S. 1. Pet. 2. 17
Peter bids us fear God and honor the King Some honor the King for their
own honors and preferments, but the true ground of honor to Kings on earth
is the fear of the King of heaven, who has so commanded. And of such as
dishonor Kings, much more of such as seek to depose and murder the^ we may
truly say there is no fear of God before their eyes, neither are they Peter's
successors: their not honoring the King proceeds from their not fearing God,
and so being faithless to one King, they will never be faithful to the other.
It is then wisdom in Kings not to command their subjects against God, yea to
command them to serve, and fear God and keep his Laws, forthen they will
honor the King and keep his Laws: but if Kings in their commands obey not
God as good subjects, they teach their subjects to disobey them, for it is
better to obey God then man, and the command is to Pro. 24. 21 Aquo secun dus,
post quem primus Tert. apol. c. 30.
fear God and the King, first God and then the King; God is called the King
Ier. 48. 15.
the Lord of hoasts because all the creatures are his subjects and soldiers,
he says to one go and he goes, to another do this and he does it, to the
sun stand still, or go back, to the sea be dry land, to the earth open, and
they do so, Psa. 148. 8.
the fire, hayle, snow and vapors fulfill his word and since all the
creatures as good subjects yield obedience to their King, it is a shame that
men should fail in their duty especially such who in their baptism have taken
the vow of allegiance: and since not only other creatures but even Kings on
earth obey this King of heaven and earth, their example should moove other men
to this duty to fear God their King; who prefers his Courtiers to be Kings in
heaven, but all such as will not have him to reign over them though Rev. 6. 15.
Kings of the earth and great men, rich men, chief captains and mighty men
shall hide themselves in dens and in the rocks of the mountains, and say to
the rocks and the mountains Fall on us and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne. King Alexander had two friends, (...)
one loved him as Alexander, the other loved him as king, Let us do both, love
him who is our God and so fear him for Hos. 3. 5.
his goodness, love him who is our king and so fear him for his pover.

Daughter.
SEcondly by the Kings daughter Filiae Regis, animae fidelis. Hier. in Loc.
is meant the Church, or the faithful. All creatures are this kings subjects
but the faithful have a nearer relation to him, in being his daughters and
sons, for 2. Cor. 6. 18
I will be a father unto you and ye shall be my sons and daughters says the
Lord almighty: so that it may be alike truly said that faithful men are his
daughters and faithful women his sons, for there is no respect of persons
with God, there is neither Jew or Greek King or subject, rich or poor, Gal.
3. 28.
male or female, but are all one in Christ Jesus. We know not Christ any
more after the flesh says 1. Cor. 5. 16.
S. Paul, neither does Christ know us after the flesh, for Mat. 12. 50.
whosoever shall do the will of his father which is in heaven, the same is his
brother his sister and mother: therefore the Church of Rome to little purpose
applies the latter part of this Psalm concerning the Kings daughter and her
honorable women to their Mollerus in loc.
Nuns at their consecration, since it belongs to men as well as women to the
married as the unmarried even to the whole Church of what nation, sex or
condition soever they be: but the prophet in allusion to Solomon's Queen here
terms them daughters; who in other places are called the Matt. 5. 9. Romans 5.
2. 8. 14.
sons of God.

Jesus Christ as God is the only Heb. 1. 2.
son of God by natural generation, as man, the only son of God by Luke 1.
35.
personal union, the Job. 38 7
Angels, Luke 3. 38. Genesis 1. 26.
Adam and Eve and in them all men and women are the sons of God by creation
after Gods image in righteousness and holiness, but men being in honor
through their fall in Adam lost this image and honorable condition of being
the sons of God, and are now by nature the Ephesians. 2. 3.
children of wrath, and sons of iniquitye: but God out of his love to man
sent his own son Heb. 1. 3.
(who is the express image of his person) to be man, to restore man to the
image of God in being the sons of God, for Ioh. 1. 12.
to as many as received him to them he gave this honor to be the sons of
God, even to them that believe in his name and so the faithful only are
restored to this honorable estate of being sons and daughters to the King of
heaven, for Gal. 3. 26.
we are all the sons of God by faith in Jesus Christ.

The Church then is the Kings daughter in law by the grace of adoption in a
spiritual union by faith being married to the Kings son.

1. Sa. 18. 23.
Seems it a light thing to be a Kings son in law: but I may say, seems
it a light thing to be the King of Kings daughter in law: It was a great
honor wherewith God magnified the blessed Virgin to be the foelicius eum cord
quam carne gestavit. Aug. de S. Virg. c. 3.
mother of a King, of God, but a greater happiness to her that she was a
daughter of the King her God: Is it a great honor to be borne of earthly
Kings, and not a greater to be borne of a heavenly King? If all worldly honors
of Kingly Parentage, Kingly marriage, Kingly magnificene, alliance, beauty,
wit, eloquence, courage, or what soever else may be of higher esteem added
heereto, be laid all together in balance with this only honor to be the Kings
daughter, they will be found too light even lighter then vanitye, in respect of
this spiritual dignity; this is that crowns all the rest, and let us so
esteem of it as the best flower in our garland.

Cease then, cease blind, old, doting world to judge them the ofscowring of the
world who are the happiest people therein, and though thou natural man
perceive not the things of God, yet the time shall come when in anguishe of
heart thou shall say Wisd 5.
this is he whom we had sometime in derision, we fools, accounted his life
madness and his end to be without honor, how is he now numbered among the
children of God and his lot among the saints.

help, may want love and will not help, may want life for they are mortal,
and though they have both power and will yet help not, put not then your trust
in princes says the Ps. 146. 3.
Psalmist nor in the son of man in whom is no help, his breath goes forth
he returns to his earth and in that day his thoughts perish; but the Kings
daughters help is in the name of the Lord who has made heaven and earth; he
is the King of Kings and can help, a loving father and will help, an eternal
King and the living God, and can at all times when he sees fitting, help; when
Psalm. 27. 10
father and mother forsake then the Lord takes us up, and though Abraham be
ignorant of us and Israel acknow ledge us not yet thou art our Isa. 63. 16.
father our redeemer, thy name is from everlasting. The King may indeed suffer
his daughter sometimes to be troubled, like the woman in the Rev. 12. 14
Revelation forced by the Dragon to fly into the wilderness, but even there,
where little hope of feod is she shall be nourished, and find a place from the
face of the serpent; but if she should find none there, yet in Ioh. 14. 2.
her fathers house are many mansions, and the Kings son her husband is gone
before to provide a place for her. The Churh may want sometimes what she
desires but never what God knows good, and though the King deny his daughter
one thing, he may give her a better; And though she be a Queen married to the
Kings son, it is fitting she acknowledge her father, and the King may suffer
her to want because he would have her come to him, for he is the King and will be
sought to and great reason he should, Because she is the Kings daughter she
Looks the King should look after her and so sets still and does not stir up
her self to take hold of the King, nor call upon him with that humility,
faith, fervency and constancy she ought to do; which if she would do, and so
dispatch her prayers as extraordinary Ambassadors to the King of heaven, she
should receive a gracious answer Isa. 54. 11.
oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest and not comforted, the Lord 6.
has called thee a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, for a moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee, in a little wrath I
hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee: Let the Church then with Queen Hester go in to the King, he will hold
out the scepter of his grace, and the devises of wicked Hamans shall be brought
on their own heads Ps. 122. 6.
Pray then for the peace of Jerusalem (for she is the Kings daughter) they
shall prosper that love thee, Peace be within thy walls and prosperity within
thy palaces; Isa. 63. 19.
Look down from heaven we beseech thee O King of heaven behold from the
habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory, and for the glory of thy name
suffer not men on earth to do thee this dishonor to abuse thy daughter; where
is thy Zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies
are they restrained O thou who have the hearts of Kings in thy hands, put into
the hearts of the Kings of the earth to hate the whore that is drunck with the
blood of thy saints.

Arise o Lord God of our salvation, smite thine enemies in the hinder parts and
put them to perpetual reproach. Oh 64 9.
remember not our iniquities for ever neither he wroth very sore, behold, see
we beseech thee we are thy people. and thus much for the Queens comfort

show forth in her conversation the 1. Pet. 2. 9.
virtues of him that has called her out of darkness into his marveilous light
and walk as a child of light, be holy as the King is holy, be merciful as her
heavenly father is merciful, abhor sin as a base thing and sinful wicked
persons as unworthy the company and countenance of the Kings daughter. Psa.
101. 7.


It is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness, Prove. 16. 12
says Solomon, so is it also to Kings sons and daughters, who as they are
above others in state, so they should be higher in their virtuous behavior as
King Saul 1. Sam. 10. 23.
higher by the head and shoulders then the rest of the people.

v. 9.
When Samuel had annoyuted Saul King it is said that God gave him another
heart, a heart befitting a King, and to great persons God gives heroic spirits
to do great things, but to his own children he gives his own spirit, so
there is another spirit in them then in the world, for as Romans 8. 14.
many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God, now the fruit of
Gal. 5. 22.
the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering gentleness, faith, meekness,
temperance: Bet ye there fore followers of God as dear children, and walk in
Love as God has loved us, but Ephc. 5. 1.
all uncleanesse or covetousuesse, let it not be once named among you as
becomes Saints, or the Kings daughters. Thus far of the relation, the Kings
daughter.

Glorious.
SEcondly, is to be considered her qualification, she is glorious.

Glorious in being gracious.

First because grace is true glory, and therefore the saints are called the
Psa. 16. 3.
excellent ones upon earth and by the prophet Isa. 4. 5.
Isaiah the glory

2. Ly because her graces are as so many tokens of Gods grace and love to her
in which she glories, for let 1 Cor. 1. 31
him that gloryes glory in the Lord; a wife glories in showing others her
rings, jewels, and costly apparel, not only for the value of the things, but
also for that her husband gave them, which she thereforealso esteems of and
will keep as evidences of her husbands love.

3. Ly, because her graces are the way to eternal glory, for Heb. 12.
without holiness no man shall see the Lord.

The Church is glorious in that she is the Kings daughter by her spiritual
adoption, but glorious also in her justification and her sanctification. The
Ioh. 8. non generis dignitate, sed morum nobilitate jnnotescere debemus. did.
40 c. 3. ex Greg. qui genus suum jactat, aliena laudat. sen. H. F. In (...) p.
80. impres. Ha. noviae.
Jews gloryed that they were Abraham's children yet did not the works of
Abraham: and many glory in their noble birth, who are inglorious in a wicked
life, their birth cannot afford them so much glory, as their life begets
disgrace; the glory of their birth is another praise, but their graceless
life is their own shame. It is true that our late King of blessed memory
relates, that for the most part a virtuous (civil and moral) life follows a
noble birth, and we see many times that none are so base and rude in their
carriage as such of mean and rude parentage: But it is true that S. Paul 1.
Cor. 1. 26
says that not many wisemen after the flesh nor many mighty, nor many noble
are called, for God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and the weak things to confound the mighty; and base things of this
world, that no flesh should glory in his presence: but such as are glorious in
the flesh by a noble birth, being called by God are far more glorious in their
new birth and gracious spiritual life; there may be then a natural noble
birth, but an ignoble life, but whosoever is truly ennobled with the glory of a
spiritual birth, is also glorious in a gracious life.

has the Philosophers stone, yet goes in rags, we will not easily believe
him, neither him that says he is the child of God and lives in sin, for he
that 1. Ioh. 3. 9. 10.
is borne of God sins not, (not willingly going on in a sinful course
without repentance) and in this the children of God are manifest and the
children of the devil, whosoever does not righteousness is not of God.

Fax mentis honestae gloria S. Ital. Phil. 3.
be exhorted to seek for this the truest glory. Some glory in their sins,
whose glory is in their shame some glory in their riches and worldly honors,
but this world passes away and the glory of it, some glory in their fine
clothes, but all this is vain glory, and too often keeps man from attayning
true glory; how can ye believe says Christ Ioh. 5. 44.
that receive honor one of another and seek not the honor that comes from
God only, whose hearts and time is taken up wholly in an ambitious affecting
honor from men, can spare no time to seek after the true honor from God,
they that too much love the praise of men, too little care for the praise of
God; Bad people Nullaru^ fere pretiosior cultus est, quam quaru^ pudor vilis
est. Cyp. de hab. virg.
may wear good clothes, and base minded men step up to worldly honor and
glory, but the Kings daughter only is truly glorious in being gracious. Let
that argument moove us which commonly preveyles every where, and that is the
fashion Let your 1. Pet. 3. 4.
adorning then be in the hidden man of the heart in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of an humble, meek, and quiet spirit which is
in the sight of God great of price, put on by the hand of faith the fine Rev.
19. 8.
linen which is the righteousness of the saints, cover your heads with the
fear of God hang at your ears, wind about your wrests, I mean your hearts
the precious jewel of Gods word more Psa. 19. 10.
worth then thousands of gold silver and choicest pearls, girt about your
loins the Ephesians. 6. 14.
girdle of truth, shoo your v. 15.
feet with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, wash hands and face I mean
your souls in the blood of Christ, for be they never so high colored, were
your sins as Isai. 1. 18.
red as scarlet they shall be as white as snow, For this is the Kings daughters
clothing of wrought gold, this her raiment of needle work, this is the
Queens fashion, she will never change it, but live and dye in it, and I pray
God give us all grace to follow it, and then shall the King have pleasure in
our beauty, And when the glory of al earthly Kings and kingdoms shall cease
and be brought to nothing, then shall the Kings daughter appear in her glory,
for we are 1. Ioh. 1. 18.
now the sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we
know that when the King our husband Jesus Christ our savior shall appear with
all the glory of heaven and earth that we shall be like him and Col. 3. 4. Rev.
21. 2.
appear with him in glory, thus prepared as a bride adorned for her husband,
clothed with the glory of God in a kingdom of glory, crowned with an
incorruptible crown of glory, to which let us Romans 8. 18.
account all the momentary light afflictions of this world not worthy to be
compared, but go on from grace to grace from glory to glory 5. 2.
rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God.

Allglorious.
THe third thing to be considered, is the amplification of this glory: and
First by the universalitie of it, all glorious.

First by the grace of justification for Christ's blood cleanses her from 1.
Ioh. 1. 7.
all her sins, and so God sees no iniquitye, because he does not Psa. 32.
impute it to her, her iniquities are forgiven, her sins covered, and the
absolute perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ is Romans 4.
to her, and in this respect Christ says of her thou art Cant. 4. 7.
all fair my Love and there is no spot in thee.

Secondly, by the graces of sanctification, wherewith her whole person in all
the faculties of her soul, and members of her body, is adorned, her
understanding enlightened with saving knowledge, so that with open 2. Cor. 3. 18
face she beholds the glory of God and is changed into the same image from
glory to glory, her will being conformed to Gods will, her affections rightly
ordered, her love, fear, joy, and hope set on other objects, contained within
the limits of due moderation, her outward senses and members of her body Romans
6. 13
instruments of righteousness unto God, and in this respect also all glorious:
For as by sin the whole person is corrupted, so by grace the whole person,
even in 1. Th. 5. 23.
soul, spirit, and body, is sanctified; the old man is cast of with his works
and beggarly rags, and the new man is put on, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness; he has respect to Ps. 119. 6. 3.
all Gods commandments and does no iniquitye and though in this life the Kings
daughter be not so glorious, as to be perfectly sanctified in full measure
through the relics of sin in her, though forgiven, yet is she in some
measure sanctified in perfectio graduum and partium.
all the faculties of soul and members of her body, and so perfectly
sanctified, and in this sense I dare affirm universalitie of grace; for where
the flesh is, there is the spirit also, and this spirit of sanctification
striveth against corruption; thus though she be black yet is she Cant. 1. 5.
comely, but here after when the body of sin shall be destroyed, and all
tears wiped from her eyes she shall be all Ephesians. 5. 27.
glorious without any spot or wrinckle, holy without blemish.

may know the tree by the fruit to be of no good kind: others, glory of their
good deeds, but their thoughts are free, their hearts full of uncleanesse,
malice, and covet ousnesse. It is ordinary with many, in much vehemence to
inveigh against, and to handle roughly the sin, they are not subject to, but
their beloved sin must not be touched, they are as tender of it as a King of
his prerogative, whosoever touches it hurts it; the chief Priests and Pharisees
will not Ioh. 18. 28.
enter the common hall lest they be defiled, behold their conscience; but
scruple not to defile their Souls in shedding innocent blood, behold their
baseness. they tithe also Matt. 23. 23
eummin and mint, but neglect judgment, mercy and faith, the greater things of
the Law: but the Kings daughter is more generous she is all glorious, in hating
all sin, and willing to all good how beautiful are thy feet O princes
daughter, if therefore thou art not all glorious thou art not truly glorious,
if there be not grace in every part, no true grace in any part, no true friend
of Christ's that does not (in his willing and ready endeavors) what soever he
commands, neither does he truly hate Ioh. 15. 14.
any one sin that hates not every sin, nor his obedience sound in any good
he does, that is not willing to every good, for this universality of obedience
is true graces evidence. It is an honorable qu'il aimeroit mieux mourir que
fair une meschant act. S. du Haillan p. 987.
report that History gives of the French King that he often said, he had rather
dye, then do any wicked thing.

cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of flesh and 2. Cor. 7. 1.
spirit, and perfect our holiness in the fear of God. A little leaven,
leavens the whole lump, a spark of fire may burn a whole Town, one fly
corrupt a whole box of precious ointment, one spot blemish a fair picture,
and one sin given way too blemish the Souls glory. Men are careful to have
their apparel suitable, (for it is ridiculous to see one clothed in velvet
breeches and a canvas doublet) let it be our care to suit our Souls with the
variety of heavenly graces, not to plough with an Ox and an Ass, to serve God
and Baal, to hold with the hare and run with the hounds for if it be glorious
to be good in some things, it is more glorious to be good in all things: he
that is Rev. 22. 11.
filthy let him be filthy still the dog will to his vomit and the swine to the
mire; but he that is righteous let him be righteous still, and he that is holy
let him be holy still, behold the King, the bridegroom comes quickly, and his
reward is with him to give every man according to his works: hold fast what
thou have that none take thy Rev. 3. 11.
crown from thee, and go on with undaunted courage and settled resolution in
the all glorious paths of grace, and the Lord be with thee, his grace will be
sufficient for thee till thou come to thy race end and be with the Lord: and he
that has blessed the with Ephesians. 1. 3.
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ here, will bless thee
with all eternal blessings in heavenly places with Christ hereafter; thus
shall be done to the man whom the King will honor.

Within.
SEcondly, this glory is amplified by the sincerity of it. Within Not outward
(say some) as the glory of earthly Kings and Queens in riches, worldly
honors, and other outward pomp, temporal magnificence, for this is the whores
dressing in purple and scarlet Rev. 17. 4.
decked with gold and precious stones, but the Churches glory is inward in the
purity of doctrine, right administration of the Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical
discipline, and the spiritual ornament of heavenly graces, which glory is
befitting the Church as daughter and spouse to such Kings as have no carnal
eyes to look on and love her for any outward respects though never so
glorious. True; the Churches best glory is inward, and that is her only beauty
for which the King Loves her and delights in her; she is more glorious in her
golden Priests then golden cups, in being rich in faith and good works then
rich in the world; but the outward glory is not to be neglected when it pleases
God to give it, only we are to be cautionate that the outward do not allure
our eyes and take up our hearts more then the in ward. She that has the
outward only without the inward is the whore. She that has the inward, without
the outward is the Kings daughter and a true Church, but where is both inward
and outward it is an addition to that Churches glory. The poverty and from
thence the contempt and from thence the confusion and miserable disorder of
some Churches, where like Jeroboams priests the meanest of the people even
hospital children (for the most part,) are made Pastors, (which is not a
nations glory but shame in so contemptible (though it should not be a
ministry) may cause us to bless God for his mercyes to our English Church
both in her inward and outward glory. The voice might have bin as truly
uttered, that poison was poured into the Church, when the livings were taken
away, as when great revenues given, she had once too much, now in many places
too little: I have often Wondered at the most gross and almost heathenish,
common, ignorance, and from thence profaneness of some poople; which I
conceived to proceed through want of able Preachers, which proceeds through
want of sufficient maintenance, which makes so many weavers and Taylours to
become That cannot speak Latin
Dutch Clearkes (as they say) in their Churches; and I am sure this is a
deformity, not a glory, in reformed Churches.

But I think by the Churches glory, Within, to be meant the sincerity of her
glory: She is glorious because gracious (as I have already showed) which is her
spiritual glory, but this glory is not in outward shows and ostentation only
before men, which, were hypocrisy, but in private also, which argues the
uprightness and sincenity of her heart before God; Solomon's Queen not only
put on her glorious clothing of wrought gold, and her costly raiment when she
came publicly before the King, or abroad in the view of the people, but
within also, in private, in her closet, or bedchamber when she was alone she
wore such glorious clothing as her ordinary, daily apparel: so the Kings
daughter, viz. the Church, is all glorious, viz. gracious, not only in the
public assemblies before men, but also when she is alone in private, she
adornes her Soul with heavenly meditations, ferve^t prayer, faith in gods
promises etc. yea the more private, the more glad and careful is she in ye
exercise of spiritual duties, as having more fit opportunity and liberty to
deck up her soul. What she seems to be in her life, she is the same in her
heart, and the same at home in private, that Is. 63. 8.
she is abroad in public, she will not lie, glorious, yea all glorious
without, glorious and all glorious within, goes forth and comes home (Cato like
eodem vultu) with the same countenance, the same in all places, like her self
glorious.

show of outward devotion, having only the outside of religion, but no true
inward affection to goodness, nor private practice of piety, Matt. 7. 5.
face-takers as the Syriack terms them, taking only the face of goodness, and
that abroad, but put it off in private. The Pharisee is more careful to wash
his hands before meat, then his heart, the outside then, the inside of the cup:
he will give Matt. 6.
alms, fast, and pray, one would think him right bred and borne of God, but in
giving alms he sounds a trumpet, in his fasts he disfigures his face, and he
prays, but in the Temple and corners of the streets to be seen of men; there
is neither piety in his prayers, humility in his fasts, or charity in his
alms, but all done for his own vain glory, nothing to Gods glory, all done
out of love to humane praises, not of any love to those heavenly graces, and
this you may perceive if you follow him home, in private he is another man,
does none of these, nor thincks of these but abroad: like some women too
careful and curious to trim up them selves when they go forth, but none
more careless and sluttish when they are at home, or like some men, that
regard not what course and foul linen they wear next their shinne, so they
have over it a half shirt of fine linen to be seen, or to use our Saviors
comparison like Mat. 23. 27
painted sepulchers, fair without, rotten within.

of goodness, it is the Queens glory, lest Christ be ashamed of us, our good
works must shine before men, that they may glorify our father in heaven, but
let us take heed we do not good only to be seen of men: Pray, fast, give
alms with other duties of piety to God and charity to man in public with
the whole Church, but forget not to do these at home, for remember, the Kings
daughter is all glorious within, not excluding her glory without, including her
glory within, for she is both: and as I showed before, universaly glorious in
all parts, so sincerely glorious in all places, at all times, but indeed more
glorious within then without.

When she is abroad, she sometimes forbeares to show forth her glory, to avoid
suspicion of vain glory and hypocrisy, but when she comes home, and enters
into her chamber, where none but God sees her, she unmaskes her face, lays
open her beauty and casts abroad all the brightness of her glory, in pouring
out her soul with more freedom and zeal in her prayers and other glorious
good duties, to make ame^ds for that restraynt in public. Psa. 39. 1. 2.


The King her father, the King her husband sees her in secret, beholds her
carriage, hears her prayers and putts her tears in a bottle, will reward her
openly and bring forth her righteousness as the Ps. 37. 6.
light; And when all vain glorious hypocrites relying on their outward
devotions, shall be cast out into outward darkness where is weeping and gnashing
of teeth, then shall the Kings daughter who is all glorious within, be received
within the kingdom of glory and Mat. 13. 43
shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of her father.

Consider what has bin said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.


