THE ROYAL LAW: OR, THE RVLE OF EQVITIE PRESCRIBED US BY OUR SAVIOVR CHRIST.
MATH. 7. 12.

TEACHING ALL MEN MOST PLAINLY AND BRIEFLY, HOW to behave themselves justly,
conscionably, and uprightly, in all their dealings, toward all men.

TO THE GLORY OF GOD, AND good of Gods Church, explaned: BY RICAARD EBVRNE
Minister of the Gospel at Hengstridge in Somersetshire.

IAM. 2. verse. 8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture,
which says: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: ye do well.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Adams. 1616.

AA

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, MASTER JOHN DACKOMBE ESQVIRE, ONE OF THE MASTERS
of Requests, to the Kings Majesty, etc. Health and happiness temporal and
eternal.
AS it is most certain (Right Worshipful) that Christian knowledge abounds
in our land, by reason of the manifold plenty and long continuance of the
sacred truth of Christian verity by Gods unspeakable mercy, and admirable
blessing, settled and taught amongst us: so can it not be denied, that Practice,
that is, conversation according with our knowledge, and answerable to our
profession, very much fails and wants among us. For (besides those, the
number or rather swarm whereof is not small, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8 Ephesians. 4.18.
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who
having their cogitations darkened, and being mere strangers from the life of
God, (as the Apostle speaks) thorough the wilful ignorance that is in them,
have given themselves over Heathen-like, or hellish-like rather, to work all
manner of uncleanness and wickedness, even with greediness) many can say,
Lord, Lord, Math. 7.21.
which do not the will of their heavenly father: and not a few are contented
to seem rather then to be sincere Christians, as taking more delight to
profess in words with their mouths, then express with deeds in their lives
the Gospel of Christ. So that it seems to me (howsoever, notwithstanding the
false imputation and vile slander of our Romish adversaries, the Preachers of
the word amongst us, have not been unmindful thereof, nor negligent or
sparing therein hitherto) very necessary and fit, that they should henceforth
bend themselves more then usually that way, that is, somewhat forbearing
doctrine of Faith and matter of knowledge, to insist especially and urge
chiefly and ordinarily such doctrines, such exhortations and admonitions as
concern sincerity of life and integrity of conversation: that so (if it be
possible) they may provoke our people more carefully to walk as well as to
talk the Gospel, and to have an holy and virtuous life as well as a sound and
true belief; whereby the mouths of our adversaries may be stopped, and men
may be occasioned, seeing our people to shine by our good life and honest
dealings as lights in the world, Math. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2.12.
to glorify God on our behalf.

To this purpose, I among others, having often times bent my speech, and by
occasion of late handled that parcel of our Saviors Sermon, Math. 7.12.
the Sermon on the mount, viz. Quaecunque igitur, etc. Whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, even so do ye to them: Observing it (being An
absolute Rule of all true Justice and equity betwixt man and man, which
therefore we may (me thinks) very aptly term, as S. James does, it, or its
coequall, Iam. 2.8.
The Royal Law) to be very profitable and available to the use and intent
before mentioned, I have been willing of a private Sermon to make it a public
Treatise, and to convey it, the form somewhat altered, and the matter
enlarged, from the Pulpit to the Press.

This little labor of mine, I am desirous ( Right Worshipful) under the
Patronage of your worthy Name, might be shielded and set forth. First in
regard of my duty unto your Worship; namely, that thereby I may, lest any note
of unthankfulness, or spot of forgetfulness be aspersed upon me, somewhat
testify my grateful mind and mindful remembrance of your special favor
and bountiful kindness unto me from time to time showed and continued: and
then in regard of the Argument it self, which is of Equity and conscionable
dealing: which by reason of your Honorable place, and worthy employment under
the Kings most excellent Majesty in his Court of Requests, seems unto me
very fit to be Dedicated unto your Worship above some others, as to one that
by his place, and (I doubt not) his often practice, does see the use and
necessity, and often is moved to urge and require the observation and
performance thereof: which alone, well regarded and fulfilled among men, would
undoubtedly cause much more peace and agreement to be in the land, and fewer
Petitions by many to pass your hand.

I have herein, among other particulars, somewhat urged (an Argument wherein
Viz, in my Maintenance of the Minist. and my twofold Tribute.
otherwhere, and in other wise, as unto your Worship it is not unknown, I have
more plentifully labored) more equal and conscionable dealing toward the
Ministers of the Church. That, in some men's opinions, may happily seem to
require some Clergy rather then any Layman to patronize the work. But
partly, since that is but the least and the last part thereof, and partly for
that I have found your Worship as a sincere lover of the Gospel, so a special
favorer of the Clergy, and in particular in some of the points urged, so
conscionable and respective, as I have showed others should be, but I have
known none but your self to be; I suppose that fitly and justly both it, and
I for it, may crave your special Protection, and favorable acceptance
thereof.

Which trusting, according to your accustomed kindness, that courteously many
times reaches out the hand to many a meaner suite, you will accordingly
vouchsafe, I do with all dutiful affection commend it unto you, and by you to
the godly and virtuous Reader: Heartily beseeching Almighty God, as he has
enriched you with no small measure of his graces and blessings, and adorned you
with sundry worthy ornaments and endowments both of body and mind, so to
continue and increase the same in and upon you, as may be best to the
furtherance of his glory, the benefit of our Country, and your own, both
temporal and eternal good. Amen.

Your Worships in all humble duty, ever to be commanded: RICHARD EBVRNE.

The sum of the Treatise.
The Rule of Equity: wherein are considered the i. Author, arguing the 1.
Perfection and goodness of this law. 2. Largeness or extent of this law. 3.
Blessing or curse that attends the obseruers or breakers thereof.
ij. Form, very 1. Brief 2. Plain
for the Memory. Capacity.
iij. Sense for 1. matter, comprehending our 1. thoughts, and opinion of
others. 2. speeches and reports to, or of others. 3. deeds and dealing toward
others.
2. manner, and that 1. Negatiuely, (viz.) Not as 1. we will or lust to do. 2.
others do to us. 3. others do to them. 4. themselves would. 5. we have
accustomed. 6. our laws bid orpermit
2. Affirmatively, viz, 1. we would others should do to us. Provided that our
will be just, reasonable, orderly.



iiij. Use in regard of the 1. Law of God: for the 1. hardness thereof. 2.
largeness thereof.
2. Laws of men, for 1. President that they be 1. Brief. 2. Plain. 3.
Needful. 4. Equal.
2. Precept concerning the 1. Executing of hu. Laws. 2. Usage of hu. Laws. 3.
Want of hu. Laws. 4. Ignorance of hu. Laws.


v. Application, viz. in 1. General touching our Laws needing some
Reformation. 2. particular, concerning our Ministers, for the 1. Livings
provided them. 2. Bestowing of their Livings upon them. 3. Having of their
dues. 4. Recovery of their dues.

vj. Conclusion, with Admon. to 1. England. 2. Impropriatours. 3. Patrones. 4.
Parishioners. 5. all men.



THE ROYAL LAW: OR, THE RVLE OF EQVITIE: PRESCRIBED US BY CHRIST. MATH. 7.
VERSE. 12.
HOW necessary Laws are among men, as daily experience does declare: so the
practice of God the Creator does make manifest, who creating man, wrote in his
heart an eternal Law, Romans 2.15.
the Law of nature; and placing man in Paradise, Genesis 2.17.
gave him apositiue law, the law of Abstinence from the tree of good and evil:
and the doing of God the Redeemer does argue it, who so delivered us from the
curse of the law, Math. 19.17.
that he left us liable to the obedience of the law: was so far from
abrogating the law, Math. 5.17.
that he protests, He came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it, being
indeed the end of the Law, but as S. Aug. long ago observed, August.
Finis perficiens non interficiens: consummating not consuming. And for our
better furtherance both in the understanding and observing thereof, at one time
abridged the whole Law and the Prophets, into these two precepts, 1. Diliges
Dominum, Math. 22.37.
etc. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul,
with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: and 2. Diliges Proximum, etc.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: and at another time summed up both
the law and the Prophets, so far as concerns man's duty to man, into this
Compendium, Quaecunqueigitar, etc. Whatsoever ye will that men do to you, Math.
7.12.
even so do ye unto them. Al which show that men can no more live without
laws, then a blind man walk without a guide. It cannot therefore (I suppose)
be a labor unfit, or a work unnecessary, to spend some time on this argument,
and by meditating a little on this principal and notable Ground of humane
laws, that Royal Law propounded unto us, and enacted for us by Christ
himself, Iam. 2.8.
to open a way to virtuous and godly minds, how to examine their actions, and
conform their lives somewhat answerable to that integrity which the laws
both of God and Nature, do require at their hands.

Wherein that I may contain my self within convenient compass, The Division.
I have resolved to confine my pen within these ordinary limits. viz. The 1.
Author. of this Law. The 2. Form. of this Law. The 3. Sense of this Law. The
4. Use of this Law.
To the which in fine, I will adioyne some special Application thereof,
according to the state and time wherein we do live. The consideration whereof,
will, if I be not deceived, present some, and intimate many more profitable and
worthy observations unto our eyes and mind.

The Author is Christ. Which argues 1. This law to be perfect and good. Math.
16.16. Ioh. 1.14. and 17.
In all laws The Author thereof, who made it, as the efficient cause, is worthy
to be considered. For upon the worthiness or unworthiness, the great or small
estimation of him, does the force and vigor, the state and nature of the law
much depend. To which point, if we do but a little cast our eye, for so much as
the maker of this law is Christ our Lord, he that is the Son of God, and
wisdom of the Father: he by whom and for whom all things were made, Prou.
8.22. Collos. 1.6. Heb. 1.2. Ioh. 1.3. 1. Cor. 15.27. Heb. 2.8. Math. 28.18.
Genesis 18.25.
and unto whom all things are made subject (for unto him is given all power
both in heaven and in earth) we shall easily perceive this law to be most
equal and just, most holy and good, most fit and necessary. For who should
enact what is just and equal, if not Justice it self? decree what is holy and
good, if not Goodness it self? or prescribe what is fit and necessary, if
not Wisdom it self? In laws made by men, we may ever suspect their
soundness, and therefore as men that are to buy wares, will view them well
before they bargain for fear of deceit; or that are to receive money, will
try it well least else they take cracked for current, and base for good coin:
it is not amiss, that we examine and prove them well by this and other rules
of perfection, before we approve and practice them; assured, that it is said
in this case no less then in any other, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Probate omnia, and tenete quod bonum est: Prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good. But in laws made by God, by Christ, we cannot suspect
their sincerity without sin, nor defer them to trial, without injury to
him that made them, and danger to ourselves that are to use them.

This shows us likewise the large extent that this law has, 2. To extend and
pertain unto all.
namely: That it reaches to as many, as are or ought to be in subjection unto
the Author thereof, that is, even unto all people, of all times, all places,
and all degrees whatsoever. As none is so mighty that he can be more, nor any
so mean that he can be less then a subject to this Lawmaker, so is there no
person that justly can pretend, He is from this law exempt. Likewise no place
that can plead Privilege, as if thither it could have no access: No time, no
age, of which it may be affirmed, either yet it is not in, or now it is out of
Date and use.

3. To contain a blessing to them that keep it: and a curse to them that
break it.
The same serves also well to promise us blessing and favor, mercy and good,
If we carefully observe: and to threaten us judgment and wrath, trouble and
evil, If we carelessly transgress this law. There is indeed no promise nor
penalty hereunto in express words annexed, but inasmuch as it proceeds from
him in whose hand is life and death, Revel. 1.18.
good and evil, blessing and curse, his very person must assure us, that he
will neither leave them unrewarded that keep, nor them unpunished that break
it. And yet when as he does after add, that This is the Law, and the Prophets,
he does sufficiently thereby intimate unto us, that it also has dependant upon
it, those promises and threats, those benefits and plagues, those blessings and
curses, Leuit. 26.
which the Law and the Prophets do either generally or particularly denounce
unto those that observe or break, Deuteronomy. 28. etc.
regard or contemn the same. Wherefore let no man lightly regard or rashly
reject this law, but know for surety: Whatsoever particular it is, that can
aptly, properly and rightly be from this general deducted; If he observe it,
there will a particular blessing: If he observe it not, a particular judgment
correspondent to the action, good or evil, attend him for it.

The form wherein Brevity and Perspicuitie.
Touching the form of it, we may therein observe the Brevity and yet
Perspicuitie thereof: points though always fit, yet seldom found together.
So Much the more commendable in this place, as they satisfy the scope intended,
which is to inlighten the mind, and unload the memory. For in these few
words, so good provision is made for both, that neither is ouercharged: because
there is lightly no memory so weak, but may easily carry it, nor any
capacity so shallow, but may quickly conceive it. And therefore if in the
artificial operations of skillful men, the form of any notable piece of work
reduced into a very fine and curious frame, as the engines of a great clock
into a small watch, the description of the whole world into a little globe, and
of a large country into a narrow map, do for the curiousness and rareness
thereof, delight the mind, and please the eye of the judicious beholder, how
much more this short Compendium of the law and the prophets, which has in it
length so little, and plainness so much, as possibly the mind of man could
not have desired more, nor the wit of man have devised the like.

Wherein the wisdom, the goodness, the care and providence of Christ for man
do notably shine and show forth themselves, while as he has thereby so
provided every man as it were of a little book that will neither lade his body,
D. Bois. Dom. Trin. 18. p. 130.
nor cloy his memory, nor comber his mind, and yet always be in readiness,
rather in his head then in his hand, in his breast, then his bosom, to
instruct and advise him, in every action and duty toward his neighbor, what
and how he ought to do: that all pretense of ignorance and excuse of charge
and incombrance is taken away from all sorts of persons. The poor cannot
complain, That he has not wherewith to buy him a book that he might read
and learn: nor the ignorant that he cannot understand: nor the busy Labourer
that he cannot attend: nor the delicate Idler that he cannot endure, to study
the law and the Prophets. For having this Bible about him, he wants not
wherewith to inform him: and being never without this, (for it is written in
every man's heart) he has enough, if he do amiss, to accuse and condemn him.

These points for the present briefly, The Sense twofold. viz.
and but briefly touched, least I should hold the Reader ouerlong from matter
of greater moment, I hasten to the third point, viz. the sense and meaning of
the words: the matter. the manner.
which for more plainness I think fit to be considered two ways, that is,
according to the matter, and according to the manner. The matter, Do, the
manner, So do.

The matter or doing here mentioned, is, according to the operations of man,
1. Matter, co^prehending our thoughts. our words. our deeds.

threefold, that is; of the 1. Mind. of the 2. Mouth. of the 3. Members.
For it comprehends 1. our thought and opinion of others: 2. our speeches and
reports to, or of others: and 3. our outward deeds and dealing toward others.

This is apparent by the precedent observation, the Author of this Law;
Gathered, from the nature and use of this law. Romans 7.14.
which being Christ, the Son of God, very God, necessarily argues, the law
to be like himself, spiritual, extending as well to the inward as to the
outward man, and speaking no less to the soul then to the body: Calu.
Instit. l. 2 cap. 8. sect. 6.
this being the true and principal difference betwixt Laws divine and humane,
That each sort is correspondent to the nature and condition of the Author
thereof. By which note alone, we must acknowledge them, as to exceed, so to
excel the one the other, no less then does the soul the body, heaven the
earth, and the everliving God a mortal man. This also appears by the
observation subsequent, I mean the use of this Law, which (as hereafter more
at large happily we shall see) concerns all the s econd Table of Gods Law,
our whole duty to man, taught at large by the Law and the Prophets, all the
precepts whereof extend as well to our thoughts as to our words and deeds. When
as therefore our Savior says, Do to them, we must take it al one as if he
had said, deal with them; think and imagine of them: speak to or of them, and
in outward works render unto them so as, etc. So that here we have a rule, a
lesson for our whole man body and soul, inward mind and outward members: by
which we are to be guided and ordered as well touching our internal
affections, as our external actions toward our neighbor from time to time.

This observed, Which therefore is not very easy to be observed.
may somewhat intimate unto us, that it is not so easy and slight a matter to
observe this rule, as at the first sight it may happily seem. For whosoever is
privy to the native corruption and imbecillitie of our sinful flesh and vicious
nature, Ferus in loc. fol. 119.
as he sees it is a matter of much difficulty and labor to contain the
eyes, the hands, the feet, and other outward parts within their due bounds: so
must he needs say, that it is harder yet, to order well that unruly evil,
Iam. 3.6.
that world of wickedness the tongue: but hardest of all to mortify the
affections, to bridle the will, and guide well the mind and whole inward man,
that they swerve not from that integrity and soundness which this law of God,
and rule of righteousness or equity divine does require.

Let no man therefore, like the young man in the Gospel, bold of his strength,
brag in haste, Haecomnia, etc. Math. 19.20.
All this have I kept from my youth up. I never did, nor ever will offer other
measure unto any. He that stands most upon, and presumes farthest of his
innocence in this behalf, is often most deceived, while indeed he considers
aright and knows well, neither what he should do, nor what he should will,
but with some corrupt affection blinded, and with some vain conceit carried
far wide of the way, wandereth he knows not whither, and does he wots not
what; the sentence which he gives, the conceit of himself which he has,
proceeding from no mature deliberation, or due examination of the cause and his
own conscience, but from some sudden motion and unsettled resolution of his
ignonorant heart or negligent mind. I will not stand to give examples of this
kind, as which are so obuious to every eye, that with ease enough they may be
seen. Only hasting to pass this point, 1. I advise every man to take heed
he deceive not his own heart with the shadow of equity in stead of the
substance. 2. I assume the premises only considered, Ludolph. de vit. Chr.
par. I. c. 39.
That if there were no other Law extant but this, it alone were abundantly
enough to convince every man to be a sinner, as who swarueth and cannot but
often swerve from that integrity of body and mind, that perfection of life
and manners, which this most upright Level and absolute Rule of moral Justice
and Equity requires at his hands. So that he has need to pray with the
Prophet, Psalm. 19.12.
Ab occultis Domine, etc. Lord free my life, and cleanse my soul from secret
sins: Dan. 9.5.
and cry with the people of God, Peccauimus, etc. We have sinned, O Lord, we
have sinned and committed iniquity: we have grieuouslie offended and
transgressed (this) thy Law, etc. For as the Apostle says, Iam. 3.2.
true it is, In multis labimur omnes: In many things we do all amiss.

From the matter I come to the manner of doing, 2. Manner, and that 1.
Negatiuely. 2. Affirmatively.
which I suppose not unfitly may be considered also doublewise, viz.
Negatiuely and Affirmatively. 1. Negatiuely, what is not, 2. Affirmatively,
what is the right and proper sense thereof. To which purpose I say.

1. The sense is not, That we should do to others what we will, Negatiuely. 1.
Not as we will or lust or do.
and deal with them as it pleases us. Our Savior does not say, Whatsoever
you lust to do to others, so do to them. This neither Gods Law nor man's Law
does allow. For though every man should be a Law unto himself, having the Law
of God from the beginning written in his heart, and thereby his thoughts
accusing or excusing him, Romans 2.15.
yet seeing this Scripture is now so defaced, by the fall of man, that none can
rightly read it: and since the will of man, being become utterly perverse unto
any good, and prone only to evil, Genesis 6.5.
has thereby so gotten the mastery over reason, that it which should rule,
cannot, and it which should obey, does not, will not, there is now no hope, nay
no possibility, that man following his will, should always do well, and follow
the thing that is good and right. Our will is now like a blind man groaping his
way, and therefore must be guided: or rather like an untamed horse, that knows
no pace, and can keep no path, and therefore it must with the bit of Religion
be curbed, with the reins of reason be ruled, and with the hand of discretion
be held aright. Indeed the Numrods and Neroes of the earth readily run this
race, Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas:
So I will, so I command,
Let will in room of reason stand,
is their common course. But cursed be their course, for it is cruel, and
their way, for it is wicked. And among men but of inferior place, so licentious
is the age and time wherein we do live, a man may sometimes hear very
peremptory terms, as, May I not use mine own child, mine own Servant, as
pleases me? It is mine own Money that I spend, mine own goods that I waste,
and what has any to do therewith? etc. But surely such sayings sound ill in
the mouth of a Christian, who should know, That there is but one absolute Lord,
The Lord of the Vineyard, Math. 20. Romans 9.20. 1. Chro. 29.11 Luke 16.1.
mentioned Matthew. 20. Who alone may do to every man, as the Potter with his
clay: and with every thing, for all is his, what he will: and not be
ignorant that every one of us is but a Steward at most to this Lord, a
Labourer in that Vineyard, and accordingly has an order assigned him, a course
set, how and whereafter he ought to dispose himself in every thing, and
shall have his counting day reserved him, wherein he must reddere rationem,
yield a reckoning, and receive thereafter his penie or his pain, and hear
either to his Commendation, Euge serve bone and fidelis: Math. 25.
Well done good and faithful Servant, etc. Or to his Condemnation, Serve
nequam and ignaue: Thou ungracious and ignauious servant, etc. In sum for
both: As the Sea is contained within its bounds, beyond the which it may not
pass; for he that made it, has said unto it, Job. 38.11.
Hitherto thou shall come, and shall not exceed: so have we our bounds set, and
our Sea-marke pitched, and those are, not our will, but his word, not our lust
but his Law, not our intention but his direction, who has said as well
concerning our neighbor as himself, Deuteronomy. 5.32. and 12.8.
Ye shall not do every man what seems good in his own eyes, but what I
command you, that shall you do.

Not as others do to us.
The sense is not, we should do to others as they do to us. Our Savior does
not say, As others do to you, so do to them likewise. Not so neither. If this
were a current course, then many times we should do evil to others in stead of
good. If this were the rule, I suppose it would be observed more then now it
is. For even now though it be not the rule, yet as if it were the rule of
Equity, and the right course, many do excuse and seek to justify themselves
thereby. Why? What have I done? I have used him, but as he did me. Such bread
as he brake to me, have I broken to him again, etc. as who would say, In
doing but so, they had done but well. Hence it comes, that many are so ready,
if they be stricken to strike again: if they be evil spoken off, or evil
spoken to, to speak evil again: if they be hurt, to hurt again: if
defrauded, to defraud again: and that it is grown by common practice to a
common proverb, Fallere fallentem non est fraus, etc.

But thus it ought not to be. For this we have no warrant at all. Gods Law
condemns it. Recompense to no man (says the Apostle) malum pro maelo: Romans
12.17. 1. Pet. 3.9.
evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke. Also our Savior before, If any man
take away thy coat, what then? take thou away his for it? Math. 5.40.
No, rather let him have thy cloak also. And, If any give thee a blow on the
cheek, what? Give him twain? No, but rather, Turn to him the other also:
that is, Be ready, be content rather to receive more wrong, then by requital
to do any. But what speak I of Gods Law in this case? Man's law also
condemns this course. For what Nation is there whose Laws ordinarily hold
it not unlawful for private persons retaliare, to repay (in evil) like for
like. And not only so, but by the very light of nature the Philosophers
heathen-wise sometimes saw it was our duty, not only not to do evil for
evil, but that we ought likewise to do good for evil. Insomuch that Xenophon
when one railed at him, Xenophon.
answered him not an ill word again, but Thou (says he) have learned to rail
and speak evil, and I (my conscience clearing me) to contemn railings, and I
speak nothing but good. Pericles.
And another, when one in an evening followed him home to his house, all the
streets as he went railing at him, returned him not an evil word, but being
come home called forth one of his Servants, and bad him take a Torch and light
home that fellow that could no better see what to say.

Learn we then, learn we I say this lesson from hence, That it is naught,
ungodly, unnatural, and not warrantable to do to others always as they do
to us: and therefore know we, it is no good excuse, no just ground why to do
evil to any. But know we this; Whatsoever others do to us, yet we must
beware, that we do nothing to them but good. Their doing will not excuse us.
When every cause shall come to judgment before him; 2. Cor. 5.10.
whose eyes cannot be deceived, and whose hands will not be bribed, every man
shall answer for himself. They for doing ill to us, we for doing the like
unto them again.

Not as other men do to them.
Our Savior does not say, As other men do to others, so do you to them
likewise. Example though it be a common, yet it is not always a current rule;
Viuitur legib. non exemplis: We ought to live by Precept, not by president.
Aug. ep. 89. ad Casulan.

Laert. Diog. de vi. and mor. Philosoph.

Senec. in Proverb.


Truth it is, men are much addicted this way, so that hardly will many be
persuaded, that can be ill done of any, which is ordinarily done of many: or
they walk amiss, which follow the mighty. Tutumest peccare autoribus illis:
There can be no danger in going ill, if such go beforevs still. But the
Scriptures are plain and peremptory to the contrary. The gate is wide, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, Math. 7.13.
and many go in there at: therefore we must not follow the most. Do any of
the Rulers believe on him (Christ?) Therefore follow not the greatest: John
7.48.
if the great be good, and the most be best, we may follow both: otherwise,
Better is good company unto heaven, then great company unto hell: and safer to
fast with Lazarus alone, Luke 16.20. Leo Pap. ser. de Ieium. Nic. I. act. Mich.
Imparat.
then feast with Dives and all his brethren. Numerus pusillus non obest, vbi
abundant Pietas, nec multiplex prodest, vbi abundat Impietas. The smalnesse of
a number (that favor a cause) nothing hurts, where Piety does abound (says
one:) nor does the greatness of the number any thing help, when as Impiety
bears the sway. His reason is, Non multitudo, sed causa damnationem vel
iustificationem adducit: It is not the number, but the cause it self, that
does either justify or condemn. Wherefore to conclude our point, howsoever
others deal with other men, yet must we not make that a President for us,
unless we beassured they have so dealt with them, as of right they should. And
then is not so much their example, as that whence they took their example, our
direction. According whereunto, he said well and worthiethe observation, that
said thus: Cicero.
Non exempla aliorum quaerenda, sed consilium est eorum a quib. exempla nata
sunt obseruardum: We are not so much to look upon other men's examples, as to
observe their purpose and intent from whom the examples are taken or drawn*

Neither does our Savior say, Not as men themselves would.
Whatsoever others would, or say they would, you should do to them, so do to
them. This also is not the right sense nor rule. For though every man should
best know what is good for himself, yet since as women troubled with the
disease Pica do often long for things scant wholesome or natural, Galen. lib.
4. de morb. cap. 10. Valesc. de Tar. in Philon. lib. 4. cap. 8.
and regard little meats good and nourishable: so men and women both surprised
with passions of fear, love, etc. with the affections of covetousness,
licenciousnesse, etc. may either will and desire, or at least, being asked or
urged, say they do will and desire that which indeed either they do not, or
should not. Their will or their words, may not therefore be our warrant. By
examples I shall happily be more plain. Genesis 39.
Potiphers wife is willing Joseph shall come into her company: but Joseph
notwithstanding her offer end desire, cannot be persuaded it may be lawful for
him to condescend thereto. 2. Kin. 5.
Naaman is very desirous to bestow upon Elisha for curing him of the leprosy,
talents of silver, and changes of raiment: but may it be a question, whether,
as his man did, the Prophet also might not have taken them? A drunkard is
content thou shall make him drunk, but yet I believe his consent cannot free
thee (if thou do it) from the curse which God has threatened to such beasts.
Hab. 2.15.
The old Rule, Volentium fit iniuria: Reg. iur. ant. Aug. cont. mend. ad
Consent. c. 7.
No force, no harm, in such cases holds not. Such voluntary consent, can
neither rectify nor justify the Action, when there is nothing but
viciousness and corruption in the intention.

Not as we have been accustomed.
Nor does our Savior say, As you have been accustomed to do to others, so do
to them still. Even as you and your forefathers have hitherto used them, so
continue. Use them no worse then heretofore you have done, and then though you
use them no better, it is no matter. Not so neither. This also is no safe nor
sound course, many things may be customable, which yet are not commendable:
and used to be done, which often were fitter and better undone. Such practice
is rather Heathenlike then Christian-like, and draws nearer the doctrine of
the Pharisees of old, and of Antichrist of new, then either of Christ himself
once, or good Christians since. For what is it else that the Pharisees did so
much stand upon under name of the traditions of their Elders? and what did they
censure our Savior and his Disciples so hardly for, but their customs? And
what was it that our Savior did again so deeply tax them for, when he says,
Math. 15.3. Mark. 7.9.
Full well ye have cast away the commandments of God, to observe your own
traditions, but the observation of their superfluous or superstitious customs?
The pretense whereof may carry a show with men, but with God is of no force:
and may prevail In soro communi in the temporal court, but in soro
conscientiae in the (truly) spiritual Court, the Court of Conscience, can not
stand.

The Fathers of the Church that had many a fight with the heathenish customs
and foolish fashions used in and before their days, be most plain and
pregnant in this point. Aug. De vnic. ^apt. lib. 2.
Veritate manifestata, cedat consuetudo veritati: After the truth is
manifested, (says S. Aug.) let custom give place to truth: and a little
after: Nemo sit, qui ausit Consuetudinem praeferre veritati: Let none presume
to prefer custom to verity. Cypr. cont. Aquar.
So S. Cyprian, Omnis consuetudo quantumuis antiqua cedat veritati: Let any
custom, how ancient soever it be, give place to verity. His reason is,
Consuetudo sine veritate, vetustas erroris: Custom without truth, is but an
old error: Quae quo magis obtinuit, tanto magis grauat: which the longer it
has held, the more it does hurt.

The Lawyers likewise both civil and common, Justin. Cod. li. 8. tit. 55. lib.
2. Constable. ff. de leg. and Senatus l.
be also of the same Judgment. Consuetudo non valet quae rationem vincit: That
custom is of no worth, which is against reason. Consuetudo absque ratione non
habet vim. Custom without reason is without force. Greg. decr. lib. 1. tit.
Consuet. cap. 10. and 11. and lib. 3. tit. de vi. honest. cler. c. 12. etc.
The Gregorian Decretals tell us thus: Consuetudo non derogat iuri naturali seu
divino: Custom does not prevail against the law of nature or Gods law. For,
Christus dixit, Ego sum veritas, non consuetudo: Christ said, I am the truth,
not, I am the custom. Further yet, Mandamus quatenus huiusmodi consuetudinem,
vel potius corrupt iam curetis extirpare: We command (says he, speaking of
some unreasonable custom,) that ye endeavor to root out such a custom, or
corruption rather. And again, Tenore Praesentium declaramus vos non teneri ad
huiusmodi consuetudines obseruandas: By the tenor of these presents, we
declare that you are not bound to observe such manner (unreasonable) customs.

And it is, Bb. Jewel, Reply. p. 21. Pet. Mart. loc. commu. class. 1. cap. 10..
7. R. Gualt. in Math. hom. 64. A. Will. in Synop. contr. 2. q. 3. and many
others.
as an ordinary, so one of the best defenses we have against the Papists at
this day, for the breach, the cutting off, and casting away of many of their
old customs and fashions, which have nothing but time and use to shield or
shadow them withal. We tell them we are not bound to believe or hold, to
observe or do any thing, how long soever it has been accustomed and used,
unless it may withal appear unto us to be agreeable to right reason, and
consonant, not contrariant, to the word of God, against the which (say we,) No
custom can be current.

And in truth without this limitation and regard, if men will be carried away
with the name of custom only, and think it must needs be all current which
is customarie, and that they need inquire no further in any thing, but, what
is the custom? what has been used heretofore? many a mischief may be
practiced, and much injury and evil be committed. Take for it an example or
two. Genesis 28.26.
Laban pretends, deceiving Jacob, the custom of the place. It was not
(forsooth) their custom, to marry the younger before the elder: but under that
pretense, he falsifies his promise, abuses his daughters, and deceiues his
friend. The Jews had a custom, Ioh. 18.39. Mark. 15.8.
That the Deputy must at the Passover set at liberty unto them one prisoner,
whomsoever they would require, how notable a malefactor soever he were: but
under color thereof, they, Pilate and the jews let go Barabbas a seditious
fellow, a thief and a murderer; Act. 3.14. 1. Pet. 2.22. See P. Mart. loc.
com. class. 1. cap. 10. Graft. chron. par. 7. page 81. and 82.
and crucified Christ, the Lord of glory, in whom was no sin, neither was
there guile found in his mouth. It were even a shame, but to name some of those
bestiall and savage practices, which under the name of Customs either now be,
or have heretofore been used in sundry regions and nations, yet seemed to them
no sin. And in our own country at this day, it is a custom too common with
some, specially at one time of the year above the rest, to rob upon the
plains: likewise, to cousen and deceive in shops: to lie, yea to swear falsely
for an advantage in bargaining. But by these and other like, which used be, in
any indifferent eye, none other then usual sins and accustomed
abominations, we may sufficiently see, That to do as we have been
accustomed, is no certain rule. We must have better warrant then that. And
that therefore we ought better to examine every custom, and consider more of
that we use to do, whether it be lawful and good, consonant to reason, and
conformable to the word of God, or not. Otherwise, the longer we run on in it,
the further we run out of the way, and the more we practice it, the more we
sin. Fem. Mon. in the cond. Babing in Genesis c. 19. Aug. Ench. ad Lauren. cap.
80. Object.
Continuance, Custom in evil does not extenuate but aggrauate the sin.
Tollit sensum, (non reatum) it takes away the sense and feeiing thereof, and
makes it seem as nothing to them that use it (as one well observes) but it
does not, it cannot alter the nature of sin.

Some happily will allege (for this is a hold which many blinded with
covetousness and other sinister affects, are loath to forgo,) That all that I
have said is true in things divine, that concern the religion and worship of
God, and respect the observation of the first table, but in things humane, for
the second table, concerning our duty unto man, not so.

Let such consider well, Answ.
and they shall see. 1. That the sentence and judgments of the Ancients are
general, and do extend to any evil custom whatsouer. 2. That they do
define that to be an evil custom, in what kind of thing soever it be,
Decret. lib. 1. tit. 4. De consu. cap. vlt.
Quae verbo Dei, velnaturae, vel iuri communi, vel rationi repugnat: which is
repugnant either to the word of God, or to the law of nature, or common equity,
or to sound reason. 3. The examples above produced, do necessarily inferreit,
unless any will say, Such customs to have been tolerable. Math. 5. and 15.
4. Lastly, our Savior both Math. 5. and 15. in the one place correcting the
false interpretations of the law brought in of old, and in the other reproouing
Pharisaicall traditions of his time, speaks as well against those that
concerned the second table as the first: and in the latter gives an instance
from the second table, and not from the first, the precepts whereof are Gods
commandments no less then those of the first.

Not as the laws of the land bid or permit you.
Neither does our Savior say, Do to them as the law of the land wherein you
live, does allow: As the laws of your country will bear, so I bid you deal:
whatsoever they permit, that practice one to another. This is not always a
safe nor a sound coarse. Great Reverence and regard, I grant, ought to be given
to the laws of nations and civil ordinances of superior powers, Romans 13.1.
1. Pet. 2.13.
for the Powers that be are ordained of God, and therefore we must even for the
Lords sake submit our selves unto them. But yet, as I think all Divines will
grant, We must not rely on ordinances humane as on divine: nor think
whatsoever is by man's law ordained, may ever safely be performed: whatsoever is
thereby tolerated, may boldly, and with good conscience be practiced: as if so
long as we have the law of man on our side, we cannot possibly do amiss.

Does this seem strange to any? No case more clear? no position more plain.
For not only the Divine will say, Act. 5.29.
That we must obey God rather then men: but also the very heathen, the moral
man can see, That Summumius, Tul. Offic. l. 1. p. 17. Cat. de mor. lib. 3.
is summa iniuria: Extreme law is (many times) extreme injury: and does
confess, that Ipse etiam leges cupiunt vt iure regantur: The very laws
themselves, do often need to be guided or moderated and qualified by the
rule of reason and equity: and experience does euince, that partly by
corruption of times wherein they are made, and partly by the current of time,
by which they pass, they sometimes are, and sometimes do become not just and
good, not fit nor equal.

Examples.
Examples to this purpose, if a case so clear needed light by demonstration, I
could produce both at home and abroad, of the present and precedent times, very
many: but as wares by a show, so this by a few, may sufficiently be made
apparent and plain. 1 In temporal.
Our laws do (as I take it) permit men to put their money to usury, and that
way to take ten of the hundred; yet who knows not that our Divines do commonly
hold and teach, Such putting of money to use, to be iure diuino by Gods law
utterly forbidden and unlawful? Our in poenam Damni) to take the forfeiture of
bands for debts unpaid; but whether a man may with a good conscience and
without sin and offense to God always take the benefit of the law that way, I
think may well be doubted. Though Landlords at in its strictness they may
justify, yet their doings many times, if they be well considered, will be
found, the one sort to be nearer the nature of oppression then of right, and
liklyer the fruits of great cruel tie then of good conscience: and the other to
savor more of deep deceit, then just dealing, and prove rather plain
couzenage then honest carriage. And, to add unto these one or two of another
nature, 4. In ecclesiastical causes.
It is a common course at this day with Patrons, to sell (or assign to such as
will sell) the Advowsons of Benefices, and, as they say, it is current in law.
By our common (but not by our canon) law, a man may do it. But how lawful
soever it be, this I am sure of, If things may be estimated, not by their
names but by their effects, and we may judge of the tree, not by his leaves
but by his fruits, it is a course (in my judgment) most sinful and vile, as
by which Sacrilege and Symonie (if they be rightly defined) are openly and
usually committed, or rather made to be no sin: and we (if this impious
course be continued) must from henceforth look for no other dealing (
ordinarily) at their hands, but to buy our spiritual livings, ( Deposita
Pietatis, Doctrinae praemia, laborantium stipendia, sanctorum munera, etc.) of
them, before we have them, as other men (Laymen) do buy their temporal
reuersions, leases and copy-holds. For what men may be allowed to sell, they
will not lightly give: and he that has first bought for his money, will hardly
believe, but that vendereiure queat, he may sell by Authority. For obteining
Ecclesiastical preferments, the world cries out, Lindw. provinc. lib. 5. tit.
de accus. cap. Nulli.
and almost every body talks of the shifts and subtilties, wherewith, one
thing being done, and another intended, men cover their covetousness, cloak
their Symonie, and elude the laws, our weak laws, now in force. But may we
believe, that so long as men can blind the world or avoid the law of man, all
is well? the conscience clear? God pleased? and such assure themselves they
have not sinned, in this, nor sold their souls with their sales unto the
devil for filthy gain? And, by our laws a great number of the best of our
spiritual livings are taken from the Church, and many spoils and wrongs unto
the Church, under the name of Customs, compositions, prescriptions, and other
like titles, all countenanced by law, are vpheld and borne out; which yet, as I
In my twofold Tribute.
and others As Master Carlt. in his treat. of Tithes. D. Ridl. in his view of
laws. Mr. Butl. in Fem. Monar. D. Guard. in Scourge of Sacrilege. Mr. Sklaters
Min. portion. Mr. Roberts in The revenues of the Gospel, etc.
more learned then I, have in our writings formerly published proved and
showed, and (in a manner) all the godly learned of the land do hold, ought not
to be done, but are sacrilegious, ungodly, injurious, and unconscionable
courses: for the not reforming whereof by law, God no doubt is highly
displeased.

So that besides reason, very experience referred to due examination, does
necessarily infer and inform us, That it is not always pium and tutum: good
and safe to walk by the way of humane laws. Men be but men, and may miss.
Neither their multitude, nor their magnitude: neither their place, nor their
purpose: their wealth, nor their wit; no, nor their piety or their policy,
can secure us, that they have not erred. Wherefore we must know, that as in
things Divine and Ecclesiastical, our obedience to the Laws, and ordinances of
men, ought to be but quatenus, so far forth as the command is not against
God and a good conscience: so in things humane and temporal, our practice and
conformity must be with such limitation as exceeds not the rule of Equity,
crusheth not the vein of true Justice, and crosses not the right form of
sincere carriage here prescribed us by him that could not err. A Christian
sustaineth a double person, that is, of a Moral man and of a Divine. And
therefore he must so satisfy the one, that he may also condignely represent
the other: which can only then be, when he does so conform himself unto, and
follow the directions of men, that his conformity thereto be always
subordinate and agreeable unto the precepts of God. It is sufficient for a
friend, that he be a friend Vsque ad aras; and as much as can be required of a
Christian, that he obey man in Domino, 1. Pet. 2.13^
in the Lord, and for the Lords sake, indeuouring in all things to keep a good
conscience both toward God and toward men. Acts 24.16.


We do live (God be praised) under so happy a government, that we may boldly
compare with any else, for multitude and goodness of Laws; but yet it would
be (I suppose) a hard task for any to undertake to prove them all, every one
in particular, so current and absolute, that none of them need, nor can be
amended: and it is more I think then is expected at any man's hand, to receive
them all, and to practice them every one without any caution or scruple at al,
none otherwise then a man may or must the very laws of God. But in as much as
the Laws of Nations and several Countries and Dominions are not all alike,
but do fall far wide each of others perfection, and the best of them, of that
which Gods Law does require; the rule we seek extending to all as well as
some, I may safely conclude, The Laws of men, in every several country for
it self, Neither are, nor can be any settled or certain Rule, for those that
be or live therein, in this behalf.

And thus for the Negative, we may partly see, (for since via erroris
multiplex: the way of error has many by-waies and turnings therein, happily I
have not remembered all,) What is not the right sense. Let us now for the
Affirmative consider what is or may be the right sense and true meaning of
these words. Affirmatively
Which as the words themselves do plainly sound, The right sense, viz. As we
would others should do do to us.
may briefly be explaned and expressed thus, that is: Whatsoever you being
well advised and rightly moved, would wish, desire, or expect, that any other,
friend or foe, near neighbor or stranger, if they were in the same case and
state toward you, as ye are toward them, should by thought, word, or deed, for
body, goods, or name, perform or offer unto you, that even so, and none
otherwise but so, you likewise at all times, and in all things do and offer
unto them.

This being the true sense of the words, thereby it appears: That every man
is to measure by himself, what is good for another: and to judge by his own
heart and desire, what he ought to do to another. Wherein this Caution only
needs to be observed, A Caution: so as our will be just, reasonable, and
orderly.
this limitation allowed, which thing also the words above do sufficiently
intimate, That we understand it not of every will and desire, as of lawless
and inordinate lust, but of such a will only as is reasonable and just,
lawful and well ordered. Which, the Ancients above any other, so carefully
respected, that in manner, it only they insisted upon: and accordingly for the
better expressing of their mind, and explaning the sense of the words, they
did sometimes read the Text thus: Omnia igitur quaecunque vultis vt faciant
vobis homines Bona: Therefore whatsoever good things ye would that men should
do to you, the same do ye to them likewise: or else leaving out the word Bona,
which they knew to be in none of the Originals, they did other-whiles in their
explications use a distinction upon the word vultis (ye will) as ambiguous.
Thus Saint Aug. Id. n. quod dictum est. S. Aug. de sermon. Domini in monte. lib.
2. c. 34.
Quaecunque vultis, non visitate ac passim, sed proprie dictum accipi oportet:
Voluntas namque non est nisi in bonis. Nam in malis flagitiosisque factis
Cupiditas proprie dicitur,. Iansen. Com. in Concord. Euang. cap. 43.
non voluntas, etc. That is, For that clause, whatsoever you would, must be
taken not as usually, and in most places it is; but properly. For Will is not
but in good things: but in wicked and flagitious facts properly Lust is said to
be, not will. Not that the Scriptures do always precisely so speak, but
where it is needful, they do so keep the word in its strict sense, that they
suffer not any other but it to be understood, etc. By which exposition he will
have us to understand, that our Saviors words must be understood, not largely
of any kind of will, good or bad, right or wrong, but strictly of such a will
as is just and good, such as properly and sincerely our will ought to be.
Many desire evil unto themselves, Examples. Perkins in loc. p. 460.

Fer. in loc. fol. 119.

Hun. in loc. page 219. and others.


as, Children that they may have their wills, to take pleasure, and not to be
held to good education: and idle persons, for they would not be set to work.
It follows not therefore, either that they should have their will now, or that
they in time to come, ought to do to others according to that disordered and
corrupt will of theirs.

Again, the malefactor that is punished for his evil deeds, his robbing or
stealing, his murder or treason, his violence and wrong, his filthy life and
lewd courses, his foul tongue and slanderous speeches, and in a word, for any
evil that he has commi^^^d, would that he might escape: but must the Judge
and Officer therefore spare him, because it is likely, if the Judge were in the
Malefactors case, his will would then be, as that man's is? God forbid. More:
A father would have his child honor him, a Prince his subject to obey him, and
may justly say, If I be a Father, Mal. 1.6.
where is mine honor? If I be a Lord, or a Master, where is my fear? if a
Prince, my Obedience? But it were absurd to understand, or infer therefore,
that the Prince must obey his Subject, the Master do service to his Servant,
or the Father honor his Child, because the words be, He must do, as he would
be done unto. For, Christ in whom was no sin, questionless is no Patron for
sin, nor maintainer of unlawful or disordered desires or deeds: And
therefore his rule must be understood to hold only in things just and lawful,
virtuous and necessary; and be limited to such deeds or desires only, as are
honest and good, right and orderly; proportionable unto, and befitting the
person and calling of him whom they concern; and lastly, rectified and
reformed either by grace and the word of God, or at least Natures true instinct
and a good conscience.

All this is confirmed by our Saviors own words other where; Math. 22.39.
namely, Math. 22. where he does abridge the second Table of the Decalogue
into this Compendium, Diliges proximum sicut teipsum: Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Which being but the same in effect that the words now
in hand are, (as the Apostle shows, Romans 13.10.
and all good Expositours consent) necessarily respects another good only,
and not his hurt. Whence it follows apparently, As that Law, howsoever some
have hated themselves, permits us not to hate our neighbor, Ephe. 5.29.
because properly and naturally no man hates his own flesh, but loves and
cherishes it: so this, howsoever some men may will evil to themselves,
permits us not to do evil to others, because properly and naturally every
man desires those things only to be done unto him, which are profitable and
good, just and right.

And thus taken with his due limitations, this rule is a direction so equal
and just, so perfect and absolute, as none more indifferent and right,
Chrysostom. hom. in Math. 7. Ludolph. de vi. Chr. par. 1. c. 39.
more fit and reasonable can possibly be found. For if every man could and
would truly and sincerely consider what he would be content, the case
altered, that another should do to him, and then do the same and nothing but
the same unto another, he should never do amiss. The very lack, and the only
want of which consideration and course in men's proceedings and dealings one
with another, is one maine and ordinary cause of so much violence and wrong,
deceit and fraud, slander and reproach: and in a word, of all the unjust and
injurious dealing, the dishonest and intemperate courses that be in the world,
while men can consider and conceive rightly enough, what they would have other
men to do to themselves, but not versa vice what they ought to do to others.
And to this purpose it has so well liked all indifferent and honest minds,
Zepper. de leg. l. 1. c. 5.
that many notable and worthy Lawmakers and Governors as well humane as
divine, Hun. in loc. page 219. and others.
heathen as Christian, have held it The ground of their Laws, and propounded
it to themselves as their principal rule, after which they framed no small
part of their laws and legal proceedings. Among whom worthy special
remembrance is Alexand. Seuerus the Roman Emperor, An History.
of whom Aelius Lamprid. relating the manner how that Caesar was wont to deal
with offenders, Ael. Lampridius.
writes thus: If any man had turned out of his way into another man's
possession to take spoil or prey there-hence, according to the quality of the
fact, he was either beaten in his own sight with cudgels, or scourged with
rods, or put to death: or, if happily the dignity of the person ouerswayed
these penalties, he was sharply rebuked, the Emperor himself saying unto him,
Visne hoc in agro tuo fieri, quod in alieno feceris? Would thou be content
another man should have made such spoil and wast in thy ground, or in thy
vineyard, as thou have done in this man's? etc. And he did often utter that
notable sentence, which he had learned of some Christians, to be one of their
laws: and when he corrected any, he commanded it to be proclaimed by a Crier,
Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris: what thou would not have to be
done to thy self, that do not to another. Which sentence (says he) he so much
delighted in, that both in his palace at home, and in public places abroad,
as of judgment and other like, he ordained it should be written up or painted,
for all men to read and do thereafter. And (as other have it) he being no
Christian, for it alone much favored the Christians, affirming often, that
those men could not be bad, that had among them laws so good.

Of the hardness and difficulty to perform this precept no man has need
greatly to complain, seeing no more is required at his hands to be done to
another, then he desires and judges fit another should render unto him, the
performance whereof can be no harder for the one, then it is for the other.
Rather it will behooue every man, as of a precept most plain and pregnant,
most just and necessary, to be take himself with all sedulity and readiness
of mind to the performance and observation thereof. It is a part of our humane
corruption and homebred (or rather inbred) imbecility, while we should be
studying how to do that which is commanded, and fulfill that is taught us, to
be thinking on excuses for our negligence, and defense of our transgressions.
But the issue thereof will be, only to take from us all just excuse of our
disobedience, and to convince us to have had more knowledge then love of well
doing: and greater ability then purpose, strength then desire to keep what is
prescribed us.

The Use of this Law (our fourth principal point) is manifold and exceeding
great: iiij. The use: in regard,
but for avoiding Prolixitie, and that which comes thereof Tediousness, I will
reduce it unto a twofold consideration only, that is, of the 1. Law of God.
2. Laws of men.


In regard of the law of God, 1. Of the law of God.
as it is the sum both of the Law and the Prophets, so it serves well as a
remedy and an help against the largeness and the hardness of them both. For
whereas the Law and the Prophets contain many volumes of writings, too much to
be of every ordinary head comprehended and kept in mind and memory, Perkins
in loc. p. 460.
the sum and substance of them both, Hunn. and others.
is so contracted into this Compendium, that therein alone is contained and
infolded as the quintessence of that greater mass, the very sum and effect
of all that which in those many and larger Books and writings, exhortations
and dehortations, Laws and ordinances is explaned and enlarged. And whereas
many places, sentences and words in the Law and the Prophets be dark and
obscure, hard and intricate to be understood and expounded, the sense of them
all may be found in these few words alone, as which do contain whatsoever in
them or any of them is intended: assured, that only is and must be the true
sense thereof, which accords, as the work to the rule, with this Ground of
laws, and foundation of equity.

This use is plainly delivered us by our Savior himself in the words annexed,
Math. 7.12.
Haec est n. Lex and Prophetae. This is the Law and the Prophets. By which
clause he does clearly intimate, that all that is contained in the Law and the
Prophets concerning our duty unto man, is but as it were so many several and
particular explications, members, branches and clauses of this one principal
precept and original statute, Do to others, as by others thou would be
done unto. And therefore he that knows this, knows all: and he that does
this, does all that in and by them to that purpose, is more at large taught and
commanded.

Object.
If this be the law and the Prophets; (for so be the words) and this be (as I
have said, and happily soon will be granted) so plain and easy to be
understood, what needs then (may some say) so much teaching and preaching?
Perk. in loc. p. 474.
A great many Sermons might be saved, and less Service a good deal well
enough suffice. This charge and cost to maintain Ministers and Teachers,
Scholars and learning, etc. is it not superfluous? As Judas said, when he
minded his purse, howsoever he pretended the poor, so may not we, Math. 26.8.
Quorsum haec perditio? What needs all this waste? For all that they can say
and teach in their so long and so laborious Sermons, words and works, it is all
but this, Do as thou would be done unto: And this, I trow, one man may tell
and teach another quickly. Who cannot learn this without any great labor? and
therefore their pains and their place too may be spared. Farther, what need so
many laws and statutes? so many proclamations and edicts? so many Canons and
Constitutions to be enacted, made and published? Kings and Princes, Governors
and Rulers of Kingdoms and Countries, of Commonwealths, and cities, have
taken more labor (belike) then they needed, and troubled themselves very much
without any great cause, in making so many laws and ordinances, in enacting so
many statutes, and publishing so many orders and decrees, when it might have
sufficed to have proclaimed nothing but this, Quaecunque vultis, etc.

But take heed, Answer.
take heed I say, of such suggestions. This wisdom descends not from
above, Iam. 3.15.
but is earthly, sensual and devilish. Such as so reason, and so speak, if
they think as they speak, do not despise men but God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
and presume themselves to be wiser then he. Perk. in loc. page 468. and others.
For, first of all, That which is contained in this law, is but so much only as
concerns our disposition and conversation unto man, that is, the observation
of the second table of Gods law, which is but the one half and that the lesser
and inferior half of the whole. For we owe besides this, as I think every
body knows, a duty also unto God, which consists in the profession and
practice of true religion, according to the tenor of the first table of Gods
law, of all which this rule has not a word. Be it then, that for our duty
toward men, this law, this abridgement of the second table might suffice, yet
for our duty to God, we must have a further direction, and other helps. And
therefore, if not in this, yet in that regard at least the labor and diligence
of the Ministers of the Church is most necessary, and the use of knowledge and
learning exceeding expedient.

2. If this alone were instruction sufficient for our duty unto man, then did
God the Father very much forget himself (with reverence of his Divine Majesty
be it spoken) in that he did command and send forth his Priests and Prophets
from time to time to set forth to the people, in their many and large speeches
and exhortations, not only such things as concerned Gods worship alone, but
also and withal, those and so many of those that concerned our duty unto man.
Neither did the Son of God well, that he would give this in charge to his
Apostles, his Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel, to call the people to
amendment and newness of life: to exhort them to all and singular particular
duties: and to insist no less on these kind of doctrines then on those which
pertain to religion only. 2. Pet. 1.21.
Nor yet the holy Ghost, by whose inspiration all scripture was written, in
causing the Law and Prophets, and a great part of the new Testament too, to be
pend and published in so many and so large volumes, as out of which might have
been left all whatsoever concerns this point. And it is their fault
likewise, that so many kings and princes, so many governors and rulers among
the people, have been so laborious in penning and publishing good and wholesome
laws as well for our conversation as for our religion. For had they not had
both precept and president from them, no doubt they would have been more
sparing and less diligent that way. If these things may not be imagined
without despite to God, and blasphemy against the most high, as indeed they
cannot, then are all those objections and cauils both vile and vain.

3. Let us consider well, first the native dullness of man's heart, and the
blindness of his understanding, specially in spiritual and good things: and
then the perverseness of his will, the backwardness or rather untowardness
of his nature, unto either godliness or goodness: so shall we see, That not
only this Law alone is not sufficient, unless it be to his condemnation, and
to take away all excuse from him, but likewise that all those helps, which God
knowing our wickedness and weakness both, has added thereto, out of the Law and
Prophets, in the use of his word and Ministry, and in the care and endeavor
of the higher powers by humane laws and policy, are all little enough.

For though it be true in general, That for our duty one to another, This is
the sum of all that can be said, yet when we come to particulars, how few be
there that can or at least that will conceive when they do, or do not
accordingly? No man almost will yield that he does amiss, unless he can be
convinced thereof by some express commandment or law. Nay, when as men are so
crafty in wickedness, and so ingenious and cunning in evil, that they can
and do devise daily new shifts and subtilties, whereby they do wrest the law
of God, delude the apparent sense and meaning, and avoid and frustrate the
intent and penalty of many an humane law; what boldness, what rashness,
would they not adventure upon, if there were no particulars at all, nothing but
this general Compendium to be their guide? I report me herein to every man's
knowledge, and most men's practice. Who is he, that can not tell you at his
fingers end, how another man should use him, and what he should in this and
that case do to and for him: but change the person, and say to him, as Christ
to the Lawyer, Vade and tu, Luke 10.37.
and fac similiter: Go thou also, and do likewise; do so to thy neighbor
too: then the case is altered. Of examples in this kind, the world is full.

Then for the other point, I mean our peruersenes and unaptness unto good, who
sees not, who knows not, That neither the instructions and directions, the
exhortations and admonitions, the reprehensions and comminations of the
Prophets, Preachers and Ministers of God, some while with the sweet promises
of Gods mercies and blessings persuading and alluring: some while with the
sharp threats of Gods judgments and cursings terrifying and enforcing: nor
yet the ecclesiastical censures of the Church by suspension, excommunication,
aggrauation, deprivation and other like on the one side; or the temporal
punishments by the purse and pains, by prisonment and banishment, by tortures
and torments, yea, or death it self most sharp and shameful on the other
side, can so bridle and contain men within the lists and bounds of their
duties, but that still, as daily we see and hear, some or other do and will
break out of order: what then were to be hoped or expected, if those helps
and spurs to virtue and goodness, and those stays and stops from vice and
wickedness were away? That therefore which these say, This one sentence were
enough for all; Do as thou would be done to, is easier uttered then
proved, and sooner said then performed. It were enough, if every man did, or
could, or would understand and apply it well. It were enough, if we were al as
prone and apt to good, as we are to evil. But being, as we are, so blind and
bad, both this short remembrance, and those many and long additions and helps
are (for their success and operation) all too little and too few. Wherefore it
is our duty indeed seriously to consider, and ingenuously to acknowledge Gods
great mercy and providence toward us, in affoording us so many furtherances and
means for our good, and carefully and thankfully to make use of them all
accordingly: especially and by name, of those two principal brethren the
Magistracy and the Ministry, which the one with the word, the other with the
sword, the one spiritually, the other corporally, do so much further and
avail to the public and private good of all, that the two eyes, and the two
hands of the body natural and organicall, cannot be thereto more beneficial
and necessary, then are those two to the state and stay of the body
political and mystical, and of the life civil and spiritual.

Of the laws of men.
And thus much of the first use of this law, which concerns the law of God.
The other use concerning the laws of men, is not indeed, as the former,
expressed by our Savior, Zepper. de leg. lib. 1. cap. 5. and 13. l. 5. cap. 14.
but in as much as all humane laws either have or ought to have the law of God
their foundation, and are, or ought to be derived, as rivers from the
fountain, from this Original, it does necessarily follow, that the use of
this law no less extends unto these of men, then unto those of God.

This use is also twofold, And that 1. For President.
that is, for President and for Precept. For first, This Law of Christ, is a
president or pattern, by and according to which the laws of men ought to be
formed and made. In the which if men will consider what I have before partly
observed, that is, for the manner, the Brevity and Per spicuitie thereof, for
the matter, the Necessity and Equity thereof; they may easily learn, That,
according to this pattern, their laws ought to be, brief and plain;
necessary and equal: for such is this, as we have already seen.

1. They ought to be contrived succinctly and briefly. That they be brief.
Brevity is either in the whole corpse of the law, that it be reduced to a
compendious form, and convenient number: which shall be the better had and
held, if the superfluous and unnecessary particulars and clauses thereof,
withered by age, impertinent for use, unnecessary for the place, unfit for the
time, etc. be pared away. Or it is in the particular laws themselves, that
they be conceived in such apt and concise terms, as may only suffice to
express the mind of the lawmakers, and may better resemble the Majesty of a
Commander, then the manner of a Commentator. Legem, Seneca. epist. 95
breuem esse oportet, quo facilius ab imperitis teneatur: vel, ut emissa
divinitus vox esse: Iubere, non disput are debet: A Law (says Seneca,) must be
brief, that it may the more easily be conceived and remembered of the
unskillful: or, as a word from heaven uttered: It ought to command, not to
discourse, or dispute.

Plain.
2. They must have as much perspicuitie and plainness as may be. Perspicuitie,
is either in the words themselves, wherewith the law, or in the language
wherewith the words of the Law are expressed. Ridl, View of laws. page 198.
If the one be such as is familiar and natural to them, and the other such as
is plain and easy to be understood of them, for whom the laws are made. If
a trumpet give an uncertain sound, 1. Cor. 14.8.
who will make himself ready to the battle?

Needful.
3. They must be needful and necessary for the time and place wherein they do
live for whom they are made. The due regard whereof cannot but require many
repeales and alterations, many qualifications and exceptions, to be made from
time to time. Legum etenim humanarum tanta varietas, Zepper. de leg. lib. 1.
cap. 10. and lib. 5. c. 8.
imperfectio, and instabilitas est, ut singulapoeneiam non secula amplius, sed
lustra fere, novas leges, restrictiones, ampliationes, modificationes novas,
etc. ferant and importent. For (says one) So great is the variety,
imperfection and vnstabilitie of humane laws (and affairs) that not only
every age, but also every other year in manner, they admit and require new
laws, restrictions, and extensions, new qualifications, and c. to be had and
made.

Equal.
4. They must be equal and indifferent. And this as well in respect of the
persons, indifferent to all, not easing some and grieuing others, nor
respecting these and neglecting those, as if they were aliis matter, aliis
noverca: to some a mother, to other some a stepmother: as of the penalty,
which must be such, as may by the sharpenes and severity thereof suffice to
contain those within their bounds whom precept alone cannot prevail withal,
and not by the lack or leuity thereof, as if they were counsels rather then
laws, open gaps and leave way at will, to those that will violate and break
them. Cicero ad Brut. ep. 2.
Salutaris seuerit as quam dictat communis ratio, and ordo publicus postulat,
inanem speciem clementiae vincit: For, Wholesome Severity which common reason
appoints and public order requires, easily puts down the vain show of
Clemency, as says that worthy Politician Tullie.

Secondly, For precept.
as it is a precept, the use thereof concerns, 1. the executing, 2. the
usage, 3. the want, 4. the ignorance, Concerning.
and 5. the defects of humane laws.

The executing.
In executing laws already extant, this Rule of Equity does require, That such
fidelity and sincerity be used, that the laws may have their due course and
effect: which is, to maintain virtue and suppress vice, Zepper. de leg. lib.
3. cap. 7. page 200.
defend the good and correct the evil: that the common good be sought and
preferred: that partiality and respect of persons be avoided: that the Law be
not wrested, nor true Judgment perverted: that Justice be not denied or
delaied, that none with unnecessary suites or unreasonable expenses be vexed
and consumed, Page 779.
etc. Which courses, if Magistrates, if Officers and others to whom the
managing of the laws is committed, do not carefully and constantly observe,
in vain do they pretend, that they due to others as they would be done unto;
and they well deserve to be numbered among those, which as the Prophet says,
Convertunt iudicium in absinthium, and iustitiam in terra relinquunt: Amos 5.7.
turn Judgment into wormwood, and leave off righteousness in the earth.

The Usage.
For the usage of Laws by such as take the benefit thereof, it is too truly
observed, and too often seen, that diverse that do go to law, do
egregiously abuse it, Zepper. de leg. lib. 5. cap. 11.
in that albeit they know in their own consciences that they have a bad cause,
yet will needs proceed; or not respecting, whether their cause be good or bad,
will not be quiet: and this, either upon a vain desire and devilish delight
they have to be quarrelling; upon which noxious humor they do feed themselves
and live none otherwise then does the Salamander by the fire, as who be no
longer well at ease in themselves, then while they be at trouble and variance
which others: or for that in the abundance of their malice and hatred toward
them, (for they can not go to law but with a spiteful mind and malicious
spirit) they desire to plague the adverse parties, to vex them extremely, to
make them spend their money, and, if they can do it, to undo them: or for that
trusting in their own subtilties and crafty heads, they take a glory, that
they are able by some or other indirect and cunning courses, to make an ill
cause (seem) good: to blind the judge, and cast a mist before wise men's eyes,
that they may not (easily) see what is truth and right: or finally for that
counting themselves wronged and discredited, if any cause good or bad go
against them, they resolve never to give over, while possibly they can find
any delays, any shifts or devices whatsoever, till they have so worn and
wearied out their adversaries, that at length, they must be enforced to forsake
and give over their good cause and just title.

But detesting such wicked, unconscionable and profane courses, too common in
these our evil days, we must know, That then only (in this respect) we do as
we would be done unto, 1. Tim. 1.8.
if we use law, which of it self is good and holy, if a man use it lawfully)
not as fools and children do their daggers, which are out at every fly, but
as wisemen do their armor, that is, as our last refuge, when all other and
easier helps do fail: If we make it not a rigorous Judge to revenge our
wrongs in the highest degree and sharpest measure, but an indifferent
Arbitratour, with all lenity and moderation to decide a cause, or resolve a
question twixt us and our neighbor. Lastly, if we reckon him we contend and
go to law withal, not our enemy but our friend, considering as we should, it
is the cause and not the party, the matter not the man, we must prosecute and
have to do withal: and accordingly therefore do so deal with him and follow
the suite, that it may appear, we seek not his trouble but our own ease; his
loss but our right; nor have any mind or delight to vex or hurt him, but to
quiet and benefit both him and us, him as well as ourselves.

The want.
For the want of Laws. If there fall out, as often there may and does, any new
case, in which there is yet no national, Perk. in loc. pa. 460.
no positive law enacted; till this be done, for supply thereof, we must have
recourse to this Ground of laws, and in that case, so do, and so deal, as it
does inform us: Assured, we cannot do amiss, so long as we do not decline
from this. A man may not think in such an Accident: There is no law for it, no
statute, no Act of Parliament, therefore I will do, or I may do, what I list.
No: If there be no statute or law for it made by man, yet here is a Law, which
will tell thee, if thou will hear it, what thou ought to do: and will
convince and condemn thee for a man unjust and wicked, if thou hear it not.

The ignorance.
Against the ignorance of Laws. Suppose a positive Law or Constitution is
extant in this or that case, but it is either so large that thou can not
comprehend it: or so intricate and obscure that thou can not understand it:
or so far out of mind that thou can not remember it: in such a case, have
thou recourse to this law and general rule, and it alone shall suffice. This
will suggest unto thee the same in effect, which that positive law thou seek
for, or understand not, if it be just and good, would direct and inform
thee more at large. A ready way to save a great deal of that cost and waste,
which is vainly and needlessly many times (what if I said wickedly also?)
bestowed on Counselors and other Lawyers, who rise apace by the falls of
litigious men, that either ignorant of law, or negligent of right, choose rather
to be acquainted with the subtilties of men, then the sincerity of God; and
care little what equity and a good conscience does require, so as they may find
out some quaint quirk, or nice evasion in Law for that they desire.

The defect of humane Laws.
Sometimes there is in some Law or Statute a defect in words, matter or other
like. Let it seem much or strange to none, that I lay such an imputation on
the laws of men. Zepper. de leg. l. 1. c. 5. and l. 5. c. 10.
For as in other humane writings, so in laws too, doubtless by reason either
of the weak apprehension, contrary opinion, corrupt affection, or other
humane infirmity of those that make laws, Who are al but men, some fault and
error, some want and imperfection may sometimes be found, which time and
truth having better examined, do discover to the same or other men's eyes.
Sometimes also, the very alteration of times, and therewith the state of things
not foreseen at first, nor happily to be foreseen by humane reach, may breed
a defect where before was none. To help this, the best remedy for the present,
is, to have recourse to this Law of Laws, which apted to time and place, to
occasion present and urgent, will inform us to supply in our selves, what is
defective in our laws, and to carry our actions aright, when the laws do
carry them awry.

These things (though but briefly) observed, concerning the use of this
principal precept, I may by good consequence conclude, That in truth it is not
so much the multitude of laws and variety of precepts humane that are
necessarily required unto virtuous courses, and to light us the way to well
doing, as, (having ever in our minds, and before our eyes this sum of all, for
an infallible rule in all our doings) the care and endeavor to practice well
thereafter, and to conform thereto, both our lives and our laws: which will
and can then only be upright and good, truly just and honest, when as they
and it do well agree and suite together. It is recorded of a certain
Philosopher, Aristot. apud Laert. l. 7. c. 14. and Aristipp. apud. cund. l. 2.
c. 8.
that asked on a time, What he had gotten by that kind of study?
(Philosophy:) he answered, Inprimis summum hoc, Quod quae alii non nisi
legibus coacti faciunt, sponte faciam: This principal and special good; That
those things which others do by compulsion of their laws, I can do of mine
own accord, without any laws. What he as a lover of learning with some good
reason did ascribe to his humane studies, that with reason far better, (this
one heavenly sentence, as a gemme most precious the stones in the streets,
surpassing all natural and Moral precepts of men) we may attribute to this
divine Oracle and absolute law of our heavenly Lawgiver, the Son of God, as
which without all doubt, is of that weight and worth, that if it only were
ever had in mind: if it only about al our actions, were duly meditated upon,
and sincerely put in practice, it would better guide us, Nowel. in Decalog.
page 37.
and more prevail with us unto true Justice and weldoing betwixt man and man,
then without it, all the laws, decrees and constitutions of men can do: which
for the most part do little avail, wheresoever of this one Law and principal
ordinance divine, there is among men no due regard.

Having thus considered the uses to be made of this law, Some Application, viz.
if I should now descend by way of Application to a several examination of all
particulars, to see how conformable and suitable thereunto the actions and
dealings of men of all sorts are carried, I might sooner find where to
begin, then where to make an end, and rather satiate then satisfy the
industrious and godly Reader: yet as well to satisfy somewhat my promise in the
beginning, as also to open at least a way to this work, that every man may
take occasion in his own practice and state of life thereof to consider, I
will add something also in this kind, answerable to that already said.

In general touching our laws needing some reformation.
For President, touching the making or amending of (Our) Laws, I will of my
self, (that so I may contain my self within mine own bounds) say little or
nothing, but only refer the honest and godly minded Reader to these
considerations following.

First to the words of his most indicious heart and head, in whose hand it is,
above any one else, to help it too, and who will, I trust, in time see that
somewhat done, which heretofore so earnestly he has wished might be done. I
could wish (says he) some three things specially to be purged and cleared in
the common law. The Kings Majesty's speech at white hall. Anno. 1609.
First, I could wish, it were written in our own vulgar language: for now it
is an old, mixed, and corrupt language, only understood by Lawyers, whereas
every subject ought to understand the law under which he lives. For since it
is our plea against the Papists, that the language in Gods service, ought not
to be in an unknown tongue, according to the rule in the law of Moses. Number.
15.38.
That the law should be written in the fringes of the Priests garment, Deuteronomy.
31.10.
and should be publicly read in the ears of all the people: so me thinks
ought our law to be made as plain as can be to the people, for that the
excuse of ignorance may be taken from them, for not conforming themselves
thereunto.

Next, Whereas our common law has not a settled Text in all Cases, being
chiefly grounded either upon old customs, or else upon the reports and cases
of Judges, which we call Responsa Prudentum, I would wish that some more
certainty were set down in this case by Parliame^^. For since the very
Reports themselves are not always so binding, but that diverse times Judges
do disclaim them, and recede from the Judgment of their Predecessors, it
were good, That upon a mature deliberation; the exposition of the law, were set
down by Act of Parliament, and such Reports therein confirmed, as were
thought fit to serve for law in all times hereafter: and so the people should
not depend upon the bare opinion of Judges, and uncertain Reports.

And lastly, There be in the common law diverse contrary Reports and
Presidents: and this Corruption does likewise concern the statutes and Acts of
Parliament, in respect there are diverse Cross and Cuffing statutes; and some
so penned, as they may be taken in diverse, yea, contrary senses. And therefore
I would wish both these statutes and Reports, as well in the Parliament as
common Law, to be once maturely reviewed, and reconciled. And that not only all
Contrarieties should be scraped out of the books: but also that even such
penal statutes as were made but for the use of the time, (from breach whereof
no man can be free) which do not agree with the condition of this our time,
might likewise be left out of our books. And this Reformation might, (me
thinks) be made a worthy work, and well deserves a Parliament to be set of
purpose for it.

Secondly, to the Judgment of former Parliaments, which so often, as a matter
very serious and needful, viz. An. 25. and 27. and 35. Hen. 8. and An. 3. Edu.
6. enacted, That the King should have Authority to assign a certain number
of his subjects as well spiritual as temporal, learned in the laws of this
Realm, to examine certain laws, then and yet in force, to the end that such
of them, as the King and the said persons, or the more part of them, should
adiudge worthy and convenient to be used and obeyed, might be executed and
continued, and the rest to be abrogated.

Babing. in Genesis c. 47.
Thirdly, to the continual spoil, wast and impeachment of the Churches in our
land, which (as is too apparent to the eye of all that will see) daily
increases and spreads it self like a wild canker in the flesh, that it is
likely in a little time, if due and speedy remedy be not provided, so to
consume and ruinate them all, that little more (as in many places already
(alas) does appear) then the bare name shall be left remaining.

Postnati. page 47.
And lastly, to the very nature of all humane laws, which properly have (as all
things under sun) ortum, statum and occasum: Zepp. de leg. l. 1. c. 10.
their rising, standing and falling: wherein it is more then probable, that the
very alteration of times, and of the manners of people with time, cannot but
now and then call for a change. For (to use not mine own, but the very words
of S. Aug. as he is cited also to like purpose by that worthy Divine the
learned Zepper, Aug. epist. 5. ad Marcellin.
) That is not always true, which some do say, Zepper. de leg. l. 1. c. 11.
Semelrecte factu^, nullatenus esse mutandum: A thing once well done, is by no
means to be altered or changed, because the case of the time being altered,
true (or sound) reason does so necessarily require, that which before was well,
to be altered and now made otherwise, that whereas they say, It is not well
done, if it be changed contrariwise, the variety it self (of the time) cries
out, It is not well, unless it be changed. So that both will only then be
right, if with and according to the variety of the time, they be made
variable, or to differ each from other. Hitherto S. Aug.

These considerations weighed, it seems to me, (if it may be free and lawful
in a good and honest cause, and in a Christian and religious common wealth, to
speak the truth,) That such as have place and power in condendis legibus for
forming of laws, do not do as they would be done unto, nor observe that
equity, which they ought principally and precisely to maintain, if some thing
be not by them done in this behalf, but all things left, as if nothing were
amiss, without any reformation or redress.

Secondly touching precept, 2. In particular.
for particular practice, passing by the manifold occurrents, that do or may
fall out betwixt Prince and people, magistrate and subject, man and wife,
parents and children, master and servant, teacher and learner, buyer and
seller, borower and lender, lawyer and client, plaintiff and defendant, Judge
and Jury, accuser and witness, neighbor and stranger, friend and foe, with
sundry other like, al which ought to be tried by this touch, Do as thou
would be done unto: Touching the state and Maintenance of our Ministers:
intimating,
I will (for brevitie and examples sake) insist only on some such as concern
the Ministers of our Church alone, and show by some Instances how well or rather
how ill, this rule, by our people, toward them, is observed.

They are the men, which for the exceeding necessity of their labors, and the
singular, yea, unspeakable good that comes unto us thereby: which for the
worthiness of their calling and excellency of their vocation, should above many
other, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
be had in singular regard, and accounted worthy double honor. 1. Tim. 5.15.
They are the men, unto whom, certain it is, whatsoever wrong and injury:
whatsoever force or fraud: whatsoever reproach, or disgrace, contempt or abuse
is offered and done, Christ protests, he takes it as done to himself. They
be his own words, Luke 10.16.
Qui vos audit, me audit: He that hears you, hears me: and, Quivos spernit,
mespernit: He that despises you, despises me. They are the men whom whosoever
deals not uprightly and justly withal, it is no marvel, if he do not deal
justly and well, conscionably and uprightly with any others. Now how are they
dealt with?

What small and insufficient provision is left and allotted them.
First of all, What provision is there made for their maintenance? And what due
courses taken that they may be according to their places and calling, their
Learning and labors condignely provided for? Is it not too too evident, that
the whole land thorough, near one half (in number or worth) of their livings,
are seized into laymens hands? and the remainder for allowance left them, is
so mean and beggarly, that in many places it is not one half, nor a quarter
enough for their sustenance?

It is true indeed that Ministers have some goodly and sufficient livings left
them. But, 1. They are but a few in respect of those of like or more value that
are taken from them: and in respect of the remainder of poor and insufficient
livings. 2. They are (all) but such as were left them by the Papists, to whom,
though their enemies in religion, they are beholding for provision, as which
came to them better (though much rent and mangled) out of their fingers, then
it is either confirmed or continued to them by our hands: and who, in this
point and practice (if we will give them their due) have showed themselves more
sound and constant, more righteous and religious, more reasonable and
conscionable then some of us ( Protestants) that in profession and knowledge go
so far before them. For (if my observation fail me not) there is scant a
layman found among us, in all this time of the Gospel, that has (I say not,
religiously added and given, he indeed were rara avis in terris, nor I say not
wholly, but) conscionably at least restored to the Church any one, or any part
of one of those livings, which I will not now say sacrilegiously, but
vnco^scionably sure were taken, and more unconscionably are so held and
detained from churchmen: and, so do men seem rather sorry that they caught no
more, then ashamed that they have gotten so much from the church, that likely
it is, if they ( the Papists) had left us those Livings three times worse then
they did, all had been one; Our ministers must have had but that which had
been left, were it much or little, enough or not.

Now being thus dealt with, do men herein deal with them, as they would be
dealt with themselves? Which of them would think, if he were a Minister, and
had but such an allowance: or, had so much of that which properly, and in all
right is his, taken and kept from him, that yet he were condiguely,
conveniently and minister like provided for? Is it likely, I say, that they
which are not content with their own lands and inheritances, though the same
surmount hundreds, yea thousands per an. unless they can hide and huddle in
among it as Achan his prey, two or three Church-mens livings to boot, Josh.
7.21.
would think they had reason to be content, if they were in the Ministers
place, with those spare leauings, and beggarly scraps, that little piece of a
living, which yet many times they can scant (freely) afford them?

I do not now make question, whether Tithes be a matter of divine right? and
as properly annexed and belonging to the ministry of the Gospel, as once to
the Priesthood of Leui? nor do I now enquire, whether things once consecrated
to God; and devoted to sacred uses, (as were both tyths and gleeb, and that
with bitter and fearful execration against any, and all those that should by
laying his profane hands on them, infringe the gift, alienate the right, and
convert the thing again to common use,) may yet be devoured with open mouth,
and taken away for ever from God and his Church? For these points I refer him
that either does doubt, or would read, to what I and others have already
written otherwhere. But I do now ask:

Two very necessary questions.
Whether in conscience and common equity the Minister of the word ought
condignelie and competent lie to be provided for, since, though the word of God
did (as some dream, and many would feign persuade themselves) provide him of
nothing in particular, nor teach that he can demand any thing by name, yet the
rule of reason, the ground of equity, and the law of nature does teach us,
Math. 10.10. 1. Tim. 5.18.
that The labourer, every Labourer, much more so worthy and needful, so
profitable and painful a labourer, is worthy of his hire, such a hire as is
fit for such a labourer that is, (to speak in their own terms) to have (at
least) a competent living*

I do ask likewise, Whether that be competent, which in many places is left
or allowed him for his living? None I think so profane and void of religion,
which will not Verba^tenus in words at least, acknowledge the former: nor any
so deuoid of reason and common experience, that will avouch the latter. Now, be
it that that which once was, and in right still should be the Ministers
living, and would, if it might be had, be competent too, be surprised into
other men's hands, must he therefore have no living at all? Must he serve and
sterue? pray and pine? preach and perish, because that once was his, is taken
from him? Or rather, ought not in all reason and conscience, in all justice and
equity, if not the whole, at least yet so much thereof be restored to him, as is
fit, and according to their ow^^ phrase, competent for him? When such
Alienations were made, was it not ever intended and thought necessary and fit,
That the Church should be left so conuenably endowed or provided for, An. 15.
Ric. 2. cap. 6. an. 4. Hen. 4. cap. 12. Octobon. cap. Quoniam de Appropriat.
ecclesiarum.
that he that had curam animarum charge of souls there, might be able, 1. to
do divine Service, 2. to inform the people, and 3. to keep hospitality? And
is it not great reason the intent and mind of the Law, being so reasonable and
necessary, (...) 1. Edu* 6. cap. 14. and in the common forms of the
Ordinations of vicaridges.
should rather be urged and observed, then the Letter and Word of the Law,
being so far from reason and equity? And if the first Usurpers did this in
some measure answerable to the time and Clergy which then was, ought not
their successors (be enforced to) do it likewise answerable to the time and
Clergy that now is, that so we in these days may have no more cause to
complain of such usurpations and spoils then had our ancestors in their
times? Or if any where there were ever any thing heretofore, any thing I say,
either tithes or offerings, stypend or stay assigned him, and such times there
have been, and such cases there may fall out euenin our time, are not his
hearers bound to maintain him? and they among whom he sows spiritual
things, to allow him to reap their carnal, in at least a competent measure?

Oh that England which professes the Gospel, An Apostrophevnto England.
and which by Gods great mercy, was so soon, so abundantly and so peaceably
above other lands, vouchsafed the Gospel, should to the Ministers of the
Gospel, the bringers and Preachers of those glad tidings of her salvation, be
so cruel and unkind? Oh that England, which God has made above many, yea,
above any of her neighbors to flow in milk and honey, should as if it were
some empty and barren soil, deuoyd of sustenance for Man and Beast, hold the
Messengers of her God, 2. Cor. 5.20. D. Bois Dom. Sexag. p. 260.
the Ambassadors of her Celestial King, above any other nation, in so base
regard, and mean account, as to suffer them which are worthy by the Lords own
testimony double honor, 1. Tim. 5.16.
to be so dishonored and forsaken, that they are (in many places) left
destitute even of necessary food and raiment; made daily to strive with
needines and want, the utter enemies of learning and knowlestge; and enforced,
King on (...) Lect. 33. p. 462.
as Clean the^^^ the Mill, to putt heir hands to many a servile labor and base
employment.

Oh England mine heart bleedeth, and mine eye weepeth to see the blindness of
thine eyes, and observe the hardness of thine heart in this respect. Alas, to
there no Balm in GIlead,, Iere. 8.22.
is there no Physician there, that the health of the Daughter of my people
might be recovered? Could there a day be found, and a way be made, even when
thou wast reforming Religion, to deformethe Church? and when thou should
have restored the spoils thereof, to make of her a greater prey? And can there
since that, in all this long and leisure time of peace and freedom of
Religion, be found no way, no means be devised to right her again? and to
restore (at least in some measure) those things which by sundry false pretenses
and many forged cauillations were unjustly and sacrilegiouslie, Terms of law
tit. 51.
to the great hindrance of learning, impouerishment of our Ministry, and
infamy of the Gospel, Math. Westminster. stor. hist. an. 1261. Joan. Sarisb. de na.
curial. l. 7. c. 17.
and us the Professors thereof, taken from her? Call to mind the days of
old, and ask (I pray thee) the years that are past, if there were not once a
time when not only these that now are pulled from the Church, but also all
those that yet it has, were not in her hands? Yet behold the piety of our
fore-elders; the zeal and devotion of holy men of ancient time, did in time,
and in short time too after the Christian faith received, render unto and
confer upon her all those, and that in more ample and seemly form then now
she enjoys any of them. Why may we not then hope, that if the like zeal
unto the truth, like devotion to the Church, and like love unto the Gospel and
Preachers thereof could once inflame thine heart and possess thy mind, that it
would be as easy at least for our Church to recover that it has lost, as once
to get the whole; and thy people of this age to be as provident and studious of
the good of our Church, and Ministers thereof, as those former were of theirs?

How cruelly and unconscionably Patrons do oftimes handle them.
Think we upon the bestowing of those few good Livings, and pieces of Livings
which are yet left us, and what an heap of evils does there present it self
unto us? For whereas reason would, and Religion does require, that for our
better encouragement to Learning, for the better reward and recompense of our
time, expenses and studies past, and to the better enabling of us in our
places, as well to that holy and excellent work, whereby men's souls are
saved, the work of the Ministry, as also that, whereby the bodies of many
poor Christians are refreshed, the virtue of Hospitality, both so peculiar and
annexed to his calling, 1. Tim. 3.2.
that as S. Paul, by his description of a good Minister in the house of God,
does seem to intimate, unless he do the one, he is not worthy the dignity,
and unless he be given and ready to the other, he is not worthy the degree of
a Minister; our Livings should be bestowed upon us, Babing. in Genesis cap. 41. D.
Bois Dom. Palm. p. 143. and Dom. Trin. 10. page 227. Io. Down. of Brib. cap. 1.
5. and cap. 5. totum.
fully, frankly and freely: does not all the world know, and to the great
infamy and discredit of our Church tell and talk, how dearly some of us are
often enforced to pay? how deeply many of us are constrained to engage our
selves and our friends for such things, before we can attain them? Yea, is
not this sin come now to that height, that Gentlemen do (and often shame not
to glory that they do) make as great profit (though underhand) of their
Church-liuings, as of any other lands they have? More, that now under name and
color of next advousons the present Presentation is so ordinarily and openly
sold and bought, as if Simonse were no sin, and Sacrilege a vice in name but
not indeed? By means whereof many times, and of the voluntary (though
cloaked) perjury we cast, and they thrust us into, we enter into them like
slaves, we live in them like beggars, and we leave them like bankrupts.

Do such Patrones, such I say, for I condemn not all, though happily they be
but a few that are not faulty, patrons in name, latrons in deed, deal with us
as they would be dealt with? Would they, think you, think themselves well
entreated and handled with equity, if having spent all their time and youth in
labor and learning, and wasted of their own and their friends goods no small
quantity in hope of Preferment at last, they should either have none at all
bestowed upon them, or if any, such only as they must pay for as largely, and
buy as dearly, as if they had deserved nothing? And so see their labors, all
their labors and their studies, their deserts and expenses so little
respected, that for money and rewards, for gold and gain (for Aurea sunt vere
nunc secula: Ovid. de art. am. lib. 2.
These now be golden times indeed, etc.) any unlettered Ass or lewd Loiterer
shall be preferred before them? What can pierce the very soul, and even kill
the heart of an ingenious Scholar, and ingenuous nature, if not this?

Do such discharge the trust of old, partly by the first founders of their
church, partly by the Parishioners reposed in them, with that fidelity and
sincerity, which becomes, I say not godly and Christian, but even virtuous
and honest men? Which of them, Simile.
I appeal to their own consciences, if he should betrust his friend by word
or will, for the time present, or to come, with the bestowing of his goods or
lands, to such and such uses, would acknowledge himself well dealt with, and
his friend an honest man, if he should see or know, the same to be bestowed
quite contrary in other sort then he intended or appointed? And therefore
when as they convert these Livings, those goods to their own most profit and
benefit, and divert them from those good and pious uses whereto they were
assigned, can they say, or with any show of equity and a good conscience, but
pretend, that they do but as they would willingly desire to be done unto?

Among particulars, The chiefest point of a Patrons duty.
it is chiefly required of a Patron that he provide the Church of the
worthiest and ablest Incumbent he can procure. But does he do this duty, and
satisfy the charge he has undertaken, that seeks not who is best worthy to
receive such a Living, but most able to give for a Living? And cares not how
good, Simile.
but how golden he is that seeks it? I would ask such a man, (the comparison
is gross, but it is good enough) upon his conscience (if he have any) if he
should deliver his own Servant a sum of Money, and bid him with it buy him
the best meat for his Table, or the best Horse for his Stable, which he can get
for so much Money, whether he would think himself well used, and his Servant
an honest fellow, if he should buy, and bring him the worst and least worth of
that kind that he can find, and put up into his own Purse, or play away the
rest of the money? I need not apply it, it is plain enough, and that such is
their common practice no man can deny.

Indeed of late these kind of Church-robbers begin to be a little wiser in
their kind. For now they have learned forsooth, not as heretofore, to take one
of their own serving men, or some Tailor, Cobbler, or other like, that could
read a little English, but to seek out some reasonable Scholar, a Preacher, a
Graduate at least, which being in want, (for now Learning goes a begging as
once Livings did) will be content to take what he can get for the present, and
counts the entrance into any Living, how bad soever, a stay for the time, and
a step to a better. But as it pittieth me to see such men, men I say, for
learning and schollershippe worthy better place, feign for very need, (as
they that account half a loaf better then no bread) to undergo such
extremities, and stain their consciences and their calling in such a sort: so
I cannot but condemn such Latrones the more, which for to cloak their sin,
and hide their abomination, fear not, shame not, to draw Scholars so good,
unto conditions so vile and base, as are too bad to be offered to the oddest
and meanest the Country yields. Judge. 17.13.
These Micahs may well glory among such as be of their own hair, and them
that know not chalk from cheese, that they have gotten a Leuite to their
Priest; but such glory is to their greater confusion and condemnation. Men of
judgment do know, that with less sin, they might, as Jeroboam, have set up
some of the lowest of the people, to fill the room, and serve their own
turns withal. 1. Reg. 13.33.


When we are admitted or instituted to any preferment ecclesiastical, Lindw.
Prou. lib. 2. tit. De Praesumpt. cap. Praesenti statuto diffinimus. Constable. and
Can. eccles. cap. 40. and as in forms of Instit. to Benesi. does appear.
we must take a corporal oath De Simonia per nos in hac part, vel aliam
interpositampersonam, direct vel indirecte non commissa, nec in posterum
aliqualiter committenda. Now when they know the bargain, and have not let go
the Living, till they have, seeking and waiting who will give most, gotten one
that has, or will satisfy their greedy desire, feign would I know, what
conscience, what equity, yea or what piety is there in such men to see us,
what in them lies, run into such wilful perjury? I grant it is our great
fault and grievous sin, I speak but of them that be faulty.
that we will so miserably for gain, for living, be drawn into so dangerous
a course: but out of all doubt, their sin is no less then ours, in that they
tempt and induce, they urge and force us thereunto: and, so they may have, (and
that they will have of one or other) their covetous humor and sacrilegious
desire accomplished and satisfied, care not what becomes of us for body or
soul. Exodus 23.4.5.
God in his law commands, if we see our enemies ox or his ass fall under
his burther, that we help him up: if we see our neighbors, yea, our enemies
beast go astray, that we bring it home again: if not, it shall be sin unto
us. 1. Cor. 9.9.
Has God care for oxen? much more then for our brother, our friend. If thou
should see a man wilfully go about to cast him self away, Simile
as to cut his own throat, ought thou not with all speed to thy uttermost,
let and hinder him? If not, shall not his blood be required at thy hands? How
then can thou be innocent, if thou shall see thy brother desperately ready by
perjury to destroy his own soul, and shall not only not reclaim and
persuade him from it, but all thou can, shall further and provoke him
thereunto? And do thou herein, but as thou would be done unto?

Lastly, when they have by some such impious course gotten into their hands the
greatest part (or the worth thereof) of that which they should freely and
wholly give; and have brought the poor and wretched Incumbent to (a portion of
the plague of Elies house) a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, 1. Sam.
2.36.
likelyer to beg then give relief, I ask, Have they done to him, but as
they would be done unto? Would any of them be content with a half, or a
quarter (sometimes not so much) of his living, and patrimony? and account that
he is honestly used, and that no wrong, no injury is done to him, so long as
he has some pittance and little part thereof left him?

Josh. 7. totum. Nehem. 13.4.7.
Oh that these Achans and Tobiahs would once be ashamed of such cruel and
unconscionable courses, and learn to deal more justly and uprightly, more
sincerely and religiously in this so great and weighty a cause: or if
Admonition or Reprehension will not prevail, (and indeed venture non habet
aures: it is hard persuading against profit) would to God our laws might be
so sharpened as might make them feel the smart of it, Deuteronomy, 13.11. and 17.13.
and therefore at least to fear to commit any more such heinous sins and
abominations amongst us.

It was thought, likely it is, at the enacting of them, that the laws already
extant were strong enough to bridle such insolences and cut off all such
mischiefs; but since dangerous experience (for them notwithstanding, our
Churches daily go to wrack and ruin: A very necessary motion.
as more then abundantly would appear, if due notice and diligent view were
taken (a thing much wished, and exceeding needful to be done) of all such
sacrilegious and symoniacall spoils, alienations, usurpations, compacts and
conueiances, which since the making of those statutes, have been made and
committed, and are yet in esse and being, unpunished and unreformed among us,)
has made the contrary too, too apparent, it cannot but be necessary, that (as
in other, and inferior cases many) farther provision be made against those
euasions and eruptions, which this kind of covetousness and impiety has
found out and put in ure.

iij. When we have Viis and modis by one hard shift or other, Act. 22.28.
happily as the President his Burgeship, gotten a (piece of a) poor living;
whereas of those Dues that are yet left unto the Church, That their
Parishmorsby customs, prescriptions, etc. do very much wrong and defraud them
no small part is, under the name of Customs, Prescriptions, and other like
sacrilegious devices, detained and wrested from us: Let men but examine their
own consciences aright, whether they would be content, if the case were
theirs, so to be dealt withal? What man is there that does not look to have
the liberty, to take the benefit of the time, and to make of his goods and
commodities as other men of theirs? What other man would think himself used
like a subject, I had almost said like a Christian, if he alone should be
enforced, to take for his goods, but as they were worth for an hundred or 200.
years ago? to take but such wages for his labor, such pay for his service,
as was allotted in like cases six or seven score years ago? Such dealing is
offered us daily by many parishionors we have: and yet which of them has the
grace or the conscience to think, Do I do, as I would be done unto?

They think they have gaily salued this sore, when they have said; Object.
Answ.
The Law is so: or, This is the Custom: as who would say, Laws or customs of
men could make iniquity to be equity, and sin no sin: evil to be good,
and good evil. If it be lawful and just in one, or in some particulars, so is
it, so may it be also by Consequ. in all: nor can that be sin, whatsoever it
be, extreme needinesse, very beggerie or whatsoever else, that may or shall
thereof ensue. If it be a course conscionably good, and fit for us, thus to be
tied to one rate still, why is it not also good for themselves? Is that good
for us, which is ill for them? If we must sell them (or let them have) our
goods at (the old) a low rate, why do not they also fell to us of their goods,
at least what we, for our necessaries, need to buy, at the like rate, as they
have ours? can We alone endure to buy at one price, An. 25. Ed. 3. 12. Ric. 2.
13. Hen. 6. An. 6. Hen. 8.7. and 23. and 24. An. 5. Eliz. c. 4. 1. Iac. c. 6.
and cap. 25. 3. Iac. c. 11. 7. Iac. c. 14. and 16.
and sell at another? Time was, that by law too, other men were tied to sell
their goods and wares at the accustomed and former prices: to take no more
wages for their work and service, then as the statute did appoine, and had
been accustomed? why were not these laws continued against others, as well as
against us? was there reason? was it equity? Was it necessary upon alteration
of the times, notwithstanding any Custom to the contrary, to repeal such
statutes, alter such laws, and break or let go such customs for other men,
and is there not the like for us? O unhappy men that we are! that all other
sorts of subjects, all other members of this common wealth, servants,
laborers, bouchers, shoomakers, artificers, vinteners, husbandmen, and who
not? can be provided for, and respected somewhat according to the times; and
only we, we I say, that are their Pastors and teachers, that are Ministers
and servants of the high God and Savior of us all, can not once be looked upon,
or in any measure, considered and eased? Nor (so hardly are we ouerborne) must
we (if some men's observation fail them not) look for any ease or amendment
of these unconscionable and injurious dealings, but account it well with us, if
nothing harder or worse be done against us. On a time, A fable.
as I have heard it told, A Lion and a man, meeting at a Painters shop, did
both view the pictures there: among which they spied one wherein was painted a
man strangling a lion. Thou see, quoth the man, that men are stronger then
lions. But, said the Lion, If Lions could paint as men do, thou should see
more men strangled by lions, then lions by men. Apply it well, and this is a
true tale still.

Object.
Some may happily marvel, why now of late, we do more complain of, and
repine at customs, prescriptions, etc. then formerly men have done?

The reason or cause is apparent. Answ.
1. Because now they are become, thorough the alteration of times, far more
prejudicial to the Church then heretofore they were. While prices of things
continued at any indifferent rate, the ods twixt them and the tithe it self,
for which they were paid, was not much: but now, the one by many degrees ( ten
or twelue-fold sometimes) so far exceeding the other, we are not able to
bear the inequality and detriment thereof any longer. The truth whereof in
this little Table, may easily be seen.

Inprimis for grounds, A Table of customarie rates.
where the Customarie pay is but 10. or 12. shillings, per an. the tithe is
worth 3. or 4. lib. at least.

Item for a goose, pigge, lamb, clafe, colte, under seven a qu. ob. ob. ob,
i.d. worth at least j.d. ij.d. iij.d. viij.d ij.s.



garden, -- but orchard acre of meadow. cowes milk. j.d. ij.d. iij.d. ij.d.
worth at least iiij.d xx.d ij.s. ij.s.





Summa, but x.d.ob.qu. instead of ix. s.ij.d.

All which rates at first, no doubt, were equal at least to the worth of the
thing rated, as to him that is any thing versed in the stories of our land, and
acquainted with the course of Tithing in ancient times, may easily appear.

A taste whereof (passing by the more ancient years, Graftons Chron. and
others. An. 1190.
wherein wheat at xvj. shillings, and xij shillings, a quarter, was counted a
great dearth: because in plentiful years it was but at xviij, pen. or ii.
shillings, and in ordinary years at iii. shillings iiii.d.iiii. shillings,
the quarter, 1205. 1286.
and by conseq. other things (for back and belly) both at the like rate. For,
note it who so will, with corn the prices of all things else, do rise and
fall.) the impartial Reader may take of this one instance, which tells us. That
in the time of King Edward the second, 1314. 1336.
by a general proclamation (the prices of victuals, belike, beginning, beyond
their former and usual rates to rise) strict order was taken, That no ox
stalled or corne-fed, should be sold for more then -- xvj. s. a fat-stalled cow
at xij. s. another cow at x.s. Item that a fat mutton corn-fed, or whose wool
is well grown, be sold but at xx. d. a fat mutton shorn at xiiij. d. and a fat
hog of two years old at iij. s. iiij. d. Item a fat goose but at ij. d. ob.
in the city, 1363.
at iij. d. a fat Capon at ij. d. but in the City at two ij. d. ob. a fat hen
at j. d. but in the city at j. d. ob. two chickens for j. d. in the city at
j. d. ob. 4. pigeons for j. d. in the city but 3.24. eggs for a penny, and in
the city but 20. etc. These being the highest prices then, what were they, may
we guess, in some former years, before they came to this height?

And that the succeeding years, from age to age, even till the end of K. Hen.
8. his reign, little differed from those, not only the general report of many
aged men, yet, or but lately living, may assure us, but also, besides the
history of those times, the sundry statutes from time to time enacted, An.
1436.
do declare: as namely that An. 15. Hen. 6. That it shall be lawful to
transport corn, when wheat does not exceed vj. s. viij. d. and barley iij s.
iiij. d. the quarter: and that 24. Hen. 8. 1444.
That Beiffe and Porke must be sold not above an halfpenny, 1532.
mutton or veale not above 3. farthings the pownd weight: and that in such
places or counties where such flesh is usually sold for less prices, they must
so continue. By which little glance over the course of times, even from the
Conquest till our age, for some hundreds of years together it appears
evidently that the prices of things continued at so low a rate, that (as I have
said) the tithe thereof could not exceed those customarie valewes, which now
appear so unequal.

2. When any custom makes more for the church then for the parishionor, then
we can not hold it. It is then forsooth, Penium in Vatinium right, not a
custom, but a Case or some thing else without conscience. As if it were not as
good and as great reason, that a custom should stand, when it makes for us, as
when it makes against us.

3. Heretofore we had the favor in law, now and then to interrupt an evil
custom, so that there was some hope that in time diverse of them might have
been broken, and we have recovered our ancient right: but now by a new kind
of doctrine, and strange sense of the law, the force of them is so confirmed
against us, that not only there is no possibility of breaking of any that now
stand, but also there is fear, that some of those (I speak but what I know)
which formerly were dead and extinct, may be revived again.

4. And generally such way or rather so many ways are put in ure for the
inge^dring and multiplying of this viperous brood, that likely it is, that in
time, and that in short time too, all our tithes will be turned, as already no
small part are, into Customs, Prescriptions, etc.

All which considered, Let no man blame us, that we so much disclame them, nor
dislike that we so far condemn them: but rather, Let every one that wishes
well unto the church, that has a love unto the clergy, and desires the
prosperity and furtherance of the Gospel amongst us, join his hand with ours
in this so holy aad necessary a work, and help what he may, to pull up by
the roots these noxious weeds and pestiferous plants, with our heavenly
Father never planted, assured, so long as they stand, the church can not but
fall, and the more they do increase and grow, the more will both learning and
religion fade and decay.

We crave herein no other favor nor benefit, then such as in like cases others
have obtained at full; and then can by no just reason and sufficient cause be
denied us: and therefore do hope, we shall at length, though with much
importunity, obtain.

The yiedling whereof, and so the restoring us all our tithes in Kind, would
yield us these great, needful and present commodities.

The benefits that would arise of the remoouing of customs, etc.
1. The minister should have (in most places) a sufficient Living: the on half
whereof, and more many times, his parishnors, by your customs, prescriptions,
etc. deteine from him.

2. The Condition of all places would be alike, whereas now a man knows not,
what his living is, how great soever the parish be, till he know, what customs
and prescriptions, etc. are there: which commonly, the greater the parish is,
the worse, and the more they are.

3. We should be the better able to keep Hospitality and relieve the poor.

4. We should be well able to pay to the Kings Majesty his Tenthes and
Subsidies, which now to many of us, is a burden heavy to be borne.

5. We should with the better ease be able to forbear (that whereof there is
great need but little hope) the Restoring (I mean) of Impropriations, while
as the rest paid us in kind, if the Composition for the Vycaridge be any
thing indifferent, would of it self, for the most part, be a tolerable
maintenance.

6. Suytes for Tithes, would be both fewer and easier. For neither would they
be so liable to the common law: nor could they be so clogged with odious and
senseless prohibitions, as now they are.

These motives being so reasonable, Ridl. View of L.p. 113.115.
and the spoils and losses which other ways we do sustain, so great; little
can our people do for us, if in part of recompense, they cannot find in their
hearts these only viz: our Tithes in kind, to restore unto us at full.

That in recovering of their Rights, the difficulties they endure, are very
many and extreme.
Fourthly and lastly, many times we are by covetous and contentious persons
denied our dues, and in forced, if we will have ought, to recover it by force
of Law. But then good Lord, what a Labyrinth of labors, what an heap of
mischiefs and perils by vexations and troubles, by combinations and plots, by
expense and charge, by loss of time and study, distraction of mind and
distaste of men, do we cast our selves into? that better were it many times for
us to have lost more then we sought to recover, then to have attempted it: and
too late do we repent our unfortunate course.

Wherein we above all the members of this common wealth, above all the
Inhabitants of this land, may justly bewail our misery, and hard condition,
for that whereas for our office and callings sake very fit and necessary it
were, that our things might, so plainly and peaceably be settled unto us, that
we might not need to go to law for them at all; or if, through the
perverseness of men, that sometime be requisite, that we might be dispatched
with such favor and ease both to our bodies and our purses, as might not
either weary out the one, or wast out the other, nor distract us from the
performance of our duties. Now alas, so are we vexed with long and tedious
suites; so are we crossed with Prohibitions and Consultations, so are we
removed from one court to another; so are we driven from one law to another;
so are we consumed and exhausted with travel and expenses, as if either men
delighted above other to vex us: or cared little what wrong and despite is
done us: or were agreed by such extremities so to handle and encomber us, as
either they would wring from us, or we should be weary of altogether: this
being the ordinary event of our trials, let the case and cause be never so
plain and just, that we must return by loosers lane, or beggars bush.

Happy therefore were we in dieb. illis, when our causes (in manner all) were
tried within our own Consistories, and we needed seldom to go farther for
trial of our right by day, then we could return home again at night: when
ordinarily the charge of a suite was fewer shillings then now it is pounds, and
the time not above so many months as now years: when Prohibitions were as
rare as now they are common, and the statutes on which they are grounded, had
either their names not known, or their sense otherwise delivered.

We deny not, but that some Prohibitions, ( P. de iure.) be necessary as a
pale or partition wall betwixt the 2. Jurisdictions, ecclesiastical and
temporal, to keep, as banks each river within its own channel; each cause
within its own court: and we easily grant that there is and must be a twofold
Jurisdiction. But till the one be so confined and limited, that it intrude not
nor usurp upon the other: and (which is the thing we specially complain of)
until the means of Limitation, be only such, or at least only so used, as
may perform their proper and right use and original intention, and be not
made (as Prohibitions de facto commonly fall out to be) as sluices that convey
all water to one Mill, means to bring all causes into one Court, we can hope
of no tolerable condition, nor acknowledge that men do to us as they would be
done unto. So that (to conclude) better were it for us, rebus sic stantibus,
that our causes for Tithes were translated wholly from the one into the other
jurisdiction. For then should we not be enforced, as now full often without any
just cause, Cic. pro Murena.
Iasonlike to run hither and thither to try and take them up peece-meale:
and so at least our vexation would somewhat be diminished: our undoing would
the longer be deferred.

These Christian Reader, The Conclusion with an Admonition.
these I say, be some, and but some, of those hard measures and unequal
dealings which are offered to us of the Ministry. Which who so well
considers off, must needs acknowledge that that rule of Equity, which should
guide and order all men's actions, is little observed toward us: that few they
be, that do to us, as they would (if the case were theirs) look to be done
unto: and the most part are toward us above others, most careless of rendering
unto us that double honor, that condign regard and reward, which the Laws of
God and Nature, the rule of Equity and true Justice requires at their hands.

Oh that England, 1. To England.
England, I say would once awake out of this sinful sleep, open her eyes to
see this her over sight; settle her heart, and set her hands to reform this
evil now at the last. It is enough my dear Country, that all this while thy
name has been dishonored with this corruption. Return, return therefore
yet at the last, Revel. 2.5.
and do (those which should have been) thy first works.

You lay impropriatours, bethink yourselues, before it be too late, 2.
Impropriatours. 1. Cor. 9. v. 11. and 13. Damas. Decret. 3.
what it is* and whose it is that you keep from the Church. Think with what
equity and conscience you can be partakers with the altar, and not attend at
the altar? and reap so great an harvest of carnal things, not sowing any
spiritual? Think what warrant you have from God, that he is pleased to forgo
his hallowed things? Leuit. 27.28.
and lose his sacred right? and what assurance, that ye shall escape his
Judgment, and not incur the danger of his curse, Josh. 6.15. Mal. 3.8.
Capit. carul. lib. 6. cap. 285. Acts 5.1.
for laying your profane hands upon his holy things? his so many, and so great
things? so long ere you were borne, given up, devoted and consecrated to his
use and service?* Think well whether it be a truth in Divinity, that without
Restitution of any goods unlawfully gotten or kept, Aug. ad Macedon. epist. 54
Latim. on the L. Pr. ser. 5. and 6.
there is no Remission? and (therefore) if you will have any hope of pardon,
any peace of conscience, any rest with God, whether you are not bound to a
Restitution, to some tolerable restitution at the least, of that, which you
thus deteine? And consider in your hearts, whether you do deal indifferently,
with equity and a good conscience, in that you see and suffer, both Pastor
and flock, Priest and People, to lie and live in want and need, the one of
temporal, the other of spiritual things, you, the while devouring that which
should, and would supply and fulfill them both? and which properly and
originally was by God and man to that very end and purpose allotted and
allowed? At whose hands will the lives and of those men, and the blood of those
souls be required?

3. To Patrons
You Patrons remember your charge, and endeavor to be, as you are termed, not
robbers and spoilers but Helpers, Maintainers, Preseruers and Defenders of your
churches, and the Rights thereof. Leave off, leave off in time, that buying and
selling, that chopping and changing of Benefices, which is now so common among
you. Give up, render back and restore again those tithes and portions of
tithes and Gleebe, which as sweet and sat morsels, many of you have so greedily
swallowed, and most unjustly and sacrilegiouslie extorted from the Church.
Think it not too much to serve God with your own goods, 1. Chro. 21.24 2. Sam.
24.24.
and to pay him the tenth of your increase, as well as any other of your
parish. Think not that you must, or can have a privilege above the rest to be
free from tithing, or exempted from maintaining the Minister. Gal. 6.6.7.
Be rather an example unto others of well-doing, and a president to the whole
Parish of upright dealing and true devotion in that kind. Discharge the trust
reposed in you, as becomes honest men, and see that freely and faithfully you
bestow that which is committed to your care. As you would be ashamed but once
to rob any man by the high ways side, so much more (for of the two this is the
greater sin) be ashamed to rob the Minister of the Church from year to
year, Fenton on Pro. 20.25. page 49.
of that which he should live upon. Deceive not your selves with his consent,
which either wickedly for greediness of filthy gain, conspireth with you to
work iniquity: or cowardly, as a true man his purse to a thief, yields to
you, for fear: or miserably for his need, is contented, as a poor man in his
want, to hold his peace, and take what you will spare, and he can get. His
consent in this case is nothing, both because it is coacted, and not merely
voluntary, and because the right Originallie is in God, not in him. Think not
that Money, that goods so unjustly, so wickedly, so sacrilegiouslie gotten,
Prou. 9.17.
can prosper. Stolen waters are sweet: but how long? and hid bread is
pleasant: but to whom? When you have stripped the poor Minister of all that he
has, and have brought him to that misery that the Iaile is ready to eat
him; and to that low estate that he cannot possibly, probably at least, recover
himself in 7. happily not in 20. years after, do now laugh in your sleeves at
his needinesse? and make your selves merry with your prey? Hab. 1.16.
Do you sacrifice to your net, and burn incense unto your yarne, because by
them your portion is fat, and your meat plenteous? Are you resolved
heathen-like, Vespasian.
that Dulcis lucri odor, ex re qualibet: Gain is good, how ever it be gotten?
Yet be you assured, and know it well, ye godless wretches and merciless
bloodsuckers, Deuteronomy. 24.14. Iam. 5.4. Psalm. 83.12. Esaias 5.8. Am. 8.4. Hab. 2.6.
Zech. 5.3.
That the cry of the poor, of such poor Ministers and their families, whom
you have thus beggered and spoiled, and also of the poor of their Parishes,
that should and might, if you had not thus rifled and disabled their Ministers,
have been relieved and refreshed by them, does ascend into the ears of the
Lord of Sabbath, and will procure a heavy curse, and pull down a hasty
vengeance on you and your posterity, that shall root out and cut off from you,
Esai. 9.14.
head and tail, branch and rush in one day.

4. To Parishioners. Number. 18. Ecclus. 35 9. ad. 13.
Ye Parishioners, defraud not your Pastors of their due and necessary
maintenance. Let them have those portions, which God out of his own, and not
your goods, has allotted them. Diminish no part thereof by your Customs,
Prescriptions, and other like unconscionable courses now adays among you too
common, but doing to them as you would be done unto, let them as your selves do
in your goods, enjoy the benefit of the time in theirs. You cannot but know in
your hearts and consciences, that it is no more possible for them to live after
the rates of former times, then for your selves: and therefore you ought no more
to urge them thereto, then you would be content to be urged to the like:
Zanch. de oper. D. lib. 4. cap. 1. these. 7. page 703 Dig. l. 2. tit. 14. De
Pact. L. 32. Amb. in 1. These. 5.
which not one of you would be. Think not you can be excused by color of
custom, or pretext of humane law, to break the law of God, to debar them of
their due, and deteine them in needines and want. Look not, while they are so
evil dealt with, that they should watch well for your souls, or yield you
plentiful store of heavenly things. While they do it with grief, Heb. 13.17.
and great distraction of body and mind, it cannot but be unprofitable for you.
They cannot labor for you, as they might and would, if they had fit and
convenient means. Well worthy are you to bear the loss and lack of their
labors, and not worthy to reap better fruit, which sustaining such hurt, see
the cause, and seek not the remedy; more, are the cause and will not be the
amendment. I verily believe, many of you are ashamed to see in what penurious
case and needy state (many of) your Ministers do live: and therefore I wonder
how either your eyes can be so blind, as not to see, or your hearts so hardened,
as (seeing it) not to redress the cause thereof. The law of God bids you: no
law of man's forbids you to do it: and yet, as if either you ought not, or else
dared not, you leave it undone. In ill doing many of you can be ready to run
one before another, and to encourage and draw-on one the other: how comes it
then to pass, that in weldoing all are so backward, every one is so afraid to
be foremost, and (in manner) none willing to be a leader, or an ensample to the
rest? Be you assured that even in this case too, Josh. 24.15.
if you will not be of Ioshuahs mind, that is, resolved, whatsoever others do,
that yet each one of you for his part will do that is right and fit, it will
never be well. While you all tarry to look for all to join and go on with
you, it must needs be, that all abide in sin and none amendment be found
among you.

Lastly, Let every man in his several place and calling, from the highest to
the lowest, 5. To all men in general.
make this Rule the Level of all his actions, his internal and external
actions, viz. his thoughts, his words, and his deeds, to all men-ward for
body, goods and name. Let him by it examine still what measure it is he does
offer to any other: assured, that only is, and can be the right and just, which
is suitable to this rule, and can abide, as good gold the touch, the trial of
this stone. Let him offer and do to another no way any thing that is contrary
to this course. He does but deceive his own heart and blind himself, that
thinks his own or other men's perverse and disordered wills or desires; other
men's doings or examples; any Custom or humane law; or any other like precept,
can justify or bear him out therein. The Rule is so just and perfect, so
plain and pregnant, so large and general, that against it no just exception
can be taken, no lawful privilege or sufficient exemption can be pretended.
Wherefore, and in a word, as the wise man says, Whatsoever thou take in hand,
Ecclus 7.36.
Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss: so I, Let every man in all
passages betwixt him and other men, remember well this one sentence, and do
thereafter, Do as thou would be done unto, and surely he shall not, he can
not do amiss. Such dealing, such doing shall make equity to abound in the
land, and integrity to ouerflow the earth. It shall make men's works to shine
before men: Math. 5.16.
and men themselves being blameless and pure, even as the sons of God
without rebuke in the midst of a naughty and crooked nation to shine, Philip.
2.15.
as lights in the world. Finally, it shall make them of their calling and
election sure: 2. Pet. 1.10.
and minister to them assured hope, when these their mortal days are ended,
with the immortal Angels and blessed Saints, to inhabit those celestial and
glorious mansions, and inherit those eternal and unspeakable joys, which
there are prepared for those that have done and do here the will, Math. 7.21.
even this will of their Father which is in heaven. To whom with his only son
Ie-Christ our Lord and Savior, and the blessed spirit of them both the holy
Ghost our Sanctifier and Comforter, three persons and one everliving God, be
ascribed and rendered all praise, honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

