SEXTVS. The Sixth Set of Books, WHEREIN ARE Anthemes for Versus and Chorus,
of 5. and 6. Parts; Apt for Violls and Voices: Newly Composed by Michaell Est,
Batchelar of Music, and Master of the Choristers of the Cathedral Church in
LITCHFIELD.

LONDON: Printed by THOMAS SNODHAM, for M. L. and A. B. 1624.

The TABLE of the Songs.
Of five Parts.
AS they departed. First Part. I But what went you out to see? Second Part. II
For this is he. Third Part. III I have roared. First Part. IIII I am brought.
Second part. V My loins are filled. Third part. VI Blow out the Trumpet. First
Part. VII Let all the Inhabitants of the earth. Second Part. VIII
Of six Parts.
How shall a young man cleanse his ways? First Part. IX Thy words have I hid
within my heart. Second Part. X With my lips have I bin telling. Third Part. XI
I have had as great delight. Fourth Part. XII Awake. XIII Sing we merrily to
God. First Part. XIIII Take the Psalm. Second Part. XV Blow up the Trumpet.
Third Part. XVI
To which is added in a vacant page, before these other Songs, an Air of a
Canzo, Composed in honor of the most illustrious Princess, the Lady
Elizabeth, etc.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, and Right Honorable LORD, JOHN, Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the great SEAL, of his Majesty's most
Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, etc.
Right Reverend, and Right Honorable:
I Have little Learning, but I have so much Music, as to know there is no
discord so harsh, as when Benefits and ungratefulness are put together. This
is a discord that cannot be tempered by any art, to make a grace, or to make
the harmony more rare and artificial. It were a shame for me therefore, that
know somewhat in Music, to commit such an unpardonable error in manners. And
this I must of necessity do, if with all humility from the deepest thoughts
of my heart, in private and in public, I do not express all possible
thankfulness to so Great, so Wise, so Learned, so Noble, and bountiful a
Patron and Benefactour. Goodness is not to be esteemed by quantity. A Hand or
an Eye drawn by a curious Painter, is worth a large Table done by an ordinary
Hand: But your Lordships Beneficence was both great and good. For it was an
Annuity for my life; and it was done so, that it had in it all that can commend
a good deed. It was not done for alliance, or former knowledge, which makes a
benefit a debt: Not for Service past; for that is not a benefit, but a reward:
Not wrung or forced by long suit, or mediation of friends, which pulls down the
price of any benefit: Not after long delay and much waiting, which is the
torment of Suitours, and makes a benefit paid for before it come. Not done with
wayward looks, and chiding, which under the color of good counsel, gives a
benefit a bitter taste of contumely. Nor won after some denyals and
repulses; that which we wrestle for, we account our own. Neither was it given
upon no cause, for so benefits are not placed but cast away. It had none of
these, but all the contrary commendations. For your Lordship conferred it on me
when I was unknown unto you, when no man had ever spoken for me; when I was
far remote and least thought of so Honorable a friend, and less of such a
favor, and it was sent by your Lordship to me; and all this done so, that when
I came to sent my thanks, your Lordship knew not who I was; yet was it done
upon hearing of some Motects of mine, of which I would not in modesty speak,
but that it makes for your Lordships just praise; He does not give, but throw
away, that has no reason for his giving: Let the world then be judge, if I
have not good cause to profess all thankfulness. And if every man, whom your
Lordship has thus prevented in greater matters (as I have heard of a great
many since this favor was done to me) had opportunity or would take occasion
to give your Lordship thanks as this Paper does, it would turn the envy of
some ill-disposed, into admiration of your sweet and noble nature. For my poor
self, I have hastened these few Motects, that I might show some part of my
thankfulness, and be further indebted to your Lordship, for a new favor, in
taking them under your Lordships protection. I know they are not worthy your
Lordships ear, but thankfulness consists not in the means, but in the heart
of him that for benefits is engaged. Yet it would be some content to me, if I
were sure, that as many eyes would look upon this Epistle, as it may be there
will be ears to hear the Songs I present. But I must be content with the
inward testimony of my heart, in which I will daily pray for your Lordships
happiness, and honor, and rest

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, MICHAELL EST.

Of 6. voc. SEXTVS.
IX. The first part.
HOw shall a young man? ^

Chorus.

With my whole heart have I sought thee, ^ have I sought thee, have I sought
thee, O, O let me not go wrong, out of ^ thy commandments, out of thy
commandments, out of thy commandments.

X. The second part.
THy words have I hid. ^

Chorus.

O teach me thy sta- ^ tutes, O teach me thy statutes, O teach me, O teach me
thy statutes, thy sta- ^ tutes, O teach me thy sta- tutes.

XI. The third part.
WIth my lips have I bin telling. ^

Chorus.

of all the judgments of thy mouth, of thy mouth, the ^ judgments of thy
mouth, thy mouth, the judgments, the judgments of thy ^ mouth, the judgments
of thy mouth, the judgments of thy mouth.

XII. The fourth part.
^ Verse.

I Have had as great delight, I have had as great ^ delight in the way of thy
testi- moneys, of thy testimonies, of thy testi- ^ moneys, of thy testi- mo-
nies, as in all manner of riches, all manner of riches, ^ Chorus. all manner of
riches, of ri- ches, For I will talk of thy commandments, of ^ thy
commandments, and have respect, and have respect unto thy ways, and have ^
re- spect unto thy ways, and have respect unto thy ways, unto thy ways, ^
unto thy ways.

XIII.
^ AWake, awake, awake, awake, and stand up to judge my ^ quarrel, and stand up
and stand up to judge my quarrel, and stand up, and stand ^ up, and stand up,
and stand up to judge my qua- rell, Avenge thou ^ my cause in thy strength, in
thy strength, in thy strength, in thy strength, in ^ thy strength, my God and
my Lord, my God and my Lord, my God and my ^

Lord, my God and my Lord, my God and my Lord, and my Lord. A- men, ^ A- men,
A- men, A- men, A- men.

XIIII. The first part.
^ SIng we.

^ Verse.

Sing we merrily, merrily ^ to God our strength, sing we merrily, merri- ly to
God our strength, sing we ^ merrily, merri-ly, merri- ly to God our strength,
Make a cheerful noise, ^ make a cheerful noise, a cheerful noise, make a
cheerful noise, a cheerful ^ noise, a cheerful noise, make a cheerful
noise, a cheerful noise unto the God

^ Chorus. of Jacob, unto the God of Jacob, unto the God of Ia- cob, un- ^ to
the God of Jacob, the God of Ia- cob, the God of Ia- cob.

XV. The second part.
^ TAke the Psalm. ^

Verse. Take the Psalm, bring hither the Tabret, Take the Psalm, bring hither
the ^ Chorus. Tabret, take the Psalm, bring hither the Ta- bret, The merry, ^
merry Harp, with the Lute, the merry Harp, with the Lute, the Lute, the ^
merry Harp, with the Lute, The merry Harp, the merry Harp, with the Lute, ^
the Lute, the Lute, with the Lute, with the Lute, the Lute.

XVI. The third part.
^ Verse.

BLow up the Trumpet, the Trumpet, blow up the Trum- ^ pet, the Trumpet, in the
new moon, in the new moon, in the new moon, ^ Even in the time appointed,
the time appointed, even in the time appointed, ^ even in the time appointed,
appointed, For this was made a statute, for ^ this was made a statute for Is-
rael, for Is-ra-el, for Is-ra-el, for Is-ra-el, for Is- ^ ra-el, for Is-ra-el,
for Is-ra-el, and a Law of the God of Jacob, and a Law of ^ the God, of Jacob,
and a Law of the God of Ia- cob, and a law of the ^ God of Jacob, the God of
Jacob, of the God, of the God of Jacob, the ^ God of Ia- cob.

FINIS.

