THE BORING OF THE EAR, Containing a plain and profitable Discourse by way of
Dialogue, concerning 1. Our preparation before Hearing. 2. Our demeanor in
Hearing. 3. Our exercise after we have heard the Word of God.
Written by that faithful and diligent Minister of Gods Word, Master Stephen
Egerton, sometimes Preacher of the Black-Friars in London.

ECCLES. 4. 17. Look to thy feet when thou come into the House of God, and
be readier to hear, then to offer the Sacrifice of Fools. LONDON Printed by
William Stansby. 1623.

To the Christian and beneuolent READER.
CHristian READER, though mine own Meditations have hither-to ever shunned the
common view of the World, contenting my self with the private Approbation of
mine own Charge: yet considering the general good that may accrue unto the
whole Church of Christ, by these labors of my Reverend Kinsman, Master Stephen
Egerton, I have ventured to commend them unto Gods Church, being thereunto also
entreated. I know, without my commendation, they will be worth your small cost
in procuring, your little labor in perusing. For it is admirable to consider,
that in these preaching and hearing Mat. 9. 32.
days, such faithful preaching, such frequent hearing, so many should yet be
possessed as it were with a dumb 1. Cor. 13. 1.
Devil, and all our Sermons to the most of men but as sounding Brass or a
tinkling Mat. 11. 17
Cimball. So we pipe, and no man danceth, we mourn and no man weepeth, we
preach peace, but no man sorroweth for his sin. May Psalm. 115. 6, 7.
we not say of these, as David of the Idols, They have ears and hear not? or
as our Savior translateth that fearful commination against the despisers of
his Word; Hearing they shall hear, and shall not understand, least they hear
Esa. 6. 9, 10 Mat. 13. 14
with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and be converted and
healed. So to hear then, is to attend with the ear, to receive with the
heart, to convert in the life and conversation, else our sinful souls can
never be healed.

And therefore this is the voice of the Spirit unto the seven Churches of Asia,
He Reave. 2. 17.
that has ears to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

There are five sorts of ears that are not hearing ears. The first, is a dull
Ear, when a man is either drousie, or careless, or ignorant.

The second, is a stopped Ear, as the Serpent stops his ear against the
voice of the Charmer. Such are our Recusants, and secure Persons, that will not
hear, lest they should be thawed from their dregs, and so converted and saved.

The third, is a prejudicial or sinister Ear: this man like Luke 10.
Malchus has lost his right Ear, and he comes as the Pharisee to Christ, to
tempt the Minister, to catch him in his talk, turning all his speech to the
worst, because he hates or despises the person of the Preacher. This man is
like the Spider that sucketh poison out of the sweetest flowers.

2. Tim. 4. 3. 2. These. 2. 10 2. Cor. 11. 3.
The fourth, is the nice or itching Ear that must be clawed, that will hear
nothing but novelties, and dainties, that looks not so much to the goodness
of the meat, as to the sweetness of the sauce. Surely this man must needs
have a thin and pined soul, and he often meets with that he understands
not, meat that he cannot digest, and so seldom or never profits by the Word
of God.

The fifth, is an adulterous Ear, that will hear any but the voice of their
own Shepherds. You shall know them as the Harlot is known, they are ever
gadding to seek their new Lovers: but God shall one day discover their
adultery to the shame of their Persons, to the disgrace of their Profession, to
the confusion of their faces. To such let me say, as Christ to the woman taken
in adultery, Ioh. 8. 10.
Go and sin no more. Now all these have Ears and hear not, and therefore
have Mark. 7. 34.
need to have the word Ephphata pronounced unto them as unto the deaf man. And
for their better direction in this duty, this present Tract is of excellent
use, being plain and familiar for the manner, and sound for the matter, being
grounded upon many excellent exhortations, and rules in the Holy Scripture:
whereby men may know how to hear with glory unto God, honor unto his
Ordinance, and profit unto their own souls.

The necessity of this duty the Apostle proves where he thus argues, Faith
comes Romans 10. 17
by hearing, etc. Now without faith it is impossible to please God.

The neglect or contempt, or ignorance of this duty, is the cause of all
profaneness* whereas if men would hear as they ought, this hearing would beget
faith, and faith would bring forth all excellent graces, accompanying
salvation. The servant which bound himself to the perpetual service of his
master because he loved him was to be brought unto the door of his Exodus 21. 6.
house, and his Master, was to boar his ear with an Awle. Whosoever he is that
enters into Gods service, he must have this mark, even an open ear, and it
must be boared at the Door of Gods Eccles. 4. 17
house, that he may be readier to hear, then to offer the Sacrifice of fools.
The Hebrews say, it is the right ear that must be boared: and surely if men
hear with a sinister ear, they do not express themselves true servants of
God. Whosoever therefore has dedicated himself to the service of the Lord, let
him express his Obligation or Indenture, by his open ear to the Word of God:
for his sheep hear his voice, and his Family do his command. God gives unto
every one that he receives into his service, this Jewel to hang in his ear,
namely, to hear with attention and reverence.

1. Whatsoever God speaks.

2. When soever he speaks.

3. By whom soever he speaks.

The next punishment unto death by our National law, is losing the ears. And
certainly whose ears or hearing God has suffered to be taken away, they are
in a dangerous or desperate case, because the Word is the savor 2. Cor. ^. 16.
of life unto the right hearer, and the savor of death unto him that hears
not as he ought. Now that you may hear with your ears, and understand with
your hearts, and be converted from your evil ways, and be healed of all your
sins; use this short and easy receipt; and as you find the effect of it,
return the glory to God, esteem of him who has presented it to your view,
and use as one that has good will unto Sion, and moaneth for the deafness of
the Daughter of his People, and shall ever pray Ephphatha be open. Mark. 734.
that this word Ephphatha may be by the Spirit of the Lord effectually
pronounced unto all those who desire to hear the glad tidings of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor
and praise, and obedience yielded, now and for ever,

AMEN.
Yours in the Lord Jesus to be commanded. Richard Crook.

To the Reader.
OF all the Senses, none is more needful, or useful, then Hearing. Of all
the Objects of Hearing, none to be compared to the Word of God. To be taught
then how to hear the Word of God, must needs be a lesson worth the learning.
In this Treatise is * Master Stephen Egerton of Blackfriars* London
that doctrine taught. The Author who first indicted it (being a man by long
Practice and much Experience, acquainted with Boaring of the Ear) the Matter
contained in it (being a means sanctified to bring us unto Life and Ha. 55. 3.
Luke 11. 28.
Happiness) and the Manner of unfolding that matter (being distinct and
perspicuous) do in especial manner commend it unto thee. Come and read.
Read and Judge.

William Gouge.

THE BOARING OF THE EAR.
CHAP. I.
LVKE 8. 18. Take heed how you hear, etc.
Quest.

IS it a hard matter to hear the Word of God preached heedfully, and with
fruit?

Ans. Yes verily: else our Savior Christ would never have exhorted and
persuaded his hearers to the performance of this duty by so many Arguments.

Qu. What Arguments does he use?

An. In this Parable he uses diverse reasons: one, because it is a very rare
and dainty thing to hear the Word profitably, seeing among so many thousands
that flock together, scarce the fourth part reapeth any profit; because though
men call you not to account: though Parents, Pastors, Masters, etc. neglect us,
yet God will call us to account, and it will one day appear, who have heard of
conscience, and who not.

Qu. What other reasons may be gathered out of the words of Christ, to prove
the profit, necessity, and difficulty of hearing?

An. Diverse: as first, to be a good and fruitful hearer is a special gift of
God, and peculiar to the Elect, My sheep Ioh. 10. 27.
hear my voice. And again, John 8. 47.
he that is of God, hears Gods Word. And Christ showing the reason why his
Disciples profited rather then others, says, To you it is given, etc. Luke 8.
10.
with many other places to the like purpose: as when true Faith is called the
Faith Of Titus 1. 1. etc.
the Elect.

Secondly, In respect of the excellency of the Word, which is called the Word
of the Kingdom, both in respect of the subject, and also of the Romans 1. 16.
Acts 26. 32 Titus 2. 11.
effect. To the same purpose it is called, The Power of God to salvation to
every one that believes. The Word of Grace, and Faith. Seeing then, it is the
word of the Kingdom, yea, of such a Kingdom; with what attention, resolution,
and heedfulnesse ought we to hear it? Iehu and his Companions counted the
Prophet a mad fellow: yet when he brought him tidings of a Kingdom, he was 2.
Kings 9. 6, 7, 8.
glad to hear it, and willing to embrace it.

Thirdly, To the same purpose (which may be another reason) it is called Seed,
yea, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
Immortal Seed, whereupon the Apostle makes the same Iam. 1. 17, 18 Ibid. 1.
19, 20.
conclusion in effect, that Christ does here in this place saying, Wherefore, my
dear Brethren, let every man be swift to hear, and slow to wrath: for the
wrath of man works not the righteousness of God So the Minister is Mat. 13.
called the Lords Sower, or Husbandman, and the people his husbandry, and the
time of preaching, the time of sowing or the Seed time: shall we then cast away
our selves, and cause the Lord to lose both his labor and cost upon us?

Fourthly, Wherein (which may be a fourth reason) we are to be the more
vigilant, because Satan like a ravening Foul follows us sore at the heels,
etc. Therefore as at all times, and in all holy duties: so especially in this,
let us remember that we have not (as the Apostle says) to Ephesians. 6. 12.
wrestle against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, and Powers, etc.

Fifthly, A fifth reason (likewise arising from hence) may be this. It is a rare
and singular grace, which few attain unto: scarce one of four; yea, rather
scarce one of forty Deuteronomy. 25. 4 Acts 16. 14.
that hears heedfully with fruit, reverent attention, etc. Plain experience
proves as much, Let Ministers examine their people, Parents their Children,
Masters their Servants, etc. and it will plainly appear how slenderly they
have heard: yea, let every man examine his own heart, and call himself to
account concerning those things which have been delivered in the public
Congregation, and his conscience will tell him, what a heedlesse and Zach. 3.
1. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
unprofitable hearer he has been.

Sixthly and lastly, The great gain and increase promised to careful hearers,
ought to encourage us, To him that Luke 8. 18.
has (says Christ) shall be given. Wherefore seeing it is a thing so rare,
and excellent, so profitable, so difficult (for the fat heart, dull ears,
heavy head, drowsy eyes, get no good:) Let no man think with himself, I
will now sit down and take my place, and sit down at ease, and hear at
pleasure, but rather let him thus think, I will go now to an exercise indeed
(although some scorn, and others foolishly impropriate the word) I must now
buckle with Satan and mine own 1. Tim. 4. 8.
corruption, etc.

Qu. Seeing then it is a duty so necessary, so profitable, rare, excellent,
and difficult to hear well; what things are chiefly to be respected to the
end we may hear as we ought?

An. To the end we may hear as we ought, we are to consider, First, what is
to be done before the Sermon: Secondly, what is to be done in the very Sermon
time: And lastly, what is to be done after the Sermon.

CHAP. II.
Qu. What is the general duty of hearers before the Sermon time?

An. Their duty is, with great care and conscience to prepare and sanctify
themselves.

Qu. How is that proved?

An. First, by plain and evident Precepts and Testimonies of Scripture, both
in the Old and New Testament. Solomon says, Look well to thy Eccles. 4. 17
feet when thou go to the House of GOD, so as thou may be prepared to
hear, that is, to obey and believe, the word of God preached in his Temple: as
if he should say, look thou be more careful to offer up thy self unto God,
by giving him an obedient heart and ear, then to bring Calves, Goats, etc.
without a believing and obedient heart, as the manner of Hypocrites and
Worldlings Iam. 1. 21. 22.
is. James says, Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
maliciousness, and receive with meekness the word that is grafted in you,
which is able to save your souls.

Secondly, The practice of GODS faithful people, Genesis 35. 2.
both before the Law, Genesis 35. Job 1. 5. Exo. 19. 10. 1. Sam. 16. 5 2. Chro. 15.
12.

2. Chro. 29. 5 Joel 2. 15. 16 Psalm. 18. 7. Job 15. 15.


2. Job 1. 5. And at the giving of the Law. Exodus 19. 10. and likewise after
the Law, 1. Sam. 16. 5. 2. Chronicles 15. 12. and 2. Chron. 29. 5. Joel 2. 15,
16.

Thirdly, The glorious Majesty of God before whom we come.

1. Cor. 2. 9. 1. Tim. 3. 16 1. Pet. 1.
Fourthly, the excellency of these heavenly things which in this holy meeting
are propounded unto us.

Fifthly, Our own insufficiency. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
2. Corinthians 3. 5.

Sixthly, The pollution and uncleanness both of our hearts and lives: in
respect whereof we ought to hearken to the saying of the holy Apostle, Cleanse
your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts James 4. 8.
ye double minded men, and so draw near to God, and he will draw near to
you.

Seventhly, (This may be referred to the fifth Reason) if the Heathen did so
highly esteem of their Deuillish Mysteries, that they used to say, Be gone, be
gone far from hence all ye profane ones; And again, Touch no unclean
thing with unwashed hands: how much more ought we to think thus of the great
and holy Mystery of Godliness, and accordingly to prepare our selves to be
partakers thereof?

Qu. You have showed me generally what is to be done of all men before the
Sermon, now tell what is to be done more particularly.

An. First, they must carefully avoid su^fetting and drunkenness, and
disorder in Diet: and use great moderation, and sobriety, especially over
night, and in the morning before they resort to the public Assemblies* Luke
21. 32
Christ says, Take heed lest at any time your hearts be overcome with
surfeiting and drunkenness. If at all times we must take heed, how much more
at this time? For Wine is a mocker, says Solomon* Pro. 20. 1.
and strong drink is raging* And as the Prophet says, Wine and strong drink
take away the heart. And Esaias says* Woe be to them that rise early to follow
drunkenness, etc. then he gives the reason, saying, Esaias 11. 24.
They regard not the Lords work, but despise the Law of the Lord of Hosts.
Where the Apostle says, Be not filled with Wine, wherein is excess, Ephesians. 4.
17. 18.
but be ye filled with the spirit; He shows that fullness is an Enemy to
spiritual Graces: whereof heedfull and profitable hearing of the word is one.

Qu. What is the next particular hinderance to be avoided, when we are to go
to the House of God?

An. Excessive care and minding of Earthly things, which are reckoned up as
those special thorns that choke up the Seed of the Word of God, that it
cannot Luke 8. 14*
bring forth fruit in due season. Wherefore when we go to hear a Sermon, we
must endeavor by all means to empty and disburden our selves of all such
thoughts, casting them from us as Thales did his goods, choosing rather to
drown them, then let them drown us by trouble and distraction.

Qu. What is the third particular hinderance?

An. A conceit and ouerweening of some singular knowledge, and furniture of
Books and reading, whereby they come with such a prejudice as will not suffer
them to reap any profit by the Word preached.

Qu. What are the most convenient remedies for the removing of this evil?

An. To this purpose we are first to call to mind, that the preaching of the
Gospel is the power of God to salvation, not to the simple and unlearned only,
but even to Romans 1. 16.
every one that believes.

Secondly, That these Mysteries are of that nature and so disposed by the
providence of GOD, that they are often revealed to babes in knowledge and
learning, when they are hid from the wise and prudent, and therefore the Mat.
11. 25
more witty, learned, and quick of conceit that men are, the more need they
have to resort to the House of God with fear and trembling.

Thirdly, The examples of Gods faithful Servants. David was not only a wise,
and witty Prince, but a holy Prophet likewise, and a man for his piety and
other spiritual graces most dear and acceptable to God: yet who more desirous
and forward to hear Psalm. 42. and 84. and 122. etc.

Acts 18. 36.


the Word of God then he? Aquila and Priscilla had better knowledge then
Apollos himself an eloquent Preacher, yet they disdayned not to hear him: Nor
he them, though he were more learned in other things.

Lastly, the public Assemblies of the Church have more singular promises of
Psalm. 29. 9. Joel 2, 22. Rom* 10. 13, 14, 15.

Mat. 15. 19, 20.


GODS present Grace and blessings, as may appear by sundry places of Scripture.

Qu. What is the fourth hinderance?

An. A partial, or rather schismatic respect of persons, such as was in the
Church of Corinth, where 1. Cor. 3. 3, 4
some extolled one, and some another, some Paul, some Apollos?

Qu. Whence proceeds this respect of persons?

An. It proceeds originally from the hearers, either from the ignorance of
their minds; or from the corruption of their hearts; and occasionally from the
Teachers, in respect of the diversity of their gifts, and manner of handling
of the Scriptures.

Qu. How are men hindered by their own ignorance, and corruption?

An. When for want of Judgment and Sanctimonie, they prefer such as speak
pleasing things, and tickle their ears with Eloquent terms, pleasant
stories, and witty Jests, and cannot away with those that speak the words of
truth and soberness, Acts 26. Titus 2. 1.
and the things as the same Apostle says, that become wholesome doctrine.
Especially, if they do plainly, and roundly lay their sins 1. Kings. 22 7, 8.
before them. Hence it was that Ahab could not endure Acts 24. 25.
Michajah. This made Felix cut off Paul in the midst of his speech, and put him
off till Mat. 14.
another time. Hence sprang the Imprisonment of John Baptist by Herod.

Qu. What are the remedies against this hinderance?

An. For a remedy against this evil we are to consider, First, that such
partial respect of Gods Ministers 1. Cor. 3. 4.
argues a carnal, and a fleshly mind, and shows that we are Babes and
Children in Christianity.

Secondly, That by this partiality we give to man more then his due, and take
from Christ that which of 1. Cor. 11, 12, 13. and 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
right belongs to him as appears.

Thirdly, That this diversity and inequality of gifts is not given for the
renting and destroying, but for the building, and the beautifying of the Church
of Christ, even as the diversity, and variety of flowers in the same Garden
differing in color, smell, taste and virtue, bring no confusion nor
deformity: but do deck the ground, and serve for the use and comfort of man:
And the manifold variety of strings and Instruments do make the sweetest
harmony.

Fourthly, Remember that no Minister excels in all gifts: and yet no true
Minister but has some special gifts and graces of edification. One is more
profound in knowledge to inform the judgment: another more powerful in
utterance, for the inflaming of the affection: one is more fit to humble, and
beat down the proud, careless and conceited persons; another to comfort and
raise up penitent sinners: one has a special grace to work godly sorrow,
another to procure Mat. 11. 16 17, etc.

Luke 10. 16


supernatural comfort and joy.

Fifthly, Remember that the contempt of any true Minister is the contempt of God
himself.

Sixthly, Let it be kept in mind that Christian Hearers look rather to the
pith, and substance of the matter, then to the enticements and paintings of the
speech.

Quest. What is the fifth hinderance to be removed before the Sermon?

Ans. The fifth (which may be referred to the former) is a certain hatred of
the Ministers and loathing of the Ministry, such as was in the Jews, which
made them to Acts 7. 55, 57.
fret at Christ, and stop their ears against him.

Quest. Whence arises this hatred of the Ministers, and Ministry?

Ans. Sometime from the personal behavior of the Minister himself, but
commonly from the matter which he delivers, whereby the Errors of their
Judgment, and corruptions of their hearts and lives, are laid open, and
reproved. This 1. Kings 18. 1. Kings 22.
made Ahab to count Elias his Enemy, And to hate Michaiah. Mat. 14.
And Herod for the like Mark 6.
cause committed John Baptist, as before you heard.

Qu. What be the remedies against this hinderance?

An. Let such haters and despisers of the Ministry consider that,

First, They despise not 1. Sam. 8. 7. Luke 10* 16 John 13. 22. 1. These. 4. 8.
2. Cor. 5. ^0.
man but God, for all true Ministers are the Lords Ambasdours.

Secondly, They do greatly prejudice themselves, in Romans 1. 16.
neglecting, much more in lothing the means of their comfort and salvation. Men
willingly bow to the tree that yields them shadow: How much more then ought
they to submit themselves to the grace of God, that brings Titus 1. 11.
Salvation, etc.

Thirdly, It is a point of godly wisdom to distinguish between the persons
and the Offices, and not to deprive our selves of the fruit of the Word for the
fault of the Teacher. In outward things men are wise: No man will refuse a good
Workman for some personal sins. He that minds to build a house will not
think the worse of the Work because the Carpenter is wicked, He that is
hungry will not refuse his meat, because the Cook that dressed it is a
Drunkard: why then should we distaste the food of our souls by reason of the
sins of him that does distribute it unto us? would any man refuse the Princes
gift, because the Messenger that brings it is a Machiauillian, etc.

Qu. What else makes men loathe the Ministry?

An. Besides that natural corruption which is common to all, there is in many
a satietie, and fullness, now (as Solomon says) He that is full Pro. 27. 7.
despises a Hony-combe; but to him that is hungry, far bitterer things are
sweet.

Secondly, That rebukes and threatenings though they be tedious to the flesh,
yet they are wholesome Medicines to the soul, and strong defenses against
Satan, etc. And therefore they should pray with David, Let the Psalm. 141.
righteous smite me, etc. and praise God because the righteous has smitten
them, as men do for the Chirurgian when he has healed them, even by painful
searching and incision.

Qu. What is the sixth impediment to be striuen against?

An. The length of the way, foulness of the weather, weakness in the
parties, want of means to carry them, etc.

Qu. What encouragements have we to overcome these impediments?

An. We have, First, the Law that God laid upon the Exodus 23. 17 Deuteronomy. 12. 11,
12.
Israelites, to appear before the Lord three times every year, and that with
their whole Family, and not empty handed, unto the place appointed by God,
which must needs be far off from a number of their dwellings.

Secondly, The promise of Exo. 34. 24.
saving them from their Enemies while they were so employed. Now considering
that God is the God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews, it cannot be but
that the Gentiles are proportionably bound both to obey the Commandments, and
believe the promises given to the Jews: though there be some particular
differences 1. Kings 2. Kin. 4. 23 Luke 2. 42. Acts 2. 5. and 8. 27. Mat. 5. 32.
betwixt them.

Thirdly, The practice and examples of the godly in former times both of the
Old and New Testament.

Fourthly, By comparison; if men take such Iournies, and make such ventures,
for their bodily provision, How much more ought they to do for the good of
their souls?

Qu. What say you to the aged, sick, and such as have young Children?

An. Touching all these in general, care must be had.

First, that they make not a necessity where none is.

Secondly, They must endeavor though they cannot go all at once, nor every
Lords Day, yet that they go as often as they can by turns every one in his
course.

Thirdly, they must be more careful to ask questions, and to desire
repetition of the Sermon, of them that were there.

Fourthly, They must keep no more at home with them, then of Necessity they
need, and such they may lawfully keep to attend upon themselves being aged,
sickly, impotent, having children, etc. for herein the saying of the Holy Ghost
may be remembered, 1. ^^ 15. 22.
Obedience is better then Hose 6. 6.
Sacrifice. And again, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice.

Qu. What is the seventh impediment?

An. The last and greatest let (which comprehends in effect all the former,)
is carnal Security, Impenitencie, Worldliness, uncleanness of life, etc,
which things either withdraw men altogether from hearing, or else make them
hear with a deaf ear, and a dead heart, etc.

Qu. What is the remedy hereof?

An. True and unfeigned Repentance, and especially that one fruit and companion
thereof, which may be called care and desire both to know, believe and obey the
Lord, speaking unto us in his holy Word: for it cannot be but by the blessing
of God, they must needs profit that go to the public Assemblies, as the
Soldiers, Publicanes and people came to John Baptist, Luke 3. 10, 11, 12.
saying, What shall we do? Especially when they be touched to the quick with
the feeling of their sin, and terror of GODS Judgment hanging over their
heads for the same, as the people were, Acts 2. 37. And the Iayler. Acts 2. 37.
and 16. 30.


Qu. You have showed me what impediments are to be avoided: now let me know
what duties are to be performed concerning this point?

An. First, let such as be Governors of Families bring as near as may be
their whole Family with them, excepting only such as are apparently like to
take hurt, by reason of their sickness, or to disturb the Congregation by
reason of their unruliness, that they may show the zeal Joshua 24. 15.

Hester 4. 16.


of faithful Joshua, saying, I, and my household will serve the Lord, and with
holy Hester, I and my Maids will do likewise, that is, fast and pray.

Qu. What is the second duty?

An. Such as have Neighbors must endeavor to encourage and quicken them to
join in company, and to go together to the House of God, saying, as it is in
Esaias, O house of Jacob come, and let Esaias 2. 5. Hose 6. 1.
us walk in the light of the Lord, and with the woman of Samaria, Come and see
a man, John 4.
etc. so let us say, Come and hear a man, etc. The performance of this holy
duty made David glad at the very Psalm. 12^.
heart. Thus Philip, and Andrew did inuit Nathaneel John 1. 45.
and Simon to come unto Christ whom they had found before.

Qu. What is the third duty?

An. As we go to the place of public Assemblies, we must be occupied and
exercise our minds with religious and holy Meditations, not suffering our own
lusts and cares of the World, and Satan with them to creep in and enter with
us into the House of God.

Qu. What be those holy Meditations which we ought to have?

An. Diverse, as has been partly showed before, as namely, First, before whom
we come, namely, before him who is King of Kings, etc.

Secondly, What thing we 1. Tim. 6. 15 Pro. 9. 1. etc.
come to, namely, a supernatural Banquet and heavenly Table for the refreshing
and satisfying of our faint and hungry souls, which will work alacrity, as
the former will humility. We see how it takes up men's hearts if it go to
speak with an earthly King, and to hear him speak with them and bid them to
to his Table. How much Pro. 23. 1.
more, when we go before the King of Heaven and Earth to speak to him by
Prayer, and to hear him by Preaching, and by both these as also by the
Sacraments to feast and feed with him?

Thirdly, We must remember more particularly, the fruit of Gods Word, and the
efficacy thereof, in that it is called, The Kingdom of Heaven, Mat* 3. 2.
The means to keep us Luke 16. 29 John 5. 39. 1. Pet. 1. 19.
from Hell, The treasury of eternal life, A sure word of Prophecy, compared
to a light that shines in a dark place, and is not only food to nourish us:
but also Seed to James 1. 18 1. Pet. 1. 23. James 1. 21. Psalm. 119. 53 92.
beget us, Being able to save our souls, That which will support us, and
quicken us in Ier. 15. 15, 18.
our greatest troubles, being the very joy of our hearts.

Qu. What is the fourth duty?

An. Fourthly, we are to read and meditate in private with others if we may
fitly, and by our selves upon that place of Scripture that is to be handled in
the public Assembly, for if a godly man Psalm. 1. 2.
ought to meditate day and night in the Law of the Lord; How can he be negligent
upon the Day of the Lord in thinking of that Scripture, which is to be handled
in the House of the Lord? And if the whole doctrine of the Gospel ought Col.
3. 16.
to dwell plentifully in us always; How can we but possess our selves of that
part of the Gospel or Word of God, which we go now to feed our souls
withal? Moreover, a Christian shall better remember the matter which is
delivered, when he has thought of the ground of it before: and also discern
more clearly the grace, and power of the public Ministry so far exceeding
his private Meditations, or otherwise the weakness of the Minister if he want
either that gift that he should have, or be negligent in that study Col. 4. 3.
and preparation which he ought to use.

Qu. What is the fifth duty to be used of the Hearers before the Sermon?

An. He must power forth faithful and hearty Prayer, first for himself,
that God will enlighten his mind, confirm^ his Memory, reform his Will,
soften his Heart, purify his Conscience, that he may grow in the knowledge of
his heavenly Doctrine, lay hold of it by a true Faith, and turn the same into
the daily, and wholesome exercises of Prayer and Repentance, herein imitating
Psalm. 25. 4, 5. and 119. 18. 33.

Luke 17. 5.


the Prophet David, and the Apostles.

Secondly, For the people that shall join with him, especially those of his
own Family. For if such be worse then Infidels, as make not bodily provision
for their Families; they cannot be Christians that neglect this part of
provision for their souls.

Thirdly, For their Ministers: for if Paul being so excellent an Apostle,
needed the Prayers of the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6. 19.
much more do the ordinary Pastors, and Teachers of the Church need the same.

Qu. Wherefore else is Prayer necessary?

An. Because, First, God only gives wisdom, and out Pro. 2. 6.
of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding.

Secondly, Flesh and blood reuealeth not those things to us, but God our
heavenly Mat. 16. 17
Father.

Thirdly, The natural man perceives not the things 1. Cor. 2. 16.
which belong to the Spirit of God.

CHAP. III.
Qu. YOu have showed me what is to be done before the Sermon, now tell me
what is the hearers duty in the Sermon while.

An. First, let such as be able to read, bring with them to the public
Assemblies the holy Bible, to the end that they may not only join with the
Church in singing of Psalms, but also readily turn to the principal places of
Scriptures that are read, expounded, and repeated by the Minister: by which
means they shall greatly further both their attention and memory, having the
help, not only of their Ear in hearing, but also of their Eye in perusing
those scriptures, that are alleged, to see whether they be truly alleged or
no: by which means also the Minister shall be made more careful to take
heed, that he do not but upon very good ground, swerve from the words of the
common Translation. If this had been observed, the Nouatian Heretic Lib. 7.
cap. 5
of whom Socrates speaks in the Ecclesiastical Story, durst not have added
those words to the Text* which he did, saying, Cursed is every one Luke 22. 1.
that keeps the Passover without unleavened Bread. Neither would that be of
whom Austine speaks Epistola nona ad Hicon, have so unadvisedly made that
hurrie among the people, by reading a word in the Prophecy of Jonas, otherwise
then it was in their Bibles.

Qu. Which is the second duty?

An. Every hearer must endeavor earnestly to be present at the whole Sermon,
from the beginning to the end, both coming before the first Prayer begin, and
not departing till the blessing be Mark. 14. 12.
pronounced. Judas leaving the Assembly of Christ and the other Apostles before
the action was ended, and the Psalm sung, had heavy success. This was
counted so great a fault in former times, that the Council of Carthage
appointed him that went out of the Congregation, while the Minister was in
speaking, to be excommunicated.

Qu. What is the third?

An. Sleep, talk, and speech with other men, curiosity in looking about, and
reading of other Books, etc. in the Sermon time must be avoided.

Qu. Why should not men sleep at Sermons?

An. For diverse Reasons. First, it is a breach of the third Commandment, or a
taking of GODS Name in vain by neglect, and abuse of Gods holy Ordinance.

Secondly, It is an enemy to that attention, and heedfulnesse in hearing which
is required of us.

Thirdly, If such a judgment befell him that slept in the night, and that at
an exceeding Acts 20. 9, 10.
long Sermon; What are we to say of those that sleep in the day at a Sermon of
an hour long?

Fourthly, It is a thing of evil report and example.

Qu. How shall they prevent it, that by reason of watching, early rising, age,
or other infirmities can hardly avoid it?

An. They must seek by all means to resist it, praying and groaning in
spirit, standing up, using the Pen if they can write, craving the help of such
as sit near them, etc.

Qu. What say you to talking, curious gazing, and gaping about, etc?

An. They are condemned by all the same Reasons that sleeping is, and that so
much the more, because sleep is such a natural Infirmity, that it may
suddenly and unawares steal upon a good and godly man, who has often resolved
with his own heart never to give place unto it: whereas any man that has but
a spark of grace, and modesty, may with a little striving, refrain talking,
and looking about, and therefore it does argue a far greater profaneness
and impudency then the other.

Qu. But may not a man read some good Book of Divinity in the Sermon time?

An. No, not the very Bible it self, except it be the places that are pointed
to by the Minister, for we are to give attendance to the things that Acts 8. 6.
are spoken. Besides, it carries with it a kind of contempt both of the
Minister, and Ministry, and a secret condemning of those that do attend.

Qu. What is the fourth duty of hearers?

An. He must mark the whole Sermon from the beginning to the end thereof, and
ponder as well one part of the sentence, as another, and not take things to
halues, or by snatches, as the manner of some is, which breeds great
inconvenience: for hence it comes that things spoken comparatively are
wrested, as if they were spoken simply. Hence it is that the proposition of a
similitude is marked, and the application neglected, with diverse other
inconveniences from whence arise Errors, Scoffings, Cauellings, etc.

Qu. What is the fifth duty?

An. The fifth duty which may be referred to the impediments, is to come with
a free mind not possessed with any prejudice or fore-stalled opinion, but in
trying the spirits of the Ministers of God 1. John 4. 5.
to hold fast that which is good. For as a colored glass makes all things of
the same color: so a preiudicate opinion makes all things sound that way that
it self imagines. This made even the best hearers of our Savior Christ,
sometimes not to understand him when he spoke most plainly to them of his
sufferings, because they were possessed with a fore-conceiued opinion of a
worldly Luke 18. 31 32.
Kingdom. Let us therefore when we go to the house of God, look to our feet,
that is, not to our corrupt affections Eccles. 4. 17
alone, but also to our preiudicate opinions and conceits.

Qu. What is the sixth duty?

An. Sixthly, we must not be present with a mind peremptorily to determine,
according to our own fancy, or to toss, and sift things to and fro, as we
list, as if we were Masters rather then Scholars, Teachers, rather then
Hearers, Judges and Censurors of others rather then Learners. For there is
nothing can be so truly and Luke 14. 1.
plainly spoken, but Pride and Malice may pervert it: wherefore let us lay aside
all sinister conceits of our own knowledge, wit, and learning, all contempt
and hatred of the Ministers persons, vain glory, self-love, etc. which
makes men think nothing right and good but that which comes from
themselves. Neither let us with Phocion, count it a goodly thing to dissent
from other.

Qu. Does not the Apostle will us to try the spirits, and 1. Co. 14. 19
judge of those things which the Prophets speak?

An. Yes, but it is not his meaning that men should of envy, vain-glorie, etc.
subject the Sermons they hear to their own proud and wanton wits: but only
with Wisdom, Charity and Sobriety to consider whether the things delivered
by the Prophets and Ministers do agree with the rule of Gods Word, and the
soundness of Christian Faith. Further that will come to pass if men give
place to their own conceits, which is said in the common Proverb, So many
men, so many minds: Quot homines, tot sententiae.

Qu. What is the seventh duty of Hearers in the Sermon time?

An. Not to be rashly discouraged or distasted with those things which at the
first may seem difficult and hard: but rather to use the more diligence, and
attention to find them out.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because, First, we must remember that the natural 1. Cor. 2. 14.
man does not easily conceive heavenly things.

Secondly, It is the will of God by this means to humble us, and to abate the
ambitious conceits of our own will, and to stir up our dullness in Prayer,
Meditation, and study, that the LORD would enlighten the eyes of our
understanding, and to repair to the Ministers of Gods Word.

Thirdly, Men do readily despise these things which are over easy and
familiar at the first, and through lothsomenesse grow faint, lazy, and
unlusty.

Qu. What is the eighth duty?

An. To understand, and mark the method and order of the Preacher.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because it is a great help to the memory, and serves as the Star of the
Mariner, and as a thread or line without which he shall be entangled as in a
Maze.

Qu. How shall the hearer attain to this?

An. This stands partly in the Preacher himself, who must keep a good order,
else it will be hard to follow him step by step. Secondly, In the hearers
themselves three things are required for the help of their memory in the time
of the hearer.

First, diligent marking, not suffering their minds to stray abroad about other
matters.

Secondly, Looking thoroughly to the Text, to see how the Doctrines,
Exhortations, etc. are raised.

Thirdly, To observe to what point of the Catechism, or head of Religion,
every thing is to be referred.

Qu. What is the ninth duty of the hearer in the Sermon time?

An. To apply that which is preached, to himself, and so to turn it to the
wholesome use, and spiritual nourishment of his soul.

Qu. Why so?

Mat. 7. 21. Luke 11. 28 and 12. 47. John 13 7. Romans 2. 13. James 2. ^5
An. Because the end of hearing is not chiefly to know and understand, but
rather to believe, practice, and obey that which is taught.

Qu. How shall the hearer apply that which is taught, to himself?

An. If it be a promise, by believing, and embracing. If a threatening, by
believing, and fearing it. If a precept or duty laid forth, by believing, and
endeavoring to practice it. If a prohibition from a sin laid out and
reproved, by believing, repenting, and shunning of it. Finally, if in every
point that is delivered, they put upon themselves the like affection, and
feeling that is in their godly Teacher.

Qu. What is the tenth duty?

An. Not to fret and wax weary and impatient, though the Minister be somewhat
longer then the ordinary time.

Qu. Ought not the Minister to keep himself within the compass of his hour?

An. Yes, he ought to endeavor it as near as he can.

Qu. Has not the hearer just cause to be offended?

An. No, for there may be diverse Reasons which may justly move a godly
Minister to go beyond his hour, and therefore the hearer ought quietly and
patiently to continue to the end of the Sermon.

Qu. What are those?

An. Diverse: as first, the fruitfulnes of the Text which he handles.

Secondly, the necessity and profit of it for the time and persons that be
present.

Thirdly, Want of opportunity to handle the same Text another time. These, and
the like considerations may give the Minister just occasion to be longer then
ordinary, and therefore the hearer ought not to chafe, and fume, though he do
a little exceed his time.

Qu. What other Reasons have you to persuade to this duty?

An. Further, let hearers consider how easily without irkesomnesse they can be
present at a play, or at some other profane and idle exercise and discourse of
greater length then those Sermons which they do so much distaste in respect of
the tediousness (as they esteem it) of them, and therefore they ought much
more patiently to bear the protracting of time at the performance of such a
holy duty.

Qu. Wherefore else?

An. Because this chafing at, and lothing of good things in regard of the
length of them, does argue a disordered, and ill affected mind: for as
lothing, and distaste of bodily food is a sign of a sick stomach: so the
like lothing, and distasting of spiritual food is a sign of a sinful soul.
On the other side, As a hungry appetite, and well rellishing of our meat and
drink, is a sign of bodily health: so the hungring after the wholesome word,
and Psalm. 1. 2. Mat. 5. 6.
delighting in it, is a sign of a good heart.

Qu. What is the last Reason?

An. The practice, and example of the godly Ministers Josh. 8. 34, 35. 2. C.
Ezra. 8. 3.
and people in former Ages, who have willingly continued a long time together at
holy exercises as may appear. How large was the Sermon of Christ, the sum
and chief points whereof are set down in the whole 5. Mat chap. 5. 6, 7.

Acts 20. 11. etc.


6, 7. Chapters? And that of Paul, Therefore it is not a strange, or new thing
for Ministers to prolong their speech, and people their presence with patience
and attention.

Qu. What is the eleventh duty?

An. That every one bring their own with them, and look to them in Sermon
time, that they neither gad 1. Co. 14. 40
out of the Church, sleep, talk, or commit any unseemly thing.

Qu. Is there not some special care of Scholars to be had, and such as can
write?

An. Yes, they are to be accustomed to take Sermons in Writing.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because, First, it will cause them to mark, and give ear to the words of
the Preacher, and keep them both from sleeping, and all unseemly behavior.

Secondly, It will help both their memory and judgment, and enable them to
give a better account of that they have heard, both for the good of themselves
and others.

CHAP. IIII.
Qu. Has not the hearer discharged his duty when he has heard the whole
Sermon attentively?

An. No, although there be scarce one of a hundred who does not think so.

Qu. What then is to be done?

An. First, Men are not to go out of the Church so soon as the Sermon is
ended, but stay the Prayer, Blessing, and Sacraments when they are administered.

Qu. Why so?

An. Touching Prayer, it is one principal part of the worship of God in the
public Assemblies, and therefore cannot be so despised without sin.
Besides, it is the exercise whereby al things are blessed and sanctified unto
us. Finally, how can we receive so great a blessing at Gods hands, and depart
from his presence without giving of thanks?

Qu. What other reason is there?

An. If it would be counted a thing uncomely, and undutiful, to stand before
an earthly King as a dead Image, and so soon as ever his speech were ended, to
turn thy back upon him without any Request or Thanksgiving: How much more to
deal thus with him that is, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords?

Qu. Why must we stay the Sacraments?

An. Because they are the public Seals of the mutual Covenant between GOD
and us, whereby he binds himself to be our God, and we our selves to be
his people, and therefore we are to be present, not only at the Lords Supper,
which belongs to all Believers that are of discretion to examine themselves:
but also at the administration of Baptism, whereby the same Covenant of Grace
and forgiveness of sins is sealed unto us.

Qu. Is it requisite for me of years to be present at the catechizing?

An. Yes, For first, many are men in years, which are Babes in knowledge.

Secondly, It is a thing of good example, both for the encouragement of youth,
and also of the Minister himself when he shall see them present that can
judge of his pains.

Thirdly, By this means the elder sort shall be better able to examine and
confer with the younger at home.

Qu. Why must people stay the blessing?

An. Because the LORD commanding his Minister to bless the people, does
necessarily imply their staying till the blessing be pronounced: else he
should not bless the people, but the bare Walls, which were to take the Number.
6. 23, 24.
Name of God in vain.

Qu. What is the second duty to be done after the Sermon?

An. Such things as have been delivered at Church must be, (as it were) chewed
by Meditation, and turned over again at home* after the example of the men of
Berea, Acts 17. 10 11.
for the quickening of our memory, increasing of our Knowledge, strengthening of
our Faith, etc.

Qu. What is the third duty?

An. Parents and Masters Exo. 12. 26. Deu 6. 2. 21 Joshua 4. 6.
must demand, and take account of their people, of the things they have heard.

Qu. Why so?

An. Because, First, they are to have a care of their souls as well as of
their bodies.

Secondly, They that will win others to Godliness, must begin with them
betime, Solomon says.

Thirdly, By this means they shall frame them to more conscience of their duty
in civil matters, and in the ordinary works, and labors of their calling.

Qu. What is the fourth duty?

An. To confer godly of that which has been taught by the way, and at our
Tables; and not according to the wicked custom of a great number, to fall
presently into idle and unsavory speeches, or Discourses of Worldly matters,
yea, to scoffing, and carping at the doctrine, or at the Teacher thereof.

Qu. What profit comes hereby?

An. By such godly speeches Christ is after a sort invited, and drawn into our
company by the presence of Luke 24* 15 32.

Phil. 4* 9. Ephesians. 4. 29, 30.


his Spirit, as he was to those two Disciples in person that went to Emaus.

Qu. What say you then to such as do not use this conference?

An. They are like that member of the natural body, which keeping all the
food to it self, and not imparting the same to the members adjoining, does in
short time corrupt both himself and them.

Qu. What is the fist duty?

An. To keep in mind that the Sabbath is not ended as soon as the Sermon is
done: and therefore not to meddle with Worldly matters: but to spend the rest
of the time in Prayer, Reading, Repetition, singing of Psalms, etc. according
to the scope of the fourth Commandment. Therefore they are greatly deceived
who think they have sufficiently sanctified the Sabbath, when they have heard
a Sermon superficially in the fore-noone: And they likewise who vainly persuade
themselves that the Sanctification of the Lords Day consists chiefly in
abstayning from the works and labors of their callings, and yet will pass the
same away in diverse vanities, lascivious Dancings, Drinkings, and bodily
pleasures.

Qu. May no bodily labors be performed on the Lords Day?

An. Yes, such as are necessarily required for the health, welfare, and defense
of our selves or our Neighbor, and could not well be dispatched the day
before, nor deferred till the day following. For in such cases the Mat. 12. 8.
Mark. 2. 27.
Son of man is Lord of the Sabbath Day. Wherefore the Macchabees did foolishly
in suffering themselves to be slain without resistance because it was the
Sabbath 1. Mac. 2. 36.
Day, which error afterward they decreed to reform.

Qu. What is the sixth duty?

An. If we have heard any thing that seemed dark, and doubtful to us, not to
be discouraged, but to confer with Phil. 1. 9, 10
our godly Pastor that we may know the things that differ.

Qu. Why must we do this?

An. First, We use it in the things of this World, much more then ought we to
do it in the things that concern eternal life.

Mal. 2 7. M t. 13. 36 John 16. 19. Acts 8. 34.
Secondly, The Priests lips preserve knowledge, etc.

Thirdly, Examples teach the same thing.

Qu. What is the seventh duty?

An. Every godly hearer must sound and search his own heart, and accordingly
sentence and censure himself touching that which he has heard, how far
forth he has been rebellious against the same, or yielded obedience
thereunto.

Qu. What will this sifting of the heart bring forth?

An. If we find a sweet harmony and consent between Gods Word and our wills,
it will work in us joy and peace of conscience, with Thanksgiving to God,
whose mere grace, and free gift it is: otherwise it ought to humble us, and
work that godly sorrow in us which Paul speaks of, 2. Cor. 7. 10.
and cause us to purge out that old leaven spoken of, 1. Cor. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
5. 7.

Qu. What is the eighth duty?

An. It is, that all Christians, especially Superiors, do endeavor to
redress and reform such as belong to their care and charge, by a more
special applying of such things as are delivered in Sermons, to their special
sins and transgressions, doubts or fears, whereby they shall discharge a
brotherly duty, and inure the other to think more deeply and fruitfully of
the things that are taught.

Qu. What follows of all this?

An. Hence it appears, First, how hard and excellent a thing it is not only
to preach, but also to hear Sermons profitably.

Secondly, It shows how far they be out of the way of discharging their
duty, who have superficially spent an hour or two either in preaching or
hearing.

Qu. What then should faithful Ministers do?

An. They ought with all care to apply themselves to perform this duty of
preaching holily and fruitfully.

First, by diligent study and meditation at home.

Secondly, By a zealous delivering of the same in the Church.

Thirdly, By Prayer, and watching for the profit of their Doctrine both in
themselves and others.

Qu. What may provoke them hereunto?

An. The promises of GODS Word set down, Dan. 12. 3. 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8.
Esaias 49. 4. and in other places.

Qu. What must good people do?

An. First, prepare themselves with great Religion to hear the Word, and to
use all reverence and attention in the hearing.

Secondly, to endeavor with like Religion to express and practice it in the
whole course of their life.

Qu. What should move them hereunto?

Luke 11. 28
An. Because (as Christ says) Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and
keep the same. And the Apostle says, James 1. 21.
The Word thus received is able to save their souls.

FINIS.

