THE Maintenance of the MINISTRY.

Wherein is plainly declared how the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be
maintained: and the true and ancient practice of our Church in this case,
showed to be agreeable to the word of God, and all Antiquity.

Necessary in these times to be read and considered of all sorts of Christians,
but specially of such as live in Towns and Cities.

By RICHARD EBVRNE, Minister of the word.

1. Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown unto you spiritual things: is it a great
matter if we reap your carnal things. LONDON, Printed for Eleazar Edgar, and
are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the
Windmill. 1609.

To the right Reverend Father in God, James by divine Providence, Lord Bishop
of Bathe and Welles, Richard Eburne wishes in Christ Jesus felicity
external, internal, and eternal.
IT is the Custom (Right reverend father in God) and that usual, ancient, and
approved, of such as publish to the world their writings, to dedicate the same
to some or other personage, eminent in the Church or Co^mon-weale. What others
ofttimes do, more for fashion then occasion, for favor then need, thereto am
I moved and even compelled by some Necessity; because handling an argument
somewhat rare (for few they be that have labored in the like) and though
very profitable for the Church of God at all times, and in these exceeding
necessary, yet not very pleasing to such as either by too much covetousness, or
too little consideration may be carried with unequal censure to condemn that
they like not, or reject without just cause, that they understand not; I need
the Patronage of such a one, as by his authority countenancing it, might
shield it from injury, and by his judgment approc^ing it, defend it from
envy.

And to this purpose, after I had pend this my Treatise of the Maintenance of
the Ministry, bethinking with my self whom to I might offer it, upon some
necessary and just causes I resolved to dedicate the same above any unto your
Lordship. First* in regard of the very subject and nature of of the work it
self: which being such, as wholly concerns the Fabrique (as I may say) of the
Church, whereof your Lor: is a principal vpholder; and the estate of the
ministers in the Church, of which no small number do labor (if I may so
speak) in your vineyard, seems properly to require such a one to undertake
the protection thereof, as by his calling and dignity in the Church, rather
then the commonwealth, is enabled thereunto. And then in regard of my self who
have heretofore employed the first and no small part of my ministry within
your Lordships jurisdiction and Diocese; and now again (by Gods special
providence) called back to finish my course within the same, do acknowledge it
to be my duty to respect above other, as the vine under whose shadow I rest,
that Architect under whom and by whom I am set on work: and do hope I may be
bold to have recourse as a Soldiour to his own Captain, or a servant unto
his own Lord, for the patronizing of my labors, where my self am entertained.

Touching the work it self; The scope whereunto I have therein principally,
and in manner only aimed, is to declare how necessary and convenient it is,
That the Ministers of the word in all places, and in each several congregation
should be provided of due and competent maintenance. In explaining whereof I
have have showed, by whom, by what means, and in what sort, this maintenance
should be yielded: withal, against such as affect new fashions, and whom
nothing pleases but what is deformed by some innovation, I have made it
apparent that the ancient and most usual practice of our land in this case is
agreeable to the word of God, and practice of the most ancient and best times.
Such indeed as can not justly by any pensionarie or other like confused and
strange course be bettered and amended. Where our practice does digress, as
best things seeldome stand any long time without some corruption and
declination from their integrity, I have in hope of some redress partly
noted. It is a thing too manifest, that the estate of our ministry at this
day is not such, that we may affirm of it, That it is every where duly
provided for: and that we that are therein have no cause for want of maintenance
and necessaries for our life to complain. But contrariwise, howsoever in many
places it is, yet (God be thanked) Such as it ought to be: yet in not a few,
by reason that that course which God himself has appointed, equity approved,
and ancient practice confirmed, is interrupted, and not in any measure there
observed, it is such as becomes not the Gospel of Christ: such as not a
little hinders the prosperity thereof, in a word such as the ministers
themselves have a just cause to complain of, all reasonable men must
acknowledge needs amendment; and it behooves those that are in place and
authority thereunto graciously, to hear, farther to consider of, and speedily
and duly to redress.

Which being a work acceptable to God, needful for our Church, profitable
and honorable for the whole land, will (no doubt) the more be respected, and
the sooner be effected, if it shall please your good Lordship, together with
the rest of your brethren (the most reverend fathers of our Church, looking
according to the experience and wisdom that God has enriched you withal,
into the estate of many distressed and impouerished churches within your
Jurisdictions) to open your mouths in the cause of the afflicted, and
according to the power and authority, which God has given you for the benefit
and edification of the church, endeavor to repair the ruins, and make up
again the breaches thereof. Wherein you may do great service to the Ch: much
further the Gospel, and become even founders of many churches within your
several Diocesses, which ^ow (alas) through unreasonable customs, cruel* and
hard compositions, beggarly stypends, small endowments, and non payement of
personal tithes, be in manner desolate; and do pity the hearts of all such
as duly regard learning and religion, truly love and respect the ministers of
the word, rightly know what becomes the house of God, and vn^einedly wish the
prosperity of our Zion, to see how they lie in the dust. You are the Pillars
upon whom we do stay, the mountains from whence we do look for help, and
the rocks under whose shadows we trust to be assisted and sheltred against
the rage and violence of such extremities and miseries as many of your
churches are subject unto. And we hope that the love you bear to learning,
the care you have of the people committed to your charges, the zeal you carry
unto the Church of God, and the respect you have to us of the ministry under
you, of whom many (having not in this plenty and peace wherewith God has
blessed Israel, wherewith parce and duriter to sustain their lives) are
discouraged not encouraged, unabled not enabled to the work they should
perform, and made even weary of their calling, will move you, after the
Gospel it self now thoroughly settled, and the sects and schisms of our church
now quieted, as loving fathers, to relieve what you may, the external wants of
your children; and as good Captains, what lies in you to provide for the due
pay of all such Soldiers as are under your hands: that henceforth none of
them (as commonly yet many are) be enforced, as it were starting out of the
camp, to entangle themselves with the affairs of this life; but attending
wholly the service whereto they are pressed, may please you that have admitted
them, but chiefly Christ Jesus the high Bishop of our souls, and Primate of
the whole church, that has called them to be soldiers.

To further, and (if I may presume so to speak) as it were to open a way to
this so godly, so good and necessary work, I have, occasioned thereunto above
many, (and which I might not with good conscience not prosecute) as the poor
widow offered my mi^e, and as a plain, but a willing hearted workman bestowed
a little labor. Which if your good Lordship, approouing my sincere and
religious purpose above mine ability (which, knowing my self to be, as from
my heart I do acknowledge the meanest of a thousand* and most unable of many
thousands to put my hand to so great a work, and open my mouth in so weighty a
cause, I freely confess is very small) vouchsafe in good part to accept; and
whatsoever my desert or handling of the cause be, to affect and favor the
cause it self, which for it selfs sake, deserves all furtherance; that so
what I have spoken in the behalf thereof, being defended from the perverse
judgment of the ignorant, and injury of all, others may be moved of their
abundance to cast in richer gifts, and as God has filled them, like unto
Bezaleel the son of Vri, and Ahol^ab the son of Ahisan^ch, with greater
knowledge and more plenty of his spirit, to adorn and enlarge what I have but
rudely informed, or may be but sparely pointed at: you shall encourage me to
proceed yet what I may, in that I have begun, till I see it come from seed to
fruit, and purchase both the thanksgiving of many to God for your readiness to
this work of the Lord, and the prayers of me and many others with me unto
the Almighty for his graces and blessings both spiritual and temporal, to be
continued and increased upon you. The Lord Jesus vouchsafe unto you his
heavenly gifts, and so guide you by his holy Spirit, that you may sincerely set
forth his Gospel, and seek his glory in this world, and in the world to come
be crowned by him with celestial and eternal glory. Amen.

Your Lor. ever to be commanded in the work of the Lord, Richard Eburne.

To the Reader.
ACcept I pray thee (Christian Reader) in good part, what I present unto thee,
to good purpose. Let not my plainness displease thee; which for to profit
thee, as the fittest phrase for an argument of this form, I have more then
ordinarily affected. In other style I might happily more better have pleased a
few, but am assured should less have satisfied all. It is the hearers duty
that I principally teach: necessary therefore I should so express it, that
they, even they of meanest reach, and slowest capacity, husbandmen,
tradesmen, artificers, and whosoever else, might fully conceive me. As here
is whereby to direct the unlearned, so there wants not wherewith to exercise
the learned, whether teacher or hearer. The one shall find his due, the other
his duty, more plainly taught then hitherto by any. To whom this seems not
enough, occasion at least is offered, the way thus opened, to perform more.
Mine attempt is no restraint of other men's liberty. For the matter, I nothing
doubt of thine assent in most points. If in some we dissent, so it be not in
the chiefest, the matter is not great. Yield me these, That the Minister
ought to have certain, sufficient, and liberal maintenance: that thereto every
one of any ability, ought (according to his ability, and of such goods as
he has) to contribute: That the best means to raise it, must needs be that,
which God, Gods church, and all Antiquity have, by practice, approved: and
for the rest I will not contend, nor when these are duly practiced (for of
that, questionles we come yet far too short) any more complain.

Thus hoping, if my labors like thee, thou will wish to them such success as
thou perceiuest I desire: if not, yet thou will afford me that ordinary
favor, which other men in works of less moment, and worse argument, do often
obtain, I wish to thee as much good as thine own heart, christianly affected,
can desire.

Thine in the Lord, and for the service of the Church, R. E.

The Argument and Sum of the whole Treatise following, according to the
Chapters thereof, which may serve in steed of a Table.
The first Chapter
THe first Chapt. as an Introduction to the whole, i^ of the Writer of the
parcel of Scripture which in this Treatise is handled, and of the occasion why
it was written. And therein is showed: 1. How necessary and fit this kind of
doctrine was then and is now. 2. How contrary ministers in these days are
oftentimes dealt with 3. The principal causes of such ill dealing.

The second Chapter
Shows, That every one that is taught by the minister, ought (having goods)
toward his teachers maintenance to be contributarie, and can from that duty
by no privilege, custom, etc. be exempt. God does assign and warrant to
Ministers their maintenance. They ought to have it, first and principally in
regard of their labor. Which is painful to themselves, profitable to others.
2. For that they do not intermeddle in other men's labors and Trades of life.
Their maintenance cannot without great sin be denied them.
The third Chapter
BEing a more special explication of the hearers duty before in general
sort only set down, declares: 1. What this word (Goods) used in the Text
does signify. 2. Of what sort of goods the minister must have a part.

The fourth Chapter
1, THat the right and best manner of payment to the minister, is* That he be
paid his part of every thing, in its proper kind, as naturally God does send
it. 2. and not by a set Stipend.
The fifth Chapter
THat toward the Ministers maintenance, every man ought to contribute
proportionably, and not voluntarily only what every man will. That is
tolerable only in some cases, But generally or ordinarily it is a course very
pernicious and evil. Yet how it might be somewhat tolerable.
The sixth Chapter
THe Minister must have (...) his maintenance, not an imagined competent
portion only. But specially besides offerings, the Tithes of all things. Which
are still due by divine right: And be of ^. sorts. viz. Predial and Personal.
The seventh Chapter
Yields some special reasons, why God vouchsafes to have (as his own.)
some part of all men's goods. Why the Ten^^. Why so great a portion, as is
Tithes, Offerings, etc. be has assigned unto his Ministers. Where the Reader
shall find diverse weighty cause^, why Ministers ought to have, not a beggarly
and sparing, but ample and liberal maintainan^e.
The Eight Chapter
Contains Answers to diverse Objections, Namely, 1. Touching the unworthiness
of the Minister. 2. The greatness of the Tenth. 3. The wealth of the Minister.
4. Custom. 5. Personal Tithes, which to pay is a benefit. 6. The Statute of
Edu* De Decimi^.
Why it were to be wished, that for a perpetual Composition about Personal
Tithes, the Custom of the City of London, above any other, might, the whole
Land through, be put in practice.
The ninth Chapter
WHat comes by laying out our goods upon worldly uses. And what, upon heavenly
and spiritual uses. How dangerous an^ unprofitable, even in respect of their
outward and temp^rall estates it is, men to be illiberall, and ouersparing to
their Ministers. And on the other side, how grateful to God, and gain^full to
themselves to be liberal and bountiful.
The tenth Chapter
Comprehends the Sum and Conclusion of the whole discourse. And declares
some motives that have put the Author of this Treatise in hope, That his
labor shall not be without some good effect.
Which God for his Gospels sake vouchsafe, Amen.

THE MAINTENANCE OF THE Ministry.
Gala. 6. 6. 7. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that teaches him
partaker of all his goods. Be not deceived: God is not mocked. For whatsoever a
man sows, that shall he also reap.
CHAP. I.
1 Of the Writer of this parcel of Scripture, and the occasion why it was
written. 2. How necessary and fit, this kind of doctrine was then, and is now.
3. How contrary thereunto Ministers in these days are ofttimes dealt with. 4.
The principal causes of such ill dealing.
THis parcel of Scripture (as the words themselves do plainly enough to every
man's understanding declare) is an instruction or direction unto all Christians,
teaching them how they ought to deal with their Ministers touching their
maintenance: that so they be not discouraged, but encouraged to labor
painfully and profitably among them in the word and doctrine. It does contain
three principal parts: that is, first a Precept, secondly a Commination, and
thir^ly a Confirmation: first a Precept, verse. 6. in these words, Let him that
is taught, etc. 2. A Commination, in the first member of the 7. verse, Be not
deceived: God is not mocked. 3. The Confirmation, in the latter member of that
verse: for whatsoever a man sows, that also shall he reap. The first of
these shows briefly every man's duty in this behalf. The second is an
answer to all such cauils and objections, as either ungodly or unwilling
people use to pretend and make for excuse of their carelesnes and neglect of
that duty. The third, by an argument and reason taken partly from the profit
and good that shall arise and redound by the due performance of this duty, to
all that carefully observe it: partly (for that also is implied) from the
disprofit and hurt that does and will befall them that be careless and
backward in the practice thereof, confirms whatsoever in the former is taught.

To the opening of the words themselves before I do come, it will not be amiss
to consider a little, First of the writer of them, who it was: then secondly of
the occasion that might move him thus to write, what it was.

The writer hereof (as the title or inscription of the Epistle shows) was the
Apostle S. Paul. He being the teacher of this doctrine, the proclaimer of this
precept; who was, as the Apostle of Jesus Christ, so that Apostle which
labored more then any of the rest, and did in sundry gi^ts excel them all:
he (I say) teaching this kind of doctrine, which he does not here alone, but
almost in every Epistle, as 1. Cor. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1. Tim. 5. etc. his example
and doing therein does sufficiently show us, that it is a kind of doctrine,
As requisite and necessary for the Church of God, and to be published and
taught abroad: So, well beseeming the gravity of a Preacher in the Church, and
befitting the mouth of the Minister of God in the Pulpit. It is a kind of
doctrine, I am not ignorant, as seldom in these days handled and dealt
withal as any: upon doubt it seems, least people take occasion thereby, to
deride them that utter it, as speaking for themselves, and tax them as
desirous of filthy lucre, rather then respect as the truth, or obey it as is
meet. But by this kind of silence the Ministers themselves have received (I
am persuaded) more hurt then possibly they could by speaking: and the Church
has incurred more detriment, and the Gospel more hindrance by the ignorance
thereof, then possibly they could prejudice or reproach, if it had been made
more known.

People know in general terms, and that rather by the very light of reason,
then rules of religion, That the Minister must have maintenance: and can say,
That the labourer is worthy of his hire. But, as their practice often argues,
they account he has that, when many times it is in name, rather then in deed;
in show, then in substance: that they use him very well, when they pay him in
manner nothing: and do their duty to the uttermost, even when they withhold
from him the greatest part of his due. Necessary it is therefore that they be
better instructed in this behalf, and Ministers oftener to teach this lesson:
which we find hitherto, by many badly learned, and worse practiced. To
encourage and imbolden them hereunto, they have many examples: as of old the
Prophet Malachy, who chapter 3. handles it of purpose, reproving sharply the people
of his time, for not performing, as they should, this duty toward the Lord
himself, and the sons of Aaron the Lords Ministers. Then our Savior
himself, who as soon as ever he sent abroad his Apostles to preach,
prescribes them what order to observe for their maintenance, and shows them
with what right they might demand, and receive the same. But specially this
our Apostle; who entreating thereof, both oftentimes and at large, offers
himself their leader, and (if I may so speak) their companion in this kind
of labor. In whose step^ while they do but tread, whose course while they do
but follow, what cause is there any should either fear the spurning of the
contentious, or care for the scorning of the contemptuous?

2. And herein too, I cannot but observe the prudence and providence of God,
which inspires this kind of doctrine into the mind, and in stils it into the
pen of this Apostle rather then any other, whose labors were to come most to
light: and who laboring with his own hands, and living for the most part by
his occupation, and not upon the Churches charge, as appears, Act. ^0. 34.
and otherwhere (howsoever he had power to have done otherwise, as well as the
rest of the Apostles, and namely the brethren of the Lord and Cephas) 1. Cor.
9. 4. (was thereby the freest and fittest of all other to speak in this
matter: because it could not be objected unto him, That he preached for
himself, or sought his own gain, and bewraied a co^etous mind, etc. Surely,
the doctrine coming from his mouth, could not but thereby be received with
less prejudice then from some other it might have been: and being contrary to
that himself often times did practice, did plainly show, That in this his
doctrine he did respect the good of the Church and glory of God, which he knew
(whatsoever his practice was) were ordinarily this way and in this sort to be
furthered: and, That his doing and example was no necessary rule, and therefore
ought not to bind others; as which was peculiar to him, not common to all, who
generally must live legibus non exemplis by laws not by examples, and practice
ordinarily according as of God we are all taught: and not, as, without
Commandment, and without necessity, upon some singular and extraordinary
respect, some few do.

The occasion that moved the apostle to write this doctrine, was no doubt, the
care of the Church. 1. He did see even then, that the hearers of the word began
to be weary of weldoing, and to be negligent and slack in ministering their
temporal things to their teachers, which bestowed on them spiritual: leaving
them destitute and unprovided, whom they ought chiefly to maintain: which he
knew well could not but turn to the great hindrance of the Gospel, and
prejudice of their souls. 2. He did also foresee, That in the ages to come
even as it is come to pass in these our days, people would again be at the
same point, little regarding their ministers so they might enrich themselves,
and be better content to be untaught, then at charge (as they account it) for
teaching. And therefore to meet with these evils, to beat down such error
and mischief betimes, and to to arm us there-against, as was fit and
necessary, he wrote thus.

Now look what occasion S. Paul had to write and publish this doctrine at the
first; the same, if not greater, is offered now again to urge and utter it.
Time was, when people thought nothing too much for the minister, but could even
find in their hearts with the Galathia^s, Cap. 4. 15. if it were possible, to
have plucked out their own eyes, to do them good. They offered to the Church in
such abundance, that there was rather an excess then want: for they did
account those their best employed goods that went to such uses. Insomuch that
as Moses, Exodus 36. 6. was feign to make proclamation thorough the host, That
none should bring any more stuff for the work of the Tabernacle, there was
already enough and to spare: Cod. lib. 1. tit. 5. leg. 16.
so the emperor Justinian and some other princes were enforced to make laws
of restraint against the excessive liberality unto churches. Yea the Popes
themselves made some Canons to that purpose. Those days are now past, the case
is altered, and the matter turned clean vpside down. It is now become a time
not offerendi, See also our own statutes of Mortmaine.
but auferendi, not a time to offer and give to the Church, but to auferre and
take from it Every man, in manner, even bestudies himself how to pull from the
ministry that he never gave: and though it be no charge nor cost of theirs,
yet think it al too much that it has. Hence it is, that in many places of the
land, the Churches are so gliebd and gelded, that more then the better half of
their right and inheritance is transferred unto new owners: and in places not a
few, the whole; only a beggarly not a scholerly, a miserable not a ministerlike
stipend reserved. And they into whose hands these things are fallen (a thing to
be wondered and lamented) make so little care or conscience thereof, that among
an hundred is hardly found one, that upon conscience of what he holds (the
Churches right) or love and zeal to the Gospel, or respect to the ministry
thereof, or compassion upon the souls of the people, which (their ministers
maintenance kept away) both live and die as sheep without a shepherd, A
Christian motion.
has restored any part thereof to the Church from which it is taken: but
among a thousand, nay among them all (so far as I know) not one, that has in
all this time of the Gospel, reendowed one Church of many, and restored the
spoils thereof. Hence it is, that many Patrons of benefices forgetting their
names and titles, that is, that they be but Patroni, defenders and keepers of
their Churches, not Proprietarij, owners and inheritors, do prove latrones,
robbers thereof; for money selling them, and by consequence even the souls of
men, to the very devil of hell, as Judas did Christ to the Scribes and
Pharisees. Some conveying the gleib or temporalities of the Church to their
own possession: Others cunningly reserving their own tithes: and in a word,
the most part of them (yea though they have already the fatt and best thereof)
not willing to bestow but the scraps and fragments freely: To such an height is
Sacrilege and Simonie grown; one way or other, making of that which is or
should be beneficium ecclesiae a benefice for the Church, a benefit to
themselves, little regarding the while how the people are provided for, and
whom they prefer, so they may come to a good market. Besides those
mischiefs, the people that are to pay the minister his due, make little or no
conscience how they do it. Many count it not as Gods part, but reckon it as a
private right to this and that man: and as they be affected to the party that
is to receive, so are they more or less willing to give; as if it were left
unto their power to limit each man his portion, and the ministers due were to
be laid out by every man's arbitreme^t, according to his supposed deserts, and
not according to the rule of God, and right of the Church. Many account it a
virtue to pare away what they can from the ministers part, and hold it wisdom
and well done, to get all things done by him at as low a rate as may be. They
think they have done the office of good parishioners, if (to shadow their
covetousness or malice, with the color of justice) they can devise any shift
and quirke in law how to debar (I will not say defraud) the minister of any
due, and bring him to that state, that he must crouch to them for a piece of
bread, and not be encouraged by them to his office: caring little though he do
not his office as he should, so they may deal with him for his due as they
would.

By all which and other like means, too long here to recite, miserable verily
is the estate both of minister and people in many places. The people are not
taught as they should be, but live still in blindness and error, in ignorance
and superstition, to the no little prejudice and slander of the Gospel,
dishonor of God, and the exceeding hazard of their souls. They have ministers
rather in name then indeed. And as the poets feign of their Tantalus in the
waters, in the midst of all abundance and plenty of the word round about them,
they remain needy enough; as fed rather with the sight of the Gospel then the
substance, and having heard of it rather by fame, then tasted of it indeed.
The ministers themselves are many where disabled to do their duty; and being
but weak and mean of themselves (for such be commonly thrust into such
places) are made more weak and even utterly unapt, for want of means to
further and enable them: whereby being given to Idleness and neglect of duty,
they are confirmed therein: or being better disposed, by mere necessity are
enforced thereto; least else they either shame themselves, or sink under the
burden.

Whence these euilles have, and do spring; if we consider, I cannot (...)
other, but that it is principally from these ^. or ^. perilous roots: namely
first from the root of all evil, that is from Covetousness, secondly from
contempt of the Gospel, and thirdly from very ignorance. For, to speak nothing
of the time past, covetousness it is that makes sacrilegious patrons at this
day, daily to make merchandise of holy things, not their own: to rob and spoil
their Churches, and into them to thrust (for desire of gain) such as are not
to the salvation but the perdition of the people. And covetousness principally
it is, that so blinds and hardneth many of the people, that they neither do,
nor will understand when they do most open wrong to the Church of God, and
manifestly abuse the ministers thereof.

The second cause I take to be the very contempt of the Gospel; a disease too
common in all places. There is not that love and estimation of the word, nor
that desire of the preaching thereof, that should be in people. Few they be
that account the very feet of them that bring the glad tidings of salvation
unto them beautiful, Romans 10. 15.
or that receive the preacher thereof as the Galathians did Paul, Gal. 4. 4.
even as an Angel of God: Luc. 10.
that esteem the word as the better part with Marie: and find it as did
David, Psalm. 119. and 19.
dearer to their souls then thousands of gold and silver, or sweeter to their
taste then honey and the honey comb. For then it could not be, but that as that
wise merchant in the Gospel, Math. 13. 45.
having found one precious pearl, sold all that he had and bought it; so they
would, for love to the word, spare no cost, and stand at no charge: and as
Lidia, Act. 16. 15. having received the faith, constrained and even adjured
Paul and all his company, to accept of entertainment at her hands; so they
would rather enforce upon the ministers of the Gospel, more then their due,
that they might encourage them to their work, then debar them of any thing
that is their own; the ready way to make them weary of all. He that is hungry
will buy him food how dear soever it be: he that is sick, will have physic
what ever it cost him: he that loves play, will spend many times that he can
ill spare: And if men hungered after the Gospel as for the bread of life, and
counted the preaching thereof the only physic for the soul: if they took
as much delight therein as many do in vanities; it could not be, but that they
would be as ready to employ their goods for the one as for the other: and not
pinch at expenses for this, being lavish and prodigal for those: nor count
even nothing too much for this use, and four or five times as much but little
for uses much worse, and less necessary a great deal. We have had the Gospel
long, even so long till we are weary of it in a manner, as the Jews were of
Manna. The continuance has not, as it should, increased our content and
delight therein, we tasting more and more the sweetness thereof; but bred rather
contempt. Else it were not possible, but we should entertain it with better
affection, and maintain the ministry thereof with greater contentation: not
suffering and seeing them to want, whose labors yield us most benefit: nor
envying or begrudging them necessaries, without whom we should be in extreme
and miserable penury.

The third cause of these evils, is very ignorance, gross ignorance: wherewith
many being blinded (as I have already said, and shall hereafter more show) do
sin in this behalf; and not knowing that they sin, continue in it without
remorse, thinking they perform their duty at full, when (God knows) they be
very far from it.

To remedy these mischiefs, I see no readier nor better way for such as be
ministers, for such I say as be in the ministry, then following the plot laid
out before them by this our apostle S. Paul, To teach and set abroad this kind
of doctrine more usually and largely, which long has lien as it were buried in
silence and oblivion: that so the Gospel being now replanted amongst us, men
may, after other doctrines more necessary to salvation, learn also the way how
to maintain and continue the Gospel; the wrongs and oppressions hitherto done
to the Church, and with much patience endured, may at length somewhat be
righted, and the world henceforth begin to be ashamed of the Simony,
sacrilege, and other like abominations, whereby it has hitherto, even in the
time of this clear light of the Gospel, made havoc of our churches.

CHAP. II.
That every one that is taught in the word, ought (having goods) toward his
teachers maintenance be contributarie. And can from that duty by no
privilege, custom, etc. be exempt. God does assign and warrant to them their
maintenance. They ought to have it, principally in regard of their labor,
which is painful to themselves, profitable to others. And therefore cannot
without great sin be denied them. Also, for that they do not intermeddle in
other men's labors and trades of life.
Verse. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, make him that teaches him
partaker of all his goods.
Having spoken sufficiently of the writer and occasion of the words, I come now
to the words themselves, and first to the precept or commandment, ver. 6. In
which (as the special branches thereof) may more particularly be observed,
agreeable unto our purpose, these 3. things. First the persons commanded, who
they be that must contribute unto the minister, viz He, every one that is
taught in the word. 2. the reason or cause why he must do it: and that is,
because he is taught; because the minister does teach him, for the Labourer is
worthy of his hire. The third is, what he must impart unto him, namely a part
of all his goods.

I Concerning the persons, that must contribute, conferring these first words
of the precept, Let him that is taught with the later of the same verse, viz.
make him partaker, etc. we may gather evidently, That all and every person
whatsoever, which being a hearer of the word does owe and possess to his own
proper use any kind of goods whatsoever, is liable to this pay, subject to
this precept, and within compass (If I may so speak) of this statute and law
of God. This statute and commandment, I say, reaches unto all and singular
parishioners, as we term them, yea to all hearers of the word whosoever both
rich and poor, young and old, married and unmarried, housekeeper or not, master
and servant, merchant and mariner, officer and artificer, tradesman and
husbandman, townesman and countryman, or whosoever else by profession he be;
they all and every of them, being hearers of the word, and owners or possessors
of any kind of goods whatsoever, are liable to this course, payable to this
purpose, and must contribute more or less, according to their several
abilities, to their teacher. As they have a benefit by him in spiritual
things, so must he by them in things temporal. This may plainly appear unto
us by the words of the Apostle, in that he does set down the precept in the
singular number. For when as he does not say, Let them that, etc. but let him
that is taught, etc. he declares manifestly that the precept extends to every
one in particular. No one is or can be exempted from this duty, but is
necessarily to be charged therewith. He only is excepted, which possesses no
kind of goods, has nothing proper to himself, deals not (as we say) for
himself any way, but lives altogether either under or by others, as children,
prentizes, etc. which are yet wholly under the tutele, keeping, and finding of
parents, masters, and other like: or such as be extreme poor, and so do
live, not by their own goods, but by the goods and alms of other men. This
precept is very like unto that law, which God of old had by Moses given unto
his people Israel, as appears, Exo. 23. 15. in these words, None shall
appear before the Lord empty; and is both repeated and explaned, Deuteronomy. 16.
17. thus: Every man shall give according to the gift of his hand, and
according to the blessing of the Lord thy God, which he has given thee. That
is, every man shall give according to his ability more or less: the rich man
shall give according to his riches, a great and liberal portion, and the
poorer sort of his tenuitie a little also, every man something: None shall come
without any thing at all. Like to this was the law of tithes, unto which every
man was subject that possessed ought. The tenth was the Lords, and must be
paid unto the Lord, wheresoever and with whomsoever it was to be found: as
appears, Numb. 18. and otherwhere.

Whereunto we may find the practice both of the Jews in time of the law, and
of Christians as well in the infancy as flourishing estate of the Gospel, to
have been very co^sonant, as may appear sufficiently for the one, by the
history of that poor widow, Luc. 21. who offered, of her penury, somewhat
into the treasury of God, as well as did the rich and wealthy much, of their
abundance and superfluities. And yet neither is she blamed by our Savior, as
doing more then her duty, more then she needed, but highly commended as doing
her duty, and but her duty, cheerfully and liberally: nor are the priests
that received the offerings, reprehended for taking an offering of a widow so
poor, themselves being rich: And by the words of the Pharisey, Lu. 18. 12.
who (speaking no doubt according to the general practice of al) protests,
That he gave tithe of all that he did possess. whereto accords our Savior,
Math. 23. 23. acknowledging for them, That tithed even the very mint and annis,
Rue, and Cummin, et omne olus, and every other herb; and saying, That they
howsoever they ought to have done also greater things, yet those they ought not
to have left undone.

As for the times of the Gospel, Act. 2. 45. we read, how the Church at first,
being not otherwise provided for, So many as had, either possessions or goods,
that is, either lands or moueables, (for so the words in the judgment of
learned interpreters do signify) sold them, and laid down the price at the
Apostles feet, that thence distribution might be made to every man, poor and
rich, hearer and teacher, according as he had need. And so every man that was
taught in the word, did that way, make him that taught him, partaker with him
of all his goods.

The Gospel once thoroughly planted, and, by the conversion of Constantine and
other Emperors and Kings unto the faith of Christ, settled in peace, this law
was more generally and fully as practiced, so established and confirmed. For
upon due notice and consideration thereof, even then universally in all
nations, kingdoms and countries that had received the faith, lands were given
and consecrated, and tithes restored to the Church in such a general,
uniform, godly and goodly sort, both for the manner and the measure thereof, as
is yet admirable to as many as note either the action then, or the disposition
of people now. To which course, how had it been possible ever people could so
generally, so uniformly, and so readily have been drawn, unless Christians
then with one mind and one mouth had acknowledged this doctrine here taught
them by the Apostle, viz. That it was every man's duty to make his minister
partaker of all his goods, and thereupon consented, as it were by divine
inspiration, That for the better success of the Gospel then, and avoiding of
contentions in time to come, such course should be taken as might once for ever
yield and settle it to the Church. Some may happily think, That the Church got
these things in time of blindness and popery, when men in superstitious zeal,
did they knew not what: but I am fo far from their opinion, that I assure my
self, and with great probability can gather and make demonstration, That
those things which are the Churches in right, and properly belong to the
maintenance of her ministers, were all granted and established in their
largest, best, and vprightest form, before popery was planted, even in the
purest and most flourishing time of the Gospel; and that in time of Popery
little was added thereunto, but rather much thereof was then, and thereby,
taken from the Church: And am ready to prove and show, That the very form it
self does plainly and plentifully argue true zeal, great piety and much
wisdom with sound knowledge; and not blind zeal and foolish superstition, to
have been the founders thereof. But of these, more hereafter.

The doctrine and sense of the words being thus laid down, it shall not be
amiss now to consider somewhat withal of such motives as the words themselves
may farther afford, whereby to move every man to the careful and due
performance of this duty. To which purpose, ^t furthereth much, As we have
already seen, who and what persons are commanded, So to consider likewise,
who it is that thus commands: For that, in any law and precept, is a matter
of moment, and specially respected. All scripture is by divine inspiration, and
has not man but God the author thereof. It is not therefore Paul but the Lord
above, not man but God that makes this law. The person is such as has
authorithy to command and power to compel: such as of whose Justice in
decreeing and equity in prescribing, without extreme impiety none may doubt.
Such consideration of the person commanding may serve us to diverse uses and
instructions. For,

First it does well confirm that already said touching the persons that must
pay, showing: That seeing God requires this duty of every man that is a
hearer of the word, therefore from performance thereof no man can be free and
exempt. For who can discharge a man from obedience to God? As for the laws
that men do make, being but mere humane ordinances, civil constitutions,
they that make them, may revoake them, or except and exempt from the penalty of
them whom they will: or a higher power may dispense therewith: but what man may
revoake that with God does enact? or dispense with those whom God does bind?
^t is a ruled case amongst Divines, granted even in time of greatest
ignorance, that against Gods law, no dispensation or decree of man can hold:
and shall we think or practice otherwise in our greatest knowledge? Who can
give thee power or leave to commit murder or adultery, to break the sabbath,
or dishonor thy parents, to steal, to oppress, etc. or make, if how dooest
any of these things, that it shall not be sin unto thee? neither can any man
give thee power to break this law of God, or acquit thee of sin, if thou
dooest break it. Let men pretend custom, license, dispensation, pardon,
privilege, or whatsoever else of like nature in this behalf, it helps not. For
as in the Law it is a Maxim, Null^mtempus occurrit Regi, Against the king,
Prescription of time holds not: so in Divinity is this another, Neque Tempus,
neque consuetudo, etc. Neither time, nor custom, nor privilege, etc. can be
a bar against God. Men may as well say, That by custom, by license, by
privilege, etc. they may be discharged from serving of God, and having any
Church, any Sacraments, any public service, and so any religion amongst them.
For doubtless so far and so long as they are bound to honor and serve God
publicly, to have the Sacraments administered amongst them orderly, to have the
word preached unto them effectually; so long and so far are they and every
one of them bound necessarily iure diuino, by the express Law of God, by
the eternal and inviolable decree of the highest, whose law is surer then that
of the Medes and Persians with alters not, to contribute and yield a part of
their goods toward the maintenance and continuance, the use and exercise of
that Religion, and Ministry among them. Which whosoever neglects and refuses to
do, he does thereby, so far as lies in him, hinde^ the service of God,
shut up the Church doors, and root out from among them the Ministry of the
Church of God, by which alone those things can be and are to be performed.

Secondly, it shows unto us the equity of the law. God being the law maker,
this law must therefore be most equal and just. For who should make a just
law, if not Justice it self? decree that which is equal and right, if not
equity it self? or order a thing wisely and excellently, if not wisdom it
self? Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Genes. 18. 25. Romans 3. 5.

Thirdly, it warranteth unto the ministers themselves, their right and title to
their maintenance. God commanding the people to pay, does allow them to receive
that which is their due. And therefore they may lavvfully and with good
conscience take it, be it much or little; as their own; because God, who has
authority over all, and whose is the earth and all therein, has assigned it
unto them. They challenge not their maintenance by warrant of man's law only,
or only by the rule of equity, but also iure diuino, by the law of God, who
as he made laws for the Priests and Leuits that served at the altar in the
time of the law: so has for his ministers in the time of the Gospel. Which
thing this our Apostle plainly testifies, 1. Corint. 9. 13. where he tells
us, That as by Gods ordinance, They which ministered about holy things did eat
of the things of the Temple: and they which waited at the altar, were partakers
with the altar: So also has the Lord ordained for the time of the Gospel, that
they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Wherefore if at any
time they preaching the Gospel, have not thereof whereon conveniently to live,
it is not because God has not allowed and allotted them sufficient for their
labor, but because men injuriously and wickedly withhold from them one way or
other, that which is indeed their due. This should advise men to make
conscience how they deal with the minister, seeing it is God that has
interessed him to that whereby he is to live. For they cannot debar him of
his due, or defraud him of any part of his right, without an open breach of
Gods law, and manifest infringing of divine ordinance. Were it not great
injury and sin to deny a noble man's servant, or withhold from one of the
Kings officers, the revenues, the lands, the pension, or other maintenance
which his Lord and Master has out of his lands, and possessions lawfully
given him? But no noble man's servant, no officer of any king or potentate, can
have greater right or better interest unto any lands, revenues, pension, or
other incomme given him by his Master, then the minister has to that with is
his due, because he has it not from man but from God, and holds in right of
the truest and highest owner, the Lord of all. In the law of God there is a
curse against him that remooueth his neighbors landmarke, which his
sore-elders had set: Deuteronomy. 27. 17. If he be accursed that remooueth the bounds
that men have laid out, is not he nigh unto cursing, and in danger of Gods
great indignation, that remooueth the bounds of the Church, and alters the
right of the minister, which the father of us all, has for many generations
past, fixed to stand for ever?

This is the principal reason why every man should pay of his goods to the
minister, That is taught.
namely (which I observed to be the second branch of the first general part of
this verse) Because he is taught in the word by the minister. The minister
does teach the word and religion of God, and so ministers to his hearer the
food of the soul: it is but equity therefore, as he receives spiritual
things, that he render temporal things; and that the minister laboring for
him whom he teaches, be likewise paid by him that is taught: for the
Labourer is worthy of his hire. Natural and common reason without Divinity
can teach every man that it is but equity, if he would have a man take
pains and work for him, that he do pay and content him for it as is fit.
Since then that every man, every parishioner does look that the minister stould
labor and take pains for him in his mynisterie as occasion requires, it is
meet, that he allow and yield him for it condign recompense. Thou will not
lightly offer that indignity and injury to a scholemaister, to have him to
teach thy child in the school half or a whole year: to a labourer to work
for thee in thy field or barn, a month or a week: to a messenger, to
travail on thy business a day or two: or to a Scriuener to write for thee, and
it be but an hour or two, but that thou will pay the one and the other for
his labor and work, Too often practiced.
as it is worth, and he deserves. And will thou offer that to thy minister
that he shall attend thee day by day, a week, a month, yea a whole year
together, at Church, and at home, for nothing, or that which is as good as
nothing?

But say I these things according unto man? says not our Apostle the same
also? who, 1. cor. 9. 7. reasons thus: Quis militat propriis stipendiis? etc.
who goes a warfare at any time of his own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? Read the place: it is worth the perusing. And 1. Tim.
5. 17. writes thus: The elders that rule well are worthy of double honor,
specially they which labor in the word and doctrine: for (says he) the
scripture says Thou shall not mousle the mouth of the ox that treads out
the corn, and The labourer is worthy of his wages. Where you may note, That
he does expound himself what that double honor, is viz. when besides the
co^digne reverence yielded to their persons for their office sake, the
ministers have such maintenance also yielded them as is fit and due: and by
conseq. that, it denied or withheld from them, they are abused and dishonored.
God himself does in his law likewise, Number. 18. 21. allege this reason as the
principal cause why the tenthes and other duties allotted to the sons of Leui
(who were the priests or ministers of God in those days) should accordingly
be paid unto them. Behold (says God) I have given to the sons of Leui all
the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve me
in the tabernacle of the Congregation, and ver. 31. It is your wages for your
service. Our Savior in like manner likes this reason so well, that speaking of
this matter, and showing his Apostles by what right they might enter into any
house, and eat and drink such things as were set before them, and tarry in that
house without going from house to house, for one meals meat here, another
there, like beggars; uses no other reason for it but this, For the labourer is
worthy of his hire. Math. 10. 10. Luc. 10. 7. And it is so consonant not only
to religion, but also to all natural reason and common humanity, that it is
hard to find that man which thinks it not requisite to be observed; I say
not as I have already said, toward his servants and laborers, but even
toward his very cattle, the beasts of the earth. For who is there but will
allow his horse prouander, that he may travel well? or his ox fodder enough,
that he may plough well?

Here be goodly comparisons, it may be some will think, and fair proofs.
What, from beasts to men? yea, and mark it well. For the comparison though it
be plain and homely, is not of my invention. I borrowed it from our Apostle
S. Paul, who likes it so well, that he does use it in two several places of
his epistles, viz. 1. Cor. 9. 9. and 1. Tim. 5. 18. and he did borrow it of
Moses, who received it of God, as appears, Deuteronomy. 25. 4. where thus it is
written, Thou shall not mousle the mouth of the ox that treads out the
corn. From whence the Apostle does apply it to his purpose, and shows, That
God in making such a law, did it more for our sakes that be men and ministers,
then for the care he had of oxen, though them also he leaves not vncared for:
and would thereby give us to understand, that if it be an unreasonable and
hard course to mousle the mouth of the laboring Ox, and pinch him of his
meat, much more it is unreasonable and unconscionable to deny to a man that
labors any way for thee, his due hire: but most of all, to the minister, that
labors for the good of thy soul, nourishment for his body, and convenient
necessaries for his life. And therefore it may well be feared, That the keeping
and feeding of their oxen and horses, will one day be a testimony against many
Christians in this behalf: because they offer that measure to the minister,
which they do not, nor will do, to the ox that ploughes in their field, or
the horse that serves for their journey; being careful that these be kept
well and fed at full, as knowing that the better they are kept, the better they
will labor: but very careless for those other, though they pine for want of
food, and live in misery for lack of necessaries; yea, and yet exclaim and
grudge against them too, if they be not as laborious as those that be duly
and well maintained; as against idle and careless persons ungodly and slack in
their ministry, without zeal, etc. as if they had never heard or quite
forgotten the old proverb, They that will have their lamp to give them light,
must maintain it with oil accordingly.

The harder that a man does work, the better he deserves (as we commonly
account) his wages: and the more his labors do profit us, the willinger we
are to pay him his due. If other men be the better worthy of wages, because
they work hard; of hire for their labor, because we get well thereby; much
more the minister of God: and that whether we respect the greatness of his
labor, or the goodness of his work. For it is not, as many account it, an
easy, an idle, a pleasant and loytering kind of life, to do the work of an
Evangelist, but one of the hardest and greatest of all others: nor a needless
and fruitless work, but of all other the most necessary and profitable that
can be. For to speak nothing of that long and laborious preparation whereby a
man is made fit for this work, by spending all his time, even from his cradle,
till well-neere 30. years of age, still wearying himself with many studies,
and wasting the wealth of his friends with great and excessive charges. Is it
not (think you) a great labor and an hard, to employ his ministry, attend
his study, and execute from time to time those things that appertain to his
charge? They that are any thing acquainted with these kind of exercises, can
somewhat tell, how it incombreth their senses, troubles their minds, breaks
their sleep, wastes their goods, weakneth their bodies, impaireth their
health, and sometimes shortens their days: And as it is a great labor and
painful to them, so is it exceeding good and profitable to their people. These
watch, but for their souls. These fight, but to defend them from their
spiritual enemies. These are pastors, but to feed them: shepherds to keep
them from the wolf: lights, to direct them: salt, to season them. These are
ministers to do them service: messengers, to bring unto them, the glad tidings
of salvation: Ambassadors on the Lords behalf, to entreat them that they
would be reconciled unto God. These are Gods laborers, and they are Gods
husbandry: these are Gods builders, they are Gods building. Suffer me a little
to magnify the office. By the Labors of the minister, we are begotten unto
the Faith, brought from darkness unto light, from the power of Satan unto God,
stirred unto repentance when we have sinned, exhorted unto our duty being
slack, reproved when we offend, confirmed being strong, strengthened being
weak, comforted in heaviness, humbled in prosperity, instructed being
ignorant, and in a word saved in the day of the Lord: Without them we could
neither know God nor our selves, eschew vice, or ensue virtue; abandon error,
nor follow truth; shake off infidelity, or receive the faith: to be short,
neither avoid hell, nor attain heaven. Wherefore, their work and labor
being so great unto themselves, and so profitable unto us, if others be worthy
of wages for their work, they rather: of hire for their labor, much more
they: of liberal recompense for their pains, they most of all* of love for
their diligence, they of singular love: of any honor for their endeavors, they
of double honor, that labor in the word and doctrine. There must be an
equality; They to receive of our labors, as we of theirs: and seeing they
do enrich us in spiritual things, we to keep them from poverty and needines
at least in temporal things, that so they may labor and ever be ready and
able to labor with joy and not with grief; for that is as unprofitable for us
as grievous unto them. If any take my words as of no moment, let him hear yet
how the Apostle himself, 1. Corinthians. 9. 11. speaks in the same manner,
saying: If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, does
it seem such a burden to your shoulders, such a charge to your purses, if we
reap your carnal things? For, is the exchange bad to receive gold for copper,
silver for dross, pearls for stones, celestial treasures and eternal, for
worldly and temporary trash? Other men look to reap more then they do sow,
(for harvest naturally does exceed the seed time) but we are content to reap
both worse and less then we sow; and shall it yet be thought overmuch? yea,
where other men sow in tears and reap in joy, shall we be infor^ed to sow
in joy, and reap in tears? or (more rightly to speak) both to sow and to
reap in tears?

Thou see now (Christian Reader) a farther interest the minister has unto
his maintenance. It is not only an inheritance and annuitie given and assigned
him by God, and so due to him, because the Lord has passed it over unto him by
assignation (as also we shall hereafter see): but it is also due to him by the
Law and rule of equity, because of his labor. He deserves it at our hands,
and earnes every penny thereof dearly, before he has it: And therefore look
what right the servant has to his wages, the labourer to his hire, the very
like, as great right and interest has the minister to his maintenance, and
whatsoever is his due.

As his right is great, and the cause, why it ought to be paid him, just and
equal: so is the fault great, and the course very unequal, if it be not
performed. In the common opinion even of wordly men, he is counted very
unreasonable, and of a bad conscience, that will keep away wages from a
servant, or not pay a workman and labourer his hire. Judge then, what reason or
conscience is it, to keep back the ministers maintenance which is his wages?
to deny or debar him his due, which is his hire? God does so exactly require
the performance of that duty toward hm that works in thy field, that in his
law he sets an hour by which it must be paid, Leuit. 19. 13. The workemans
hire shall not abide with thee until the morning. He must be paid ouernight,
the very same day at even that it is due. Deuteronomy. 24. 15. Moses adds a reason
why: least, (says he) he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin
unto thee. And in Malac. 3. 5. the Lord lays an heavy curse, and threatens to
be swift in Judgment against them that keep back the hirelings wages. The
Lord being thus provident for the good usage of the poor labourer in thy
barn or field; looks he not for as good dealing, and as due payment unto
those that labor in his own vineyard, and whom he has sent forth into his
own harvest? or will he not as speedily and severely revenge their cause, and
right their wrongs, when they shall cry unto him for the injuries that are
offered unto them, and for the wrongs and oppressions they receive and sustain
at the hands of such as keep back their hire, and pay not the^ their wages,
but deny them their just and appointed portions? The bread of deceit (says
Solomon) is sweet to a man: Proverb. 20. 19. and 9. 17
but afterward his mouth shall be filled with gravel. It is goods clear gained,
and so much well saved some may think, that is gotten from the Church, and
kept from the Minister: but if any prove the richer thereby at length, or such
goods do long prosper, I am much deceived. For sure I am, that there is a God
that judges the earth. Thus far of the principal cause why, viz. in regard
even of desert, people ought to yield unto their Ministers due maintenance.

Besides which, the same words of this parcel of scripture in hand, viz. let
him that is taught, and him that teaches, may yield us yet another reason or
cause thereof: and that is, in regard, not of that they do, but (as I may say)
in regard of that they do not. I mean for that they do not intermeddle,
(for so they should not) in the trades, occupations and professions of other
men: but as they are consecrated to god, do give themselves wholly (...) the
Ministry and service of the Church, and so do not by dealing in their trades,
take from other men their livings. In which respect, even as that was one
especial reason, why the Jews paid tithes unto their brethren the Leuits,
viz. for that they had none inheritance among them; but that which should have
been their part, went in common among the rest: so this ought to be one
sufficient cause, why the Ministers of the Gospel should have maintenance of
and from others, Because they entangle not themselves with the affairs of this
life as do others: which if they did and might do, would happily be more
prejudice to others then their maintenance now comes too. For were they not
called by God to this business, and set a part for this work of the Gospel
alone, they could set themselves, some to be Lawyers, some Merchants, some
husbandmen, some artificers, etc. which would greatly increase the number of
them that be of such professions, to the no little hindrance of such as live
thereby, and so doing they might be able to live of themselves. But this
seeing they do not, being yet all servants of one God, all members of the
same commonwealth, all subjects to the same King, it is reason they be
relieved and provided: for by some other way: least extreme necessity compel
them intruding upon the trades, sciences and professions of other men, to do
that which otherwise they neither should nor would.

CHAP. III.
Being a more special explication of the hearers duty, before in general
sort only set down, it shows; Of what sort of goods the minister must have
a part. And what this word (goods) used in the text does signify.

Text. Make him partaker of all his goods.
WHereas I observed in this verse, containing the precept, 3. things (to be
specially observed, viz.) First the persons who must contribute; secondly, the
cause why; and thirdly, the matter what: viz. a part of all his goods: I am now
come to that point, to examine and discuss, what it is, that he that is
taught must do for his teacher; that is, make him partaker of all his goods.

This is the point which is Caput Rei, the chief of all, as wherein lies (as
they say) the key of the work, in respect whereof, all that I have hitherto
said, is but little. For that already past, consists wholly in general
points: but now follow such as are particular. In laying down whereof, I know
before, that I shall speak directly against some such courses as many think
to be very good, and bring to light some things unthought off in these days.
And therefore here specially I do entreat thee (courteous and Christian Reader)
to lay aside all passion and preiudicate opinion, and to read me with such
religious affection, and indifferent mind, as becomes him that seeks the
truth, and prefers the mind of God, before the manners of men. My meaning is
not to offend any, but to satisfy all: not to contend about any thing, but to
examine every thing by the rule of righteousness, trying out by the very
touchstone of all truth (Gods undefiled word) what is gold, and what is copper:
which cannot but be as necessary for others to know, as for me to utter. Let
not man therefore receive that with the left hand, which I deliver with the
right: For mine own part, knowing this to be a very necessary kind of
doctrine for these times; as Paul would not forbear to set forth the doctrine
of the resurrection to the Athenians, Act. 17.
howsoever it were accepted: so neither I this. And I will hope still, That as
Paul so preaching, though some mocked, others doubted, and some dissented, yet
some beleueed, and claue unto Paul: so I thus writing, though some regard it
not, others wholly reject it, yet some and those the better some and sort too,
will both accept it, and put it unto practice. But howsoever, veritas non
quaerit angulos. Truth is not ashamed of the light, it seeke^ no corners.

And now leaving preambles, let us come to the point. The matter, now to be
considered off is, what he that is taught must do, viz. He must make his
teacher partaker with him of all his goods. In these words, 2. things specially
do offer themselves to our consideration. The first is, whereof he is to let
him have a part. The second is, what part or how much thereof, he must let him
have. For the first of these, the words are plain. He must have a part of his
goods, that is, of his goods in general whatsoever they be, and of all his
goods, that is, of every sort of his goods, some, of what kind or sort soever
they be in special.

What the Apostle means by goods, Of () his goods.
it is no hard thing for any man to conceive; seeing all men know, That
whatsoever it is that a man has to live by, and serves either ad victum, or ad
cultum, to yield us either meat for the belly, or clothing for the back, are
all of them Bona, the goods of this world. If the Apostle had said of all his
lands, or of all his increase, or of all his fruits, or all his labors, some
question and difficulty might have been made, what might be the sense; but
using no word that is any way ambiguous and subject to equivocation, but this
word (...) goods, which comprehends in all men's knowledge indefinitely (as Bona
amongst the Latins) whatsoever a man lives by, there is no place left for any
evasion or contention. If any difference at all be, and that the Apostles
words should be pressed more to one sort of goods then another, the use of the
word with us, would permit it to be understand rather of moveable goods, of
goods gotten by labor and art, as by trade and occupation, then of land and
its increase. For in our English phrase we do commonly call those kind of
means to live by goods, but the other lands. And accordingly when we will
express a man's whole estate, we say in lands and goods: or put a difference
between the different estates of men, we say, One is worth thus much in
lands, another thus much in goods: which manner of speech we find also used in
scripture, as Act. 2. 45. where it is said, That the godly conuerts sold their
possessions and goods; that is, all that ever they had, mooueable and
immovable, lands and other things whatsoever. So that unless we will
understand the word here used, to signify, only and specially, not lands but
other goods, not riches, rising of inheritance and possessions, but such only
as are gotten by art and labor, which indeed were absurd; we must take it as
reason requires, and all interpreters do consent, for all that a man has, all
sorts of goods and substance whatsoever.

This sense standing for good, and going current as needs it must; this clause
does plainly show, That such as live by trades and sciences, by art and
labor (as the greatest number do in towns and Cities) are no less liable to
this duty, and bound to contribute toward the maintenance of their ministers,
then those that live by husbandry and tillage, by the fruits and increase of
the earth. Many of that sort of men do presume, that because they have not
lands and fields to yield them increase, therefore they ought to pay little or
nothing. But, that therein they do deceive themselves, these words of our text
do make it as apparent as the light at noone days. For if that whereby they
do live, be goods: if that which they get by their trades and occupations,
sciences and industry, art and labor, be goods, as well as that the
husbandman gets by his tillage and increase of the earth, (and that is
already so apparently convinced, that it cannot be denied) then is it clear
that the minister ought to have a part with them thereof, as well as with the
husbandman in that he possesses and lives by. As the Minister makes no respect
in executing of his Ministry, whether those he teaches be husbandmen or
merchants, tradesmen or artificers, but teaches all, ministereth the word and
sacraments to all indifferently; so they are to make no difference between
these and those goods, whether they be gotten by land or by sea, by trade or by
tillage, by husbandry or by merchandise, by natures increase or arts industry:
but by that whereby they do maintain themselves and live by, by that and
those kind of goods, they must help to maintain him too.

That the Apostle did speak it indifferently of the one sort of goods as well
as of the other, and intended directly it should be a rule for the one sort of
hearers as well as for the other; there needs no better proof nor other
argument, then the practice of this kind of doctrine in those times. For it is
most certain and easy to be conceived, by any that has never so small
knowledge, and but superficial understanding in the scriptures, That
Christians in those days were for the most part citizens and townsmen,
tradesmen and artificers: and therefore they were the first and most special
persons that were then to practice thus, and did above all others impart of
their goods unto their teachers. The history, called The Acts of the Apostles,
is full of examples of this sort: which for breuities sake I leave to the
Reader to be perused.

2. If we call to mind the principal cause and reason, already noted out of
the text, why all sorts of men should give of their goods to this use, is it
not the same to one sort as well as to another? If townsmen have as great
need of teaching as they in the country or rather more? If they can no more
be without a Minister then the other? why should they not maintain him as well
as the other?

3. Go to the rule of Equity, which tells us, that The labourer is worthy
of his hire: and if by that rule, the townesman, or tradesman, be bound to pay
him that works for him in his shop, his house, or other business which
co^cerns his body, no less then the husbandman is, and does and will give as
good wages for such causes as he: why should he not pay his minister
likewise, that labors for his soul, and does his best work, as largely and
bountifully as the husbandman does?

4. Look upon the necessity and state of the minister: And has not he that
lives in the town need of as much maintenance as he that lives in the country?
Nay rather has he not need of much more? For, needs not his study to be
greater? Is not housekeeping, is not diet and apparel, more chargeable unto
him? is there not greater cause of hospitality? why then, where there is
greatest need, should there be meanest help? and where is most use of
maintenance, there least be yielded?

5. Besides all this, Consider we whence all men have their goods. Is it not
God, that same God, that gives his blessing as well upon the labors of them
that live by trades, or handicrafts, as upon the increase of the earth? that
makes men to prospe^, whether it be by sea or by land? that gives the
townesman power to get riches, as well as the countryman? And then seeing it is
every man's duty that has received ought at Gods hand, to honor God
therewith, and show himself thankful to God, as to the author and giver of
all things; ought not the tradesman, the townesman, and Citizen do this as well
as the husbandman? When Solomon, Prou. 3. 9. says, Honor the Lord with thy
riches: or as other translations read, With thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase: does he speak only of goods that arise by
increase of the earth? or does he not rather in the first clause speak
generally of all goods whatsoever? and in the latter particularly of such as
arise by tillage? Read but the note in the margent, and consider.

Thus, by the manifest words of the text, the practice of the doctrine in the
Apostles time, the use of the ministry, the rule of equity, the state of the
minister, and the author from whom all have their goods; it appears, that
they that have one sort of goods as well as another, ought to pay of that they
have, to the minister for his maintenance.

Let men therefore learn to make more conscience of this matte;, seeing we
plainly see, That as it is a very unreasonable thing to look that the
minister should teach them, and labor in his ministry for them for nothing,
being flatly against the rule of equity: so it is also a wicked and ungodly
thing; being a manifest b^each of Gods ordinance and commandment, who has
ordained and commanded, That every one that is taught in the word, of those
goods that he has whatsoever they be, should give a p^^t to him that does
teach him, and so honor the Lord with his substance.

CHAP. IIII.
Shows, That the right and best manner of payment to the minister, is. That
he be paid his part of every thing in specie, that is, in its proper kind,
as naturally God does send it, and not by a set stipend.

Text. Partaker of all his goods.
Having now seen in general whereof the minister must have a part, next we
are to note the same thing in special; that is, in what sort it ought to be
paid unto him. To which purpose it serves well, that our Apostle says not
only of his goods, but which is more, of all his goods; that is of every sort
of his goods some. He must, as we say in this case, be paid in specie, in
the very kind. Otherwise, he may have a part of his goods; but not of all his
goods: as two pence at Easter, a sheafe of corn at harvest, etc. is a part of
a man's goods, but not of all his goods. But then thou give him a part of all
thy goods, when then payest him a part of thy corn, thy hey, and thy cattle,
thou having corn, hey, and cattle: a part of the fruits of thine orchard and
garden, thou having orchard and garden: a part of thy fish and of thy foul,
if thou have taken fish or foul: a part of thy spoils taken in war, thou
having gotten a booty in war: a part of thy money gotten by thy trade or
labor, thou having gained by thy trade and labor: in a word, a part of every
several thing which thou do live by, and comes to thine hand as thy goods,
his s^are is many therein as well as thine own, how sorts soever thou have.

Thus the children of Israel, Gods own people, dealt with the priests in their
days, as we may read in diverse places of those ancient stories; and namely,
Number. 31. where it is recorded, That the children of Israel having gotten a
great booty in ^arre, they paid out of it (and that by the Lords appointment)
the Lords tribute unto the Leuits, both of the person^, women sl^^es; and of
the cattle, beeues, asses, and sheep. Yea of the very jewels they gave also
an offering, of every sort some, as there they are reckoned up, verse. 50. Jewels
of gold, bracelets, and chains, rings, earings, and ornaments of the legs.
The like have we 2. Chro. 31. where it is reported thus; The children of
Israel and of Judah brought unto the house of God, for the Priests and the
Leuits, bullocks and sheep, corn, Wine, honey, and of all the increase of
the field, and the tithes of all things, and laid them on many heaps. Nehem.
10. and 13. we do read how by the commandment and encouragement of that
good Ruler Nehemiah, the whole congregation of Israel, being newly returned
from the captivity of Babylon, do enter covenant with the Lord to do the
like. And that this practice continued even in our Saviors time, and not
without his approbation, we may gather by his words concerning the Pharisees,
Math. 23. 23. who (as he testifies) tithed the ver^e (...) and rue, annis and
cu^^^in, and every other herb. They paid not for the tithe of them; but
tithed the^, that is, paid the tithe thereof in its kind. And this says our
Savior, they ought to have done, whereunto accords that vainglorious
ostentation of the Pharisee, Luc. 18. 12. who says, That he paid tithe of all
that ever he did possess.

How much this course of paying the minister every thing in his own kind
pleases God, we may easily conjecture by this, That he allowed none other
course amongst his own people for his servants the sons of Leui, unto whom
notwithstanding they dwelt not as mynisters do now, at home amongst the people
in every several City, town or village, but were resident by themselves,
either at the house of God, or in their own Cities, he appointed by express
Law, at their own charge, as far as I can gather (which was no small travail
and expense) to bring home to them all their duties, as your may read, Deuteronomy.
12. 11. When there shallbee a place which the Lord your God shall choose to
cause his name to dwell there, thither shall you bring all that I command you;
that is, your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the
offerings of your hands, and all your special vows whi^^ ye vow unto the
Lord. Besides that, whereas there were of the seed of Leui two sorts, Priests
and Leuits, the tenth of all things being paid unto the Leuits in kind, they
(the Leuits) were bound by express law likewise, to pay unto the priests the
tenth of that tenth in his kind also; as appears, Numb. 18. 26. and Nehem.
10. 38. neither it is unlikely, but that that which comes from God unto us,
by the natural course of his providence, which we know to be most innocent and
pure, is (being returned unto him) therefore best accepted, because least
spotted with the stain of unlawful or indirect procurement.

And as this course best of all other pleased God, so has it likewise most
liked the Church of God, and the Christian governors of the Church (as
imitators of God) in all ages since: as may and does manifestly appear by the
practice of all Christendom, for many hundred years together, and by sundry
laws and constitutions both spiritual and temporal, civil and cannon; which
here to recite were but superfluous.

I may add further, That not only the Jews in time of the law, and
Christians in time of the Gospel, have approved this course, but that
likewise it was in practice through the very instinct of nature, and light of
reason, even before the Law in time of nature, and where the Law reigned not in
its time, amongst the very heathen. For, to speak nothing of the offerings of
Cain and Abel, Genes. 4. (because therein is no mention made of any priest,
though it be probable, that they were not offered up unto the Lord without a
priest; who, serving at the altar, by the very Law of nature was to participate
with the altar) who offered according to their several professions of life, of
such things as they had; that is, Cain of the fruits of the ground, and Abel
the first borne and fat of his sheep. We have, Genesis 14. a plain instance
for it in Abraham: who (having obtained a great victory against his enemies) is
there expressly reported to have given unto Melchizedec, Priest of the high
God, a certain part of all; that is, as some understand it, of all the goods
he had whatsoever, or of all, that is as others expound it, and the text of
scripture, Heb. 7. 4. seems to confirm, of all the spoils and prey that he
had taken in the war, of every sort some. And the like in Jacob, Genesis 28. who
there voweth (which no doubt he, most religiously, after performed, Genesis 35.
3.) to give unto God of all (that is, of every kind of thing according to his
kind) that God should give unto him, a certain part. And touching the
heathen, Pliny, an Historiographer of no small account and credit, reports of
the Romans, That they used not to spend their wines or new fruits, till the
Priests had received a part thereof. And of the Sabeans and Aethiopians,
people of the East, That of those spices which those countries yielded in great
plenty and variety, the custom was, that the merchants might not meddle with
any, till the Priests had laid out of every sort unto their Gods, their
accustomed portions. And of diverse other nations, Festus another story-writer,
does give this general testimony; The people of ancient times used to offer
of every thing a part unto their Gods. So that before the Law, under the Law,
and since the Law, amongst Heathens, Jews and Christians, the ancient and
common, and so the best and most approved practice has been, to pay to the
Priests and ministers of the Church, Gods part in kind.

Neither is it without great and apparent reason that thus it should be. For
if we consider of it, we shall find that it is every way the best, most
equal, and indifferent course that can be.

First, it does after a sort correspond unto that the teacher does; while,
like as the minister of God does impart unto his hearer in spiritual things
all the counsel of God, and delivers unto him every principle of Religion,
instructs him in all several duties, and increases him in all kind of
Christian knowledge, hiding and keeping back nothing from him, that God has
appointed him to teach, and behooues the other to learn; as notably our
Apostle does for himself protest, Act. 20. 27: so the hearer again for his
part, by a kind of retribution, does render unto his teacher in te^porall
things, a part of all that he has, some of every sort of goods that God
has blessed him withal, hiding and keeping back from him no kind of thing,
that is once his own.

2. It is the truest and iustest kind of payment that can be. For, so the
minister may have his full due, without diminution or alteration: which how much
God respects, may appear by 2. special places in his law. The first is,
Leuit. 27. 33. where it is said, Of that which was the Lords part, he that
was to pay it, should not look whether it were good or bad, neither shall he
change it. See, God would have it as it did rise; else if he did change it,
both it and that it was changed for, was holy to the Lord, and might not be
redeemed. The other place is, Deuteronomy. 26. 12. where the people paying their
tithes are enjoined to do it in manner upon their oathe, with very solemn
protestation before the Lord. The sum whereof is this; When thou have made
an end of tithing, then thou shall say before the Lord thy God, I have brought
the hallowed thing out of mine house, and also have given it to the Leuit
according to thy commandment. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, that
is for any necessity whatsoever, nor suffered ought to perish through any
uncleanness; by putting it to any profane use; but have hearkened to the voice
of the Lord my God, and done after all that thou have commanded me. That is,
I have paid every thing justly, as in thy law I am appointed. Look down
therefore from thine holy habitation, even from heaven, and bless, etc. As
who would say, He desired to be blessed and prospered in all that he had,
none otherwise, but according as he had dealt truly and justly with God and
his ministers in that point: and acknowledged as was just, and does no doubt
come still to pass, that there were no hope to prosper well, if he should
defraud God and his servants of their sacred and appointed portions.

3. It is the speediest course whereby the minister may receive his due, sooner
then else he possibly can or should. For, paid in kind; as soon as it can be
severed from the rest of that kind, it may be paid: which cannot so speedily
always be done, if the owner be permitted to convert it first into money. And
this also was a point specially provided for, in the Law of God; as appears,
Whereupon S. August. ser. de temp. 219.
Exodus 22. 29. where it is said: Thine abundance, and thy licour shall thou
not keep back: that is, thou shall not defer the payment of them to the
priest; for that is meant by keeping back, Si tardius dare peccatu^ est, quanto
peius est non dedi^^e?
as interpreters do agree, the old interpreter expressing it thus; Non
^^rdabis offerre. Thou shall not linger or foreslow to offer it. And another
(Tremell*) thus; Ne differto dare, Defer not, that is, put not off the
payment of it from time to time, but do it out of hand, so soon as it is
payable. And indeed if it be an offense to God, to keep back the wages of the
^ireling, that works for thee about thine own business, and not to pay him
as soon as it is due, as we are taught Deuteronomy. 24. 15. and otherwhere; shall we
think that he will be pleased, if his workman that labors for us in his
harvest be paid when it pleases us, at our leisure once in a year, happily
in 2. year, and not so soon as any part of his maintenance falls out to
be due unto him?

4. It is the most necessary course that can be. For the minister being to
keep house, and hospitality too, (for that is required at his hands, 1. Tim.
3. 2. and they must do it that have wherewith) he shall be the better
enabled, yea, and the more occasioned thereunto, receiving every thing in kind,
and so having provision of one thing or other always at hand. And this is a
point so necessary to be considered of in these days, wherein charity is
grown cold, houskeeping let down, and hospitality in manner banished both out
of Churchmens and laymens houses; that if by this means, viz. by paying the
minister his due in kind it might any whit be revoked, and restored; that
only good thereof were cause enough why it should with all care be performed:
that so, in so holy and necessary a good work, men, specially they that should
be men of example to others, might not be any way hindered and discouraged,
but furthered therein to the uttermost.

5. It is the most certain and stable course that can be, as which is least
subject to alteration: because howsoever the prices of things do rise or fall,
and daily change, yet the things themselves change not. And therefore Nature,
which commonly is one, must needs be the most indifferent and permanent
standart betweenes God and man, the minister and his people, that can be. God
seemed to have respect hereunto, Number. 18. 27. when commanding the Leuits to pay
the tenth of their tithes to the priests in kind, he says, that so doing it
should be reckoned unto them as the corn of the b^rne, or as the abundance of
the winepresse: that is, it should be accounted, as if it had been grown
upon their own ground: by means whereof the priests with them, and they with
the people, should still from time to time receive more or losle, as God gave
the increase, which observed still, must needs be the most equal and certain
course howsoever the world go. For so, the minister, as God blesses the
people, shall be partaker of the blessing; and if they suffer loss, he
likewise shall bear (as is fit) the burden equally with them.

Thus by all hitherto said, that is, by the practice of all ages, the Law of
God for his own people, and by manifest and manifold reasons, it may appear,
that the right and best course for payement of the minister is, to pay him in
specie, a part of every sort of a man's goods, as it does arise in his kind.

Some do make a question, whether it were better that ministers generally
were paid their maintenance by the things in kind, as commonly they are, or as
in some few places, by set stipend?

Such a question is sufficiently answered by that already said. I deny not,
but that in cases extraordinary, and in some places, a stipend may prove more
convenient: but generally and ordinarily (for that is the question) to turn
all into stipends, must needs be generally and absolutely the worst course.

As for that that may be objected, touching the toil and labor that the
minister must have to receive his things in kind, by means whereof (they will
say) he is feign to work and labor, specially at harvest time, otherwise
then befitteth his calling: I say first, That always needs not; For, having
family and keeping house, he may have those to labor for him, which can
perform such things better and fitter then himself; and he needs not, except
it be for pleasure or recreations sake, put one finger to that burden.
Secondly, in smaller parishes where the profits of the place are so slender,
that he is enforced to take more pains then others need or do, the matter is
not so great, but that it may without offense be tolerated; nor so tedious,
but that it may soon be dispatched. And it were very hard there, that others
should do it for him, and not he or his: because it is not probable, but that
having already very little to live by, he should by that means have less;
For, his gatherer or pay-maister would look to have ashare with him for his
pains. And that is the mark I think (and it behooues the Clergy to
consider of it) that many do shoot at, that would have ministers brought to
stipends, that so their Lay-farmers, or pay-maisters, might get yet more of the
ministers profits into their hands, whereof they have already too much.

2. Again, whereas others may object against the receiving of things in kind,
that it breeds much trouble, wrangling and contention between the minister and
his parishioners, the like may be more justly feared, in the leuying,
imposing, collecting, demanding and paying of stipends.

3. Lastly, whereas the corruption of patrons and others, that have interest in
the bestowing of livings upon Clergy men, is at this day exceeding great, and
does not a little daily impouerish the ministry, and spoil our Churches: by
stipends, that pest would nothing be stayed, but rather increased. For whereas
now the minister receiving all things in kind, whatsoever the patron or others
receive of the minister, directly, or indirectly, must be in secret, known to
God, and them alone; because the patron cannot take away any part of the gleeb
or tithes, but that the world also will see and know it: then, having all in
his hands, and being to pay only a stipend, it is easy to gather how easily
he might find the means to share what part thereof he lusted, with the
minister of the place; and yet unless it be by the poor man's threed-bare
coat, or thin cheeks, the matter never be espied.

All which things considered, I am so far from liking that stipendary
maintenance, that I wish rather the number of stypends in our Church might not
be increased but diminished, and (if it were possible) wholly taken away. I
mean specially, That whereas there be diverse Church-liuings in our land,
^eazed into laymens hands, on which only a set stipend of ten pounds or there
about is reserved for the Curat of the place, that that course might be
utterly cut off; and in steed of that stipend, such a competent part of the
gleeb, tithes, and other profits of the place being allotted for a perpetual
Vicar, as might be fit and able in some tolerable sort to maintain a
sufficient teacher there.

That my motion is very godly, just and necessary, I doubt not but that all
indifferent men will easily grant. But it will perhaps seem a matter hard to
be effected.

I grant, that to enforce any to surrender the whole, because it is their
proper inheritance, were Summum ius: but yet I cannot be persuaded, but that
if power perswasiue be all in vain, that power coactiue may with great
equity, reason, and piety too, be used, to enforce such to surrender so much
of that they possess, as may in lieu of that beggarly stipend, be a competent
maintenance for one, that is, though not excellently (as the whole would have
been) yet competently learned, and able in some measure to discharge the duty
of a Pastor to the people.

This were not to strain the Law, but to put in execution the very true sense
and meaning thereof, which by ouer-strict observing of the letter, is abused.
For it is out of all question, that when such stipends were allotted, it was
intended, That the Churches should still be provided for, of able ministers,
and then thought (The condition of ministers, who were then all singlemen; the
s^ate of these times, wherein all things to live by, were four times at least
better cheap then now they are; the disposition of people in their voluntary
offerings being much more liberal then now it is, etc. being considered)
that ten pound a year or thereabout was a sufficient and schollerlike
maintenance. But that things being so much altered as now they are, the pay it
self should stand without alreration, is an open and certai^e perverting of
the mind and sense of the Law. And therefore no breach of Law, no wrong to the
possessour, no contrariety to reason; if men will not of their own accord,
upon very conscience of what is necessary, do that is fit, that they be
ouer-ruled and enforced thereunto. And I speak herein no more then what our
Savior did in another case, Math. 12. against such of his time as ouerstrictly
stood upon the very letter of the Law of the Sabbath, telling them that the
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; and therefore it were
not an observation but an abuse of the Law, to let a man perish on the Sabbath
for want of present help. And is it not worse in this case, when through
ouerstrict straining of words that had a meaning good enough, many souls are
suffered daily to perish, many ministers of the word are dishonored, the
Sabbath from time to time profaned, and God made offended? No more then what
the laws themselves do affirm. For in the civil Law, Cod. lib* 1. Tit. 17.
Deleg. and conf. 5. thus we read: Non dubium est in legem committere ^um etc.
that is, There is no doubt but that he offends against the Law, which
retayning the words of the Law, does contrary to the meaning thereof. Neither
shall he avoid the penalties set down in the laws, who contrary to the mind
of the Law, does, by a strict prerogative of the words, fraudulently, excuse
himself. No more then what is practiced diverse ways in other things. There
be ancient statutes concerning the wages of servants, laborers, etc.
agreeable no doubt to those times; but will any reasonable body affirm, that
it were fit, they should be urged now? And have not the rates therein set
down, justly upon due consideration been made alterable by later statutes, as
of An. 5. Eliz. Cap. 4? What the common pay of schoole-maisters, where no
school was founded, was wont to be, few but can tell. But has not common
reason prevailed there against so far, that now a days there is scarce any
that will either accept or offer it? If very conscience and reason can see it
requisite to alter the pay for other men, what lets it should not for the
minister too; unless it be that of all other we respect them least? Lastly,
nor do I move other then that which long since was by law intended and
attempted to be donc: as may appear in the abridgement of statutes in the
title Appropriations, by these words; Because that much hurt has come to
Parishes by Appropriation of Benefices, etc. Be it enacted, etc. That hence
forth in every Church so appropriated, a secular person be ordained Vicar
perpetual, canonically instituted and inducted in the same, and Couenably
endowed by the discretion of the Ordinary to do divine service, and to inform
the people, and to keep hospitality there, etc. And that the said statute, viz.
(a statute of An. 15. Ric. 2. Cap. 6.) should be kept and put in execution, and
all Appropriations made since the statute contrary thereunto, to be reformed
before a certain time, or else to be void. An. 4. Henr. 4. cap. 12. Where we
may note, That even then in time of grossest Popery and greatest blindness, the
Appropriations of benefices was accounted (as indeed it is) a great hurt and
not a benefit to the people; So necessary to be reformed and restrained) what
might be, that the estates of the land feared not to oppose themselves against
the Pope, the only cause and cocatrice of those evils: and thought the same
not to be in any measure sufficiently reformed, unless there were a
perpetual Vicar there endowed, and that so conuenably that he might be able
to read^ divine service, 2. to preach, and also 3. to keep hospitality:
neither of which, much less all, is it possible for him well to do that has
but such a stipend as we speak of, or such Vicarage as many at this day are
in the land. Thus it is manifest, That it is a thing but just and reasonable,
that there should in such cases an alteration be made. 2. That it were best to
be done by things in kind, is also as apparent. By which means (a thing
that ought not little to be respected) the minister (each several Church
being endowed) should not live in that seruilitie unto laymen, as now a days
many do to their pay-maisters: Nor should so many bad and unworthy men as
there are, and (things standing as yet they do) needs must be, be thrust
into the ministry; Such places, being now capable of none but such as be
most unworthy and unlearned, would then (as others are) be able to entertain
such, as for learning and other gifts required in a minister, were worthy
maintenance.

CHAP. V.
That toward the ministers maintenance every man ought to contribute
proportionabely, and not voluntarily, only what every man will, That is
tolerable only in some cases. But generally or ordinarily it is a course very
evil and per^itious. Yet how it might be somewhat tolerable is noted.

Text. Make him partaker of all his goods.
Having in the former Chapters spoken of the quality of the things whereof the
minister is to have part, we are now to consider of the quantity, and examine
out how much, or how great a part of every man's goods he ought to have; The
hardest indeed, but the chiefest and most necessary point of all the rest. On
which, if I dwell somewhat longer then in the other I have done, I trust the
courteous reader, considering how necessary and how difficult a point it is,
will easily bear with my prolixitie. This that we way find out, a two fold
quantity must be considered of; that is, how much in proportion, and how much
in number, etc. For the former, The very words of our Apostle do at least
intimate unto us, That there must a certain Proportion be observed by them
that give of their goods to their teacher. For, requiring every man to give a
part of all his goods, he shows plainly enough, that men must give
profacultatu^ ratione, according to their ability, and the quantity of the
goods they have, some more, some less. Not every one like much,
arithmetically: but every man alike geometrically; that is, proportionable,
ratably. As men do differ in ability and wealth, one having more, another
less: as God has and does bless men, some with one or two sorts of goods,
some with diverse and sundry sorts: so they must bless God again by imparting
to their minister, a part of their few or many sorts; so that of all, and of
each sort of goods, every man may return a part. This accords well with the
course which God appointed unto his own people the Jews, for maintenance of
their Priests and Leuits then. Their principal maintenance was a tenth part of
all things. Now, who knows not, that where a certain equal part, as the
tenth, twentieth, or xxx. part is allotted, there must needs be a most equal
and exact proportion among all; one paying no more then another does according
to his ability. 2. They had a Law, That three times a year, all their males
should appear before the Lord; and none must appear empty, but every one
must bring somewhat, of his own voluntary goodwill; yet with this Prouiso,
Deuteronomy. 16. 17. Every man shall give according to the gift of his hand, and
according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given thee: that
is, according to his estate and ability. 3. And in their ordinary offerings,
for cleansings, for attonements, etc. the richer sort were appointed their
offerings of greater worth, as a bulbocke, a ^am, a goat; the meaner sort a
lamb, a pair of turtle doves, or two young pigeons. So as, a proportion
according to the ability of the persons was still observed*

And this course so liked all wisemen of former ages, that they resolved none
fitter then it for the maintenance of the ministers of the Gospel. As if we
do but look upon the manner thereof, observed for the most part, all
Christendom over, for many hundred years past, viz. That a certain part of
every thing be paid to that use, may evidently appear.

That thus it should be, we may reason and gather, First, from the rule of
equity: which requires, that every one be dealt with indifferently and
equally. Now as in other payments of rents, of customs, of subsidies, and the
like taxations to Lord and King, to this and that use, all men will grant,
that there is no indifferency used, if men be not rated and taxed according to
their several estates, as their abilities are, in regard of others that are
rated as well as they: so neither in this. Then only is the matter carried with
equality, when that rule which the Apostle prescribed in another case is
observed also in this; that is, That Some be not burdened, that others may
be eased; but upon like condition, that there may be an equality. 2. Cor. 9.

2. From the use of the ministry, which is one and the same to all. Every
several person, every several family has like interest in the labors of
the minister; and as free, and as full and large use thereof to all intents,
one as another. It is reason therefore, that they contribute toward the
maintenance of the same, one as much, and as farfoorth as another: This they
only do which give equal with others, not in sum, but in proportion. For,
a little to a poor and mean man, is as much after the rate, as 20. or 40.
times so much unto a richer man, whose estate does by like degrees exceed the
other.

3. From the honor and duty, that all do owe to God. For seeing it is God
(as I have before observed) that gives to every man the goods he has, be
they more or less: why should not every one according as he has received,
honor God with those his goods, express and declare forth his thankfulness,
as liberally, and as largely for the rate, one as another? It is true, That God
respects not the gift, but the giver; and looks not so much to the value of
the offering, as to the heart and disposition of the offerer: and therefore did
more accept the widows mite, then the great offerings, and rich gifts of the
wealthier sort. But yet I do not believe, that he would as well have accepted a
mite, a piece, from the rich men's hands, as from the poor wydowes: or that a
rich man by a poor mite or 2. may ordinarily express a rich affection to God,
as well as by offering some greater portion; specially in such a case as this,
where men are taught and told beforehand, Deuteronomy. 16. 17*
That every man must bring not absolutely what pleases himself, how much, or
how little he lusts, Ecclu^s 35. 10.
but according to the blessing of God upon him: that is, according to his
estate and ability: which even children know, he does not, That having very
much brings very little, and possessing many things, gives part but of a few.

4. By this means, every man is made q. d. to see with his bodily eyes, and
feel with his very fingers the truth of that Maxim, There is no respect of
persons with God; Act. 10. 34.
while as all are taught, accustomed and inured to give of that they have alike
to the honor of God the author, and to the maintenance of the Gospel and
ministry thereof, the means of their salvation: and so do find and see by
daily experience, That God accepts of every man according to that he has,
and not according to that he has not, so it be given with a cheerful eye;
and expects to be honored of every man accordingly.

5. If this course of proportion be not observed, much injury and damage
must needs be done unto the minister: and great cause of scandal and
discontent be ministered unto the people.

1. To the minister it cannot but be much injury and damage; if some paying
him in good sort, others, as well able as those, wind out themselves for
little or nothing.

2. Offense and discontent must needs arise among the people, if some shall
perceive themselves to be farther charged then others. For who is, or will be
content to be rated to any payment more then the rest of his neighbors of
like state and worth? and be pleased to bear a great charge of any business,
and that continually from time to time, from year to year; others as well or
better able, going either altogether free, or always far less charged then
he?

Concerning the former sort of quantity, that is, touching proportion, let
this hitherto said suffice: which how duly it is always and eachwhere
observed, I leave to the diligent reader with himself to consider.

Let us now proceed to see and enquire of the other kind of quantity, that
is, how much in number, etc. the minister must have. Touching which point there
be sundry opinions. Some of them be but of the vulgar sort, some again are
the opinions of the learned. Those of the vulgar sort I could very willingly
pass over in silence, and let them dye with their authors; were it not
partly, that such as be wise in their own conceits, would think happily what
is not directly answered, cannot: partly, for that the practice thereof is at
this day pernicious to the Church, and prejudicial to the ministry thereof:
and therefore as an evil plant which our heavenly father has not planted,
needs to be plucked up by the roots. Of vulgar opinions I will at this time
touch but one, which is this: That the minister is to have no certainty, but
every man's good will, even what they, as their affection leads them, will
voluntarily contribute. This opinion reigns commonly among townsmen and
tradesmen; who having not lands, to yield tithes of the increase of the earth,
will needs persuade themselves, That of their other goods it is at their own
choice, whether they will give him ought or naught. This I call a vulgar
opinion, because I do not know that ever any man of learning or knowledge,
either Divine or other, did hold the very same.

This may be a course good enough and tolerable in cases extraordinary: as
first in time of trouble and persecution, in which if by usurpation and
violence of tyrants, the Church cannot maintain her ministers as it should, it
must do it as it may. 2. Where such as properly belong to one parish, do
either soiourne for a time in another, or else for their ease or other like
occasions often resort unto another. These as they do by an extraordinary, and
but a voluntary manner, take benefit of the labors of a minister, so may they
in a like sort (provided always it be done without prejudice of their own
Pastor) yield him a benefit of their labors and goods. So for Chapels of
ease, etc. In the like nature do I reckon the practice of many people at this
day; who being through the corruption of patrones, or other iniquity of the
time, destitute of fit and able teachers, do better provide for themselves by
some extraordinary (but yet certain) stipend, raised among them by a
voluntary contribution. Which course, as I cannot, where it is sincerely
handled, but highly commend, and praise God for the readiness of heart, which
thereby many do show unto the furtherance of the Gospel: so in it, I cannot
but admonish such as be godlily, and zealously affected, that they take heed
they do not deceive themselves, Hinc caput mali^
by deteyning from their own Pastors, that which properly and by all laws is
their right, to confer it on others; and so disable their own pastors from
doing that which others perform; feed others with their bread, they the while
enforced to gather up the crumbs: and wrong themselves, thinking they deal
exceeding godly and religiously, when indeed it is (many times) scarce justly;
and look for praise, where they are scarce free from blame.

In such cases (I say) as these are, the course before mentioned may be
tolerable: but that this is not a fit course ordinarily (the thing whereupon I
stand) and for continuance any where to be practiced, nor it that God
prescribes, which we s^eke after; I shall, I doubt not, make it appear by
many arguments.

First of all, There is no such thing taught us in the word of God: we are I
say, no where in the scripture taught, That every man should give to the
maintenance of his minister, but what he will, as much or as little as pleases
himself. This is the way to maintain and reliue the poor of the parish, and
not the Pastor. Concerning the poor, says our Apostle. 2. Cor. 9. 7. As
every man is disposed in his heart, so let him give. But concerning the
minister, neither S. Paul, nor any Apostle else so speaks. They always use
such phrases of speech, as import not a benevolence but a duty; not an
uncertain alms, but a certain reward: as in our text, he must be made
partaker, that is, have a part of all a man's goods; a manner of speech never
used concerning the poor. So, 1. Cor. 9. Who gooes a warfare at any time of
his own cost? etc. Whence we may gather, That as the soldier knows his
pay, the sheep-heard his wages, etc. and depends not on a mere uncertainty:
so must the minister. For, To releive the poor is a work of charity; but to
maintain the minister is a work of Justice, and duty: the one must beg;
the other demand: the the one craves; the other challenges: the one has it
by favor and of pity; the other by right, and of desert.

If any will object the times of the Apostles and primitive church; My answer
is, There was no such practice then. They did not maintain their ministers then
as it were by alms: But as we read, Act. 2. and 3. They that had lands and
goods sold them, and laid down the price at the Apostles feet: and so
distribution was made; by whom? by the Apostles themselves, Act. 4. 35. and 5.
2. and afterward by the Deacons, Act. 6. To whom? to every man, hearer as well as
teacher. In what sort or measure? as every man had need, and was fit and
sufficient for him. Were ministers tied to men's good wills here? when as they
were the treasurers for the whole Church? had all at their own disposition?
and had like part as any other had?

Let it be granted that then it was so* Does it follow it must be so now?
There is a difference I take it, twixt a Church under persecution, and a Church
in peace; a time of trouble, and a time of rest: as also betwixt a Church
planting, and a Church planted. In time of persecution, as then, men must do
as they may, and not as they would: and take if their right cannot safely be
had, instead thereof, what the time will afford. Mat. 12. 1.
And yet that no more proves or makes such doing to be a Law for us that
live in better days, 1. Sam. 21. 6.
then David's eating of the shewbread in a time of need does argue, that any
man might have done the like at any time as well as he: or S. Paul's working
with his own hands while he preached at Corinth and Ephesus, Act. 20. 34.
that all ministers must follow some occupation, 1. Cor. 4. 12.
and live of themselves, not taking of the people any thing either of duty or
benevolence.

2. The affections and minds of people be not such toward their ministers of
the Church as in those times they were. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
Then they thought nothing too much that was given to such uses. Churches had
their common treasuries, and every man striued, who might exceed others in
enriching the Churches, in augme^ting the treasure thereof: Cap. primo.
so that (as before I have noted) Moses was forced, Exodus 36. to make
proclamation, That none should bring any more stuff for the work of the
Tabernacle. So there was rather cause to restrain the people, and to dissuade
them from giving so much, then either to complain of them (as now) for giving
too little, or urge and compel them to give more. But now quite contrary, many
think all too much that the minister has: and diverse strive to pull from the^
vijs and modis, what they can, as if they accounted those the sweetest morsels
that are plucked out of his mouth, and those goods best gotten, that are wrung
from the Church. And therefore if the liberal disposition that was in people
then, did move the ministers of the Church to rest satisfied with the
voluntary oblations of the people, for they were abundantly enough: yet now, as
the uncharitable and pittiles affection of many toward the poor in these
days, has enforced the rulers of our land to draw the wealthier sort to a
rate, and co^p^ll them to give, not what every man will (though indeed all
alms should be voluntary) but what is meet and necessary: so, and more then
so, because this I speak of, has greater warrant, the illiberalitie of the
people to the ministers, their unconscionable dealing toward them for their
labors, does require, That a certainty should be appointed for them.

3. The manner of oblations and voluntary contributions then, was far other
then now it is with us. For as the ancient fathers that lived nearest unto the
times of the Apostles do report, it was the custom of Christians then, both
men and women, somewhere every Sunday, and somewhere menstrua die, every month
(sunday) to make oblation. By which often doing thereof, though they offered
never so little at once, but (as one of them calls it) modicam scipem, a small
benevolence, it could not be but that it must rise in the whole year, to some
reasonable quantity; For as the old saying is, Marie a little make a great.
The custom of our Church once was, to offer 4. times a year at least: but
that is now come, through a worse custom, to once a year, at Easier only;
and then how little it is, it is a thing lamentable, and almost incredible to
relate: as little and less happily, as in ancient times, they did offer at
once, that offered every month, or every sunday. So that the times, the
disposition of people, the manner of offering being so much altered as they are,
it is no reason that that course should be pressed upon the minister now,
which was in practice then. The cases and causes are nothing like.

Secondly, it is against the rule of equity. Equity requires, that as he
that paies, knows what work to receive for his pay, so he that works
should know what to receive for his labor. That is, As the parishioner does
know certainly what he is to require at the ministers hand, as that he preach
thus often at least, minister the Sacraments, read Divine service, in this and
that sort, etc. so the minister should know as certainly what he is to demand
and have of his parishioner in recompense of his labors: and not he to be
tied to conditions for his duty, and stand at courtesy for his maintenance:
they allowed to command him for that he is to do, and he enforced to
entreat for that he is to have. Thirdly, It is contrary to the practice of all
times. Before the law, Genes. 47. we do read of the Egyptian priests, that
they had their lands certain and reserved unto them to live upon: and (oh that
heathens should be more righteous then Christians) besides that in time of
famine, they had an ordinary of Pharaoh; ver. 22. And before that, we do
read, cap. 14. of the same book, That Abrah. paid to Melch. Priest of the high
God (and in him is expressed to us no doubt the common practice of all the
godly of those times) he paid I say, not what he lusted at adventure, but thus
much; a certain portion of all that he had. In time of the Law, the Priests
sons and seed of Leui stood not to men's courtesies, but had their tithes
certain; and knew their parts of every kind of offering, that came to the
altar. And in time of the Gospel, howsoever some particulars have failed; The
general practice in all ages, nations and countries whatsoever, has been, and
is, that the minister should know (for the principal part of his maintenance)
what to demand, and the people what to pay.

The same course holds current in all trades, sciences and professions else.
Go into all Courts of judgment, have not every one their known and several
fees? Go into the City, have not all officers their certain salaries? Go out
into the field, has not every Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant, Soldiour, etc.
his known pay? Go into the country, has not every labourer his ordinary
wages? Come home into thine own house, will thy servant trust to thy curtesy
for his service? will any workman work with thee, either by the day or at
task, without agreement what to have? And is it not a strange thing, That
should be thought to be a course fit and good enough for the minister, which
is good for no body else? and he be enforced to that kind of dealing, which
all others disclaim and utterly refuse?

Plutarch, a worthy Historiographer, writes of Licurgus, that famous
Lacedemonian Lawmaker, That being advised by one, to plant in the City
Democracie, that is, popular government in steed of Aristocracie, that is, the
government of the chief men; he made only this answer: Begin (says he)
that, thy self; Plant thou first a Democratie in thine own house. His meaning
was, That kind of government would never prove good in a commonwealth, that
was so bad, that no man would endure or admit it into his own house. The like
answer and no more I might have shapen to this objection: Let them that think
it good for the minister to stand at men's courtesies, practice it in their own
houses a while, and bring us word after a while how it frames: The wiser sort
would thereby have conceived enough. But having to do with the vulgar sort,
(for it is their opinion that I am in hand with) let wise men bear with me,
though I bestow more words then one or two, to stop the mouths of a
multitude.

In every thing how good or evil it is, is commonly perceived by the effects
thereof: it is not a good tree that brings forth bad fruit. If we go this
way to work, what good comes there, of this course? of this I mean, That the
minister should stand to every man's courtesy? and take (as they term it)
their good wills, as if he were their al^^esman? For mine own part, I can see
none: what others can show, I long to see or hear.

Indeed, as in building of the tabernacle in the wilderness in the days of
Moses, Exodus 36.
the people there being left for that once, to do every man what he would
according to the willingness of his heart; they performed it in such sort as
testified the exceeding love and zeal they had to the service and house of
God: so people continuing the like course for the maintenance of the ministry
and house of God in these days, this good might come of it, They might thereby
take occasion to show their great love and zeal to the house of God, to the
ministry and ministers thereof, by offering and giving thereto of their own
accord, without Law or compulsion, as much and as plentifully as others do
(and happily against their wills) by force and constraint of law. But it
experience may speak her knowledge in this matter; If by men's dealings in this
case, by that many do give, and would of their own accord but give, to this
so holy, so good, and so necessary a use, in such places where they stand upon
it, That they neither ought, nor will do otherwise, a man shall judge of their
love, to God and his ministers, of their zeal to his Church and the Gospel;
surely we must judge it to be very cold and small* very backward and bad.

Now as there comes no good of this course for ought that I can see: so on the
contrary side, I know it and see too often that much evil and hurt comes of it.

As first, It disables the minister utterly to do his duty. For wanting, as
that way he cannot but do, all necessaries both for his life and his study,
how can he possibly be able, either to study that he may preach, or preach
when he has studied?

2. It is the ready way to discourage him from doing his duty, to make him
timorous and fearful in reproouing of sin and wickedness; as knowing before
hand, that living upon the courtesy and good will of his hearers, if he but
once cross them (as they term it) that is, but once touch the sin, that
such and such do live in, they will be even with him for it. Displease any in
word or deed, and of them ye get nothing.

3. It is the ready way to induce the Minister of God to flatter and soothe the
richer sort, in hope of the greater reward and better Benevolence at their
hands, Both which vices (flattery and fearefulnes) how pernicious they be in a
Minister, who of all other men should be most free from respect of persons, no
man but may easily conceive.

4. It discourageth and disables him utterly, from any good housekeeping and
hospitality; as who living himself, like a beggar, rather then an
housekeeper, knows not how he shall be able to keep house, and give
entertainment to others, being certain of nothing himself.

5. It is the sure way to keep the Minister of God in extreme poverty: then
which, there is not any mischief more dangerous to the Church of God. For such
is the charity and good devotion of the most part this way, that if they may
hold the Minister at that bay, not one among. 20, I speak within compass, and
that a great deal too: I say, not one among 20. will by his good will, deal
with the minister, Ministerlike.

6. It emboldens every man against the Minister, to use him for his maintenance
at their pleasure. Because, if he will not take their allowance. What they be
disposed to give him, though it be not worth the taking up, not the twentieth,
happily not the 40. part of his due, he shall have nothing at all; seeing by
law, (as they account and will handle the matter,) he shall or can recover
nothing of them.

7. It is such a course, as if it hold a while longer, and be not speedily by
due law reformed, will (it may justly be feared) bring the Ministers of diverse
places to very beggary, or the Ministry of such places to be dissolved. My
reason is: many such are resolved already, that they owe the Minister nothing,
or at least, that he can recover of them nothing at all but their accustomed
offerings; that is, two pence a piece at Easter. And if they come once
generally (as already many do) to practice it, we may soon conjecture what
the sequel must needs be. And this is a common thing, whatsoever any has used
of his voluntary to pay, howsoever their wealth increase, scant one of an 100.
will augment any thing to the minister: but contrariwise, in manner all be
ready upon any light occasion to abate and give less. And abatement once made,
it is never bettered again. So that by all likelihood in a little time it will
come to nothing at all.

8. It is such a course and kind of dealing, as if it should (which God forbid)
be practiced generally, were the ready way to overthrow the Gospel, to beat
down the preaching of the word, and to banish religion out of the land. Go
throughout the land, from Dan to Beersheba, and look what manner of ministers
and ministry there are in such places, specially, where the minister depends
upon men's goods wills; and find one place or parish almost, if it be
possible, where the minister lives not in great needines, and the people perish
not for want of teaching. We have at this day (God be thanked) a great number
of learned and excellent teachers in the land: but if they should be all
brought to such a kind of mainteinance (And how can that he good for some,
which is naught for all?) Do you think within a few years, there would be
found half the number that now is? Where are able teachers at this day most
wanting? and where be the simplest and meanest ministers commonly found? is it
not (where the best need to be) in towns and Cities? I see no greater, nor
almost no other cause then this, for that in such places, The minister has
little or nothing provided him to live upon, but is enforced to take like a
beggar, what men will give him. And thereupon none of any learning, of any
gifts, delight to come into such a place; or alighting on such as it were by
chance, or upon some necessity, when he once sees his entertainment, will
long tarry there. Such be the effects that come of this kind of course: now
judge of the tree by his fruits.

9. Lastly, if it be a good course, commendable, or but tolerable in the
land, why does not some Machiuillian head or other suggest unto the high
Court of Parliament, how necessary and profitable it were to be planted
throughout the land? what land and revenues it might bring to the Crown, what
profits and treasures to the Kings coffers, what inheritance for gentlemen,
younger brothers, what possessions and habitations for many people in our so
populous country, what wages for soldiers, etc. if all the tempo^alities, and
other certain emolumentes of the Church were seized upon, and the Clergy
left unto the courtesy and benevolence (maleuolence indeed) the offering and
good wills of the people: which (as may be seen in diverse places already)
were provision enough for them, and would well enough content them. For why
might not all, as well as some, live on that fashion, and rest upon the kindness
of their hearers, who would not of conscience see them perish for want? etc. If
this were not to be endured, marvel not much (good Christian and godly
Reader) though I seem vehement against that pestilent practice in few, which
were intolerable in all. For, speaking from some experience, I have seen so
much evil and inconvenience thereby, that I cannot but from my heart detest
it, and desire and labor what lies in me the utter extirpation thereof. And I
do hope that by this little Anatomy thereof laid before thine eyes, thou will
be moved, to confess and conclude with me, That a voluntary contribution
for the ordinary maintenance of the Minister is no where tolerable; and that,
it is the duty of all Christians, as they make conscience of their duty, to
God, respect equity, have any love to the ministry of the Gospel, and
desire the prosperity thereof, to yield the minister a certain pay, one way
or other: that so both themselves may know what they ought to pay, and he what
to demand; and how to recover it, if it be withheld.

Though this voluntary maintenance be (as I have showed) a course that Gods
word does not approiue, that agrees not with the rule of equity and reason,
that neither Jews nor Christians did ever generally practice, a course whereof
comes to the Church of God no good, but many evils and perils: yet it is not
unlikely, but that many, unless there be soome good law to enforce them
thereunto, will hardly be reclaymed from it, and will (say what either I or
any else can) stick to it still. To direct such therefore, the while, to use
(if it be possible) a bad thing well, and to keep themselves from sin in so
dangerous a course; I will for their sakes bestow a little labor, and add yet
a few lines more, to show them, what measure and proportion they should in
reason and equity keep in this case; that so in some measure, they may
satisfy their duty to God, and content the minister of his Church; to whom
though they will give but what they will, yet they are bound in conscience to
give that that is somewhat tolerable and reasonable. Reason must take place,
though law do not, and conscience govern our actions where compulsion is not.
A heathen man being asked what good he had gotten by his Philosophy?
Answered; I have (says he) gotten this good thereby, that I can do those
things unbidden, which other men do for fear of the laws. Religion ought to
prevail no less with us. We should not need humane laws to compel us to
our duties, whose consciences are informed by the rule of equity, That every
man of his own accord ought to do to others, as he would, if the case were
his, be done unto. If this be but right and equal, as I think every
reasonable and religious man will grant it is; Let us (presupposing for a
while that there is no positive law, either to direct, or compel us to any
thing in this case) consider accordingly, when the minister has labored for
thee the whole year (I am bold now good Reader, to talk somewhat familiarly
unto thee) and has bestowed upon thee most liberally and carefully spiritual
things, and rests yet all the while upon thy good will, contented without any
agreement or certainty assigned to stand to thy courtesy for temporal things,
what, or how much (if thou be a man of any ability) it is fit and requisite in
any reason thou should give him? I will speak what I think: and because it
is but a conceit of my own, a proportion by me alone in this case propounded,
I will speak with the least too. Let the indifferent Reader vouchsafe the
reading of it, and then judge: know thoroughly what it is, and then censure it
as it likes him. Mine opinion is this; That though the minister do stand to
thy courtesy, yet thou in conscience, I say in conscience and reason, ought
to give him no less for his whole years labor for thee and thine in the
ministry, then thou do or would give unto a schoole-maister, for
teaching one of thy children a whole year. I say it again. Every man ought
in conscience, to give his minister for teaching him, and his whole family in
the word of God, so much at least, I say so much at the least, (for his due is
more a great deal many times) as a schoole-maister commonly has for teaching
one child.

I know this will seem much and strange to such as be so far wide of this
rate, that by their good wills they will not, nor usually do not give the
minister half, nor a quarter, no some s^ant the tenth part so much. Note this.
But, howsoever it seem to any, That it is a proportion most reasonable, and
indeed the lowest rate that reasonably can be kept, I doubt not to make it
most evident and plain to the understanding of all that be not wilfully
blind, and exceeding obstinate in their own opinions. Neither will I, nor need
I go far from the Text we have in hand; as which of it self does offer to
yield me 3. or 4. very plain and special reasons and arguments for it.

First, the Apostle here calls the minister a teacher, and the parishioner
one that is taught: as you would say, a schoole-maister and his scholar. And
in the judgment of interpreters that are very learned, he does use that
manner of speech, purposely, to show, That as it is the duty of the scholar to
maintain his master, so it is the duty of the hearer to maintain his
minister: which who^so will not do, even among profane men, is accounted
impious and unjust. And indeed what other is the Church but a
Diuinitie-schoole, the minister a Lecturer, and the hearers scholars?
According whereunto it is, that Christians at first were called Disciples, that
is in plain English, Scholars.

2. Look what thou give for teaching one of thy children, If thy
Schoole-maister deserve it for teaching one alone, does not the minister
deserve so much at the least for teaching thee, and thy whole family? thee I
say, thy wife, thy children, thy servants, and the stranger that is within thy
gates?

3. What does the minister teach thee? He teaches thee (says our Apostle)
in verbo. He teaches thee the word of God. He reads to thee a Divinity
Lecture. He does minister unto thee spiritual things. He speaks unto thee
(as it is said otherwhere) words whereby thou and all the household may be
saved; A kind of doctrine, then which none is, nor can be, more excellent,
precious and worthy reward.

Now I pray thee, is it not a reasonable thing and an ordinary, according to
the excellency of the learning that a man teaches, so to give him greater or
lesser pay? Why then is it not reason thou give him that teaches thee (and all
thine) Divinity, that informs thee to know God, that shows thee the way to
eternal life, that brings thee the glad tidings of salvation, so much at the
least, as thou do give a man to teach thy child to read, or write, to
understand the Latin or Greek tongues?

4. What ought to be his reward? a part (says our Apostle) of all thy goods.
And that is more I think, if it be well shared, then any man does allow to
his Schoole-maister for any one child.

But leave we for a while the Apostle, and let us turn our eyes aside to
behold the practice of times; that so we may see how near others both in our
and former days have come to this proportion.

1. How did the Israelites maintain their priests and Leuits? Who knows not,
That by Gods appointment, besides diverse other things that fell to their share,
they had the tenth of all things?

Is it likely their School-maisters were maintained in that liberal manner? and
had another tenth for every child they taught? I trow not.

2. Look all England over, and behold what provision our forefathers made for
ministers, and what for Schoole-maisters.

Is it not so, That the meanest benefice in the land almost (that is whole) is
better in revenues then the best school? And has not the minister many times
of one, even a mean man, ten, yea twenty times as much as the Schoole-maister
for one Scholar?

3. Do but enquire in London, where the ministers of the Church are in
commendable sort provided for; and which may in that respect, be a glass and
pattern for sundry other Cities and towns in England: and tell m^^, whether
the ministers part out of every house (if he be justly dealt with) be not
commonly so much at least, as a Schoole-maister takes for one Scholar?

4. Remember of such places where Lectures have been kept, and preachers
maintained by an extraordinary stipend; Is there any such place where they
could possibly raise a stipend of any mean competencie, but that the
inhabitans must be content to contribute thereto, viritim, man by man, house by
house, for all the better sort, as much at the least, as they usually give for
teaching one of their children?

5. In all reason and equity, in all reputation and account, is not the
minister of the Church, before the master of the school? The school is
commonly but as it were a step to the ministry, and a stay for a man till he
be fit for the ministry. In all meetings and assemblies, has he not his
place before the schole-maister? is it not reason then, as he is before him in
degree, so he should be equal with him at least, in maintenance?

But now a days with us, in places not a few, for the most part it is quite
contrary. The condition and estate of schoole-maisters, is commonly far
better then the ministers. If a man can get 4 or 5. score scholars, he shall be
sure to live like a scholar, nay like a gentleman by them: but though a
minister have so many households to his Church, if he have nothing to trust to
but their good wills, he lives not like a scholar, but a beggar rather. Some
would think it scant credible, happily if I should say, That a man may have
more maintenance by 40. or 50. boys in a school, Note this well:
then by an 100. housholdes, by 400. communicants in a parish: but I do
believe it, And see in what misery many of our ministers do live.
and can speak it of mine own knowledge, That it is probable and possible,
That a schole-maister may have better maintenance by 7. or 8. boys, then a
minister by 7. or 8. score households. Where it is so, and I think if due
enquiry be made, it will be found so in many places of our land, the greater
our sin, the heavier Gods wrath; the more lamentable and miserable the estate
of our ministry: can we say that people do deal conscionably and liberally
with their ministers? and Christianly and thankefully with God? or that
ministers complain without cause, and be already every where duly and
sufficiently provided for? I know that these things will seem strange, to
such as are not acquainted with them, and do confer to the maintenance of
their ministers in another manner of measure: but I would to God, they were not
most true, and that our ministers felt them not.

I hope (good Reader) that by this that I have said I have (according to my
purpose) made it evident unto thee, That such as will needs continue that
evil custom, to give the minister but what pleases themselves, yet ought in
reason and conscience (if they be of any ability) to pay him so much a piece
at least, as they give a schoole-maister for teaching one of their children.
And this rate do I hold to be so reasonable and indifferent for both sides,
that I wish with all my heart, That as David made it a Law in Israel, 1. Sam.
30. 24. That of things gotten in war, as his part was, that gooeth down to
the battle, so should his part be that bideth by the stuff, and keeps the
camp: so, in such places where people will not willingly and justly pay as
they should, tithes of their labors and gains, but enforce the minister to
stand to their courtesies, till a better Law come in place; That either the
people themselves, would make it a custom, or the superiors of our land, a
law and statute in England, That in steed of those tithes, besides their
accustomed offerings and other extraordinary prouentions, as his pay is that
teaches in the school for every scholar; so should his pay be, that
teaches in the Church for every family: that is, the ^icher sort to pay as
for the best scholars, the meaner as for meaner scholars, and the poorer
sort that are payable, as for meanest: that so yet some convenient portion and
proportion, some certainty might be observed and known. By this rate, where
now of an hundred houshoulds, the minister has scantten pounds, then of every
40. households he could not but have more.
It is a rate so reasonable and easy, that as by it, where the place is any
thing populous, as those commonly are where it needs chiefly to be put in
practice; in some co^petent measure the minister might have sufficient
whereupon to live: so by a less, such as now is too common, it is not possible
in these times, for a man to redeem himself from extreme need, and be other
then very poor. In a word, it is a rate so small and easy, That I more fear,
least I sin against God, and offend his Church in approouing it, then suspect
that any which is contrary minded, shall be able to prove against me that it
is too great, too hard, and unreasonable.

I have held the Reader somewhat long I confess, upon this one point, and it
may be some will object, altogether without any cause: For (may some say,) As
it is not fit indeed, that the minister should be left to the courtesy of the
people, so neither is he; For by express law and statute already in force,
he is every where provided for of some certainty; as of prediall tithes,
where they are to be had, and of personal tithes, where the former are not: as
appears in the Statutes of Ed. 6. An. 2. Cap. 13. De Decimis.

True it is, and not to be denied, That that Statute does indeed so enact.
From which I trust I may be bold to observe this one thing farther, for
confirmation of that I have said, viz. That it is the judgment of our whole
Church of England, and of all the estates of our land, confirmed in express
words by act of parliament, That the Minister ought to have a certainty to
depend upon; And that the contrary, not in mine opinion only, but in their
wise and general judgment is, as indeed it is, intolerable and unfit.

But for a full answer to the objection proposed; First, I do speak of that
is practiced, not of that is enacted: and do condemn that course which now is
grown with many into such a custom, that nether that law, nor reason, no nor
the word of God can hitherto reclaim them from it; and so do not weary my
Reader with waste matter, nor fill my paper with an unnecessary discourse.

Secondly, I say, and with all reverence and Christian humility, prostrate at
the feet of my Superiors, desiring and craving leave that it may be free for
me in so great a cause, and that so nearly and so much concerns the glory
of God, and good of this Church, for which every good man ought to be content
(if need be) to lay down his life to speak the truth; I say it, That that
statute does in very deed rather say it, then assure it to the minister, show
what he should have, then enarme him to recover it. Because whereas it debars
him of the defendants oath, the surest and most usual remedy in all causes of
tithes, it is found by long and too too much experience, that thereby (that
clause being commonly abused against him) he is also debarred of the thing it
self that he seeks to recover. For people being now a days very apt to abuse
any advantage that law may yield, do easily learn, That if they will but not
confess any thing, the Minister can recover but what he can prove; which
commonly must needs be just nothing: whereby his case becomes such, that
unless he will take with quietness (as they call it) what they will of
courtesy give him, by contending for more, he is sure too loose al. No doubt
there were some reasonable causes* why the oath was forefe^ded, and it may be the
integrity of those times) when the statute was made) such, that it was
presupposed, me^ needed not to be pressed so far, but would of very conscience
to equity and right, of love to the Church and Ministry, of zeal to God and
his Gospel, do that were fit voluntarily, it being but showed them; or at
farthest, upon examination, acknowledge the truth freely. But the corruption
and backwardnes of these our times showing wholly the contrary, and being
such, that I think that man to be as rare as a black swanne, that by virtue
of that statute, has of late years recovered any thing; and that there be
many hundreds that can justly allege, That by abuse or weakness thereof, they
have done, and do daily leese in manner all: surely there be causes more just
(unless some better course be taken) why it should be again permitted them:
without the which the ministers may justly and with griefs enough complain,
That that statute (standing as yet it does) allowing them a certainty, viz.
personal tithes, in name, does take the same from them is very deed, and
remittes them to that it seems to condemn; the mercy and courtesy of the
people.

CHAP. VI.
That the minister must have for his maintenance, not an imagined competent
portion: But specially, besides offerings, the tithes of all things; which are
still due by divine r^^ht: and be of two sorts, viz. Prediall, and personal.

FRom the opinion of the vulgar sort, Let us come (God assisting) to those of
the learned. Among whom, some do hold, That concerning the ministers
maintenance, what it should be, there is nothing certainly determined in the
word of God; only this is therein taught us, and required, That the minister
must have competent maintenance. This if it be yielded him, how, whereof, or by
whom; so he have it, it is no matter. Others be of the mind, That the
scripture teaches us, both that the minister ought to be maintened: and that
his maintenance ought to be not an imagined competencie; but specially Tithes,
the tenth of the increase of all things.

The former of these opinions (The reverence and honor that I bear unto the
persons, learning, and judgment of those that be contrary minded always saved
and reserved, because amicus Plato amicus Socrates, sed magis Veritas: Truth
is to be preferred above all men) I do dislike. For it seems unto me
improbable, that God, who from the very beginning till Christ's time (for that
neither is nor can be denied) as careful for them whose Priesthood was nothing
so excellent and worthy honor, as the ministry of the new Testament, had
declared and revealed, whereby he would have the priests of those times to be
maintained: as by tithes, offerings, etc. and did not leave it to the
discretion of men to allot what they imagined to be competent; should now, in
the time of the Gospel only, the later days, and worser age of the world,
2. Tim. 3. 2. 3.
wherein his spirit had foretold, That men would be lovers of themselves,
covetous, boasters, proud, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
without natural affection, intemperate* despisers of them that be good,
lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God, having a show of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, etc. All and every which vices in whomsoever, and
wheresoever they reign, would hinder the condign entertainment of his
ministers: That he should I say, in these wicked times and perilous days,
leave the^ (the preachers of the Gospel) whose ministry by far excels
the former, to the mercy of the world, and conscience of the worldly minded to
appoint them maintenance, as careless how they were dealt with.

2. Whereas the Church of Christ* even from the Apostles times almost, put in
practice generally all Christendom over, the payment of Tithes for the
maintenance of the ministers of the Gospel: shall we say, They did this,
only as accounting that to be a fit course, and a competent maintenance for
that purpose? or shall we say they did it as accounting that to be the right
course commanded of God, and which they had learned out of the word of God
ought to stand in time of the Gospel, as it did in time of the Law, for the
Lords own ordinance? To affirm the former is against all appearance of
truth. The express words of the Fathers and learned that wrote in those
times do plainly (as hereafter shall be showed) testify the contrary. Do
we not see then (granting the later) that this conceit of a competent
maintenance, does (which is neither safe nor godly) openly check and cross
the judgment and practice of all Antiquity?

3. And for so much as we seek not what may be done at some times, and in some
cases, but what is Gods ordinance in this case, and therefore ought ordinarily
and generally every where and at all times to be done: what President and
practice in any one age of the Church can any show for this competent
maintenance without tithes, as we can throughout many ages, for the ordinary
maintenance thereof by Tithes? Before the time of the Apostles the ordinary
maintenance of Gods ministers was tithes: in the time of the Apostles, it was
either by a community of all things, or by a voluntary contribution: since
their time and a few succeeding years without any interruption until this
present day, the ordinary maintenance of the ministers of the Church before
Popery, under Popery, and since Popery, has been by tithes, and not by some
other supposed competent maintenance. Now is it probable, That should be Gods
ordinance for the ordinary and perpetual maintenance of his Church (for that
is the question) which at no time, in no age of the Church has been generally
practiced by the Church? And that instead of Gods ordinance (all the lights of
his Church being blinded) another course of man's invention should generally
from time to time be approved and admitted?

4. But be it supposed, that nothing particular and special can be demanded;
but only the general, a competent maintenance. Let us enquire, if happily
that may be found, what is a competent maintenance. If any will show it us out
of the word, thence we are sure nothing can be showed unless it be tithes. If
Tithes be not it, I ask first whether it be more or less then Tithes? If
they will answer more; is there any hope that disclaiming Tithes, in steed
thereof a greater and richer portion may be obtained? Nay is it not very
likely that many do gladly hear of and favor this conceit of a competent
maintenance, in hope to draw thereby the authors thereof to overthrow
themselves, and so get yet a great part of the tithes and other emoluments of
the Church, which hitherto have escaped the hands of spoilers, as a prey? Not a
few will quickly learn this kind of Logic; Ministers are to have, by their
own confession, but a competent maintenance: and what then should a minister
do with so great a living, so much tithes? less by half is enough for a
minister. If one refuse it, yet a great many other will be glad with it, and
acknowledge that they have living sufficient too, etc. 2. If they will say,
Less then tithes is a competent maintenance; do they not then justly provoke
against them the minds of all that truly favor learning, and duly consider
how it ought to be honored? do they not then openly, without any color at
all, set open the door unto extreme impiety and sacrilege? making way, and
as it were justifying it, To have all Church livings, tithes, lands, and all
long since consecrated unto God, to be profaned, and turned into that whereof
the land is already too full (and too lamentable experience has taught us, is
a great part of the misery of our ministry, the ruin of learning and
religion among us) Impropriations?

Nay, do they not speak manifestly against the scope of the scriptures, 1.
Tim. 5. 17.
which teach, That the minister must have double honor; that is, an honorable
and liberal, and not a sparing and poor maintenance? 1. Tim. 3. 2.
must be a keeper of hospitality, and so be able to entertain others,
aswellas to live himself? must live of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 14
that is, have such maintenance for his preaching of the Gospel, that he may
be able to live thereby alone, without any intermedling, for lack of
maintenance, in other trades of life: not sparingly and needily neither, but
well and wealthily as becomes his calling, and as did they by the altar, that
waited on the altar: which cannot Ordinarily be done, if his maintenance be
less then the tenth.

Secondly, I demand who shall (if the word of God do not) determine what is
competent? Shall the Clergy? It is likely they shall not be admitted as
competent Judges in their own cause. Shall the Laity? What is then to be
expected, but that they will favor themselves enough, and too much? will there
not be among them, Quot capita, tot sensa, as many men, so many minds. And as
men are surprised with the affections of covetousness, of contempt of the
Gospel, disgrace of that calling, neglect of learning, and other like: so is
it not likely one will detetmine this to be competent, and another that, and
the fewest of all come any thing near the mark? and they (the ministers) be
enforced to accept that for competent, which is not, and to take that for
suffitient many times, which is half less then enough?

And what remedy? For (seeing as they say, God has said nothing to this
purpose) they must believe others and not themselves, That to be competent, not
which they themselves know, but which others say is competent.

If already there had been no trial of the practice of supposed competencie,
men might happily be thought to fear, where no fear were, and to suspect more
then they had cause. But because experience is the surest, though not always
the safest teacher: let us hear from it, what (upon persuasion no doubt, That
a competencie only was required) men have already determined upon that point,
and what good beginnings it has made; and the e culmo spicam, guess while it
is yet in grass, what corn it is like to prove.

1 It is not many years ago, That ten pound a year was held a competent
maintenance for a minister, and accordingly some Church-liuings being seized
into laymens hands, in lieu thereof, there was allotted back again, either a
few of the fragments thereof, then worth thereabout, or else a set stipend of
like value.

But how competent a maintenance that has proved, as we cannot but with grief
consider, and had need with tears lament; so I fear many a damned soul in
hell does feel. All confess that such allowance is now incompetent: but who
are they that amend it? A godly and necessary motion.
It were reason, that as the temporalities: themselves are by the alteration of
times become worth 4. or 5. happily 10. times so much as they were when such
stipends and endowments were allotted out of them; so they should now increase
the same accordingly, in such measure (at least) that a man might be able to
live thereby now, as he might have done at that time by such allowance: and
fit, in very conscience, That he that takes all the pains, should have, if
not all, nor one half, yet at least a fourth or a fifth part of the profit. But
men have so learned S. Paul's lesson backward (that is, not Godliness is great
gain, 1. Tim. 6. 6. but gain is godliness) that nothing contrary thereunto
sounds well in their ears.

2. For our present days, what do men account now to be competent? Be there
not many that think twenty pounds a year enoughe? The ordinary reckoning and
practice is forty. Some few there be, that are so liberally minded toward the
ministers, that they could wish, they had an 100. marks, or an hundred pounds
a piece: and that were abundantly enough (if they be not deceived) for any
minister. So that in all their opinions that talk of a competencie, and would
be the caruers thereof, if ministers will maintain the general, and laymen
may determine the particular; from 10. or 20. pound. to an 100. pound. is
competent maintenance for any minister. But what co^petency there is in these
rates I leave to others to judge: this only added, That for mine own part, I
think of them all caeteris Paribus, as once Demosthenes did of the counsels of
certain Orators in his days which he resembles to the dyets of sick men,
Demosth. in Philip.
which neither give a man life, nor suffer him to die. And, for the opinion it
self, of this supposed competencie, the more I do consider thereof, and of
the evils and inconveniences and mischiefs that it must needs bring with it
(quite contrary to the nature of truth, whose property is, the more it is
eyed, the fairer to appear, and further to allure) the more am I drawn to
dislike and reiecte it.

Leaving it therefore, Let us come to the other opinion, viz. theirs which
hold That by Gods ordinance, and Law yet in force, the minister ought to have
the Tithes for his maintenance. Which point I shall with the more alacrity and
facility entreat of, because diverse even of those that deny Tithes to be de
iure Diuino, Gods ordinance for the ministers of the Gospel, do yet grant
and affirm, Willet in Synop. cont. 5. qu. 6 err. 79.
That to the end the minister may have a competent maintenance, this is indeed,
The most safe, indifferent, and surest way to raise such a maintenance: yea,
so excellent and good a way, as none better can come in place thereof.

A thing may be said to be de iure Diuino, 2. manner of ways: that is, either
after a sort, because it is grounded upon Gods Law; or else absolutely,
because it is directly commanded by the Law of God. According to the former
sense there be that easily grant, Tithes be de iure Diuino: and that (using
their own words) in 2. respects. First, in respect of the equity of the law
in paying of Tithes* which is this, That the minister ought to live of the
people, and to have sufficient and competent maintenance by them. Which equity
and substance of the Law, being moral, ought always to continue, being
grounded upon the Law of Nature, Thou shall not mousle the mouth of the ox
that treads out the corn. Secondly, in as much as the laws of the land and
of the Church (Princes laws) do confirm this ancient and excellent
constitution of Tithes, we are bound iure Diuino, to obey such laws, being
agreeable to the word of God; which commands obedience to our magistrates in
all lawful ordinance. To these we may add a third respect: and that is, The
obligation wherewith the Church of Christ has long since bound her self to
the payment of the Tithes; Hooker Eccl. pol. lib. 5. 79.
having for many ages past, consecrated them unto God. Whereby it comes to
pass, That howsoever at the first, Tithes might probably have seemed men's
own, and men have had some color to use them as they saw good: yet now,
being made Gods by dedication, being given up and yielded unto him for the
service of the Church, they are become his proper inheritance; And therefore
can not now, without open injury to God, and his Church* without transgression
of his Law, be alienated from God, taken from his Church, and put again to
common use. He (I say) having thus long time been in such sort invested with
the possession of them, it is now altogether vain and superfluous, to enquire
wether they be a matter of divine right? Thus Quodammodo after a sort, in this
sense, and in these respects, the point controuerted is granted. But because
this concession does not satisfy the question it self, let us examine the
other sense also.

Now searching the scriptures for this matter, Genesis 14. and 28. we shall find
that Tithes were paid by holy and godly men, as by Abraham and Jacob, before
ever there was any law written, in the time of Nature. Whence we may not
obscurely gather I think, That, to pay the Tenth, is a part of the moral
law; a duty which God from the beginning required of man as His sacred Right.
For those holy P^triarkes, no doubt, did nothing in that point, but what it was
all men's duty to perform* and are set forth as examples and Presidents, in
whom we are to see what other godly men of those ancient ages and former
times did accustom.

And herein I am the more confirmed, for that in profane histories I do
find, That the very heathen of those elder years, the time of Nature, used
almost every where to pay the very same portion, The tenth, unto their imagined
Gods. Some to Jupiter, as the Persians; some to Hercules, or Apollo, as the
Romans and Grecians: the Sabees and Aethiopians, to the sundry gods which
their countries worshipped: And in a word, as Festus an ancient Storie-writer
does report, generally, decimam quaeque veteres dijs suis offerebant, All
nations of former times offered to their gods the tenth. For how could it be,
that all people, even those that knew not the true God, yet should herein
consent with the true worshippers? but that either by the light of nature, or
by ancient tradition received even from Noah and other Patriarks, they had
learned, that The tenth was Gods part.

If any will object, that the heathen did it by instigation of their gods,
devils indeed: [for, such a thing does a certain Chronographer of those times
relate, Diod. Sicul. Bibl. lib. 5. cap. 2.
as opening the reason how that custom Vouere decimam Herculi, To vow and pay
the tenth to Hercules, took his beginning; saying, that Hercules (a devil
appearing in such a likeness) being on a time friendly entertained by Potitius
and Pinarius, promised a happy life and increase of wealth, to all such as
should offer to him the tenth of all their goods.] This is so far from
overthrowing that which I infer, that it helps not a little to the proof
thereof. For why else should it be, Why the devil desired to have the tenth.
that the devil should claim precisely that part, but because being an enemy
to God, and desirous, as envious of his honor, and as the Ape and imitator of
God, to transfer unto himself Gods worship, and to rob him of his glory and
due every way; as in sacrifices and oblations, so in tenthes likewise, he did
assume and vendicate this part of Gods worship: as if not God, but he had been
the maker and owner of the world, and giver of prosperity and riches unto men
upon earth.

The story of Jacobs payment of tithes carries a greater show of repugnancy,
because it reports that he paid them upon a vow. Genesis 28. 20. saying; If
God will be with me in this journey which I go, and will give me bread to
eat, and clothes to put on, so that I come again unto my fathers house in
peace, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone (which I have now set up
as a pillar) shall be Gods house; and of all that thou (O God) shall give me,
I will give the tenth unto thee. Whereupon it is objected by some, that Jacob
paid them not as a moral duty, but as a vow.

But that is easily answered. First, that Jacob had a respect to the covenant
made with Abraham; namely, I will be thy God and of thy seed, Genesis 17. 7. By
virtue of which, he was bound to show himself thankful as Gods servant by
outward service, whereof tithes were a part: and secondly, seeing it is
manifest by manifold examples and practice of godly men, that it is no new
thing nor unusual with the godly, by vowing to bind themselves to do that
which by the law of God and former duty they are bound to perform (so to
stir up their own slacknesse, and enkindle their zeal to necessary
obedience) what lets but that we may conceive the like of Jacob in this
case? He knew it (no doubt) to be his duty, to pay to God the tenth: yet
partly to stir up his own care and zeal; partly to testify more apparently
his thankful heart, which even before blessings received, bethought it self
what to render to the Lord for the same, received: partly, as abhorring and
disclayming the profaneness of the world, which (likely) even then began
every where to cast away the fear of the almighty, and to detain to
themselves as their own, Gods part of their riches; he binds himself by
special vow, to perform that which he knew to be, though he vowed it not,
his duty to do. That I strain not his words from his meaning; he himself,
by his former words, being also a part of his vow, does bear me witness. For,
if you note the words well, he voweth three several things. First, that the
Lord shall be his God; that is, That he would worship and serve none other
God. And it is out of al doubt (says a very judicious interpretour) that
therein he comprehended the sum of (his) piety and religion. Secondly, that
that stone shall be Gods house; that is, that there where he had pitched the
stone, he would (as in Gods Tabernacle) serve God, build an altar, and offer
sacrifices, etc. as Cap. 35. 1. and 7. verse. Thirdly, that of all that God
should give him, he would give the tenth to God; as the proper maintenance
that belonged to the house of God, for the sustenance of the priests that
should attend on the altar. Here no man I suppose will say, but that it was
Jacobs duty, even without a vow, to serve and worship God only, to offer to
him Sacrifices, etc. Yet does he by vow promise to perform it. And therefore
as because he vows those duties, it follows not, else he was not bound to
have done them: so neither does it follow, because he vowed tithes, therefore
to pay them, was (else) no par^e of his duty. It is more probable a great
deal, that being a most religious and wise man, knowing that God delights not
in rash and unlawful vows, and knowing the payment of Tithes to be
acceptable unto God; upon mature deliberation resolves, to the end his vow
might please God, that should be a part thereof.

Thus notwithstanding any thing that can be objected, it appears by payment
thereof before the Law, that to pay the tenth, is a part of the moral law,
derived from the very law of Nature. Whence it follows, That such payment is
in force still: for the moral law is perpetual, as a duty taught unto man
from the beginning, to continue to the end, so long as there remains a man
upon the earth. Which standing firm, this also must stand for firm, That such
Tenth is now due to the ministers of the Gospel, because they are to us as
Gods Substitutes, as were the priests then. And therefore as one says of
Abraham paying Tithes; What Abraham owed unto God, he paid it unto
Melchizedec, as unto God himself: So, what people owe unto God (viz. Decimam)
they ought to pay unto the ministers of the Gospel, as unto God himself.

To say it is a moral precept, To maintain the minister, or to give God some
part of our goods, is but a weak evasion; for so much as it evidently appears,
that the Tenthe, and not any other, or any uncertain part has been from the
beginning paid unto God, received by his Substitutes, and accounted Gods part:
and that God himself so soon as he makes claim to his right, and once
nominateth what it is, claims and calls it by the name of the Tenth, as
Leuit. 27. 30. Numb. 18. 20. saying, The Tenth is mine.

2. From the time of Nature, if we come to the time of the Law; all do know,
That from Moses till Christ, the tenth of all things was accounted Gods part,
and that the Lord made challenge thereunto as to his own proper right and
peculiar portion. The Tenth of the land is mine. All tithes are holy unto the
Lord, and I have given the Tithes unto Leui and his seed. And hereupon it is,
that he says, that He is their inheritance: and that Malac. 3. 10. he does
charge the people, that in withholding their Tithes and offerings they had
robbed him, etc.

In these speeches and their like, we must note two things: First the Lords
right unto Tithes. He claims that part and none other: not an viij. or xv.
or a xx. but the tenth precisely; as his own proper inheritance. The tenth
(says he, is mine.

True it is, that all we have in a sense is the Lords, because All things are
of him. 1. Chronicles 29. 14. And in that sense it is said Psa^me 24. 1, The
earth is the Lords and all that is therein, the round world and they that dwell
in it: and Ps. 50. 10. All beasts of the forest are mine, and so are the
cattle upon a thousand hills. And says our Apostle, what have thou O man
what ever thou be, and whatsoever thou have, which thou have not received? But
in this case God does cla^me the tenth to be his in a more peculiar sense and
sort; and that is not Iure Creationis, because he has made all: nor Iure
Potestatis, because he has the disposing of all; for in these senses the
other nine parts are also the Lords: but Iure Proprietatis sieve
Reseruationis, in respect of the very propriety thereof, or by way of
reservation; because having given all the rest unto the sons of men, he has
reserved unto himself, to bestow where he will, the tenth, as his own
immediate right and portion, even in a like manner as a Lord passing away his
land to a tenant, reserueth yet for his own use, a certain rent out of it.

The notice and consideration whereof no doubt moved some very learned and
judicious expositors, to entitle tithes by the name of a sacred and holy rent
or tribute, as it were insinuating thereby, that as the land of Egypt (Genesis
47.) being sold into the hands of Pharao, there was reserved unto Pharao, the
first part of the increase thereof, as a rent or annuitie thereof, and the
people allowed to take the other four parts for the seed and for their
labor, and for provision for them and theirs: So the whole earth being Gods,
and he giving it to the sons of men, he has notwithstanding for a token
and acknowledgement of his sovereignty, reserved unto himself, as a rent and
sacred tribute for the whole, the tenth of all.

The other thing I note out of the words, is the bestowing of tithes. Tithes
(says God) are^^ine. But to what use? I have given them (says he) unto the
Sons of Leui for an inheritance. And why to Leui and his sons? for the
service which they serve me in the tabernacle, Number. 18. 1. And this teaches
us, that in Israel so long as Leui served at the altar, and waited in the
Tabernacle, so long he had right to Tithes. How right? Not Proprio iure, not by
his own proper right, but in the Lords behalf, and by way of assignation from
the Lord, who had (to speak after our fashion) passed them over unto Leui and
his heirs so long as their service did continue. These things being observed,
that is, first, the Lords right unto Tithes, which cannot but be perpetual;
then his assignation of Tithes to Leui, which was but temporary; and
herewithall that the ministers of the Gospel are to God now in the steed of
Leui, and do minister unto him, not in the same but a more excellent form; we
may with great, and I think undeniable probability gather, that for so much as
the Lords right unto the tenth holds still, he has Le^its to serve him
still, his temple and service to be attended still; that still they ought to
receive that right on the Lords behalf, which have succeeded in the steed of
those that received it heretofore.

To say, that the law of tithes ceased when Leuies service ended, is an
argument of no force. First, because they were assigned not so much for the
persons sake as for the office, the Service of God: which continuing though in
another form, does necessarily require the continuance of the maintenance,
unless a better come in place, which is already granted cannot be. Secondly,
because the right and so the law of Tithes took not his beginning at Leui (for
the payment of Tithes was not then first instituted, but assigned only to whom
for that time, and in that land, they should be paid) It is therefore
improbable, that the payment of tithes should end with Leuies service, which
took not beginning thereat; but were Gods, and belonged to the priests of God,
when as yet Leui had not the office: but reason and equity does rather yield,
that as the priests of God in time of nature, had them before Leui, and the
law: So the Ministers of the Gospel should have them now after the law, and
since Leuies time.

Farther, we are to consider, that the assignation of tithes made to Leui
pertayned only to them that were under the law. Then, that those nations which
lived without the law (written) could be no less bound to the payment of
tithes even in time of the law from Moses til Christ, then they were before the
law from Adam till Moses: whereupon it must follow undeniably, that howsoever
the heathen failed in this as in all other parts of Gods service, yet Gods right
(for right according to our English proverb, never rots) continued among them
still: and therefore if there had bin among them any godly worshippers, and
priests of God, they both would and ought to have paid tithes to those priests
of the high God, and not to the sons of Leui; as Abraham, Jacob, and other
godly men of their and former times, did pay the same to the priests that were
in their days. If all this be true, and what thereof can be denied I see not;
then forasmuch as the preaching of the Gospel, is but a reuoking of them back
into the right way, that were gone astray, and a restitution of the true
worship of the only true God over all the world; what lets that the
ministers of the Gospel should not now have restored unto them also, what by
continual right belonged to the priests of God wheresoever the law reigned not
from Adam unto Christ? So that whether we consider of the ministers of the
Gospel as successors in office (for the substance is still one) either to the
seed of Leui under the law, or the priests of God without the law, it will be
hard to show why they should not succeed them both in maintenance as well as in
service.

Besides this, whereas there are in tithes two things to be considered, that
is, the Institution and Assignation, Gods proper and immediate right, and man's
mediate and subordinate possession, the one respecting God himself as Lord of
all, the other man, Gods ministers for the time being: can any man show, nay
will any Divine say, that God has no longer any proper right and interest unto
the temporal goods of men on earth, but has remitted unto man that holy rent,
that sacred tribute, which once, before the law, and in the law, in sign, and
for an acknowledgement of his universal Sovereignty, he imposed upon the
wolrd? If that may not be affirmed, for all Divines I think hold the contrary:
what is or can be that Sacr. vectigal, if it be not Tithes? Who can show us any
other? 2. or must we imagine, whereas in true wisdom and good policy, all
kings and princes of the world, all landlords, and proprietaries of the earth,
do impose upon their subjects and tenants, their tributes, customs, rents,
etc. Certain, whereby the one may know still from time to time, what to demand,
the other what to pay; that God the fountain of al wisdom and author of al
good policy, and order, and not of confusion, permits men now in time of the
Gospel (as seeing the tenth to be gra^amen Ecclesiae, a burden too heavy for
hi^ church, an exaction too hard and great for the world now to bear, and
therefore repenting him of that course which for more the^ 4000. years he had
approved and continued to honor him with their goods in what proportion and
quantity they lust, to pay for tribute to him what they will? whereby neither
he that paies it, nor he that on Gods behalf requires it, may be able to say,
This is it: I assure you, it sounds not in mine ears. And therefore until
the institution and right of tithes to God, as well as the assignation of them
to Leui, be proved to be void and at an end, I see no sufficient reason to
yield, either that men ought not to pay them, or ministers to require and
receive them as Gods part still.

3 From the time of the Law, let us come to the time of the Gospel, and so from
the old Testament (for proofs) unto the new: and therein for orders sake,
first, unto our text it self. Where if we demand of the Apostle, how much the
minister must have of his hearer, true it is, he does not say expressly the
tenth of all his goods, but a part. Make him (says he) partaker of all his
goods. But if we may conjecture what, or how great a part he should mean,
forasmuch as we are assured that Saint Paul knew well, that the priests of God
before the law, and the Leuits likewise in time of the law, had always the
tenth part, and that in the whole scripture there is no certain part but
that, named to be the Lords, or approved and assigned by name to any that
served in the work of the Lord: what part may we imagine that he meant, but
that which he and all the learned, yea learned and unlearned knew, had even
from the beginning of the world been counted the Lords part, and the priests
portion? And it is more probable, that therefore in the new Testament, that
point is not so directly handled as it was in the old, because by the old, it
was already very manifest; then that the mention thereof was omitted, because
it was to grow out of use. For the alteration needed a special declaration,
which the continuance needed not. And therefore in my opinion the Apostle must
be understood to speak of the tenth part, and not of any other, new, and
never yet in use. As if he should say: Let the hearer make his teacher
partaker with him of all his goods, according to the ordinance of God, insuch
manner and measure, as from the beginning it is not unknown that the servants
of God have ever been accustomed to receive. As in a like sense, speaking of a
thing already known we say, Let such one have his due: and in the Gospel,
Math. 20. The Lord of the vineyard having first agreed with all the laborers
for a penny a day, ver. 2. when Even was come says unto his Steward, Call the
laborers and give them their hire. And it is the more probable, because he
does require expressly (as I have already taught) that this part be paid in
specie in its kind, and out of all such goods as a man has, by due
proportion, which was and is the true and ancient payment of the tenth. For
speaking plainly of the manner how this part should by paid, he might thereby
easily be conceived what he meant concerning the measure. How probable it may
seem to others I cannot tell: but this I know, That these considerations have
seemed to some and those very good Divines (though contrary minded) so weighty,
that they have thereupon yielded thus far, That if any place in all the new
Testament do make for Tithes, it is specially this.

If the Apostle be obscure in this place by reason of the brevity of his
writting, let us see whether he be not more plain in some other where he is
more large. Turn we back therefore to 1. Cor. 9. where, upon another occasion
he does insist upon this doctrine of the ministers maintenance. There ver.
13. taking an argument a simili, from them that ministered in the temple about
holy things, and waited at the altar, how does he conclude? Ita etiam Dominus
constituit, etc. So also, has the Lord ordained, that they which do preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Here it seems unto me, the Apostle
plainly teaches, That the same measure and the same manner of maintenance,
which they had that once served in the temple, and attended at the altar, is
now allowed and assigned to them that serve in the Church and preach the
Gospel. They were maintained in very liberal and co^petent sort, so must
these. Their maintenance was sealed and certain, not voluntary, so must these.
They were maintained by tithes and oblations, so must these. Their portion was
of holy things, that is of Gods part, of things consecrated to God, so must the
portion of these be. Neither is it a matter of equity only, that it were fit
thus it should be, or a humane constitution, supposing it were best so to be:
but ita Dominus constituit, or as others read, mandauit, it is the
constitution, ordinance or commandment of the Lord, that this ought to be.
The Lord, who has a peculiar right to a certain part of every man's goods,
has thus appointed. As once God assigned over his tithes and other duties to
the seed of Leui, because he had separated them to serve in his Tabernacle: so
now their service being ended, and he having substitute in their rooms for
the work of the Gospel, not some certain families of the earth, but Pastors
and Teachers, who^ it pleases him to call; To these, to the end they may live
by their ministry as the former did by theirs, and be encouraged to the
work they have in hand, has be assigned over that which the former had, viz.
his Tithes and Offeringes. In a word, the Apostle speaking of a kind of
maintenance that is of Gods ordinance and not man's, established by the Lord,
not devised by man, allotted the preachers of the Gospel to live upon, and such
a one as they had that ministered in the temple, and served at the altar; let
such as be contrary minded prove unto us, That their maintenance was not
tithes: and then, and never tell then will we yield, nor shall they be able
to prove, That ours ought to be, not Tithes, but some other thing. For it is
evident by this place of the Apostle, That such as theirs was, ours must be.

From this place of the Apostle, let us proceed to another, and that is, Heb.
7. where he makes mention very often of Abrah. his paying tithes to Melch:
which though he do to another end, yet by those his words, being about
another matter, he shows withal, That Tithes pertain unto the ministry of
the Gospel as once they did to that of the temple. First of all it is evident
by the Apostles words, that Melchizedec was a figure of Christ: whence it
follows that Christ in the person of Melchizedec received tithes of Abraham,
and that they are due no less to his priesthood, then to that of Melch. But if
Christ had right to tithes before the law, has he not the same right also
since the law, in the time of the Gospel? For his priesthood being perpetual,
so must his right be too. Farther, if we consider of Melch. in his own
person, that is, not as a figure of Christ, but as the priest of God; if Melch.
had right to receive them in the behalf of God, whose priest he was, how much
more Christ, who is a priest for ever after the same order that Melchizedec was?

Touching Abraham, we may consider of him, either as a private man, or as a
Patriarch. As a private person in paying tithes, what other thing did he, but
what was every godly man's duty to do? which (says a certain learned writer)
is so reported, that thereby it may sufficiently appear, that it was a custom
or ordinary thing among the godly of those times. And who can show us, that
the godly are freed from that duty since the law, which they owed to God
before? Or, that God which accepted Tithes, as his sacred Right then, has
rejected it now? As a Patriarch, and father of the faithful, if we consider
him; does not he the father, by performing that duty, show in what steps
his children ought to walk, whose offspring we are, not according to the
flesh, but by that which is the surer side, by faith?

But what is all this to us, that be ministers of the Gospel? very much every
way. For seeing we are in Christ's steed, 1. Cor. 5. 20. and he that receives
us receives Christ, Math. 10. 40; as Melch. being Dei subrogatus, Gods
deputy, lawfully received at Abraham's hand what was due to God: so we on
Christ's behalf do as lawfully claim and receive of the hand of Christians
what is Christ's right. Which thing is not improbable that our Apostle
respected, when 1. Cor. 9. the place before alleged, he says, The Lord has
so ordained: as it were giving us thereby to understand, That such maintenance
as the Leuits received in the Law as Gods right, for their service at the
altar: such ought the ministers of the Gospel receive now in Christ's behalf
for their service to him in the work of the Gospel: because as God assigned
it unto his Leuits then, so has Christ (who in the new Testament, by that
title of Lord, is commonly distinguished from God the father) unto his
ministers now. And as Abrah. the father of the faithful was then to pay the
tenth to the priests of God, as to God himself: so all the faithful now, are
to pay them to the ministers of Jesus Christ, as to Christ himself.

Now that I have showed warrant and proof for this point out of scripture, I
will adioyne also the testimony and judgment of the learned and ancient
fathers and others of the Church: who wheresoever they speak any thing of
tithes, so speak thereof, as generally in their times acknowledged to be of
divine institution; no man for well nighe a 1000. years (the depth of all
corruption and blindness) after Christ gainsaying them. This I do^, as well to
confirm more fully that I have avouched, as also to take away all pretext from
such as shall thorough ignorance imagine this to be but mine own private
opinion. They shall perceive that I teach none other thing in this matter, then
the ancients for many ages past have done.

S. Origin lived within 200. years after Christ, Origin.
not above 90. years after the death of S. John the Apostle of the Lord. He
writing upon the book of numbers, Hom. 11. and speaking of the Law of Tithes
says plainly, Hanc ego legem. This Law (of Tithes) as also some other, I
(says he) do think necessary to be observed still, according to the
letter. And in the same place reproouing the people of his time for not paying
tithes, he has these words, Quomodo abundat Iusti^^a nostra? that is, how
does our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes, and of the
Pharisees, if they dare not taste of the fruits of their ground, before that
they bring forth the first fruits to the priests and the tithes be separated
for the Leuits? and I doing none of these things, do so abuse the fruits of
the earth; that the priest knows them not, the Leuit is ignorant of them, and
them the divine altar feels not? Again in the same place; Non videtur
huiusmodi anima habere memoriam Dei, that is, That person seems not to
remember God, not to think, nor believe that it is God that has given him the
increase which he has received, which he so lays up as if God had no part in
them. For if he thought them to be given him of God, he would know also, by
rewarding the ministers of the Church, to honor God, with his own gifts and
rewards. And a little after, Indecens and magnu^ existimo, and impium vt is qui
Deum colit, etc. I hold it to be a thing indecent (says he) unworthy and
impious, that he which worshippeth God, and comes into the Church, who knows
that the priests and ministers do wait at the altar, and serve either in the
word of God, or ministry of the Church, should not of the fruits of the
earth, which God (causing his sun to shine, and sending rain in due season)
does give, offer some part to the priests. And where our Savior says, Math.
2^. 23. speaking of Tithes, These ought ye to have done, and yet not leave the
other vadon^, that he expounds to be a moral precept no less for the use
of Christians then of the Jews: and so accounts that by these words our
Savior gave his approbation for payment, of Tithes in time of the Gospel. So
his judgment is this, that the law of tithes, is still in force even according
to the letter: that Christ approves the payment of them: that our
righteousness does not exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
if we pay them not: that that person forgets his duty to God with omitteth
it: that it is a thing in a Christian, indecent, unworthy and impious not to
give to the ministers of the Church a part of those fruits and increase which
God has given him, etc.

Not many years after Origin, lived S. Cyprian. He, epist. 66. reproouing one
Geminius Faustinus a minister, for intermedling in secular affairs, Cyprian.
says, That Ministers have nothing to do with secular affairs: but as the
Leuits had no other business but to attend the altar, so the Lord had provided
for ministers, that they might not be drawn by wordly occasions from their
holy business, but might live honorably maintained with their brethren, as
they who received tithes of the increase of the earth. He says that the Lord
had provided such maintenance for his ministers, alluding (it may seem) to the
place of the Apostle 1. Cor. 9. where he says So has the Lord ordained, etc.
So, that is, as the Leuits and priests, ministering in the temple and waiting at
the altar, lived of the same.

Three hundred years and more after Christ his time lived S. Hierome. Hierome.
He writing upon the Prophet Malac. cap. 3. where mention is made of Tithes
says, What we have said of Tithes, which once were given by the people to the
priests and Leuits; understand to hold in the people of the Church that now is.
And a little after, The people of the Church (of Christ) are commanded to give
tithes. For the farther proof whereof he alleges S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 17.
The elders that rule well are worthy double honor; expounding the word Honor
there to signify maintenance, and maintenance to be Tithes.

In the same age though somewhat later, Ambrose.
flourished S. Ambrose. In a Sermon de Quadragesima, he has these words.
Quicunque recognouerit in se, etc. whosoever shall call to mind that he has not
faithfully paid his tithe, let him now amend that wherein he has failed. What
it is to pay faithfully? but that he bring at no time, neither less, nor the
worser sort of his grain, or of his wine, or of the fruits of his trees, or
of his cattle, or of his garden, etc.

Near about the year of grace 400. lived S. Chrysostom: who writing upon,
Matthew, Homil. 41. says directly, Iustitiam, Misericordiam, and fidem.
Justice, mercy and faith has God commanded for his own glory, but tithes
for the maintenance of his ministers. And Hom. 18. teaching the husbandman how
he may be a worthy Christian and do good works though he build no Churches,
he says: Quasi ducta vxore velspo^sa, etc. ^n English; As toward thy wife
whom thou have married, or thy virgin whom thou have endowed, so be thou
affected toward the Church. Assure it a dower: so shall the reward, (or as some
read praedium the possession) of blessing be multiplied upon thee. For what
good will there not come thereof? Is it a small matter I pray thee that thy
vinepresse be blessed? is it little that God of all thine increase does first
receive his part, the tenth? This furthereth much the peace or prosperity of
the husbandman. In all which words he does only teach, That men ought to
pay tithes, affirming it to be Gods ordinance, and calling them Gods part; but
withal gives these reasons why, viz. 1. because so the minister is to be
maintained, and it is the means to have a plentiful blessing upon the rest.

I come now unto S. Augustine, August. An. 420.
who so succeeded the former in time, that when some of them were very aged,
he but began to write. He has written of this matter more then any of the
rest. There is extant one whole sermon of his de Decimis, touching Tithes,
besides many sentences thereof in other places of his works, of which I will
recite some. Tom. 10. Hom. 48, He has these words: Reddite dictum est
Caesari, etc. It has been said, Give to Caesar those things that are Caesar's,
and to God the things that are Gods. Our foreelders therefore abounded in all
kind of wealth, because they gave to God his tenth, and paid to Caesar his
tribute. But now because devotion to God is gone, the oppression of the court
is come upon us. We have refused to lay out to God his tenth part, now
therefore the whole is taken from us. The Chequer has that, which Christ has
not.

Again writing upon the 146. Psalm. he has these. Exime partem reddituum
tuorum, that is, Lay out a part of thy revenues or increase. Will thou lay out
the tenth? lay out the tenth then: though this be but little. For it is said
thath the Pharisees gave the tenth also. And what says the Lord? Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes, and of the Pharisees, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: and he whose righteousness thine
ought to exceed, gives the tenth* but thou give scant the tenth of the
tenth. Likewise Ser. de temp. Sermon. 219. de Decimis. Deus qui dignatus est,
etc. God (says he) which has vouchsafed to give us all that we have,
vouchsafes to receive again the tenth thereof, yet so as shall be profitable
not for himself, but for our selves. And a little after, reproving them that
made no care to pay their tithes, he expostulateth with them in this sort.
Audi indeuota mortalitas; etc. which is. Hear O thou mortal wight without
devotion. Know thou that whatsoever thou have is Gods? and will thou not
give to God the maker of al things any part of his own? The Lord has no need
of thy goods. God craves not reward but an hon: he requires none of thine but
his own. He vouchsafes to demand the first fruits and tenthes of that thou
have from him, and do thou couetously deny him? what would thou do if
reserving the 9. parts to himself, he had left thee only the tenth? Hitherto
out of S. Aug. Out of all which his words we may note these specialties; That
he counts the tenth to be Gods, as tribute to be Caesar's: calls it Gods
part: says that God receiving it, receives but his own: that long before
his time tithes were paid: and expounds and applies the scripture for it; as
before him, Origin and others had done: and affirms that the paying of them
is the means of plenty and blessing from God, as the withholding of them the
cause of scarcity and oppression among men, etc.

Long after S. Aug. viz. about Anno 600. lived S. Gregory. Gregory.
He Hom. 16. upon the Euangels has these words, Suut offerre in lege, etc.
that is. As ye are commanded in the Law (dear brethren) to offer unto God
the tenth of your goods, so strive to offer also the tenth of your days.
Wherein expressly he applies the precept of tithes written in the law unto
Christians, so teaching, or rahter taking it as a truth without question and
controversy, That Christians are commanded by Gods Law to pay Tithes.

To whom agrees Beda, Beda.
that lived about an hundred years after him: who in a treatise that he
intituleth Scintillae insisteth upon the point, and proves by scripture and
by fathers, Tithes to be due, inferring out of S. August. among the rest this
sentence. Tithes are required of duty: and them who that will not pay, does
invade goods that are not his own, as much to say as he is an oppressor or
extortioner.

Of the same mind is Caesar Arelatensis, Caesar Arela.
saying; Tithes be no private man's, no lay man's goods, but the Churches right.

To all these, as it were a Summist of them all, I will adioyne Strabo a story
writer, Strabo.
who lib. de reb. Eccl. cap. 87. makes this collection; Decimas Deo and
Sacerdotibus, etc: which is to say; That Tithes ought to be given to God and
his ministers, Abraham by his facts, and Jacob by his vows do insinuate:
besides the Law (of God) has so appointed, and all the holy Doctors (of the
Church) do consent and testify.

From particular men let us come to general councels: so shall we see not
only what some, yet of the best, but what all the learned of former ages
thought of this matter; consenting as it were vno ore, as upon a truth
undeniable, that Tithes ever were, and still are due, De iure Diuino.

Anno Dom. 580. Council. Matisc.
was held Council. Matisconens. the second. In the 6. Canon whereof, it was thus
decreed; Leges Diuinae Sacerdotib. and ministris Ecclesiaru^ consulentes, etc.
Which in English is to this effect: The Laws of God providing for the priests
and ministers of Churches, have commanded all people, that, as their
inheritance, they should pay them in the holy places the Tenths of their
increase; that so being entangled with no wordly labors, they may be at
leisure to atte^d their spiritual ministeries. Which laws all Christendom
have for many ages past, kept inuiolably: whereupon we do ordain and
constitute that all people do bring in their Tithes Ecclesiastical
accordingly. And if any shall contumaciously break our decrees, let him be
excommunicated.

Near about an hundred years before this council, was held the first
council of Orleaunce, which affirms also the same.

In the time of Charlemaigne, Duriens. Synodus.
Anno 779. followed Duriens. Synodus: wherein Cap. 10. it was decreed, That
Tithes should be paid, and that they which refused so to do should he
compelled thereunto; not only by the excommunications of the Church but also by
the officers of the commonwealth.

About 30. years then next ensuing, viz. Anno 813. was held Synod. Moguntina.
Synod. Mogunt.
In the which they thus determine; Admonemus vel praecipimus, vt decimae de
omnib. dari non negligantur, etc. We admonish or command (says this
counsel) that Tithes of all things being due by Gods law, be not neglected to
be paid, because God himself has appointed them unto himself to be paid.
For it is to be feared (mark their reason) lest whosoever with draws from
God his due, happily God, for that his sin do take from him his necessaries.

Council. Rothomag. Council. Rothomag.
is thus cyted by Gratian. Cause. 16. q. 1. Omnes decimaeterrae, sieve de frugib.
sieve de pomis arborum, domini sunt, etc. All the tenth of the earth, whether it
be of fruits of the ground, or of the trees, are the Lords, and they are
sanctified unto him* Sheep, Bullockes, Goats, and whatsoever passes under
the rod, every tenth thereof shall be accounted holy unto the Lord.

Council. Tribur. cap. Council. Tribur.
13. says thus, Quid si diceret dominus, Nempe meus es homo, mea est terra
quam colis, measeminaquae spargis, mea animaliaquae ^^ginas, meus est solis
ardor, etc. that is, What if the Lord should say, Truly thou O man thy self
art mine: mine is the earth which thou tillest: mine is the seed which thou
sowest, mine are the cattle which thou feedest: mine is the heat of the sun,
etc. And whereas all being mine, thou which lendest me but thy hand,
deseruedst but only the tenth part, yet do I allow thee nine parts. Give me
therefore my tenth. If thou will not give me my tenth, I will take away thy
nine: If thou give me my tenth, I will multiply thy nine. If any therefore do
make a question, why Tithes are paid? Let him know, that therefore they are to
be given (Two notable reasons) First, that God by such devotion being pacified,
may more abundantly give us necessaries: and secondly, that the ministers of
the Church being thereby relieved, may be the more free to the fulfilling of
their spiritual exercises.

And in the decrees (the Canon law of all Christendom) Extra de decimis, cap.
14. Parochiano, these words are read; For So Much as Tithes have their
institution not from man but from the Lord himself, they may be required, as a
due debt.

Time will not permit me to recite all: diverse other ancient councels have
determined the same things. These cited, being the common voice and full assent
of all the learned of the first and best times, do plainly and aboundanly
testify That Tithes are still due by Gods law, holy to the Lord, his due
ordained by God, etc. They do not challenge them at all, as due by the rule of
equity, much less by positive law and constitution of princes, but by Gods
ordinance. True it is, that the laws imperial, the laws of several nations
and kingdoms, do mainetaine and approve tithes: but we must understand it
thus (and so no doubt in ancient times the lawmakers themselves intended) as
confirming and restoring to the Church, that which they had learned by the
general and vncontroulled doctrine of their own and former ages, to be the
Churches in right, as did the godly kings and rulers in Israel, Ezechias,
Josias, Nehemias, etc. which restored to the Leuits their appointed portions,
and brought again to the house of God the tithes, first fruits, offerings,
etc. which in currupt times had been withdrawn. This is manifest enough by
that already alleged out of the Fathers. For thereby, it may appear, that
tithes were claimed and paid to the Church, before there were any Christian
Magistrates to confirm them by law. For Constantine surnamed the great, who
was Emperor about the year 300. was long after Origin and Cyprian; and yet
he (as faith Hermannus Gigas) was the first that ever we read of, to have made
any law, that tithes of all things should be paid to al Churches. Four hundred
years at least after whose time (as Krantius in Metropoli sua lib. 1. cap. 8.
Krantius.
does note) it was that Charles the great did also remit to Christians their
tributes, and in steed of of them assigned tithes unto Churches and bishops.
And it is yet more apparent by that which antiquity records of Dionisius
Dionisius.
that was Bishop of Rome before the days of Constantine almost an hundred
years, how that he made division of parishes, assigning several Churches to
several ministers, and assigned tithes and lands accordingly unto them all.
Add to these the testimony of S. Augustine before mentioned, Maiores nostrl,
etc. For he, living not above an 100. years after Constantines reign, says
yet that their foreelders used to pay tithes; giving us thereby to understand
that that custom had been ancient, even before any princes were Christian,
to make laws to that purpose.

Concerning the present time, if I were alone, having so many of the ancients
on my side, I need not fear the cause much. Truth changes not with times;
nor is to be measured by multitude. But God be thanked I am not alone. For
howsoever some and those learned men of our Church be contrary minded; the
greater Number, I assure my self, do go with me. I do but as a le^rner,
sitting at the feet of so many worthy Gamaliels, subscribe unto their reverend
judgments.

If any enquire what the learned of other Churches think, the testimonies of a
few may give us a probability of the rest. Iunius says thus; Iu^ius.
Tithes by allawes (that is, by the law of Nature, of Moses, of Christ; and of
nations) have for ever been hallowed unto God. R^dulphus Gualter Gu^lter.
though he be Caluins imitator, and as it were Commentator in his Homil. upon
Math. cap. 23. dissenting from him in this point, says plainly, These things
(speaking of tithes) ought to be transferred to the Church of the new
testament. And a little after; Nec est quod aliquis decimarum legem, etc. That
is, neither is it to any purpose for any one to say, that the law of tithes was
abolished together with the ceremonies of Moses law. For by what arguments may
it ever be proved, that that law of Tithes was ever by God abrogated?
Zepperus differs as not in mind, Zepperus.
so almost not in words from Gualter; for de leg. lib 4. cap. 10. thus he
has: A^ quibus argumentis. etc. And by what arguments shall it be proved that
law of tithes to have been by God at any time abrogated? And again.
Quemadmodum in quartodecalogi praecepto; Even as in the fourth precept of the
decalogue, that which is ceremonial is ceased, the moral part remaining: so
at this time, tithes are a part of that stipend, which by the law of God and
of nature, is due to the ministers of the Gospel, for their labors in their
office.

Now that we have seen, what God, what the ancient Fathers and reverend
councels, and some of our late, but learned writers have determined upon this
point, I trust I may safely without prejudice to the truth, or doubt of error
conclude with them, and maintain what I have so often affirmed, viz. that tithes
are still due even by the law of God; The right and ordinary means for
maintenance of the minister, and (which is our princicipall question) That
very part and quantity which every man out of his goods increase ought to give
to that use. Herein If I do err, I will not say as Jeremy did, cap. 20. 7. O
Lord thou have deceived me, and I am deceived: but this I may well say; The
pillars of the Church have failed under me: the lights of the world have
blinded me: the guides of Israel have led me out of the way: the fathers of the
people have caused me, desiring to walk in their steps, to wander: with whom,
so many, so holy, so learned and so ancient, while I do err, if the old
proverb (Cum Platone errare tutissimum) be worthy any respect, I fear and
care the less.

Well: be it that it be most true, that the tenth is Gods part and so the
ministers, Objection.
yet what is that to such as have no lands, no fields, no cattle, no fruits of
the earth, etc? What is that to tradesmen, artificers and other like, which
live by their employments, by their labor and industry?

To such an objection I answer thus: Answer.
First, Be it thou have no lands, no fields, nor cattle, etc. Yet, if thou
dwell upon the face of the earth, Small
it is marvel but thou have part of the earth more or less, Tithes.
an orchard or a garden at least. And if thou grant that Tithes ought to be
paid of the fruits of the earth, then must thou by thine own confession, pay
tithe of thine orchard, and thy garden be it little or great, as does the
husbandman of his field, his meadow, his cattle, etc. If it be a small matter,
yet somewhat it is: and where is but little, even a little is worthy the
receiving, and it cannot but be sin to withhold it. Mark but our Saviors
words, Math. 23. And thou shall see plainly that those minutae decimae small
tithes, as the law terms them, are to be paid as well as the greater. For there
he speaking of the Pharisees that paid Tithe of their Rue, annis, mint, cummin,
and of every other herb, all garden herbs, as every woman can tell, says
expressly, that as they ought to have done weightier matters: So this, though a
small thing, they ought not, (as they did not) to leave undone. Which speech of
Christ's, as I have already showed, in the judgment of S. Origin contains a
precept for Christians now, as well as an approbation of that the Pharisees, in
that point, did then. And as we do spy day at a little hole, and try how good
the tree is, by the taste of one of the fruits: So by this little, trial may
be made, and notice taken, how good, or how evil a payer of tithes thou
would be, if thou had possessions and great store of lands and cattle as
the husbandman has. It is our Sauiour^ own rule and therefore current, Luke
16. 10. He that is faithful in the least, he is faithful also in much: and
he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. If therefore thou have
not great and many tithes to pay, yet pay thou thy few and smaller tithes
faithfully. As Zachariah and Elizabeth are commended for just, in that they
walked in all both precepts and ordinances, that is both greater and smaller
obseruances of the law of the Lord without reproof: so is it the part of a
just m^n, to make a conscience of every duty small and great.

Secondly, be it that thou have no fields, nor lands, nor cattle, and such
like, that yield such kind of tithes, yet if thou have other kind of goods,
Personal tithes.
there is a kind of tithe, mark well what I say, there is a kind of tithe to
be paid of those kind of goods that thou have: as of fish, of fowls, of
spoils in war, of money gained by trade, S. August.
by art and labor. S. Augustine, as he wrote of this matter de decimis most
of any of the Fathers, so is he playnest of all other. Sermon. de Temp. Ser. 219.
de dec. he says directly, Quodsi decim^s non habes, etc. But (says he) if
thou have not tithes of the fruits of the earth as the husbandman has, yet
whatsoever means thou have to live by, it is of God: and of that whereby thou
do live, he demands tithes. Pay thou therefore tithes of thy warfare, of
thy trade, and of thy handycraft. Thus preached, and wrote, S. Augustine for
12. hundred years ago and therefore it is no new opinion: he goes farther and
gives reason why this kind of tithe should be paid as well as the other. Aliud.
n. pro terra dependimus, aliud pro vsura vitae pensamus: that is, The one kind
of tithe we pay for the use of the earth (which we possess) the other for use
of our life upon the earth. Pay therefore O thou man, whatsoever thou be, thy
tithes; because thou do possess the earth, and because thou art vouch safed
thy life: his proof is; For thus says the Lord: Every man shall give a
redemption of his life: and so shall there not be among them any plague or
sickness. The place of scripture he alleges, is Exodus 36. 12. Whence this
father gathers that every man is to pay to god a tribute of his goods such as
he lives by.

S. Ambrose S. Ambrose.
writes to like effect in a Sermon, he has de quadrages. Q^icunque
recognouerit inse quod fideliter non dederit decimam etc. The same in Page 73.
Whosoever (says he) shall call to mind that he has not faithfully paid his
tithes, let him now amend that wherein he has failed. What is it to pay
faithfully? but that he offer and bring at no time, neither less, nor the
worser sort of his grain, or of his wine, or of the fruits of his trees, or
of his garden, or of his trade, or of his very hunting. With these agrees S.
Gregory, saying (as in the decrees he is alleged) Extra de dec. cap. 23. Ex
transmissa. Fidelis homo, de omnibus quae licite potest acquirere, decimas
erogare tenetur. ^. Every faithful man is bound to pay tithes of all such
goods, as he can lawfully get.

According hereunto, whereas the first and most ancient laws, as well
temporal as Ecclesiastical, run in general terms, Decimae de rebus omnibus:
Tithes of all things; the Canonists and other Lawyers as well of former as of
later ages willing and endeavoring to explane the same by specialities, have
inverted, approved and hitherto continued that vulgar and known distinction of
Tithes prediall and personal. By prediall meaning such as arise of the
increase of the earth: Pet. Rebuff. tract. de dec.
by personal such as arise of goods gotten by labor and industry whether they
be gotten (says a very famous Lawyer) by handicraft, industry, science,
warfarre, traffic, or any other lawful act. And so do all agree upon the
point, That every man is to pay one kind of tithe or other: viz. prediall if
he be a husbandman, personal if he be and quatenus as he is a tradesman,
artificer, etc. Of such goods as a man has and lives by himself, they
determine that God and his Church must still have some or other part. He that
is taught, of what vocation and course of life soever he be, must make his
teacher partaker with him of all such goods as he has.

Reason and equity do consent it should be so. For as in the commonweal, it
is but reason that in subsides and other duties to the King, etc. one sort of
subject be taxed as well as another: So in the Church for the service of God.
It is a weak plea for a tradesman, an artificer, a townesman, a citizen,
that is of wealth competent, to say I have no lands, therefore I ought not to
be seized to subsidy: it suffiseth that he be found worth thus much in
lands or in goods. And as bad and weak a reason it is to say, I have no
lands, no corn, nor cattle, therefore I ought to pay no tithe. If thou have
other kind of goods, pay of those thou have. God requires a part of that a
man has; and not of that, he has not. Give therefore to God, that which is
Gods, as well as to Caesar that which is Caesar's.

2 Further, look upon the use whereunto the tithes are assigned by God and
man: what is it but the maintenance of the minister? now have not townsmen
use and need of the Gospel? of the ministry? of teachers, as well as
husbandmen? Why then is it not reason they yield thereunto the due and
appointed maintenance as well as they? Have they other means equivalent? we
know of none: the ministers find none. The very law of nature says The laborer
is worthy of his hire, for whomsoever it be that he does labor. Why should any
then look that men should labor for them, gratis. The law of God and man has
appointed this, Tithes to be the hire of the Minister, his wages for his work
in the Gospel. Why then should any sort of people deny or withhold it? They
that will have spiritual things must render temporal. Otherwise, a man has
no reason to account himself bound to labor for them as his hearers, that
will not intertaine him as their teacher. They that contrary to the law, which
says Forsake not the Leuit, all days of thy life, forsake the minister, and
Keeping from him his appointed maintenance, Deuteronomy. 12.
leave him to seek the bread of his body, where he may; have no wrong done
them, Hos. 3. 4.
if they be forsaken, and left without Ephod and without Teraphim, to seek for
the food of their souls where they will; and are little to be pitied though
they wander from sea to sea, and from the north to the east, Amos. 8. 12.
running to and fro, to seek the word of God, and yet find it not, because
they have brought such famine upon themselves, and reap but such fruits as
their own hands have sown. Their own blood be upon their own heads, that
will prefer riches before Religion, earth before Heaven, the world before God,
and the wealth of their body to the health of their soul.

From proof let us come to practice: to which purpose if inquiry and search
be made, all ages and times will afford us record sufficient, when, where, and
by who^ such tithes have bin paid.

The first Tithes that ever we read to have been paid, were those that
Abraham paid to Melch^zedec. And what kind of tithes were they? If the common
translations of the Bible deceive us not, the text of holy Scripture, Heb. 7.
4. tells us, They were tithes of the spoils, the tenth of the booty taken
in battle, that is, Personal tithes.

2 Concerning the Isralites whether they paid the^ or no I will not contend. It
is as probable, yea, as no. First* by the words of the law, which after an
enumeratio^ of some particulars uses this general term all the tenth in
Israel, Tithes of al things. Nu^. 18. 21. 2. Chro. 31. 5. Secondly, by their
certain and known practice in other things, namely in all kind of offerings
and sacrifices to be performed unto the Lord. In those there was no difference
among them betwixt one and other, but the one sort were bound to perform them,
as well as the other. The law is plain for it, Exodus 12. 49. but specially,
Nu^. 15. 13. All that are borne of the country shall do these things, thus: and
one law, and one manner shall serve for both. They that had not beasts of their
own for sacrifice, must buy them of others, etc. Now as they were to provide
the^ offerings for the Lord by such goods as they had; likely it is, they were
also to pay tithes for the maintenance of the Leuits and priests of God, of
such goods as they had. Thirdly we do read Number. 31, That being returned from
battle, the Lord did expressly require, by the name of The Lords tribute, a
certain part of the booty, as one of 50. and of 500. one, less indeed a
great deal then a tenth, yet bearing proportion to a tenth. And whether it may
be accounted a right personal tenth that is diductis expensis, the expenses
diducted, let others judge. It does show us at least thus much: That God would
by some part of that which was gotten, be acknowledged to be the giver of the
whole, and author of the victory. And that such custom continued in Israel,
we may not obscurely gather, 1. Chro. 26. 26. where we read, That of the
battles and spoils taken in war David the king and the chief Fathers, the
captains over thousands and hundreds, and all the captains of the army, and
besides them, Samuel the Seer, Saul that had bin King, Abner the son of Ner,
Ioab and others, had dedicated (according as the Lord commanded, Nu. 31. say
some expositors) such an abundance of treasure, that there were treasurers, men
of great name, elected and deputed for keeping thereof.

Fourthly, The Leuits themselves, having none inheritance of lands, etc. yet
did pay to the priests the tenth of their tenth: and that was accounted unto
the^, as we read Nu. 18. 27, as the corn of the barn, and abundance of the
winepresse. If the Leuits themselves that received tithes of others must and
did pay tithe of that they had, is it not probable, that others of what
condition soever they were for whom the Leuits served, did pay of that they
had, which might, be acounted unto the^, as the corn and wine to the
husba^d-ma^, and and as the tenth of the tenthto the Leuits? and does it not
intimate, that by such means as a man has, and does himself live by, he ought
to co^fer to the maintenance of the minister; who must live by him, because he
labors for him. Fifthly, Luke 18. 12. our Savior brings in a Pharisie
speaking proudly I grant, yet truly thus: I give tithe of all that ever I
possess. Hereupon I ask first, whether in the person of this one Pharise, be
not expressed unto us the actions of them all? and in this point, of the whole
nation? then, whether all Pharisees were husbandmen only, or whether ^t be
not probable, That some of them were artificers as Paul, Lawiers as Gamaliel,
townsmen, as they that dwelt at Ierusaelem, etc And thirdly, if being
townsmen, tradesmen and artificers, they did give tithe of all that they
possessed, whether it must not necessarily follow, That they gave Tithes of
their trades, labors, stipends, etc. seeing goods gotten that way, be part of
that a man does possess as well as cattle, corn, etc. and is the same to
him, that the field, the tree, the beast, etc. is to the husbandman?

Sixthly, Admit (contrary to so evident probabilities) that the Jews did not pay
any personal tithes, yet it follows not by and by, that therefore Christians
ought not. For the case is not altogether like. Because their priests and
Leuits dwelt together, either at the house of God or in other their own Cities
assigned them as their peculiar possession by the lot of God, under the hand of
Iehoshuah, and did not dwell so dispersed as the ministers of the Gospel do
and must, viz. in every City, town and village. Our manner of habitation
therefore does necessarily require that which theirs did not: that is, That
the minister of every place, have his maintenance according to the place; viz.
by prediall tithes where are prediall, and by personal tithes where are
personal. Otherwise, seeing in Law and equity too, there is no compartition
betwixt ministers of the Gospel as was among Leuits for their tithes; either
such places, where prediall Tithes are not, must be without ministers for
lack of maintenance, or else the ministers having little or nothing must (as
commonly they do, but woe be to them by whom it comes) live not like their
brethren that have prediall tithes, minister like; but, as if they were the
drudges and dregs of the world deserving no reward, beggarlike. And to this
agree the words of the Apostle who says, 1. Cor. 9. That the minister should
eat (as the shepherd) of the milk of his own flock: drink (as the
husbandman) of the fruit of his own wine: be fed (as the ox) of that corn
which himself does thresh out: and as our text decla^^^ plainly) ^ee made
partaker of all his goods, whom he does teach in the word. Which is not
observed, unless as the husbandman yields him tithe of his corn, of his
cattle, of his fruits, etc. so the fisherman yield him tithe of his fish* the
fouler of his fowls, the Soldiour of his pray, the hireling of his wages, the
tradesman and artificer of their monny gotten by their labor, art and
industry, etc.

3. From the Jews if we go to the heathen to search for this matter, their
stories do abundantly testify that touching their bootres and pray taken in
war it was an ordinary thing with them to pay Decimas the tithes thereof (as
Abraham had done to the true God) to some or other of their imagined Gods. As,
(...) General among the Greeks, having gotten a notable victory against the
Persians, Decimae seposuae, the Tithes of the pray were laid aside to sacred
use, and employed part unto the honor of Apollo, part of Iup^ter, and part of
Neptune. Sabellic. Aenead. 3. lib. 2. page 339. Camillus Dictator among the
Romans, subduing the Veians, Tithes were paid unto Apollo. Liui. Decad. pri.
lib. 5. The Carthiginians paid unto Hercules the tenth of their Sicilian pray.
Dauell. page 464. Of other goods to pay the tenth was happily not so usual
among them, yet not altogether without example. For as Plutarch in Lucullo
reports of Lucullus a Roman Citizen and a rich, that he observed the use of
paying tithes to Hercules: so Diodor. Sicul. Biblith. lib. 5. Cap. 2. does
testify. That not Lucullus one he, but also many Citizens of Rome, and not
only those of mean wealth, but likewise they that were esteemed the richest
of them all, used to pay Decimas the tenth of their goods to Hercules. Thus it
appears that the heathens also used to pay personal tithes as well as prediall.

4. Desc^nd we lastly unto our selves, that is unto Christians* And what has
been accustomed all Christendoome over for many 100. of years together, is
not obscure to perceive nor difficult to gather, by the number infinite almost
of Decrees, Laws, constitutions, discourses and writings that are extant at
this day to be read of all men touching this sort of tithes as well as other.
Among the which, our own English. Statutes^ made since the aba^doning of
Popery in the days of the worthy and renowned Kings of most famous memory,
King Henry the eight, and K. Edward the sixth, deserve remembrance. In the
preamble whereof all such as shall attempt to withhold their tithes either
prediall or personal are branded with the note of evil disposed persons; and
in the body whereof is at large expressed the ne^ner how such kind of tithes
ought to be paid. And what? Shall we offer that unto the makers of such laws
and constitutions to imagine that they enacted such things as they either knew
ought not, or they intended should not be put in practice? Or that unto our
forefathers and other ancient Christians, That they lived under laws
lawlesly? gave the^r superiors leave to decree what they would, but took
liberty to themselves to observe what they listed? and made no conscience to
pay such Tithes as the laws both of the Church and land informed and required
them to pay? If we would; yet the memory of former times will convince us to
our faces, seeing it is not unknown unto the present age in what wealth and
good estate the ministers of the Church in former days as well in town as
country did live. For how could that be, except that people then had made a
conscience to pay all manner of Tithes, and acknowledge personal tithes to be
no less due then prediall?

5. For our own time it can not be denied, That in London, and some few other
places that are tied thereunto by ancient composition, (And happy were our
land, and blessed shall he be that effects it* if the like were established
the whole land over) they are still yearly paid, to the glory of God, great
good of the Church, and content both of pastor and people. If in other places
where such composition lies not; they be not paid either by computation, or
other reasonable composition, yet that they ought to be paid is a case most
clear. And the withholding of them can be none other but a most grievous
sin to God, wrong to his Church, prejudice to learning, hindrance to
religion, and decay of our ministry. Of which there is no hope it may be
furnished with learned and able teachers in towns and Cities specially, where
at this day they are most wanting, and yet most needful, to be had; unless
people be drawn either by instinct of conscience, or strength of good and able
laws, to the due, or at least much better performance of this duty.

Thus scripture, fathers, reason, laws and practice affirm that there are two
sorts of Tithes to be paid, viz. (...) and Personal. That the tradesman,
artificer, etc. must pay a kind of Tithe of such goods and profits as (...)
has, as well as the husbandman does of his.

But, what kind of Tithe? (for that I willed before to be noted) what? a full
Tenth of all he receives, as does the husbandman of all that which to him
increases? herein I acknowledge some difference. Neither will I about it
dissent from them in whose steps I have traced hitherto. The common
determination of the learned and Laws in this behalf both is and has been,
That the tradesman, artificer, etc. shall pay the tenth of his clear gains,
that is, Expensis d^ductis, his ordinary and necessary charges from the whole
being first deducted. By which advantage it must came to pass, That whereas
the husba^dman pays int^gram Decimam, an entire Tenth, one of every Ten, it
may so fall out, according to the greatness or smalnes of the expenses, that the
other shall pay but one of xij. or xv. of xx. or xxx. happily of fifty, which
yet is still called (rather I think for the relation it has to that number,
then for the proportion or quantity it self, and for avoiding confusion) a
tithe or Tenth.

See now good Reader, This is that Durus Sermo, that hard saying, that
unreasonable motion, whereof who can abide the hearing? But let no man be
offended without cause. Let all things be considered well and weighed in
equal balance, and what hardness, what extremity, is there in this? when as
the tradesman, the artificer, etc. in regard of his charges, labors,
adventure, etc. is so much favored more then the husbandman, that where the one
bath but nine parts for his labor and charges whatsoever it be, the other may
have 2. 3. 4. or 5. times so many parts or more to himself for his charges?
What, because it is no reason, by reason of his much charges, and many
casualties, he should pay an entire tenth, which no body does demand no^
affirm; is it reason therefore, he should pay no tithes at all? honor God
with none of his goods? reward the minister that gives him spiritual things,
with none of his temporal? What? nothing but his accustomed offerings? For so
some stick not to stand upon it, viz. 2. pence ^ ^eece at ^aster.
That they which have no lands, cattle, etc. ought to pa^e nothing but their
offerings; except (forsooth) they will of their own good wills (as if their
minister were their almesman) give him any more: A speech so deuoide of sense
and reason, that I wonder it can come out of the mouths of such as will seem
to guide their words by reason, and their action by religion. For is there any
law that says: None shall pay Tithes but such as have lands, cattle, etc?
Does not our own Statute law, (which yet of all other is most favorable to
the people in this case) and the Canon Law, speak directly of 2. sorts of
tithes, Prediall and Personal? And whereas the accustomed offerings are so
small, that it is not possible they alone might be able to maintain a minister
in any sort, no not in the greatest parish in England: may it be imagined,
that any lawmakers should but intend such a thing, viz. To exempt all such from
payment of Tithes as have not lands, etc. knowing that there be many hundred
parishes in the land, where if personal tithes be not paid, the minister has
and can have in manner nothing to live by? There is none I think of so little
knowledge and experience in the world, but knows well enough, That in all
places the land over, wheresoever men pay tithes of corn, cattle, etc. to the
uttermost, yet they pay these accustomed offerings too. Now me thinks, people
(knowing this) should of themselves conceive, that tradesmen, etc. pay not
their offerings in lieu of those tithes and other emoluments which husbandmen
pay: but that as husbandmen pay the like offerings, notwithstanding their
Tithes paid in the largest manner; so themselves should, besides those
offerings, pay some thing or other, which might be somewhat equivalent to the
husbandmans Tithes. That so it might appear by their deeds, Phil. Iud. lib.
de prae^* and hon* sacerd. Victus sacerdotum lautior, argumentum esse potest
pietatis public^.
That they love the Gospel and ministers thereof, no less then the husbandman
does, and are as worthy thereof as he. Which thing, without all question,
our forefathers and ancient lawmaters carefully did intend and respect in
appointing personal tithes: and is only then performed, when they, in one or
other manner, are yielded.

CHAP. VII.
Yields some reasons and special causes, why God vouchsafes to have as his
own, some part of all men's goods. Why the tenth. And why so great a portion,
as tithes, offerings, etc. are, he has assigned unto his ministers. Where the
Reader shall find diverse weighty causes, why ministers ought to have, not a
beeggerly and sparing* but ample and liberal maintenance.

HItherto I have showed what right the Church has unto Tithes, and proved by
sundry arguments drawn from the scriptures, fathers, laws of nations, rule of
equity, and consent of times, That Tithes both prediall and personal, are
still due to the ministers of the Gospel, and ought now in the time of the
Gospel by divine right and ordinance to be paid. Now I hope it will not seem
to the good Reader time ouerlong, nor labor superfluous, to consider somewhat
also more specially of the end and reason wherefore it has pleased God to
sanctify and set apart unto himself, as a continual inheritance, any part,
or such a part of our temporal goods. Such a consideration can not but be a
profitable and necessary motive and incitation to the true and better
performance of this kind of duty.

Of this point I conceive that there be 2. principal causes* one that
respects directly and immediately God himself; another that respects the
Church of God.

That which respects God himself, is the acknowledgment of Gods sole and
sovereign Dominion over all. God will by by some certain portion of our
goods, returned back and offered up again unto him, be acknowledged to be
Lord of all. I say again: As God is the giver of all our wealth, and he only
who blesses the works of our hands: so for acknowledgement of his universal
Dominion, he will have a part thereof set apart for himself. This is it the
Lord means, when making claim unto Tithes, offerings, vows and other
hallowed things, he calls them his; and speaking of them, terms them Mine
offerings, my hallowed things, the Lords tribute, his inheritance, etc. as we
read in sundry places of the law; namely, Numb. 18. Leuit. 27. etc. that
Solomon means when (as a moral duty written in the hearts of men by nature)
he teaches every man, To honor the Lord with his substance, Prou. 3. 9. that
the Prophet insinuates, when on Gods behalf he charge the people, that in
withholding their tithes and offerings, they had robbed and defrauded, not so
much the Priests and Leuits, as the Lord himself. Ye have spoiled me, says
the Lord: wherein? in Tithes and offerings.

Accordingly ancient Divines counted it current Doctrine and a kind of speech
very agreeable to piety and truth, to speak after this manner: We offer unto
God our goods as tokens of thankefulnes, for that we receive. Ire^aeus.
Origin. August.
Iren. lib. 4. Cap. 34. He which worshippeth. God (says Origin. in Numb. 18.
Homil. 11.) must by gifts and oblations acknowledge him Lord of all. S.
August. tract. de Rectitud. Cath. conuers. has these words, Vnusquisque de
quali ingenio vel artificio viuit, etc. Every man of that means whereby he
lives, thereof let him pay to God the Tenth. Let him consider that all is of
God, that he lives by, whether it be the earth, or the waters, or seeds, or
all things that be under heaven or above; and if he (God) had not given it unto
him, Decret. Greg. lib. 3. Tit.
he had had nothing. And in the decrees, as a Maxim undeniable, such like
preambles and assertions are to be read; Cum autem in signum vniuersalis
Dominij, etc. De Decimis. W. Lindewood.
for so much as in sign of his universal souereignitie, as it were by a
special title, the Lord has reserved Tithes unto himself, auouching and
clayming them to be his own, etc. And some of our own later writers very
iudiciously, Prouinc. lib. 3. Tit. De Dec. and oblat. See before fol.
upon like consideration, have termed tithes and other holy things
appropriated unto God Sacrum vectigal, a sacred Tribute, or rent: Sacred both
in regard of the person (God) to whom properly it is due, and of the use, unto
which God has assigned it to be paid.

There cannot be a clearer truth then this: Marlor. in Heb. 7. 4.
yet so are men's eyes now a-daies blinded with covetousness, or their minds
daseled with ignorance, that a great part of men, even of men professing
godliness and knowledge, seem to account it a strange doctrine. Many would
feign persuade themselves that for their wordly goods, if they use them soberly
and without excess, if they get and keep them without the detriment and injury
of others, specially if they go one degree farther; I mean, if they bestow
some small and contemptible portion to some charitable uses; they have
discharged their duty to the uttermost, and God requires no more at their
hands. But indeed we must know yet farther, That as we cannot honor God
rightly, unless both our bodies and souls be employed sometimes merely in
his service: and as we cannot with our bodies and souls religiously and duly
serve God, unless some part of our times, as the seventh day, be taken
clean away from our wordly business and uses, and employed wholly in his: so
we do not and cannot truly and thoroughly honor him, unless we give unto him
likewise a part of our substance. For are not our goods his, as well as our
days, and as our selves? why should we not then honor him with a special
part of the one, as well as of the other? And unless with part thereof we
acknowledge his supreme Dominion, by whose benevolence we have the whole, how
do we give honor to whom honor belongs, or how has God the things that
are Gods? I would know what nation in the world, did ever honor God, and did
not think it a point of their duty to do him honor with their goods? So
that this we may blodly set down as a principle clear in nature, an axiom
which ought not to be called in question, a truth manifest and infallible,
That men are eternally bound to honor God with their substance, in token of
thankful acknowledgement that all they have is from him. To honor him I say
with their worldly goods, not only by spending them in lawful manner, and by
using them without offense in the world, but also by alienating from themselves
some reasonable part or portion thereof, and by offering up the same to him, as
a sign that they gladly confess his sole and singular Dominion over all, as a
duty which all men are bound unto, and a part of that very worship of God,
which, as the Law of God and nature it self requires, so we are the rather
to think all men no less strictly bound thereunto, then to any other natural
duty: inasmuch as the hearts of men do so clea^e to these earthly things, so
much admire them for the sway they have in the world, impute them so generally
either to nature or chance, so little think upon the grace and providence from
which they come, That unless by a kind of continual tribute men be inured to
acknowledge Gods Dominion, it may be doubted, that in short time men, would
learn to forget whose tenants they are, and imagine that the worlds is their
own, absolute, free and independent inheritance.

Thus it appears by the Testimony of God himself, and of godly men from
time to time, that as God out of the whole mass of mankind has reserved to
himself some, whom he calls his elect: out of the habitations of the s^nnes
of men, their earthly buildings, some, which he calls his temple, his house: of
times and seasons some, his Sabbaths, his solemn feasts: of servants and
attendants, some his Priests and ministers: So likewise of the goods and wealth
that me^ enjoy upon the earth so portion unto himself, viz. his Tithes and
oblations, as his proper right, portion and inheritance.

That God ought to have some part of our goods sanctified and offered unto
him, will happily be soon granted of the most part to be but necessary just
and reasonable: But may it be possible to show any reason or cause why God
should vouchsafe to make choice of the tenth part rather the^ so other, either
greter or lesser?

The maine and surest reason of al is his will: against which (he having once
revealed that his will is, to reserve the tenth part as his own) who may
dispute? He is not bound always to give us a reason of his will, which we
know cannot but be just and wise what ever it be. Of days and times, why he
has sanctified to himself the seventh day we have the reason and cause
evidently taught us, viz. because on that day herested from al his work which
he had created. Ge^. 2. 3. Exo. 20: and therefore it behooved that day not the 6.
or 8. or any other to be celebrated. If we have not y^ like for our goods yet
that it is no less reasonable and just, we may not doubt.

2 And reason it self must needs teach us, that it is no reason, if we must
give to God some part of our goods, that it should be any contemptible
portion; as if it were fit to honor God as we relieve the poor of the parish,
With some cold benevolence: and therefore that Centesima, an hundredth, or which
is worse (though often practiced) Millesima, the thousandth part of our goods
were enough for him. We shame to bring unto a Noble man, a prince, a king, any
other then some royal and notable present, the best and goodliest we can get:
such as may well beseem us to give, and him to receive: such as may argue our
affection toward him, and procure and win his liking toward us. How much more
then, being to come into the presence of God, and to offer to him of our goods
should both reason and religion move us, to the end it may be the better
accepted, to offer to him no beggarly nor niggardly part, but such as may show
a thankful heart, 1. Chro. 29. 12.
and liberal mind: nor of the worst and scruffe, but of the fattest, fairest
and best of our goods; according as God did, by express law, require of his
people, Leuit. 22. 19. Deuteronomy. 15. 21. and 17. 1. Exech. 43. 22. and being not
performed, did in them sharply reprove, as ye may read, Mal. 1. 8. Wherefore
seeing reason teaches this, it cannot but conclude withal, That must be a
tenth or thereabout.

3 But the likeliest reason that I can conjecture is, the end and special use
whereunto God assigned and intended to depute this his portion; which is (as
after I shall show at large) the maintenance of his ministers: for whom it
seems he accounted the tenth to be a portion so co^petent, as by which
ordinarily together with his offerings, they might in some sufficient and fit
measure be able live: which they could not do upon a less, as the 15. or 20.
part.

And this reason I think the whole world in manner (heathen, Jewish and
christian) has in all ages, as, if not obeying, at least yet imitating God,
approved and respected, in condiscending to yield (as a portion to that use so
competent, that any other more co^petent it were not possible for the wit of
man to devise) that part, to the maintenance of the priests and Ministers of
God and his Church. The farther from reason (religion I will not say) this
present age; which (dissenting from the judgment of God, of ancient and best
Christians, besides Jews and heathen) account the hundredth, yea many times,
the thousandth part of the goods to be enough for God, and maintenance
sufficient for his Church and ministers thereof.

4 And as God by express law required the best and fairest to be offered unto
him: So in many things men have observed (how truly I leave to others) the
tenth as it were naturally to be the best, the very croppe and principal.
Insomuch that in old Plautus Plautus.
the word Decumanus is used for magnus, that is the tenth thing for a great one
of that kind: and (as scholars do know) in other Authors Decumana oua, decimus
fluctus, decumana porta, and decumanus limes, are used for, or accounted, of
others the greatest. So that God requiring the best, and the best and goodliest
being naturally the tenth, it seems that in demanding the best, he means
the tenth.

5 Some thing there is also to be considered in the very number it self. For
it is certain, that not only men endued with religion, and true knowledge of
God, but even heathen wise, have respected much the Numbers of 3. of 7. and of
10. which probable it is they have done by a certain secret and special
instinct of natures light, suggesting unto them 3. as a number mystical
because of the Trinity; 7. as a number of holiness because of the seventh
day; and 10. as a number of perfection, containing in it, and under it, al
other numbers: as which in the speech and reconing of all nations under heaven,
take their nomination and proceeding still by 10. and from ten to ten. Now (as
one says well) Three being the mystical number of Gods unsearchable
perfection within himself: 7. the number whereby our own perfections thorough
grace are most ordered: and Ten the number of natures perfections (for the
beauty of nature is order, and the foundation of order number, and of number
ten, the higest we can rise unto without iteration of numbers under it) could
nature better acknowledge the power of the God of nature, then by assigning
unto him that quantity, which is the continent of all she possesses?

6 Law or express word of God, whereby he had revealed to man that he required
the tenth rather then any other part, till Moses time we find none: but when as
we read that long before Moses the tenth was paid to God, may we not with good
probability gather, that they knew that God accepted that part gratefully, and
required it rather then any other part, at their hands?

Let us also see the other cause, viz. that which concerns the Church of God:
and that is, That so he might have wherewith to maintain those that should
attend his Ministry and service in all ages and in all places the world
thoroughout.

It cannot be denied, but that God from the beginning of times required of al
men to be publicly worshipped and served: and thereupon it is not possible to
name that nation under heaven, which living in any form of humane society,
has not by the mere instinct and light of nature professed a public and
solemn honor and worship of God. So that whether they have done it rightly, as
did the Patriarks and Church of God from time to time; or erroniously and
corruptly, as the heathen that knew not the true God, nor true form of divine
worship: yet they have al, and always agreed in the matter, viz. that God was
publicly to be worshipped, howsoever they disagreed and varied in the manner,
viz. in what sort that ought to be done. Secondly, it is as clear and out of
all question, that for the due and better celebratio^ of that his publik
worship and service, God ordained from the beginning a public ministry and
priesthood, Heb. 5. 4.
and would not that any should presume to intermeddle in that function, Exodus
28.
and undertake that work, but such as he himself had either ordinarily by
men, Number. 3. and. 17.
or extraordinarily by himself called and chosen thereunto. Ephesians. 4. 11.
And reason: For if among men, Princes, Lords, etc. will not be served and
attended on, but by men of their own choice; 1. Cor. 12. 28
is it not more probable a great deal, that the King of Kings, and Lord of all
Lords, will not be served in his Church, but by such as himself has thereunto
elected and appointed? Now as God would ever have public worship of his own
description; servants and attendaunts thereunto of his own ordination: so it
was his will, and his wisdom, to reserve unto himsel^e a part of the goods,
increase and profits of the world* that so he might have of his own, wherewith
to maintain those his own servants. This I take to be clear by Gods own
speech unto Moses: when having set his mark upon diverse things, calling them
mine offerings, mine hallowed things, my tithes, etc. he adds, These have I
given to the sons of Leui, Why? for the service which they do me in the
Tabern, and It (viz. the tithes, Philo. Iud. lib. de praem. and (...). Sacerd.
Sed ne quis ex conferentibus, exprobret accipienti suum Beneficium, iubentur
prius in templu^ defer munera vt tum demu^ inde sacerdotes de^umant.
offerings, etc.) is your wages for your service unto me. Which words do
plainly show, that God would that such as attended him, and served at his
altar, should receive those things as his pay, and not as men's; as from his
hand and not from man: in lieu of the wages and reward which for their service
it was fit and necessary, that he their master and Lord should allow them.
Whereupon he ^aith not to the people (The manner of speech is much to be noted)
you shall give them your offerings, etc. for the service they do you: but I
have given them mine, etc. as who say, You shall pay it me, and as mine from my
hand shall they receive it, that so I may pay them out of mine own purse, with
mine own hands, of mine own goods, and not they serve me or I retain them
at other men's cost. Theophi. in 1. Cor. 9 Nec san^ dixit, vt ex oblationibus
ederen^, sed ex lacrario, ne uel qui aliquid caperent puderet accepti, perinde
ac si ab hominibus alerentur: vel qui impartirentur his su^, insolese erent.
Idem. Manducandum afferit, non ex discipulorum facultatibus, sed de Euangelio:
ne forte f^perbiant quod apostolos sustentarent. Neque. n. inquit, tu his
alimoni^^^ subministras, sed propri^ quadam industria, hoc est, Euangelij
^nunciatio ipsos alit.
That they have, they have it of me, and from me, it is mine and not yours.
Which if you yield not to them as I have commanded you, you rob and defraud me
your God, as well as them my servants. To this accord the words also of the
Prophet Malachie. cap. 3. 8: where God speaks thus: Will a man spoil his
Gods? yet have ye spoiled me. But ye said wherein have we spoiled thee? in
tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have spoiled me, even
this whole nation. Bring ye all tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in mine house, etc.

Where the Lord again challenges al tithes and offerings properly, and in
right to be his, calls the Priests barn his barn, the Priests house his
house, and shows plainly; that he has allotted those his duties to them as
their mainetenance for the service they do him. It was the least thought the
people had, to defraud God, they accounted they had but pinched a few fat
bellied priests that had no need thereof, and kept short a sort of lazy
Leuits unworthy of it: but God tells them, that in abusing them, he was abused;
in defrauding them, he was spoiled: because those things which they should have
received, were properly his, and not theirs.

Neither were the very heathen so blind and ignorant but that they saw this:
and therefore whatsoever they vowed and offered unto their Gods, they delivered
it always into the hands of some or other priests; as they that knew, that God
had assigned over to his priests and ministers the use of such things, as
should be given, consecrated, or offered unto him. And therefore whereas they
themselves made great conscience of touching or profaning hallowed things,
they never accounted it a fault, but a freedom and duty in the priests, to
live thereof.

And truly I cannot therein but commend the religious intention of our
foreelders, who did ever account the tithes, etc. as none of their own goods,
but, as they did usually call them, Gods part; as who had learned, that such
things properly were due to God himself, and therefore did pay them even of
conscience to God, as they that considered and knew that God had given them to
the Church for the maintenance of the ministry thereof: and knowing that to
rob God, to commit sacrilege, could be no light offense, did often in their
Testaments make provision to pay a certain sum of money, as a recompense for
tithes forgotten; whereas now no conscience (and much less recompense) is made
pro dec. ablatis for tithes any way taken from God and his ministers.

The same persuasion was no doubt one special motive that induced them to be
willing and careful to pay such duties without respect of persons, without
grudging and repining, without exception at this man and that; as they that
knew and considered, That whatsoever men deserve, or may seem worthy or
unworthy of: yet God, who is the giver of all is still worthy to receive his
own part out of the whole, without diminution or alteration: and they still
bound, what ever he be that receives it, to pay the same. And verily the want
of this persuasion is one maine and principal cause, why at this day in many
places people pay the minister his maintenance so grudgingly and so badly. They
consider not, that what they pay, is none of their own, but properly Gods part,
due first of all unto him as an Honorarium wherewith they ought to acknowledge
him the supreme Lord. They account that they pay to be their own, and they
deal with the minister as for mine and thine. And accordingly as they affect
the man, so they presume to deal with him, not thinking that they have to do
with god in this case, more the^ in any other ordinary or wordly matter: and
therefore as love or hatred, content or disconte^t, covetousness or equity caries
the^, so they deal more or less liberally and justly in this behalf.

This has come to pass (I conjecture) a great deal thorough the ministers
own defalt; in that diverse of them, not looking thoroughly into the matter,
have taught people, that Tithes are not now due Iure diuino, and claim tithes
and offerings as their tithes and their offerings: whereas indeed if they
followed the phrase of holy scripture, and spoke as the word of God teaches,
they should rather call them Gods tithes, the offerings of God, and claim them
by the name of Gods part, the Churches right, etc. I do not deny, but that
they may in some sort call them, their tithes, their offerings, their duties,
etc. because they are by assignation from God become and made theirs: but yet I
doubt whether they can without sin always so speak; and should not rather,
even in honor of him by whose right they hold, whose receivers and substitutes
they are, speak more properly, and if not always, yet usually call them as
they are, the offerings of God, Gods tithes, etc. This would move men that
hear it, to be more religious in this point. It would strike some better awe,
and move the conscience of men the more in this case, to use more sincerity,
equity and liberality then commonly they do.

The Fathers and men of ancient time did never almost speak otherwise then
thus; Read Deo decimam: Deus dignatur dec. accipere: decimae Deo debentur: Pay
to God his tithes: God vouchsafes to receive the tenth: tithes are due to God.
And they bring in God claiming in this sort, Give me my tenth part: if thou will give me my tenth, I will multiply thy nine parts: if thou will not give me
my tenth, etc. And if we shall imitate them therein, we shall do but as the
best have done.

But to bring the matter to some issue, the point is, that God has reserved to
himself tithes, offerings, etc. that so he might have wherewith Desuo, of his
own proper goods, to maintain his ministers.

Herein I note a special point of the great and divine wisdom of God, that
would so provide for his servants and not leave them to the courtesy of men.
And I would it might be well considered, whether they do not check this wisdom
of God, which deny this verity, and affirm, that God (as not so provident for
his servants, as men of any place or fashion be for theirs) has provided them
of nothing of his own, but left them to the courtesy of the world, which hates
them, and mercy (for the most part) of the merciless.

Further consider we, whether God having reserved unto himself a part of that
men possess, and yet to that end specially that therewith he might maintain,
among us, such as might, being his servants, guide us in the way of salvation,
bring us to Ged, win us to Christ, confirm us in the truth, etc. and so be our
ministers as well as his, ours in the work of the Lord: Consider, I say,
whether it be not a great sin, a notorious argument of extreme ingratitude to
God, to defraude them of, or to deny the^ that maintenance, those means to live
by, which God has given the^ for our good? seeing thevse of their ministry,
the fruit of their labors, and service in the work of the Lord, redoundeth
properly and specially unto us. If a King receiving tributes, subsidies, etc.
of his people, should employ the same in defense of the country, the good of
the commonwealth: If a landlord receiving fines and rents of his tenants should
spend the same among the^ in keeping of good house, in repayring their
tenements, in mending their highways, etc. we would easily grant, that such
subjects and such tenants were much to be blamed, if they would not willingly
pay those payments to the uttermost. God does so and more then so with us. He
receives of us the tithes and offerings as his Sacru^ vectigal his sacred
tribute, his holy rent: and what does he therewith? he employes it all again
to our good, to our use, in maintaining worthy Captains and Soldiers, that
may defend the Gospel and continually encounter the enemy of our faith: upon
laborers that may work hard in the work of the ministry, and be painful in
publishing the Gospel, that so we might be builded up as holy temples and
spiritual habitations to himself, yea that so we might be exalted to dwell
with him in eternal glory. And therefore I think our sin cannot be little, nor
our fault excusable, if as it were condemning his wisdom, and envying our
own fe^icity, we will not suffer his goods, his portion, to be converted to
our best profit, nor willingly pay and yield him that which is his right, that
so we may receive it again, not to his but to our own benefit. Hardly, it is
likely, would we be drawn, as did many godly Christians in the primitive
church, in our days some few people do, and as in the judgment of such as be
wise and religious, it is but the duty of all Christians (if need be) to do,
viz. (paying our tenth from the Church) maintain the minister out of the other
nine parts, as by allotting him another tenth, because the very tenth is taken
away: or giving him otherwise unto that which remains that which is somewhat
competent; seeing we grudge to him that which is none of ours, but Gods, and
so his (the ministers) own already: that which not by us, but indeed by God*
is alloted and assigned unto him. This reason and consideration seemed unto S.
Aug. S. August. Ser. de tem. 219.
so good, that speaking of tithes in one whole Sermon thereof, it is the very
first that he does urge; Deus qui dignatur totum dare, etc. God (says he)
which vouchsafes to give us the whole, does vouchsafe to receive again of us
the tenth, which shall yet redound not to his, but doubtless to our profit. How
to our profit? but because our outward estate shall be bettered thereby, by Gods
blessing upon the 9. parts, for that the tenth is justly paid, as there he
shows, and hereafter we shall see: and our inward estate shall be amended, while
the ministry of the Gospel being thereby planted and continued among us, our
knowledge, faith, and piety shall thereby be increased. The same also the whole
council of Tribur. Conc. Trib.
considered, as appears by their words, where supposing God to speak thus,
Give me my tithes, etc. they conclude in this manner; If therefore any man make
question, why tithes are paid? Let him know, that therefore they are to be paid,
1. That God by such devotion being pacified, may more abundantly give us
(corporal) necessaries: and 2. that the ministers of the Church being thereby
relieved, may be the more free (from worldly and secular encumbrances) to the
fulfilling of their spiritual exercises (the fruit whereof we are to
receive.) For (as it is well known) they labor not for themselves, but for
others.

And thus appears sufficiently the other, that is the second reason, why God
has assumed unto himself part of men's earthly goods as his own proper right
and inheritance.

But yet, before I proceed any farther, a farther question does arise, and may
be moved, upon that last set down, Namely, why it pleased God to allott out
unto his servants, his ministers, so great a portion, so honorable
maintenance, as (besides offerings, vows and other things consecrated to God,
both moveable and immovable) the Tenth is: All which it is certain, that not
without Gods approouement or appointment, the priests and ministers of God in
all ages received and had: and in this age and time of the Gospel, ought to
have.

For answer hereunto, many and those maine and very apparent reasons may be
given: and they all either expressed in, or deducible out of the word of God: as

1. First, thereby to honor their calling before men, who naturally do
respect them that have some good means to live by: and contrariwise, contemn
and despise such as be in poverty, as persons obscure and contemptible. The
elders (says S. Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 17.) that rule well, are worthy double
honor, specially, etc. Where, by double honor, in the opinion of al
expositors he means as well liberal and honorable maintenance for
themselves, as due reverence and obedience to them and their Doctrine. The Lord
did account it an honor to Aaron and his priesthood to be well and worthily
maintained, neither can it be other to the ministers of the Gospel. And if in
time of peace and prosperity men think it commendable for men of other
degrees and callings to live in wealth, and have some abundance of these
external blessings: how can it be but commendable likewise for the minister
of God, to reap some fruit of the same things, to refresh his head with oil,
to have his table well furnished, and his cup full: That it may not be said,
that The ark of the Lord does rest in a tent of skins, and lie under a
covering of goats hair, when men do dwell in their houses of Cedar, and have
their sieled chambers, 1. Chro. 17. 1. and Hag. 1. 4. And experience does
show, That as howsoever men should receive the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ
without respect of persons; yet it is rare to find the man, that does not
prefer the man that wears the gaie clothing before him in the vile
raiment: Iac. 2. 2.
so it is hard to find that people, which does not contemn a minister of
God, if he live in poverty and baseness; and esteem him much the more,
whatsoever his desert be, that carries some sway in the world, and lives (as
we term it) in good reputation, and of himself.

And when his person is once in disgrace and contempt, what is to be expected
of his labors it is easy to judge. Solomon observed long ago, Ecclesiast.
9. 16. That, Better is wisdom then strength; yet the wisdom of the poor is
despised, and his words are not heard. I remember I have read, how that the
Athenians on a time being in a common counsel, Aul. ^ell.
about some weighty matter, one that was but a poor and abject fellow, gave
indeed best advise and spoke most to the purpose: The chief of the City
considering that it would be the less and worse accepted, if it should be
known to proceed from such a one, seemed to take no notice thereof; and
therefore assembling together another day, caused one that was of greater place
and more authority with the people, to propound the same advise again: and so
they followed it, as the later man's, when indeed it was the formers. And I have
my self observed and seen ere now, that two men preaching, the one being
poor and of no note in the world, and the other rich and of account for his
wealth and living, though the poor man has by many degrees in the judgment
of such as could discern, and were not affectionate, exceeded the other, yet
he has been far less regarded; and his labors, of the greater number, as
scarce worth the hearing, disdaigned and little set by. It is a fault I grant,
to respect the doctrine and labors of a man the less for his poverty: but yet
it is such a fault, as far as I can find, which God will have amended, not
so much by reprehending men for it, as by encouraging and inducing men to take
away the cause thereof by maintaining his ministers well, that they may not fall
into contempt. Where that course is not taken, but men will first by disabling
and impouerishing the minister bring him into contempt, and then contemn him;
as the Philosopher not unworthily laughed at the folly of them which rejected
him when he came in his old rags, but admitted him courteously when he
returned in trim apparel, as if his new attire had made him to be another,
and not the same man he was before: so may we justly condemn the wickedness
of such as make the minister, by ill and unworthy maintenance, contemptible;
and then having themselves made him such, do undeservedly contemn him.

2. Secondly, this is done, To move and drove men to be willing to undertake
this kind of calling. For else who almost will betake himself to the
ministry, and be desirous to become a Divine, if he see before hand no hope
of perferment, no likelihood of due maintenance to arise thereby? I grant,
that preferment and reward is not the principal end, whereto men should look:
yet when as men are not of that degree and calling by birth, as the seed of
Aaron was, but are, in respect of themselves, free to make choice what kind of
study, what course of life and profession they will follow, it will be hard to
find many that will prefer that calling above others; when they foresee,
having spent their time, their patrimony, their studies, for many years
together that way, little or no hope of condign reward, and fit maintenance.
Many will rather (as is daily seen) betake themselves to other professions, to
the Law, to Physic, to the schools, yea to service, etc. wherein they see
more hope of maintenance, and a ready way opened unto preferment and estimation
in the world. And few parents will there be, that will have any great desire to
train: up their children of purpose for the ministry, when as they shall
perceive that when a man has spent upon one child (if he be a man of any
fashion) 2. or 300* pounds, thrice or twice as much as upon any of the rest of
his children, yet he is farther off from preferment then any of the rest, while
it is not easy to attain any thing unless it be some beggarly stipend, or a
peeld benefice scarce worth the taking up.

Heathen men could observe, That Honos alit arts, Tull^e.
it is honor and preferment that maintains any kind of learning: and that,
probata virtus inhonora cessat: virtue though it be commended, yet if it be not
honored and rewarded, will soon be discouraged. And we may observe, say what
men will, That it is maintenance that does and will maintain religion, and
preferment that does and will draw fit and worthy men to the ministry: That
the want of due mainteinance in our land is the principal cause, that religion
among us flourishes no better: and the lack of due preferment in our Church
the maine and special reason, why our ministry till this day after so long
a preaching of the Gospel, so great a peace of the Church, so large a t^me for
breeding up and planting of sufficient men, remains yet so unfurnished, as it
does, of able teachers; one half at the least, being yet far from any
competent sufficiency to that office: Besides many others, who being with
learning and gifts very sufficiently qualified, which for want of due
maintenance are both discouraged to employ their studies, disabled to do that
which otherwise they would and could perform, and compelled to bend their
wits, and spend their time otherways.

Would to God therefore the Governors of our land would at the length respect
this purpose of God, who has allotted to his ministers so great and competent
a portion, to the end thereby to allure and inuit men to vndergooe the
calling: and accordingly provide that every where the same might in some
measure so be laid out for them, that there might be apparent hope of
preferment, and some certainty of sufficient and good maintenance for such as
would betake themselves to that course of life. Then within a little while it
would appear, that there should be no occasion nor need for furnishing of
places, to fill them up with Tailors, Weavers, or out-worne spend thrifts. The
universities like good fruitful mothers would breed up and send abroad of her
children well near enowe to supply such vacations. Many would open their
mouths with joy, that now bide silent with grief: not a few would stir up
the gifts of God in them, which now either like the slothful servant bury
them in the earth, or with Martha employ them about things though necessary for
themselves, yet less necessary for the Church: and some no doubt that for
preferments sake, have half against their wills, left this calling, would
return again from the school, Physic, Law, etc. to this most sacred
function.

3. A third cause is, to enable them that be entered into the ministry, that
be ministers already, to be faithful, diligent and assiduous in their
charge; whereunto they can not but be the more occasioned, when they have all
their necessary wants ad victum and ad cultum sufficiently and abundantly
supplied: and wherein to fail, they have either none at all, or far less
excuse when as they be not, for want of necessaries, enforced to leave the word
and serve tables. Act. 6. 2. that is, to discontinue their chief and
principal studies, and betake them to some other calling or courses, to their
profession not pertinent. Contrary to the rule and the mind of the Apostle,
who 2. Tim. 2. 4. says, No man that warreth intangleth himself with
the affairs of this life, because he would please him that has chosen him to
be a Soldier, etc. meaning, that, as he that goes to the wars gives over
his ordinary, private and domestical affairs that so he may follow his
Captain without ^et, and do good service unto his country; so should he that
betakes him to the ministry of Christ, forgo all other vocations and courses
of life, as husbandry, handicrafts, merchandise, schooling, Physic,
Chirurgerie, etc. and follow only that work of God, whereunto only he is
called, which alone will require a whole man. Contrary to the mind of the
ancient fathers, who, as we may conceive by the words of S. Cyprian, epist.
66. reproved one Geminius Faustin* that had undertaken the charge of pupills,
and oversight of a man's will; as doing therein against the Canons of the
Church then: saying that Ministers have nothing to do with secular affairs:
but as the Leuits had no other business but to attend on the altar, so the Lord
had provided for his ministers now, that they might not be drawn by wordly
occasions from their holy business, but day and night should attend their
heavenly and spiritual exercises: and by the words of S. Gregory, Duaren*
desacr. eccl. minist. lib. 1. cap. 25.
who rebukes a certain bishop or minister of his time, for that he did
undertake to teach grammar, thinking it unmeet for ministers of the Church to
meddle in any secular affairs, and get their living by worldly labors.
Contrary to the ancient Canons and Decrees of the Church, as may appear Decr.
Greg. lib. 3. Tit. Ne cler. sec. neg. se immisceant. Contrary to the practice
of the best of that sort in all times, as of Aaron, who left the magistracy
wholly to his brother Moses, and held himself only to the service of the
Tabernacle: of the Apostles, who Math. 4. 20. et. 19. 27. gave over their
trades of fishing, etc. and following Christ, endeavored only this, to become
fishers of men: and after Christ's Ascension, as soon as the Church was a
little increased, refused any longer to be encombred with the serving of
tables, but washing their hands thereof, left the charge of it wholly to
others, that so they might give themselves continualie to prayer and
ministration of the word, living thencefoorth not upon the labor of their
own hands, in this or that secular trade, but upon the charge of the Church:
as S. Paul does plainly testify, 1. Cor. 9. 4. where, in defense of himself,
that yet upon some special and extraordinary occasion used not this power, he
says, Have we not power to eat and to drink, that is, to live upon the
charge of others, without laboring our selves, as well as the rest of the
Apostles and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? I might add likewise the
example of Christ himself, the Prince of all Pastors, who coming once abroad
to preach the Gospel, gave quite over that trade of life wherein, as a private
man, he had spent his time, mar. 6. 3. Justin. in Apolog. and betook himself,
only to do and to teach those things that perteined to the kingdom of God,
living and susteining him and his, of such goods as by the faithful that
followed him, were ministered unto him. Luc. 8. 3. John. 13. 29.

I confess, they do not well, and as they should, to spend their time in
worldly business, as in teaching of scholars, etc. These things were fitter a
great deal for men of those professions, the^ for any of the ministry. But
say I, who is in fault for this? you know the old proverb. Necessitas non habet
legem, Need has no law. It is not fit they should do thus, but it is better
to do thus then to starve (or steal) for want of necessaries. Emalis minimum:
Of two evils the less is ever to be chosen. A hard shift that a man must be
feign to intrude upon others, because he can not have that which is his own. A
lamentable thing that whereas in all other trades and courses of life (if a man
be of any industry or means) he may be able by his trade and profession
alone, to live w^l and somewhat wealthily, for as the old saving is, Ars
quaeque suum alit artificem. Every art susteineth his artist: only such is the
state of our ministry in England, that in many places, it is not possible for
a man therein, and thereby alone to live, though parce and duriter, in any
tolerable estate. Which considered, no man may justly deny but that the
Governors of our Church have done well, that in their late Canons, Ca^. 78.
they have reserved to the minister of any place the prerogative of teaching
there above any other. A poor supply where better means are wanting. And I
wish that, Things standing as yet they do, they might be assisted to the
uttermost, to enjoy the benefit thereof. But on condition that the Governors
of our land would provide that in every place there might be some competent
maintenance (a matter with no great difficulty to be soon effected) for the
minister thereof: I could wish that there were a Law, That no minister should
intermedle with any practice or profession but his own. For, for my part,
though I wish well to all the ministers of the Church, and do know that many
of them in these days do live as much or more by other means as by the
ministry, yet knowing by long and much observation and experience, how unfit
and prejudicial a thing it is to their ministry, I am so far from
justifying, liking and commending such courses, whereunto their own extreme
necessity, and the injury and iniquity of the time does compel them, that I
hold their condition therein, a thing to be pitted more then approved: and
their fact a matter rather to be tolerated then defended.

How unapt and unable a man is for such a charge and work as is the work of
the ministry, when he is unprovided of time and means to provide and
sustain himself, and furnish his study, it is no hard thing for any man
though unacquainted with scholars life to conceive. For who can work and
labor that has not food convenient to strengthen his body? who can in his
labor do anything workmanlike and artificially, that wants time, tools and
instruments convenient and fit for the purpose? who can travail a iourny that
has not wherewith to defray his expenses? Besides that, when a man goes about
any thing not with joy and comfort, but with grief and discontent, what he is
like to effect, let all guess that ever have felt any D^squietnes of mind or
anguish of spirit? Ministers also are men and not Angels, flesh and blood and
not spirit, and therefore when they see themselves neglected of those they
labou^ for, left destitute by them for whom they spend and consume themselves,
and for their best and chiefest labors, least and worst rewarded, how can they
have any edge unto their books, or courage to their studies? Or, to speak
nothing of the grief of mind which must needs assault the minister of God in
such a case, is there not just cause to complain, when as a man's means that
way is so slender, that it is hardly sufficient in any measure for very books,
paper, and other study expenses? can a man so live? must he, not then of very
necessity either supply his wants by other means, or if that fail, forsake
his study, give over his book, and convert that which his study does and
would require, to the use of his life? and then if he must study without books
and helps, or preach without study, as many do, that want times and means
convenient; what good is to be expected at his hands, or fruitful speech from
his mouth, no man but may conceive that knows any thing what belongs to a
scholar; or, is not so senseless as to think, That it is no more for a
minister to preach a Sermon, then for himhimselfe to pull open the pulpit
door. The Philistines feared but little of the Hebrews, so long as there was
neither shield nor spear i^ Israel. 1. Sam. 13. 19.
They knew that a multitude unarmed could do no great harm. And I think the
common enemy of our salvation, the devil, and of our religion the Papist,
fears little of such ministers of the Gospel, as are without means to live
by or to study with. Lunae radijs non maturescit Botrus.
They assure themselves such will do no great harm to either of their
kingdoms; seeing certain it is, such for the most part, were as good sit still
as labor: better many times to hold their peace, then to bring into the
pulpit, as often they do and must, such raw and undigested matter: and should
show more discretion by being more silente, then true zeal by uttering, as
busily as any other that is and may be better provided, quicquid in buccam
venerit, what comes first to hand.

And in such cases I do marvel with what conscience men can expect at the
ministers hand, That he should labor and teach them as diligently as others
that feel none of these wants and greeuances, and (as many do) murmur or
complain against the^ as idle, careless, and negligent in their duty and
charge; when they are thus enforced, will they, nil they, to be encombred about
worldie things, and continually distracted from the best. I cannot tell
whereunto better to liken it then to the dealing of the Aegiptians with the
children of Israel (Exodus 5.) when they would not allow them any longer straw
to make brick withal; and yet, they being enforced to seek for stubble and
straw about in the fields, and all the land over where they could get it,
exacted of the^ the whole tale of brick as in former time, when they had straw
allowed the^. So these, they allow not the minister convenient maintenance as
he should, and others have (happily themselves keep it from him): and he is
enforced for want thereof to shift where he can, to put his hand to any labor
and spend his godlen time in worldly employme^ts: and yet, as if he were
provided for to the uttermost, had nothing to do but atte^d his book, nothing
to trouble him, but the care of their soul^s, they require him to preach
usually, and look that he should perform his duty (as they call it) and do
the work of an Evangelist, to the uttermost, as they do or may, that are not
distracted with any such things: But with as good reason truly as if a man
having employed his servant all day long in business abroad, should yet when he
returns all wearied with former labors, at 3. or 4. a clock at afternoon,
require him to perform as good a days work that evening, as he might have
done the whole day: or (to use the very phrase of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 9.)
mousling the Oxes mouth, should enforce him notwithstanding to labor in the
floor, as well, or as much as he whose mouth is not mousled, but may by eating
as he labors, as I^nathan did by licking honey as he pursued the Philistians
(1. Sam. 14.) continue and repair his strength.

But to bring this point to a conclusion. As it is fit that the mister labor,
so it is fit that he have maintenance. Dignus est. n. Operarius mercede sua.
The laborer is worthy of his hire. And as people know it is the ministers duty
to minister spiritual things: So let them know it is their duty to minister
temporal things. And therefore let the one be as ready to employ their goods,
as they would have the other to employ their gifts: that so the man of God,
having his Chamber, his bed, his table, his stool, and his candlestick ready
provided for him and his servant, 2 Reg. 4. 8. and 13.
may be willing to turn into the Shunamits house, and bethink himself what
he may do for her to requi^e her great care for him: Act. 10.
That so Peter with all his company, being entertained of Cornelius with all
kindness and liberality, may be encouraged to tarry with him, and speak unto
him words whereby he and his may be saved: that so the feet of them that bring
glad tidings of good things being precious in ous eyes, Romans 10.
they may show unto us the way of salvation: And Christ being entertained of
the Samaritanes and entreated to tarry among them many more may believe, Ioh. 4.
and be turned to the faith. This out of all question better agrees with the
mind and counsel of God, then the measure that many times is offered to his
ministers. God is not so bad a master, as to look his servants should attend
him without wages; nor so ill an husband, as to have any to labor in his
vineyard, and not yield him his penny. He has otherwise provided for them, if
men by cruelty or craft bereave or defraud them not thereof. Let that be
yielded them, and then if they employ not their function and perform not their
duty with all diligence, let them bear the blame for ever, be censured at
the worst, and condemned, yea and punished as idlers and loyterers do deserve.

4 Fourthly, this so liberal a portion has God allowed to the minister, to
the end he should be as a pattern unto every good work. 1. Tim. 4. 12. so
specially a maintainer of that commendable work whereby Some have received
angels into their houses unawares. Grego* in Pastoral. Egentis mentem doctrinae
Sermo non penetrat, si hunc apud eius animum ma^ns misericord^ae non commendat.
Heb. 13. 1. I mean hospitality which how can he do (as is expressly required
at his hands, 1. Tim. 3. 2) If he have not so liberal and plentiful a
maintenance as may suffice, not only to his own private and domestical
necessaries, but also in some good measure redound and exceed to the supply of
the want of others. Neither do I think but that this was one special cause
that induced the Christian world, in ancient times to allot to the ministry,
not only that which God required, viz his tithes and offerings, but besides
and withal, to the end they might have wherewith to keep house commodiously,
such lands and other emoluments as at this day in many places (God be praised)
it yet enjoys, and in many more we may perceive once it had. And (to speak my
conscience sincerely in this matter) I verily think, that one maine cause, why
God permitted such spoil to be made of Churchlyuings (as at this day we see
there has bin) was, because the Clergy forgetting to what end so ample
maintenance was alloted them, did for the most part, either couetouslie
convert it to the enriching of themselves, their kindred and allies: or
ryotously dissipate it in uncleanness, pride, and other excesses. And I do
fear that some like sins remaining in our Clergy at this day, is no small
cause, why God in his judgment against us, suffers the Church to continue
without restitution, that so they might be pressed with want and need among
themselves, that are careless to ease and succor the wa^ts and distresses of
others.

5 Farther, we may conjecture, that so great a portion God allotted to his
ministers for their maintenance, partly, that so they might have wherewith
likewise to sustain in good sort their family, their wives, children and
others necessarily depending upon them. For it was never the mind of God, That
his priests and ministers should remain (as the papists dream) altogether
unmarried and in single life, as may evidently enough appear by his calling of
Aaron a married man unto the high priesthood: and of the whole Tribe of Leui to
his service in the tabernacle, which without marriage would within one age have
bin extinct: by Christ his chosing such to be his Apostles as were for the most
part married me^: and by S. Paul's description of a Bishop and minister of the
church, 1. Tim. 3. where he makes mention both of his wife and children showing
thereby, that that degree being honorable in all, Heb. 13. 4. was notonly
tolerable (which the papists deny) but also as lawful and commendable in him
as in any other. Now inte^ding they should be married men, as well as any other
profession of people, and forbidding the^ to intermedle in worldly affairs, it
must follow necessarily, that he intended that their wives and families should
be sustained by the same means by which themselves lived, and that the same
should be such and so great as might, if occasion served, suffice thereto. Our
people are sufficiently persuaded (I think) concerning the lawfullnesse of
marriage in ministers, as well as in others: (and of what mind and judgment
for that matter the ancient and best Christians were, the very livings
themselves ancie^tly allotted to the ministers of the Church in every parish,
do evidently argue: whereas if they had bin o^ the Papists mind, some blind
cells, small dormitories and stipendary paies had bin fitter for them.) but
they be not alike persuaded, that it is their duty to give them such
maintenance as may suffice, whether they be married or unmarried. No, they
think they have notably well discharged themselves in this point, if they allow
them such a sparing portion, as will somewhat tollerably keep a single man.
Neither has this error done a little harm in our Church. But I stand upon
it, that God has allowed them, and would that men should allot them such a
sufficient part as may suffice them all their life long, whether they be married
or unmarried. Which of them (not ministers) betakes himself to any course of
life, but looks so to get by it, that he may have wherewith to maintain
himself and a family also? And what reason is it that a minister should not
expect for, and receive the like in his profession? Is it not their Vltimum
Refugium? the place of their rest? and That whereunto when they have once put
their hands, they may not look back? If then it will not yield them such
reasonable contentation and sufficiency to live upon, though they have family
and charge, better disclaimed then accepted, and left in time then repented of
afterward.

6 Neither is it probable, that God had no respect to age, to impotencie, to
sickness, etc. In respect whereof, because they are such as are incident to
men of this calling, as well as of other; no doubt it is, and ever was the
Lords will, that they should be so provided for, that they might have wherewith
to sustain themselves, if any such thing should befall them.

This may sufficiently appear unto us by that leuiticall law, N^m. 4. 47. and
8. 24. whereby he ordained that the Leuits after 50. years should be
discharged of that part of their office which was hard and laborious, and which
they had in the prime and strength of their life sustained; and it should
suffice that they were present at the business, to assist and ouersee the
rest. From which we may gather evidently, that God would, due respect should be
had of men in his ministry, according as either age or other accidents should
require: and not they be cast off, and left penilesse and comfortless when
their labor fails; verifying in them also the old proverb, A young
Seruingman, an old beggar: as if their continual and many labors, and the
spending of their chief strength and best time, deserved no farther
compensation, nor other reward, then for the present, and might not purchase
them any thing for the time to come. To the like purpose may the example of S.
Paul, receiving relief and maintenance from the Philippians long after that
he had preached among them, Phil. 4.
be very well applied: neither did they more, or other then their duty was:
which the Apostle notes, where he says Ye have done well, that ye did
communicate to mine afflictions: nor did he, in receiving it, presume farther
then was fit and lawful he should. For they being still daily bettered and
benefited by his former labors which like good seed continued grouth after
seed time, he might, if necessity so required as then it did, with good reason
and conscience receive some reward and recompense of his labors passed,
Phil^m. v. 13. and 19.
the fruit whereof remained still, and for the which they did owe unto him even
their own selves. If such provision be not had (as in many places it is not)
for our ministers, their case and estate cannot but be miserable. For what
shall they do, if by reason of any impotencie befalling them, they need a
Coadiutour? they need some extraordinary succor? having but as it were from
hand to mouth. What? Shall they longer then they be able personally to
perform their duties, be behoulding to the almes-house? Nature has taught the
Emmet to gather corn in harvest wherewith to supply her want in winter: and
reason and religion both do advise men to provide aforehand. But if they of
al other, which should direct others to follow reason and religion, and be
careful to be helpefull still, but at no time chargeable to others, be held so
short, and fed so sparingly that their very harvest is, but as the gleaning of
grapes after vintage, and their most income, but as the gathering of ears
behind the reapers, what must their Autumn and Winter be, but needy misery,
and what possibility to reserve ought till time of need? A thing abominable no
doubt in the sight of God, who has always showed himself as unwilling to
have any beggar in his ministry, as in Israel.

Thus it may appear, that there be many, and these very great and weighty
causes, why God would his ministers should have a liberal allowance, and
thought it good to assign over to them so great a portion as (in some men's
eyes) the tithes and offerings seem to be. If men will take upon them to be
wiser then God, and think that they can see greater and iuster causes why to
take the same (or some part thereof) from them again, and tie them to a
shorter allowance, the evil be upon their own heads. For mine own part,
considering how prejudicial to the ministry, dangerous to the people,
dishonorable to the Gospel, and repugnant to the mind and purpose of God, the
beggary impouerishing and spoil of the ministry is, I say (concluding this
point with the words of a certain learned and judicious writer of this time)
That, Lower. de pa. Eccl. lib. 1. cap. 25. Vide tot^^.
If a man should even by covenant and Oath bind himself to the Devil, to do
his uttermost in oppugning and wasting the kingdom of Christ, he could not
attempt it any way more directly then this, viz. By driving and bringing the
ministers of the Church to such straights and difficulties, that having not
necessary and convenient maintenance for them and theirs, they must of
necessity either give over the ministry quite, and betake them to some other
trade of life wherein they may be able to live; or else deuoide of all courage
and comfort in their office and ministry, with Sighs and sorrow exercise
their function, by occasion whereof others also might be discouraged from
applying their minds to the study of Divinity, and not be desirous to bu^e
poverty so dear. It was the only plotte and pestilent course that Julian that
Apostata and utter en^my of our faith could devise to root out Christianity
withal. He thought it not best by violence and cruelty, as his predecessors
had done, to oppress and cut off the Christians, Hist. tripart. lib. 6. Cap.
1. and 27.
but taking from the Clergy their preferments priuedleges, stipends and
livings, and exacting of them such stipends as before they were wont to
receive, remoouing also out of their places the chief and best of the
ministers; he resolved, that by such means Christians wanting such as might
rightly teach and instruct them in faith and religion: in time, by degrees, the
religion would of it self decay, and they forget their own profession. And no
doubt this is even a Stratageme of the Devil himself, now he can no longer
averto mart impugn the Gospel, thus by keeping down, disabling and
discouraging the ministers thereof through need and penury effected by
Sacrilege, Simonie, beggarly stipends and other like indirect means, to
hinder the proceeding and prosperity of the Gospel at this day among us. and
fill up the Church with a number nomine, non ^e, ministers learned and able,
rather in name then indeed.

CHAP. VIII.
Contains answers to diverse objections. as, Touching the unworthiness of the
minister. The greatness of the Tenth. The wealth of the minister. Custom.
Personal Tithes. The Statute of Ann. 2. Ed. 6. de Decimis. Why it were to be
wished that for a perpetual composition about personal tithes, the custom of
the City of London, above any other, might the whole land through be put in
practice.

Verse. 7. BE NOT DECEIVED: GOD IS NOT MOCKED.
HItherto have I continued (as thou see beneuolent Reader) the explication of
the former verse, being the first general part of the whole parcel of
scripture which I have taken in hand, wherein has been showed somewhat at
large the hearers duty toward his teacher touching his maintenance. Now in
order follow, as the second general part of the text, the words proposed. In
handling whereof I am to undertake the answering of such, or at least some such
obiectio^s, as are or may be pretended against that I have formerly delivered.
whereunto our Apostle does give me apt occasion in the words that now I am
come unto, which (as I noted at first) are a Comination warning every one to
take heed that in this matter (wherein to be deceived it is very easy, for
that men do not easily believe those things that seem to sound against their
worldly profit) he be not deceived, neither by others, nor by his own vain
pretenses. And why? for God is not mocked. And it sounds as if he should say
thus. I know well enough what shifts and devises, what excuses and pretenses
many do and will make to cloak and excuse withal their ingratitude to God,
and illiberalitie to his ministers, but let men take heed how by frivolous and
vain pretenses, they blind their own and other men's eyes. For God neither
can, nor is, nor willbe mocked. He searches the very hearts and reins and
sees not only what men do and knows to the uttermost their abilities what
they are able and ought to do: but observes likewise with what mind either
willing or unwilling, with what affection either of zeal or contempt to the
Gospel, of love or neglect to the ministers thereof, men do carry themselves in
this case. And therefore let men look to this matter in better sort, and make
more conscience thereof then many do, knowing and considering well, they have
herein to do, not only with men, but also with God himself, who both does
and will, as surely as severely revenge the wrongs and opprobries that are
offered and done unto himself and his servants in this behalf. This is the
some and general sense of the words, the branches whereof are two, an
Admonition, Be not not deceived, and a reason, God is not mocked. of which I
will speak somewhat more, first in general, then in special manner.

1. By this Epiphonema, BE NOT DECEIVED, the Apostle takes away all excuse for
not maintaining the ministers of the word, and shows, that if any excuse be
made, though in the judgment of the world ofttimes it seem just yet before God
it is unjust, and has no place. Many are wot to wind out this way and that.
One prete^ds that he must maintain his family: another denies statly that he
has whereof to give or lay out: some being careless think that others do
give enough, so as they need not to give likewise. I have got nothing this
year says one, and says another, I have lost very much. This man pretends
the hardness of the time, the dearth of vittailes, etc. that man complains of
the many payments and greeuances that daily are imposed, and what not? Some
cry out against the ministers, They be covetous and have never enough. And
there be that say if that which we, of our good wills, give them, wiil not
content the^ they may work and labor for more as we do. Have they not this
and that, etc. And indeed who can reckon up all the idle and vain pretenses
wherewith men do cloak their sin, whereby it comes to pass that oftentimes
the minister is left destiture, and God provoked against the people. But says
our Apostle, Be not deceived, The matter is not so easily and slightly
answered. Every word, that is thus headlongly shot out, is not by and by an
allegation sufficient. These be but vain shifts, and will little prevail at
length. yet who almost has not such in his mouth? and thinks not that he
has said enough, and spoken very much to the purpose when he has made some
such protestation? For, so willing are men to be soothed in this sin and so
apt through their own preiudicate affections to be deceived in this matter,
That the slightest reason, the vainest pretense, and simplest argument that can
be, is unto many good enough, And cause all sufficient to confirm them in
their sparing and illiberall humor: but the strongest reason, the plainest
proofs, the authority of scriptures, the judgment of fathers, decrees of
counsels, determination of Laws, consent and practice of all times, are all
too weak, and without force to draw them forward and induce them to perform
this duty sincerely, and as they ought. And what is this, but wilfully to be
blind? purposely to abide in error? and as it were for the nonce casting a
mist before their own eyes, to suffer themselves to be deceived?

2. The reason. God is not mocked. that is, first it is a matter of greater
moment then you take it. You have herein to do with God as well as with men,
and you cannot wrong the one, but you shall offend the other. Show not your
selves therefore to be as the unrighteous indge in the Gospel, that neither
feared God, nor cared for man. He that accounts it to be nothing to him,
whether the minister be condignly maintained or not, does sink or swim, is
far deceived. Such vain and idle pretenses, such carelessness and denial of
duty is none other then a very mocking of God himself, and a kind of
scorning and derision of his most excellent majesty and glorious name, Which
all the world should fear. Which to be no small sin, the words of the first
Psalm. alone, may sufficiently teach us, where the scornful are placed in the
third, that is, the highest degree of wickedness, whereto well accords a
saying that S. Hierom has as he is cited. Decret. cause. 16. q. 1 wherein
alluding, as it were to the phrase of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 12. declaring the
desperate case of such as be in heresy, he says when a man is grown to that
height of of sin, that he will not contribute and give as he ought, condign
maintenance and intertainement unto them that be Apostolic men, and Preachers
of the Gospel of Christ, he does even (as one that has made himself unworthy
of the Gospel) condemn himself.

Secondly, God is not mocked: that is, he is such a one as cannot thorough
ignorance in himself or shifts in others be deluded: men may be mokt with and
beguiled because they be ignorant, and know not the state of every thing, and
of every person, God not so: men may pretend unto men poverty, losses, charges,
and what not? and so blind the eyes of men at their pleasure: But God is not
mocked. He sees and judges righteously: men may tell the minister that his
due is but this and that; and protest that what they offer, is more then their
ability, then their due, etc. but there is a God which knows who speaks
truly and who not, who dissembleth and who deals uprightly, unto whom, if we
must (as our Savior teaches, Math. ^2) Give an account of every idle word and
vain speech that scapeth our lips, how much more for such words and
protestations whereby any in a matter of such moment, do go about purposely
to delude and deceive the minister of God.

Whereof to advertise people the better to consider what they had to do, it
seems to me, first, that God himself among his own people did expressly
command every man, that as well for payment of their first fruits as also of
their tithes, he should come into the place which God should choose, and there,
before the very altar of God, and in the presence and hearing of the Priest
should protest before the Lord his God, in this sort. And Now lo I have brought
the first fruits of the land which thou O Lord have given me, and I have
brought the hallowed thing out of mine house, and also have given it to the
Leuit, etc. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, nor suffered ought to
perish through uncleanness, nor given ought thereof for the dead: that is, I have
not converted it to any profane and unlawful use, nor kept it back and any way
defrauded the Leuit thereof: but have harkened unto the voice of the Lord my
God. I have done (viz. in this point touching the true paime^t of hallowed
things) after all that thou have commanded me. Look down therefore from
thine holy habitation, even from heaven, and bless thy people. etc. as you may
read more at large in the place it self, Deuteronomy. 26. A solemn kind of
protestation little less in effect then an oath, whereby the party did testify
his uprightness in that behalf, or otherwise made himself culpable of
notorious abuse of the sacred name of God, which he had called to witness.
Secondly, that the church of God of old did ordain and accustom, that people,
for payment of their offerings, their personal (or privy) tithes, and other
like, should come into the Church, and there rekon with the minister, there
tender and pay him his right, and there offer up into his hands as unto God
himself, that which is holy to the Lord, and separated for Gods part; which
might be no small mot^ue to a reverent and religious care in this behalf, if
people would consider, that the minister is there in Gods steed, and receives
what is appointed in the honor and name of God: that they themselves do stand
there as it were in the very eye and special presence of God who is the
searcher of the very heart and reins: and That therefore it behoues them to
deal uprightly and sincerely, to speak truly and unfeignedly, as they that
do know and remember, that they have then and there to do not with man only,
but with God likewise, and therefore do abhor, yea and tremble to utter an
untruth, and speak a lie, for saving a little of their worldly goods.

3 And therefore, in such cases, let men take heed, For, God is not mocked: as
he cannot (thorough ignorance) be deluded, so he will not be mocked with: men
may be mocked with, because they be not able many times, to right themselves,
and revenge or redress such wrongs as are offered and done to them, and
therefore must with Patience perforce put them up: but with God it is not so.
Heb. 10. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, for
our God is a consuming fire. Heb. 12. he being a judge most just and upright,
both can and will revenge himself of all such, as by their mockeries and
shiftings do abuse and wrong him and his servants. For

First in regard of his ministers he has told us, He that despises you
despises me: as on the other side. He that receives you, receives me. And we
are not ignorant what God said once to Samuel, 1. Sam. 8. 7. They have not cast
thee away, but me have they cast away: nor of the sentence of Moses to his
people, Exodus 16. your murmurings are not against us (Aaron and my self, Gods
ministers and servants) but against the Lord. And we may be assured, seeing that
Christ does account whatsoever is done or given to the poor and needy, his
little ones, to be done unto himself, Math. 25. 40, 45. much more does he, and
will he so reckon of that which is done to those that are nearer unto him by
their office, and do as it were represent his own person, his messengers and
special servants. We read of David, 2^ Sam. 10. 4. when his messengers that he
had sent in kindness unto* Hanun King of the children of Ammon were unkindly
handled and sent back with shame and discredit, their beards clipped, and their
coats cut off at the wast, etc. how grievously and offensiuely he took it;
and how wrathfully and extremely he did revenge it. Let us not think but that
God does tender as much as ever David did, the cause of his servants: and if
their beards be clipped, and their coat^s cut short, I mean, their livings
gelded, and their mainteiance taken from them: if they be made to eat the
she^^s and take the straw, when other have the kernells and the corn: he both
can and will in due time revenge it. He has testified, that it shall be easier
at the day of judgment for them of Sodom and Gomorha then for such as will
not receive his messengers, whom he has commanded, departing to shake off
against such the very dust of the^r fecte for a testimony. Wherof^ of their
extreme ingratitude and contempt of God and his word, and of Gods wrath and
indignation against such contemners.

Secondly concerning himself, fearful and notable even to this purpose is
the example of Ananias and Sapphira his wife, Act. 5. who making a show to lay
down at the Apostles feet the full price of their land, when indeed they kept
back a great part thereof, are by Saint Peter reproved in this sort. Why has
Satan filled thine heart, that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? and
Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. and again, verse 9. Why have ye
agreed together to tempt the spirit of the Lord? and thereupon by and by for a
perpetual monument of his indignation against such sins are smitten
(horresco referens, I even tremble to tell it) both of them, with sudden and
terrible death: with whom, in sin how nearly do they concur that keep
away that, which for many ages past, is consecrated to God and his Church, by
the laws of equity, of God, of the Church, and of our land: and therefore is
not now in their own power, and cannot without great and apparent sin be now
converted, or rather perverted to any profane and common use, and to cover
their shame and sin withal, come into the Church, and presence of the
eternal God, and there protest to their minister, that they have nothing to
pay: that they owe him of right but this and that: that they do not, nor will
not deceive him of a penny, etc. but God is not mocked.

Hitherto of these words in general terms, which being briesly thus run
over, I will now more largely touch also certain special objections
particularly. Them for orders sake (being many) I will sort into 4. ranks, as
unto certain heads, whereunto all such may be referred; and they are these,
Personal, General, Local and Special.

Personal I term such objections as may be pretended against the persons
themselves that should receive such maintain^nce. Against whom their
unworthiness sometimes is objected. And that is twofolde, either in life, if
they be such as be not of Good conversation, but given to some or other
notorious vices: or for learning, if they be such as can not preach at all, or
not so learnedly and excellently as some others do.

To which one a^nswere may serve, viz, That notwithstanding any such defects,
yet the maintenance, the ordinary maintenance of the minister (for of that do I
speak altogether) ought to be in such sort settled unto him, that it may not be
lawful, not easily possible for any private persons personal unworthiness to
withdraw it, or any part thereof. People must know, it is not lawful to
requite one wrong with another: not fit that they be at liberty to withdraw
their pay from any upon supposed unworthiness, least they take liberty to
pretend unworthiness where there is none, and under color of fault in some,
offer injury to all, and abuse upon light occasions even the best. They must
yield the minister his due howesoeuer. If he be such a one as deserves it
not, the fault being not theirs, but his; he must answer for his faults
other wa^es. No reason every man be his own judge in his own cause, least
malice or avarice become parties. What is punishable or reformeable, must be
referred to superiors on earth, or to God in heaven.

God never permitted any such liberty to his own people. Whatsoever the
Priests or Levites were in their desert, yet the people without any exception
are commanded to bring in their tithes and oblations. The Priests are reproved
by the Prophets, and termed Dumb dogs, Deceivers, Sleepie watchmen, etc. but
the people are not advised and taught by the prophets, therefore to withholde
from them their appointed and legal maintenance, never was there greater
corruption among them, never more wickedness and all kind of unworthiness then
in our Saviors time: yet he sends the leper cleansed to the priest, and bids
him offer as was appointed. And sitting over the treasury, and there beholding
how men cast in their gifts, commends the poor widow for her rich mite,
and approoueth the fact of all, calling it the Offerings, not of the Priests,
but of God, Luke 21. 4. It is also forefended by ancient laws and ordinances
of our Church and land. Among which one is notable, made in the time of King
Hen. the 8. An. Dom. 1538. the words whereof are these. Foras-much as by laws
established, every man is bound to pay his tithes, No man shall by color of
duty omitted by their ministers, deteine his tithes, or be his own Judge, but
shall truly pay the same as has been accustomed without any restrainte or
Diminution: and such lack or defalt as they find in their Pastouts and Curates,
to call for reformation thereof at the Ordinaries or other superiors hands. To
this effect we read also in the Decrees, lib. 3. cap. 20. De dec. Tua nobis.
Nonnulli vitam clericoru^ tanquam abhominabil^m detestontes, Decimas ijs ob hoc
subtrahere non verentur. Verum si. etc. that is, many detesting the life of
Clergy men as abominable, fear not for that cause to withdraw from them
their Tithes; But if such parties had due respect unto God, from whom all
their goods do come, they would not offer to diminish the right of the Church,
nor presume to de^eine their Tithes. And a little after, Seeing that God (whose
is the earth and the plenty thereof, the whole world and all that dwell
therein,) ought not to be of worse condition then a temporal Lord, that lets
out his land to others; It seems truly too unequal, if Tithes which God in
token of his universal Sovereignty has commanded to be paid unto
himself, affirming Tithes to be his, upon occasion premised: or rather by
purposed fraud should be diminished. And again; Whereas no man may give away
that which is another, without the good will and consent of the owne^^ Because
therefore we will not suffer that the right of Churches and churchmen upon any
presumption be diminished, we command you, That you do compel all such as
either in respect of their persons or of their possessions ought to pay tithes
(personal or prediall) to the Churches and cleargie-men of your Diocese, to
pay them to the uttermost. I will add to these a notable saying of a later
writer, that is, of R. Gualter Tig. in his Homilies upon S. Matthew. Homil. 269.
They object (says he) that many do filthily abuse Tithes, and therefore
they are unworthy to have them. But this is a bald excuse, For of such
abuses, they shall yield an account to God, which do commit such things, not
who pay the Tithes. And what reason will excuse him that with-holdes from the
needy his necessary Living, least happily he abuse it to surfeiting and
drunkenn^s? It is the part of every Christian man to pay to every man that
which is his due, and not to go about to excuse his own iniquity by another
fault: hitherto he. Thus it appears, neither the law of God, nor of the
Church, nor yet any equity, do permit any upon a conceit of the ministers
unworthiness any way to with-holde from him his due: but that they are bound to
pay it to him, as he is their minister, and not-as he is so or so worthy a
minister. The principal reason why, expressed also in some of the former
allegations is worthy to be noted, and that is Because the ministers
maintenance is not properly his, but Gods part.

The Tithes are Gods, as has been before showed. If he therefore be not worthy
of them, yet God to whom they are principally due, is not unworthy. And
therefore as it cannot be but a great fault to withholde rent from a Landlord,
or deny tribute to a Prince, for the persons sake that is his receiver: so it
cannot but be an open sin to deny to God his right, for his sake into whose
hand it is to be paid.

I have insisted upon this point a little the more, because howsoever it be a
thing unlawful, yet it is too usual with us, in case of personal tithes.

There are not a few which abusing the weakness of the Statute that should
restrain them, do take what liberty they lust upon any occasion to wrong the
minister. Which being a practice so apparently contrary, not only to reason
and equity, but also to the word of God and all good practice, I trust, as a
thing not tolerable in a Christian commonwealth, (among them that carry any
zeal to the Gospel, or love to them that bring the glad tidings thereof,)
shall not long continue (being so apparently discovered) without due
reformation.

2, General Objections I term such as may be made against tithes in
general, or against the whole maintenance of the minister, as this. The Tenth
is a portion too great for the minister, and a burden too grievous for the
people. Less a great deal, as a 20. or 40. or but an hundredth part, seems
to many might be enough, if not too-much.

But who shallbee judge in such a case, what is too-much, or or what but
enough? what every private person? or only this present age? Then indeed Vae
vobis, woe to you ministers, Your stay is bad already, and daily worse and
worse it wilbee. There will be then no end of oppression and cruelty, of
fraud and deceit, of Symonie and Sacrilege. And why? but because all you have
is thought now a days of many to be too-much: And that though there be, in
places too many, but little left, yet less were enough, But if God, if our
forefathers, if all Antiquity may give Judgment and obtain Audience,
sentence is already long ago past on your side, viz. That the Tenth is but a
competent portion, and not too much. For

1. First, God assigned not it only, to his Levites and Priests, but together
with it, well near as much more in other things. For as appears in the
books of Moses. Besides the Tithes of all things, The Levites lot.
They had first, 8. Cities with their Subburbs of a mile circuit at least, for
their habitation. Number. 35. losh. 21. Secondly, theirs were the first fruits of
all things both annual and natural: Leuit. 23. 10. and 19. 24 Thirdly, of
diverse sorts of sacrifices and offerings, either the whole, or a great, and
ever a certain part was theirs, as Exodus, 29. 32. Leuit. 7. 31. and 8. 31 and
10. 14. and 24. 8, 9. and Number. 18. does appear. Fourthly, of all consecrated
things, whether it were man or beast, house, or ground, either the thing it
self without redemption, or the redemption thereof, at a full and certain
value was the priests. Leuit. 27. Fifthly, in cases of restitution, if neither
he to whom the goods belonged, nor any of his kindred could be found, the goods
to be restored, was the Lords, and the priests had it. Number. 5. 8. 6. And
lastly, Their inheritance could never be diminished, but (notwithstanding any
sale) returned still in this Iubile, increased it might be by Dedication. etc.
Leuit. 25. 30.

2. As for the Church of Christ; it has been generally so far from
accou^ting the Tenth too much for the ministers of the gospel, That Suasponte
of her own voluntary and free heart, it has added thereunto (to the end they
might honorably and condignely be maintained) no small nor few augmentations.
Of Constantine the great that worthy Emperor, it is recorded, That over and
besides Tithes of all things, which he first of all, by laws Imperial
confirmed to the Church, Eu^eb. de vit. Co^stan. lib. 2. ^^p. 36. and 39.
to enriche it withal. First; all such lands, livings, houses, and fields,
etc. as in former times had been given to the Church, and in times of
persecution taken away again, he restored. 2. Of the heathen images which were
of purer metal, he made much money, S^zomen. H^^t. eccles. lib. 2. c 4.
and gave that money unto the Church treasuries. 3. Out of the public tributes
throughout every city, he deducted a certain portion, and assigned the same
to the Churches and Clergy of every place. 4. If any had dyed in martyrdom
without heirs, or others of their blood, and left any goods behind them, he
decreed, the same being enquired out, should be brought into the treasury of
the Church, etc. 5. Whose munificence other Emperors, Kings, Queens, Princes,
and sundry other rich, but devout Christians, following; by sundry means, The
goods and treasures of the Church (says one,) were wonderfully augmented.

3. If we come near home, (and by that which remains, and the ruins of the
rest, judge of the whole, who so will but cast his eye upon that uniform,
general, goodly, and godly course, which once our land-ouer was thoroughly
planted, for the maintenance of our ministry here in England, shall be not
see, That our ancient predecessors did account the tithes alone, to be even
with the least? And therefore beside the tithes, To the end the ministers of
God, the Levites of the Gospel, might have whereon to live, as becomes the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, they did (as it were imitating the best, God I mean in
his law, for the Levites lot) endow every several Church with some reasonable
portion of land, called The Gleebe: and 2. ordained likewise, that every
Christian (of years) both man and woman, should of his free accord at certain
times in the year, offer unto God something, more or less, according as
either God had blessed him, or his devout heart moved him: 3. unto which, if we
add the worthy, and those not a few dignities and preferme^ts without cure
of sundry name and title, a great part whereof (God be praised) remains unto
this day, what was there more to be desired, whereby they might testify their
zeal to religion, love to learning, regard to the ministry, and (the scope
we aim at) That they, in the abundance of their loves unto their teachers,
thought not the Tithas alone to be a reward or maintenance sufficient, much
less too much for them? How therefore, comes it to pass, that degenerating
from the steps of our own ancestors, from the example of the primitive
Christians, yea, and from the pattern of all perfection, God himself, any
should account the tenth, nay the tenth alone, to be too much either for the
minister, (or rather God) at their hands to receive, or the people to pay? As
S. Paul said once, speaking of God, 1, Cor. 10. 22. What? are we stronger then
he? so may I say, What? are we wiser then he? and then all they which for so
many ages past, (as it were) vno ore and animo, with one mind and one mouth
agreed, The Tenth to be but enough? Does knowledge and understanding dwell
only with us? And has our age alone the luck, to espy Nodum in Scirpo, an
oversight that had escaped the eyes of God and men before?

4 Last of all, practice and experience does show, that the tithes even with
other emolume^ts besides, are many times not enough. For so it often falls
out, That either by the smalnes of the place, or greatness of desert in the
person, the ordinary maintenance, though yielded in the best and largest
manner, is found many times to be far too little, and needs supply by
other places and means. And therefore that is a frivolous objection, That the
Tenth is too much, which God himself, the Church of Christ generally, the
Church of England particularly, and our daily experience affirm to be with
the least. It is too much in their eye only, that sincerely love not the
Church, nor the Gospel: that delight to see the ministers thereof (to the end
they might be contemned) in Contempt rather then in honor, in shame then in
credit: and desire to make a prey of that which is Gods and his Churches, and
to be enriched with that which is not their own.

2. Of the same nature I take their Objection to be, that pretend the estate of
the minister. He has no need of these or those profits; say some. For, he
has enough besides: his living without these is sufficient. A speech both
wicked and absurd. Who has made them judges above others what is a sufficient
living for the minister? or given them power to pare off the superfluity
thereof? All men will acknowledge I think, that it were an open wrong, and
manifest sin, to refuse to pay a rent or other debt to a rich man, because
he is otherwise (in his conceit) rich enough, and able to spare it. And I see
not, but the case is all one, if upon like pretense a man deteine ought from
the minister. Again, what is this but to envy at another man's prosperity? why
should any grudge the minister his living for the greatness, more then he
does the greatness of his own charge in general, or the wealth of any of them
of his charge in particular? It is not in their power to disburden him of his
charge any way: and why then should they presume or attempt to abridge him of
his due any way? If the place be so spacious and populous, that it may arise
yearly to any round Sum, what is that, to any particular persons, who are
no less bound to pay their due to the uttermost, then if it were 5. times
less? For the question is not, what may (in men's sparing conceits) suffice
such or such a man? but, what in duty and conscience every man, or any man
ought to pay? in which respect the payment of one thing and not of another: of
one person and not of anoaher; of one part of a parish, and not of another,
stands not with equity. If one part of a parish contribute toward the
maintenance of the minister well, and as is fit, and another little or nothing:
if one body pay his whole duty, another deteines the whole, God is
dishonored, the minister defrauded, the Church wronged.

That which one pays, is no discharge for another, but for himself. And as he
that pays does but his duty: so he that pays not, does not his duty;
Neither is he freed by that which another does for himself, but condemned,
the one having indeed no more liberty then the other. Parishes were sorted
with inequality at first, not for easing of some, more then others, in
maintenance of their minister, but that by such inequality of divisions, there
might be such inequality of maintenance as might be fitting to the inequality
of the ministers desert or charge.

Which godly and necessary purpose they do directly cross, who upon their
own private conceit of a sufficiency of Lining without their pay, do
attempt to enforce upon the ministers a kind of equality in maintenance with
others, twixt whom there is no paritie of desert or charge.

Neither do I see, the state of our ministry for maintenance standing as now a
days it does, how the minister himself can be excused from blame and sin,
Zanc^. de Red. lib. 1. cap. 19. in 4. precept.
if he upon any occasion or means, having otherwise sufficiently to live
upon, do refuse or neglect to receive of any, or of all, that which is his
due, or any part thereof. For by such means he shall cause those of other
places to be enuyed and evil spoken of, that do receive or demand the like:
and so hinder the course of the Gospel among them.

2. He shall maintain Avarice if not Sacrilege in his own people. And 3.
which is not lightly to be regarded, he shall by such means (as manifold
experience does testify,) Lindewood. Prou. ec^l.
prejudice for the time to come, both himself and his successors, or at least
sow the seeds of dissension, Angl. lib, 3. Tit. de Dec. and Oblat.
which will break out whenever any such omitted or neglected duties shall be
required.

To which purpose, I do remember that I have read a certain ancient
Constitution Ecclesiastical of this our Church of England, wherein after due
Censure pronounced against all such as shall upon any color detain the
Tithes and other maintenance of the minister, the ministers likewise are
censured^, that shall, (the fear of God set aside) for fear or favor of men,
^mit effectually to demand and seek to obtain those rights, which unto
themselves, and their churches of right do appertain.

3. From these let us come to some other objections, as to such as be local,
that is, such as concern some special places more then other. Of this kind,
Custom is not the least, nor least usual.

Neither do I deny but that it is a thing that ought much to be respected,
and do willingly acknowledge concerning the very point in question, viz. the
ministers maintenance, that in our land and Church of England, it is one
principal cause of much good and quietness betwixt pastor and people, while
both, ruled by custom, do rest satisfied with that, which it, by course of
time has made a law. And so long and so far as any custom is good and
reasonable, accords with truth and equity, do say of it, with Saint Aug.
Cum consuetudini verit as suffragatur, nihil oportet firmius retineri, Aug.
cont, Donat. lib. 4. Cap. 7.
when truth it self (and reason) approoueth a custom, nothing ought more
firmly to be retained. Non. n. (as says Tertullian,) possumus respuere
consuetudinem, quam damnare non possumus) For we ought not, Tertul. de virg.
vel page 491.
nor cannot refuse that custom which we cannor condemn.

Where Custom is not such, but is appara^tly evil and wicked, being repugnant
either to reason, or nature, or the word of God: etc. for so much as by the
very laws of men, Decret. lib. 1. Tit. 4.
a Custom to the end it may have the force of a law, ought to be both
agreeable unto reason, and lawfully prescribed: De Consu. cap. vlt.
we may justly allege against it that saying of our Savior to the pharisees,
Math. 15. 3. Why do you transgress the Commandment of God by your tradition,
or Custom? and the law of God to his people, Leuit. 18. 30. Keep ye mine
Ordinances (says God) and do not any of those abominable customs which
have been before you. Ciprian. Epist. lib. 2, ep. 3. ad. Caecili.
And say with Cyprian, we ought not to attend what any before us has thought
fit to be done, but what first of all Christ who is before all, did first
do: neither must we follow the Custom of man, but the truth of God. For
(as the same Father says otherwhere) Custom without verity, is but the
Antiquity of error.

These things premised, Be it now, that there is any where such a Custom (as
they will call it) risen and used, that people shall not maintain their
Minister, not give of their goods to him that teaches them: seeing this is a
custom wicked and unreasonable, as which is directly 1. against reason, which
says, that The labourer is worthy of his hire. 2. against nature, which
forbids to mous^e the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. 3.
against the word of God, which commands him that is taught to make his
teacher partaker with him of all his goods: and bids every man so to honor
the Lord with his substance: Therefore it ought to be broken, and not suffered
among men. For as it is no good argument to say, it has not been our custom
to serve and worship God, to honor Christ, to have divine service, to have
any Church, to receive the Sacraments, to have any preaching, to have other
then a Sermon once in a month, or in a quarter, with other like; and therefore
we will not now begin to do it, or to have any such thing: so it is neither
good argument, nor agreeable to good reason to say, it has not been our
custom, to maintain our minister, to pay any tithes: to give him any thing
but what we lust: to be at any certainty, and therefore we will not now
begin any such matter. For reason and truth (as well said S. Augustine) must
be preferred before custom. And the Truth being manifested, custom must not
be followed, because the Lord said not, I am the custom, but I am the truth.

Yet sometimes custom is falsely prepentended. People count that to be a
custom, which is none. For in these cases properly to speak; Custom is an
ancient and long continued manner of payment of any kind of tithe in this or
that sort, in this or that quantity. And therefore holds only de tanto, as
I may say, not de toto. It preuailes I mean, and is justly pretended, when
question is about the manner how a thing should be paid, but not for the thing
it self. For it is a ruled case, or Maxim in the law, that Non est mos de
non decimando. There is no custom for paying no tithes at all, or no tithe of
any one thing. But where any thing has been paid for the tithe of such or
such a thing, though it be but two pence for that which is worth two shillings,
or but twelve pence, where in very deed ten shillings were with the least,
or but the twelfe or fifteenth, or but the thirtieth or fortieth part of the
thing it self, custom carries it, be it reasonable or not, that it shall
still be paid in no other sort. Otherwise the denial, or non-payement of any
kind of tithes, is nothing else but a flat denial, debarring and withholding
of a manifest right, and no more makes a custom (how long soever it has been
left unpaid) then does a a tenants denial^, or detayning of his rent from his
landlord, prove and cause it to be irrecouerable, and not due, whenever he
list to claim or sue for it, as a thing whereof the less is already paid, the
more is behind and to come. In a word, Then properly may it be called a
custom, when some certainty is known, that the Incumbent may be able to
understand, what is his due, what his predecessors have, and himself ought
to receive, and the parishioners what they are to pay.

Here it were not in vain to recite some of those many hard customs and
unreasonable compositions wherewith at this day our ministry is oppressed,
that being laid open to the clear view of all men, they might the easier be
discerned, and the sooner (If the case be not desperate) mollified. But as well
for avoiding tediousness as for other causes, I leave them to the
consideration of the godly and conscionable reader, who being any thing
acquainted with the state of our ministry, may of himself observe diverse
such; and do only wish that such due regard might be had thereto, that
hereafter neither any man may have cause by writing, nor any minister by
grieuance to complain thereof: which might easily be effected (if my
conjecture fail me not) if one thing alone, not foreseen at the first, were
rightly looked unto now. I mean the mutabilitie an^ alteration of times.

For likely it is, that whereas for diverse things, by custom or composition,
only thus much is now paid for the tithe thereof both in town and country,
which proves now to be far too little. and the Church and ministry to be
thereby greatly hindered, the reason why so small a pay (according to our times)
was heretofore either imposed or agreed upon, (for I think that they were
settled at first with consent and liking of both sides) was because in those
times it had proved, and was one year with another, reasonable, and such as
was indifferent as well for the one as the other: and the cause why they are
found to be so far from indifferency, and so unreasonable for the one side
alone, in these days, is only or chiefly the alteration of the times, by
which, ground, fruits of the earth, cattle, houses, and all other things
titheable, are grown to such a high rate and extreme worth, as in those days
was not imagined they could possibly have risen unto with continuance. The
special reason that mooues me to conjecture this to be the cause is, for that
I know that in those times, when such customs and compositions took their
beginnings (for most of them seem to be somewhat ancient) not the laytie but
the Clergy, the Churchmen, were the stronger side, and therefore
(questionless) would never yield but to such composition or Custom, as in
their judgment and knowledge, or conceit (then) should not be prejudicial to
their Churches. Wherefore if this error of the times alone were amended,
probable it is, that diverse customs and compositions, which now ministers (not
without cause) complain of and grudge at, might stand without dislike on
either part. The readiest way to amend it, were to make such rates and payments
somewhat alterable* that so as prices of things do rise or fall to any notable
difference, the rates and payments themselves might from time to time, as upon
every vacation of the benefice, or altenation of the possessour, or other like
opportunity, vary and alter: and not the minister enforced to look, with his
continual hindrance, when things will come (which happily and very likely
will never be) to those old rates and valewes again: and be feign to live the
mean while, not as his parishioners, according to the present times; but as no
body else does, according to the former: as if it were possible for the
minister alone, and above any others, now a days to live well enough, by that
which was thought and found, when means to live by, were more then ^ower times
cheaper then now they are, to be but sufficient for him, and even with the
least: or reason that any howsoever unreasonable and preposterous composition
should bind as well the succeeding as the present Incumbent: and men have power
to prejudice not only themselves, because me^ may do with their own as they
lust, but also all that ^ome after them, even in things that are not their
own, farther then for the use, and present time.

I come now to the fourth and last sort of objections, viz. those which are
more special then any of the former, that is such as concern Personal tithes.
Touching which very much is to be spoken and answered, as which of all other
are most in question.

It seems unto many, a thing most unreasonable and hard, that personal tithes
(such I mean as of Artificers, Tradesmen, Merchants, etc. are to be paid)
should be demanded. And therefore as if the Statutes and laws to that purpose
made, and yet in force, were a thing against all reason and conscience, they
will not abide to hear thereof. What? men to pay tithes of their labor, and
of their private gains? Tradesmen and artificers to be accountable for tithes?

But for answer. 1. That such kind of persons ought to contribute toward the
maintenance of the minister as well as others, is already so plainly and
firmly proved, that any man, not void of sense and reason, cannot but be
satisfied with it.

2 This kind of contribution, whether any lust to call it a Tithe, or a
tribute, or a rate, or a pay, or what else any will, it is not much material;
it is the thing it self, and not the name that is in question. If the name
seem odious unto any, let it be changed if it may. Though I think there be
more reason to retain also the name, as all our predecessors and laws have
done, then to alter it.

3 Concerning the quantity, how much they should pay, this is granted that
such persons are not required to pay as the husband man does, an entire tenth,
but a tenth of their clear gains, their expenses and charges being thence
deducted.

4 If the quantity determined do seem also (as to many it does) over great,
what might be little enough, I cannot easily guess. And I suppose our
predecessors, and the wisest and most learned of all Christendom, which did
determine it, saw more cause (and I doubt not but they saw in this matter as
much as was to be seen) why so to determine, then any now can show for the
contrary.

Their common allegations are as follows.

1 They of whom such personal tithes are demanded, are poor tradesmen,
artificers, etc. which having no lands, no cattle, etc. as has the husbandman,
are not able to pay.

Answer. 1. Where poverty is truly pretended, their case I grant is to be
pitied not burdened. Neither is it intended that ought should be paid, but
where it is due. But he is very poor that has nothing at all to pay. If their
gain and income be but small, yet according to that it is, as they have
received, so ought they to return again to God. It is not fit, nor it is not
lawful, because they have not as much as they desire, therefore they should
spend Gods part and their own too, and eat up that, by which the minister
should live, as well as that which pertains to themselves.

2. But whether poverty be always justly pretented (as if none were to be
accounted rich, but such as have lands and cattle) may very justly be made a
question. For if, as a tree is known by his fruits, so poverty or riches may
by the effects: then out of all question, if we compare the husbandman and
tradesman, the townesman and contryman together in other outward things, as in
diet, apparel, house, household furniture, building, expenses, etc. it will
easily and quickly appear, who is the poorer. And now, is it not strange, that
whereas in all other things in worldly matters, the tradesman, etc. oftentimes
exceeds the countryman very much, and will be taken for the richer, and more
able person, only in honoring God with his substance; in upholding religion
with his riches, in maintaining the ministry of the Church with his wealth,
he will not come near him by many degrees: but though he delights to have the
fairest house, the best apparel, the furest armor, goodliest furniture,
richest table, etc. Whatsoever it costeth him: yet is, contented (rather then
he will be at any charge) to have the worst teacher, the abiectest minister. And
is poverty the true cause of this? is need always justly pretended? Is that I
say, ever the right cause, why now a days among such vix inuenias locupletem,
locupletem dico (they be S. August. words, not mine) non tam facultatibus sed
op^rib. a man can scant find a rich man, a man I mean that is rich, not so
much in worldly goods, as in good works, in ability as in deeds? Why, that
many etsi in dom^b. aeuro^unt diuites, tamen in Ecclesia sunt mendici, Though
at home in their houses they want neither silver nor gold, that appear very
rich, yet at Church, in the house of God, they seem to be very poor: though
for their own private and worldly respects, they have and will find plenty,
yet for the service of God, and good of their own souls, they have little to
spare? I will not say as S. August. does, we all worship one Christ, and
profess all one religion, but not all with one mind: yet some cause there is,
but it is not poverty, what ever it be.

It was not thus in former days, in time of Popery, and among our own
forefathers. There be some yet living that can partly remember, and more that
have heard their fathers tell, That the ministers of the Church lived then no
where more richly and well maintained then in towns and Cities: That diverse
small towns did maintain 4. or 5. Popish priests in better sort, then now a
days one minister of the Gospel can be maintained. Yea, as some worthy
credit do write, some Cities, and those not very great, did in those times
maintain 30. or 40. Mass priests, better then now they do 3. or 4. preachers
of the Gospel. By what means they did this, though it be not much to the
matter in question, for all was of their liberality and readiness of heart
toward religion, yet they having as small lands as many have now, and living by
their trades and sciences as such do now, it must needs be that they made
that care and conscience of their offerings and personal tithes, which does
not appear now.

Therefore as the Apostle said once to his Corinthians in another matter, so
may I in this. I speak it to our shame; Ours, that do profess the Gospel,
that glory of knowledge, and presume of our zeal unto the Truth, and special
love unto the Gospel: ours that condemn ignorance and detest Popery: that the
children of darkness should be wiser them the children of light: That they which
rightly knew not God, but lived in Idolatry and all kind of superstition
should be found more righteous in this so material a point of religion then
we: and be justified by our selves (their adversaries for the Gospells sake)
that they did (as indeed they did and do) better honor and maintain their
vain teachers, blind guides and false Prophets, the^ we our sincere
Pastors, faithful leaders and true teachers. Indeed it is no new thing, and
therefore the less wonder. The Egyptian priests had better provision made for
them in a time of penury and famine, then our Evangelical ministers in the
Halcyon days of all abundance, Genes. 47.
peace, and plenty. The Prophets of Baal 450. and of the Groves 400. are fed
at I^zabels table with the best, when as Elias is glad to eat with the Ravens
by the river Cherith, and other the Prophets of the Lord are sustained in a
cave by Obadiah with thin fare (God knows) bread and Water. 1. Reg. 18.
But what may we think of it? may we not therefore justly fear, That as our
Savior protested against his own nation, that the men of Niniuch, and the
Queen of the South should arise against them in the day of judgment, and
condemn them, because they repented at the preaching of Jonas, Math. 12.
and she come from far to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but they would not
repent at his preaching that was greater then Jonas, nor hear his doctrine
that was wiser then Solomon: so our Popish forefathers and other blind
Idolaters shall arise in the day of Judgment and condemn many of us, because
they had that due and good respect to their priests such as they were, which
we have not to ours, such as they are. They were content many times to
empouerish themselves to maintain the Church and enrich the ministers thereof,
whereas we care little how to empouerish the one and spoil the other, so we
may enrich our selves. And if this way they any thing offended, it was in this,
That they made their priests being but bad, to be worse with ouerfeeding,
and pampering them too much; we run quite into the other exreame and (that
which is of the two, the worse) do make them that be good men, and would be
good ministers, many times to be bad, unprofitable and contemptible, by
pinching them, and keeping from them that which they should live by: and to the
no little detriment of learning, and ruin of religion, turn to our profane
uses, and reserve to our private estates, that which in equity and right, by
the Law of God and his Church, should be employed to a more common good. But
take we heed, God is not mocked. A masked pretense of poverty will one day
be a seely shield, and little help when God shall bring every work into
judgment, and disclose the things that now lie in darkness.

2. Secondly, it is objected, That those of whom such kind of tithes are
demanded, do commonly adventure much, and so be subject to many losses, etc.
more then the husbandman is: and therefore no reason that they should pay any
such tithes.

Answ. 1. That their estates are more casual is not denied. And in
consideration thereof, partly it is (I think) that by the consent of all, an
entire tenth is not required of them, but (as I have formerly noted) a tenth of
their clear Gains, diductis Expensis But because it is no reason that they
pay so much as the husbandman does, is it reason they pay nothing at all? I
will not here actum agere, Let the Reader think of it as God shall move him:
Enough is already said touching that point.

2. As for the adventures and hazards, the great perils and many dangers,
which they do pass and endure, I for my part am so far from thinking it
reason, that in regard thereof they should befreed from yielding to God or his
minister any part of their goods, that thereby I hold them rather, to be the
more bound (being delivered out of such perils, and having obtained good
success) to show themselves therefore the more thankful to God, as unto whose
only great favor, singular providence, and special mercy, they do (as they
ought) impute their safety and good event. And of my mind it seems were
those godly and truly religious Captains of Israel in Moses time, who having
been at war, and their whole army being but 12000, had fought and vanquished
5. Kings of Midiam, and all their people, and yet found upon reuiew of their
companies, that they had not lost a man, Numb. 31.
though they had already by the Lords appointment, parted with one half of the
booty, unto the rest of the people that went not into the field, and of the
other half had given as a tribute to the Lord, of every 500. one, did father
voluntarily over and above all this, in token of their special thankfulness for
Gods so great and unexpected deliurance, offered unto the Lord another rich
offering of their Jewels and ornaments which they had pillaged, to the value of
16750. sekels of gold, a memorable testimony of their grateful minds. They
thought it not enough to give to God as others did, and as was ordinarily
required, but because they had tasted of Gods mercy above others, they account
it their duty (as every godly man should) to give to God more then others.
For, nature, much more religion teaches, all, that The more a man receives,
the more he is bounden. The greater benefits, the greater thankfulness is
required at his hands.

True. But cannot we be thankful to God, Objection.
though we offer unto him none of our goods? we can praise him with our hearts,
and with our tongues declare the wonders that he had done, we can exalt his
name in the congregation of the people, and tell out his works with gladness.

Or, Answer.
To be plain, we can be content to offer unto him the oblations of our hearts
and our lips, but not of our hands. We can be content, S. Bernard.
as S. Bernard very aptly, to this purpose speaks) to go with the wise men
to seek Christ, yea, we will with them fall down and worship him too, but we
be grown too wise with the^ to open to him our treasures; That is, the very
renting of our hearts, we cannot endure to be tied unto it. If Paul will make
Agrippa a Christian, he must except these bands too. But be not we deceived,
God is not mocked. He requires that we honor him with our goods, as well as
with our bodies and our spirits, for both those and these are his. Which the
man after Gods own heart David, well considered, when (as we read Psalm. 116.)
hauuing bin in such distresses and troubles, that standing upon the brincke of
the pit of despair, he said, All men are liars, and utterly deceived, that say
or account of me, that ever I shall es^ape these dangers, and be exalted to
sit upon the throne, and yet at length finding Gods mercies so immeasurable
heaped upon him, that he was not able to express them, bethinking how to show
himself not unmindful thereof, nor unthankful therefore, he did enquire
within himself, saying; Quid retribuam Domino, etc. What shall I render to the
Lord for all the benefits that he has done unto me? He resolves not only I
wili take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: but also
this, verse 15. I will offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving according to the law,
and I will pay my vows even now in the sight of all his people; that is, I
will with my goods perform such ordinary duties as the Lord in his law does
require: and I will besides render of my goods such other things as in my
trouble I vowed extraordinarily to give or offer up unto my God, if he should
deliver me out of them. Now if men be so far from David's mind, that (because
they have been in trouble and danger) they will not only not vow, nor give
any thing extraordinarily, but refuse likewise therefore, to render even that
which God does ordinarily require, let them take heed, least pretending to
draw near unto God with their lips, their hearts (whatsoever they pretend) be
as far from him as their hands; and instead of showing thanfulnesse, they do
not openly bewray manifest unthankfulness, and so make themselves unworthy of
future blessings, that be so ungrateful for former.

3 But it is not fit, that the minister should receive personal tithes:
because so he will from time to time, be acquainted with men's several estates,
and know as well as they in manner, what they gain or lose from year to year.

Answer. But why is it not fit he should know, in some general sort at least,
how god does bless or not bless, prosper or not prosper his people? For how
they do rise or fall, and what their states always are, he cannot know,
because he is nothing the more acquainted thereby with their expenses and
spending of that they have. God thought it to be fit enough among his own
people the Jews: as may appear by appointing them, 1. To pay the tenth of
every thing. 2. to bring 3. times a year every man his offering according as
God had blessed him. In diverse of their offerings, to offer an offering of
greater or lesser value, according as they were either rich or poor. Again
we do see, that the husbandman at this day every where does account to the
minister of God how God has blessed, enriched and increased him, or otherwise
diminished and brought him low, in every thing he has, both great and small.
And why shall tradesmen, etc. think that not fit for them to do, which God
did judge to be very fit for his own people, and which husbandmen neither
refuse nor think unfit? Let others think what they will, I do verily think it
to be not only fit, but also expedient and necessary too, that every man
whether he be husbandman or tradesman, does live by by land or sea, by natures
increase, or by his ^rte and labor, should let his minister know how God does
either bless or not bless him, that so he (the minister) may be the more
occasioned, the rather for that it so nearly touches himself, either to
praise God for plenty and abou^dance sent, or to pray to God, where his hand
is heavy, for the remoouing thereof, and sending of better success.

Farther, But where some composition lies, unless the minister be made
acquainted with the Income and increase or decrease of his parishioners estate
by Computation, which way is it possible he shall know what certainty to
demand, or depend upon? but must (the thing that it most disclaimed, and indeed
utterly intolerable) stand still to the courtesy and benevolence of the
parishioner. Wherefore since it is most unfit and unreasonable that the minister
be left to men's courtesies and co^scie^ces, which now a days be but short; let
such as think it not fit that he should be acquainted with their gains and
losses from time to time, condescend at least to that which neither part has
any just cause to except against, that is, some reasonable Composition, as in
London already there is: which one year with another may be indifferent for
both sides.

4 But where is any such Tithe paid? who is there that paies them? Therefore
why should we do otherwise then others do?

Hereunto though I might answer in a word, We ought to live by laws not by
examples: And therefore though it were true, that this kind of Tithe were now
no where paid, yet this being proved (as it is) that of right it ought to be
paid, such examples of non-paiment do not justify, but make more evil the
fact. For, The more trangressors, the greater the sin. The farther the
disease is spread, the more intolerable and needing speedy care, ne pars syncer
a trahatur, least al be mard: yet if the willing Reader will vouchfafe but to
turn a little backward he shall there find it sufficiently declared, how
long, by whom, and where, those kind of Tithes have, from time to time been
paid.

Farther I answer that in diverse parts of our land, they are paid in one or
other manner namely in the cities of London and Canterbury, as both by
practice, and by the statute for that purpose extant in print, is evident.

2 Besides London, these kind of Tithes are also paid in diverse other places,
in some other manner, as I do gather, by the very words of the statute
touching such tithes; wherein is this Prouis^, That in all such places where
handiecrafts (...) have used in some other manner, (viz. otherwise then by
computation of the tenth, the expenses diducted) or by compositio^ for the
tenth proportionably, with London) to pay their tithe, that there the same
Custo^e of payment of tithes shall be observed and continue still. For these
words do plainly signify that there be such places in the la^d, whereby some
ancient custom, artificers, tradesmen, etc. have used to pay such Tithes
though in other manner, then either by the statute generally is provided, or
in London, etc. particularly is used: otherwise that Prouiso were superfluous.

3 Also in fisher towns, the fishermen do pay tithe of their fish, and so
do fowlers of their fow^e, both which are a kind of personal tithe, as by the
manner of payment thereof, and custom of every place may easily be coniectured.

Now seeing personal tithes are paid in fisher towns, likewise in London and
some other places else, after one sort; and in diverse other places after
another; and in all other places (of like nature) ought to be paid: it is
superfluous to ask where they are paid, and who do pay any personal tithes?
Rather they show themselves apparrantly worthy blame, that moved neither by
the example of husbandmen that pay predial tithes, nor of the best of our
towns and cities (such without all exception is London, being the head city
of the whole kingdom) which do in one or other manner pay personal tithes,
and so yield the minister a certain maintenance, will look only upon those,
which regarding neither law nor good example, do not their duty; and account
they do not amiss, so long as they do but as such (the worst, not the best)
do.

5 But this were a great charge to towns and cities, where people already,
though they do pay the minister nothing toward his maintenance, yet have
enough to do to live. And were it not a great benefit to them, if they might
continue as they do in many places, that is, giving that way but what they
lust?

Answer, 1. Why should any account that to be a charge and burden over
heavy, which others do easily bear, and that, I say not without any grief,
but even with desire to continue? Be there not diverse places in the land, where
prediall tithes being paid to the Church, the minister receives yearly more
pounds, then shillings in some towns, that yet are the more populous, which
nevertheless do not count it a matter of charge, nor repent that ever their
predecessors condescended thereunto, but (may count themselves, and) are indeed
of all other thereby most happy, because they have those notable means which
others want, to obtain the best and most learned teachers to reside with them?
And what charge, what burden is it to the Citizens of London, to pay as they
do by the house? Do they complain thereof? Do they find it a beggering and
undoing unto them? and see that they have cause to curse the time, that ever
such a course was taken betwixt them and their ministers? Nay rather, do not
many of them of their own liberality and love to the Word, augment and
enlarge it? And does not infallible experience show, manifest and manifold
reasons convince, That it was an happy thing for them, that ever so just and
necessary a law was enacted, and so excellent, good and indifferent a course
provided and planted for their ministry? And that the ministry of our land,
specially in places of like condition, will never stand in good estate, nor the
people thereof have due and necessary teaching, till the same or some other
like course for personal tithes be generally and duly planted and settled
among us.

2. Men ought not to count that a charge (a burden not to be admitted, being
yet absent, nor endured being present) without which they cannot well be. But
except men will maintain a minister, they cannot have, nor indeed are not
worthy to have a minister among them. Wherefore as a tenant counts it no
charge to pay his rent, because unless he pay it, ^start; he knows he
cannot dwell in the house: so neither ought the parishioner, who ought to
account himself no less bound to pay to the Church the rights thereof: and
be as willing to yield his ministe^ that is due, as he would him to be to
perform the office and duty of a minister.

3. It is certain and evident, That our predecessors, ancient and best
Christians, did not account it a charge ouer-great to pay their personal
Tithes, and maintain liberally their ministers: nor a benefit to tradesmen,
etc. to pay them nothing, and give them but what they lust. For then they would
never have condescended (as it appears generally they did) to the payment and
establishment of personal as well as of prediall tithes. And it had been an
easy matter for them, while yet no such thing was in practice, and not so much
as the name of personal tithes devised and known, to have admitted no such
kind of imposition, but to have held fast such a privilege and benefit: but
that, besides reason it self, religion had rightly informed them, that, which
covetousness will not suffer us to learn, That such freedom was bondage, such
ease the worst burden, and such a benefit the greatest detriment: and
therefore it was as necessary for them to impose personal tithes on tradesmen,
etc. as prediall on husbandmen, and no more benefit for those to be free of
the one, then these of the other.

4. I appeal to their own consciences that thus object, what benefit it is to
any parish, where prediall tithes are due, to have them taken from the Church,
and nothing there to be left, except it be some peeld Vicaridge, scant worth
the taking, or some, beggarly stipend worse then it? I am sure unless they
will speak against their own consciences and all reason: unless they be of
that mind of which it is likely that some are, viz. That, so they might have
their tithes, and other profits, which now the Church does or should enjoy
into their own hands, they cared little, whether they had any minister, any
public service of God, or any teaching at all: they must answer, That
(howsoever the case now stand,) that is not benefit to the place, but an
extreme misery and plague; seeing by that means they of the place must needs
have such teachers, not as are fit, but as they can get and rest contented for
the most part, with the dregs and refuse of the Clergy, whereby the blind
leading the blinds, both fall into the Pitt^: whereas if the minister (as in
other places) had the whole, they might have some learned and very able teacher
to their Pastor; who, carefully attending them, might save both himself, and
them that hear him. Now if the matter be well looked into, what difference is
there twixt the one and the other? I mean, if in the one place the minister
has all the prediall tithes kept from him, and in the other all the personal?
and thereby as well the one as the other is a fit receptacle for only the worst
and unworthiest Pastor? And what is this but as that, a kind of
Impropriating? unless happily it be of the two, the more wicked and
intolerable. First, because in the other, that the minister has though it be
but little yet is certain. He knows what to demand of every man, and has
good Law for recovery of it, if it be detained, in this, not.

2. For the most part it is more in quantity then the personal tithe is; the
number of parishioners or communicants one with the other compared.

3. The other is taken away by Law; this by very fraud, and nothing else but
abuse (or at most insufficiency and weakness) of Law.

4. In the other every parishioner pays his full tithes, if not to whom of
right, yet to whom by Law, it ought to be paid: and so is, quod ammo^^,
discharged of his debt and duty to God and the Church: but in this, the
parishioner without so much as any cloak or convert of Law to hide his sin
withal, deteines his tithes to himself, and so conuerteth to his own pr^uate
use, that which the other either directly or ind^^ectly pa^es to God and his
Church.

5. Finally, Note th^^ well.
what benefit it may be to any people to vsu^p this liberty, I know not;
unless this be a benefit, That by this means they may at their pleasure
abuse, wrong, impouerish, persecute, weary out and drive away their minister
whenever they list. For by this means, if a company of them shall but lay
their heads together, upon any conceit they have against the man, to hold him
short for his maintenance, and to pay him no more then perforce they must, and
both he and they know (how muchsoeuer in very deed his due be) he is able by
any law ^et in force to recover; then it is easy to conjecture what will
within a while become of the poor minister. And whether this be not a kind of
persecuting of the Gospel, (and therefore unfit to be tolerated where the
Gospel is professed) let all men judge. For if in wars, as experience^ does
show, it be possible to assault and overthrow the enemy as well by famine, and
secreat underminings as by open battle in the field: and it be true which
Divines have observed, that there is a kind of persecution that is privy and
wrought by subtilitie and policy, and it no less dangerous, then that which
is open and by planie force and violence; then out of all question, this is as
fine a pollic^e and as notable a subtilitie, whereby men may persecute the
minister of God at their pleasure, keep him and drive him from them when they
list, and yet be reputed in the face of the world for none other then good and
honest men, yea religious and good Protestants, as any lightly the devil can
devise. And therefore knowing the whynes of Satan, I will not marvel, if any
such as are secreat enemies to religion, and indeed despise and contemn the
ministers thereof, what show soever they make unto the world shall labor and
stand up with tooth and nail to hold fast this (supposed) privilege and
benefit. But I shall more then marueil, if (this devilish Stratageme being thus
dis^^uered,) any that sincerely fears God, vnfcinedly loves the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and in truth and verity affects the ministers thereof, shall
but open his mouth to have it continued, and such an advantage and ready means
for the devil and his members, to persecute the ministers of the Gospel, at
their pleasure, suffered among Gospelling Christians.

I have showed sufficiently that it is no benefit to any (whatsoever some
account it) to be freed of personal tithes. Now will I also show (for the
farther satisfying of all) that indeed it is diverse ways, a great benefit, and
the right way to do themselves good to pay them, and so their own great harm
that they do not.

1. By that means, they shall honor God with their riches, as God has
commanded, Prou. 3. 9. as did Abraham, Genes. 14. Jacob. Genes. 28. the
Israelites, Numb. 31. their neighbors and brethren that are husbandmen round
about them do: and all men, by the Law of God and nature are bound, as already
is proved and declared in the 6. and 7. Chap. of this treatise at large.

2. They shall procure unto themselves able and good teachers, one of the most
principal benefits that God can bestow on men in this life; and not be
subject, as commonly they are, unto the worste and unworthiest of all other.
Maintenance for learned men once settled and had, learned men will easily be
had also to accept it: not had, it is vain to expect or hope for such to come
among them. I deny not, but that sometime learned and very worthy and able
men do accept of very mean places. But it is either for very necessity,
making of such as it were a stay till they can be better provided for;
Dionisium Corinthi.
Or it is for a supply, and by way of augmentation, having some better
preferment otherwhere. And then not seldom it so falls out, that delighting to
be most with them that best maintain them, these are left to unlearned
Curates: and so have indeed learned men rather in name then in deed to their
Pastors, according to the measure they offer them, which is a living in name,
and not in deed; a maintenance in show, but not in proof.

3 They shall procure the blessing of God upon them and their goods, even in
regard of their outward estates. For (as after I shall show more fully, Cap. 9.
following) God does bless the^ with plenty and increase of wealth, that duly
pay their tithes, as well personal as prediall, and liberally maintain the^r
ministers, whether in town or country: as contrariwise he (...) them with
losses* shipwrackes, scarcenes, barrennes, poverty, and need of all things,
that deal otherwise.

4. They shall procure much unity, amity, and good liking betwixt them and
their ministers; whereas now there is continual dislike, grudge, discontent,
grief, and murmuring on both sides. They think him a man covetous and
unreasonable, one that will never be satisfied: he again counts (as the truth
is) them unreasonable and unconscionable in their dealing toward him, that look
he should rest satisfied with their offerings only, and those other scraps that
now and then fall out, together with what they lust besides to give him. Which
is in truth a kind of beggarly condition* and so unseeming a minister of the
Gospel, that I hold him worthy much reproof that shall accept and approve it.

5. They shall avoid the grudge and envy of their neighbors, husbandmen, and
others that pay in good sort, who (as I have heard often with mine own ears)
do repine and grieve that they should pay so much (yet but their due,) to the
maintenance of their ministers, when others better able a great deal in
wealth and worth (though not in lands) pay in manner nothing: not the
fortieth, nor many times the hundredth part that they do. They ask (not
without reason) why one husbandman, his living being not worth above 10. or
20. pounds by the year, should yearly pay 20. or 40. shillings a piece at
the least; and a Merchant, a Clothier, a Trade or handicrafts-man, dispending
by his trade or science an hundredth pound a year at least, esteemed worth 500.
happily a 1000. pounds, shall pay scant so many pence? Or when the
husbandman pays somewhat either in Specie. OF by custom and composition for
every thing he does possess, why these shall not pay of any one thing almost
the tenth? For they be not so blind, but they can see, nor so bad accounta^ts
but they can tell, That if tradesmen paid but the tenth of their gains for
any one commodity that often they deal in, it would and must needs be more
then that they commonly give for the whole.

Such inequality and vn-indifferency seen betwixt them that be of one parish,
one church, one country, and one kingdom, and therefore should be as equally
and indifferently dealt with, one as another, how can it but offend, and grieve
them that be still pressed, and bear ever the heavier burden? And so much the
more when they see, That by this means many times it is, that they are ill
taught, have had Ministers, and their Ministers live in need and beggerie:
whereas they know well, that if the rest of their neighbors did mainta^ne them,
and allow them as much a piece, (or but half so much) according to their
ability as they do (and in all reason and equity, besides religion so they
ought) they might have as able and good teachers as in other places and
parishes there be.

6. Whereas now it often falls out, That where the place consists not of
tradesmen etc. some of the wealthier sort are feign, (they seeing by the
withdrawing and ill payment of the greatest number their Minister else not
able to live among them) to pay more then is their due: hereby, a due
certainty settled by law, all shall alike according to their estates be liable
to the Ministers maintenance, and so he better maintained then before and yet
they that before were ouer-charged much eased.

7. Whereas now in diverse places, some well disposed people, considering their
want of teaching, have of late years d^uised a remedy by surcharging
themselves, that is, by maintaining a preacher besides their Minister: by this
means they shall be eased of a great part of that charge. For their own
Minister being condignely sustained, would oftentimes perform that the other
does.

7. 6. We do pay personal tithes: as they are due, so they are not denied.
Answ. I do not deny, but that diverse tradesmen, artificers, etc. do pay
their Ministers somewhat above 2 pence a piece, as 4. pence, 12. pence, 2.
shill. ten groates, or it may be a crown, etc. but howsoever they may account
that overplus, to be their personal, or (as they call it) their privy tithes,
and pay it in name thereof: yet for my part I am altogether of another mind,
and do verily think and take the same to be but a mere offering only. My
reasons are, 1. If Tithes be Decima pars, a tenth part of that a man does
possess, or of a man's gains or increase, for so the word does sound, men have
defined Tithes, and the law of God does determine: then in no sense, can such a
scantling or pittance justly be termed or counted for any Tithe: seeing many
times, it is so far from the tenth, that is not Centesima the hundredth,
happily vix millesima pars, scarce the thowsandth part of that years increase,
and clear gains, and so no way proportinable to tithes, either as gods law,
or as man's law does lay them out.

2. They which pay it, do pay it, not as a thing due and accountable as tithes
are, but as a matter voluntary, such are offerings: which they may, as they
account, and indeed upon the least spleen in the world against the Minister,
do deny to pay, thinking ((...) a man may believe them) that by law he has
right to nothing but his two penie offerings: and that whatsoever they pay him
more, it is their courtesy forsooth, as a gift or alms, and not their duty
or his desert.

3. It comes nearer to the quantity and nature of an offering, which commonly
is and has been a thing voluntary, far less then the tenth part, variable
according to men's minds as well as their estates, etc.

4. Otherw^se the right payment of offerings cannot be seen among us. For that
2. pence which alone they account to be their offering, is enforced by law,
which requires not so much only, but (as I take it, and else it is wrong)
so much at the least of every one, and therefore is not voluntary. Secondly,
that is (as they account it) equal to all: whereas gods law (whence the
custom of offerings has his chiefest ground) required it should be more or
less according to every man's ability, Deuteronomy. 16. 17. And it were a shame and
discredit to the richer sort, that they should offer, not like rich men much,
but as poor widows every man his mite, or as one terms it, and well, micas,
their ^rums; as if they reconed of the minister in the, Chapter as of Lazarus at
their doors.

5. It was the custom once of our Church of England, to make their offerings
4. times in the year at the least. Which though now by a worse custom they be
brought all to once; presupposing it were yet invse, if a rich man should offer
but 4. times a year, I would but ask what might be expected from him? what?
but an halfe-peny at a time? Could he for very shame, setting aside Devotion or
Religion (though he did pay his tithes besides in the largest manner) cast down
less then a groate, six pence, or twelve pence at a time? which cast in all
at once comes to a like reckoning.

So that every way this matter considered, make of it what they can, they can
make no Tithes of it.

At the most it is but an offering, and that a poor one too, if it be compared
with the abundance which some of those offerers do possess, or with the
little which it self is, in respect of that the husbandman does pay, or with
the manner of offering among the people of the Jews; who I doubt not by way of
voluntary offering alone, besides their tithes, their vows, their first
fruits, and their appointed sacrifices, gave far more then many of those of
whom I speak, do give every manner of way.

Wherefore I may with good reason and evidence conclude, That they which pay
their minister but in such sort, therein pay him no tithes at all; and so
withold from him the greatest part of his maintenance, viz. his Tithes,
wherein properly the very substance of the ministers maintenance does
consist: the rest viz. his offerings, being but as an overplus cast in, and
added to the heap.

Wherein I would to God people would or could see, First how hardly and
injuriously they deal with the minister, in that for his whole years labor
and pains among them, they yield him no ordinary maintenance at all. For
the offering (as I have said) is but as an extraordinry bounty. And therefore
speaking of these matters I am wont to say, That he which pays his offerings,
and other petty and extraordinary duties, but withholds his tithes, does like
as if a man making a show to pay a man a bushel of corn by heap, should
deliver him but the ouer-measure, and keep back the just bushel for
himself. Secondly, how unconscionable and void of due consideration they show
themselves, who seeing the husbandman to pay tithes as well as offerings, and
to contribute toward the maintenance of the minister so liberally, That there
is scant a man among them whose living is worth Com. annis, an 100. pounds, but
yields the minister 7. or 8. pounds at least, and in places that be fertile and
good a great deal more: and diverse tradesmen, etc. (in London I mean) to pay
by the house 7. times as much at least, as they do by this voluntary course:
yea, knowing that they themselves do many times give the minister, more for
one hours labor, as at a marryage, a funeral, etc. then this way for the
whole year, yet can persuade themselves that they do well, and satisfy their
minds, that they perform their duty to God and his minister in very good
sort?

For what conscience, reason, and equity is in it, that a man able to dispend
by his trade, science, and profession 100. marks, or an 100. pounds yearly,
should look to have the benefit of a ministers labors, for him and his all
the year long, for twelve pence, or ten groates, etc: specially when as an
husbandman not of like worth in living by far, gives him as many or more
pounds?

I hope I have now made it most evident and clear to the eye of all
indifferent persons, that notwithstanding any thing that can to the contrary be
objected, it is both reasonable and necessary that Personal tithes as well as
Predial be paid: and by consequent, That the laws, and namely the Statute of
An. 2. Edu. 6. cap. 13. to that purpose made, are, in that point, not hard and
unreasonable, but reasonably equal, and just. Against the which, howsoever
some do murmr and complain in that respect, yet I would to God, that the
ministers had no more cause of complainte then the people have, by reason of
the greeuances, which by occasion, or abuse, at least, of that Satute,
concerning personal tithes, they do endure.

For, if (as I trust it may) it may be lawful for them that be grieved to
groan, and that feel themselves distressed, to call for help, and open their
griefs: if in this time and liberty of the Gospel it may be free in defense
and furtherance of the Gospel, to speak the truth; the truth is, That that
Statute (in other respects) is ouer-fauourable to the people, (as made
altogether or their advantage) rather then to the minister, and too hard to the
minister, not to the people. Namely,

First, in regard of the time allowed for payement, which is at Easter. For,
till then by the Statute, the parishioner may choose, whether he will pay any
penie of offerings, or of those personal tithes.

This clause, I assure you, goes hard for the minister. For howsoever in some
country parishes, where are few or none, that ought ot pay personal tithes,
and the minister has his living come-in, at other times of the year in due
sort, it is no great matter, nor hurt to him to tarry for his personal tithes
and offerings till Easter: yet in Towns and Cities, where the poor minister
has but a little (God knows) as yet, to live upon, to tarry for all till
the years end, and to be feign (as no doubt many do) to borrowe, etc.
wherewith to keep house till Easter, that goes hard. 2. And as the forbeara^ce
of a man's due so long time, cannot but be to him some trouble and hindrance;
yet it were well, if he lost nothing thereby in the end: but that is seldom
so. For the parishioners who commonly are ready to prey upon every advantage,
and ingenious to devise means and shifts to pay as little as may be, take
thereby occasion to shuffle together their whole years employments; And then
though they have gained well in the former quarters of the year, if happily
they have lost any thing in the later, the parson pays for it: whereas if they
paid those personal tithes, as the husbandman does his prediall, or as fishers
and fowlers do their personal, viz. always when they arise, or at the
quarters end, as in London, the Minister might happily fare a little better
then commonly he does. Neither is this all: but by this means, 3, if the
Incumbent having served 2. or. 3. quarters of the year and more, happen to die
before Easter, all is lost; he, his wife, family, etc. for a great part of the
years service, shall have nothing, but the next Incumbent shall reap the
fruits of his whole years labors.

Secondly, in regard of the persons exempted by law from such personal tithes,
which be, first all common day-labourers, and then in fisher towns, all save
those that have fish to pay. For of these, the former is a favor more then the
husbandman has, who, how poor soever he be, yet does and must pay somewhat.
And then the later is more then a favor, even a great privilege to the
wealthy, besides the meaner sort of such townsmen: seeing it is probable, That
no town stands so on fishing, but that there are in it diverse and they
wealthy too, of sundry other trades and occupations, who yet (if I mistake not)
go clear by benefit of the express words of the statute; where it were
disagreeing neither to reason nor religion, that they should help to maintain
their Minister of that they live by, as well as their neighbors that live by
fishing: and not the whole charge rest upon some few, and the Minister receive
nothing at all of many of them.

Thirdly, in regard of the means appointed for recovery of those tithes:
wherein the party grieved is utterly debarred of the defendants oath, and per
Conseq. of any certain and ready means thereto. Of which point let that
suffice which is before spoken.

Fourthly, page 54.
in regard of the very words of the statute concerning the quantity
prescribed. For I do not yet find it agreed, nor explaned by any, what is to be
accounted Clear games.

The common opinion is: That only to be Clear gains, and so titheable, which
a man puts up (as they say) in his purse at he years end, above all
charges and expenses whatsoever: Or which a man at the years end finds his
last years stock to be increased, above that at the beginning of the year it
was. But though I know, that neither this way, after this so large a sense, do
any almost now a days satisfy the law, that this neither is nor can be the
true sense of the law, I have many and those apparent reasons: as,

1. So might the Ministers maintenance prove exceeding small, nothing happily
some years. For it is probable that many tradesmen etc. may gain well, and
yet lay up nothing at the years end, but spend all in housekeeping, gaming,
drinking, etc.

2. So there should be no manner proportion, betwixt predial and personal
tithes. Because where as the husbandman, how small soever his increase be, yet
paies somewhat: the tradesman though he gain indeed very much, yet if he
have occasion thereunto, or but will spend all, shall pay nothing. And then
whereas among husbandmen the maintenance of the Minister lies equally upon them
all, both poor and rich, every one paying more or less, according to that he
has; among tradesmen it shall lie only upon some few, and those the
honestest and thriftiest only.

3. So should the practice of that law for personal tithes, utterly differ
from the practice of the same law in places exempt, as in London, in fisher
towns, etc. In which every man rich or poor, that has either house or fish,
paies accordingly: every man spending but his own, and not the Ministers
part likewise.

4. By this means the Minister stands still at an uncertainty and the
courtesy of his parishner; (the thing principally disclaimed.) For the
parishner what ever he gain is still at his choice if he list, to spend all:
and may handle the matter so, that though another gaining but 20. pounds, yield
the Minister 10. or 20. shill^ yet he gaining an 100. pou^ds, may not yield him
twenty pence.

All which absurdities and inconveniences weighed, it is probable, that is not
the true sense of the law, upon, and from which they do arise.

Another therefore if we seek, that I take it, must needs be this; That every
such person shall pay the tenth part, not of his gains absolutely, above his
first stock or principal, but of his clear gains: that is, of that, which,
having diducted and abated all such charges and expenses as besides the first
penie that he had occasion to lay out, surmounteth toward housekeeping, and
increase of stock.

So that whereas in prediall tithes, the husbandman is not allowed for his
seed, ploughing, weeding, reaping, mowing, shearing, carriage, or any other
like charges; in personal tithes it is otherwise: The trades-ma^, etc. shall be
allowed (besides his principal, for his expenses in tools, rent, reparations,
for carriage, cellerage, custom and other like, and pay Tithe only of that
which arises clear above all such charges, and is left him, when he has
made his full and absolute return toward his household necessaries, or to be
newely employed as a stock.

This sense, as any man may easily perceive, first, is very consonant to
reason: secondly, bears some proportion betwixt prediall and personal
tithes, in that wel-nigh all tradesmen, artificers, etc. may be found liable
more or less, to such a kind of pay: thirdly, admits some known
certainety (the thing specially intended) in every man's estate: fourthly, it is
confirmed by the usual practice of the payment of such tithes, in such cases
as are out of question, as in London; where paying by the house, every man
whose house is 10. shill. or above, of yearly re^t, paies accordingly: of fish,
whereof in most places the tithe is paid, not of the just Tenth, but of the
twelfth, and in some places, but of the fifteenth part, 2. or 5. parts (as the
expenses may appear to be more or less) being allowed for boat and Said,
etc. Which does plainly argue, That the expenses mentioned in the statute,
should be understood, Inre, circarem, and extrarem.
not of all kind of charges whatsoever, that a man may be at, for himself and
his Trade, the whole year thorough, but those only which are employed about
the very thing it self, (...). lib. 3. fol. 99.
as instruments and means, or as the principal, or a part of the principal, to
bring it (the gains) to hand. Which kind of charges or expenses once deducted,
the remainder, being clear gains is to be shared betwixt the gainer thereof,
and his minister, toward the maintenance of them both: even as the husbandman
does his whole increase as naturally it does arise, without any such deduction.

These things considered, that is, the time of payment, the persons exempted,
the means for recovery, and the ambiguitie of the words, I hope I may without
any danger, wrong, or sca^dal at al, justly conclude and affirm, that the
statute for personal tithes is not hard, but exceeding favorable unto the
parishioner: and, That the ministers rather have great cause, finding by just
and long experience, how men abuse those favors, and pervert that law, to
their great prejudice, the hurt of our ministry, hindrance of the Gospel, Stop
not your ears at the cry of the afflicted.
and decay of learning, to complain thereof, and with all earnestnes to crave
and desire the magistrates of the land, and al those in whose hands it lies to
redress such evils: that weighing the matter more thoroughly, and considering
more seriously of the cause, for the righting of their wrongs for furtherance
of the gospel and learning, for increase of preachers in the land, they would
either alter this statute wholly, and settle in steed of it a perpetual
composition betwixt the incumbent and his parishners for personal tithes,
either after the manner of the city of London, or some other like: or else at
least, so explane, amplify and perfect (a common practice in sundy cases even
of ^inal moment) the present st^tute, that al ambiguities and euasions being
taken away and stopped, the minister might plainly and directly know, what to
demand, and how to reco^er it, and the parishioner what and how to pay. Wherein
the case being so doubtful, ambiguous, apt and open to contention as now it
is, any reasonable certainty were much more beneficial to the ministry,
then that which now can be had. And it could not but be a means of much peace
and concord betwixt pastor and people (a thing worthy to be bought with some
loss) who now in this case, will yield in manner nothing, without continual
contention: which moves the greater number of ministers, rather to lose in
manner the whole, then to be litigious and accounted contentious for a part.
The statute was made in such a time, when it was thought a virtue, to nip and
abate the height of the Clergy: and therefore if it do seem ^o favor rather
the parishioner then the Pastor, ^and give the one advantage to pay little,
rather then the other to recover much, it is not much to be wondered at, or
greatly misliked. But now that time it self and truth her daughter have
discovered the defects thereof, and the present time affecting (as is
necessary and just) a learned and able ministry, it were requisite and a
very godly act, if it might so be looked into, that it might appear, we are no
less respective of our times, then they of theirs: and as willing to restore
to the Church and ministry what we find wanting and needful, as they to
take from them what they thought superfluous and needless.

Thou may marvel happily (good Reader) why in urging this matter of
personal Tithes, I do so often mention the custom and order of the City of
London: but both that thou may not be ignorant of my meaning, and be moved
the sooner to be of my mind, I will not conceal from thee the causes thereof,
which are as follows.

First long and good Experience has proved that course, being duly and
without fraud and corruption practiced, to be very equal and good. Such
indeed, as it is hardly possible for the wit of man to devise in the like case,
a better.

2. It is a thing desired of the greatest part of the ministers of our land,
whom the case concerns: as which, if it might in case of personal tithes, be
generally planted, would, as already appears by the practice thereof in that
one place, make our land, our Church, our ministry and people much the
happier.

3. What course, disclayming that which is found by too long and too much
experience to be very prejudicial and insufficient, should any rather look
unto, then unto that, which the head City of our Church and kingdom, has as
a spectacle and example to the whole (if men had as great desire to imitate the
best as the worst) upon due and m^ture deliberation, established and planted in
it self, and for the good it finds therein, without any desire of change or
alteration, hitherto continued?

4. It could not but be a thing praiseworthy and goodly, if as there is one
Law for prediall tithes, the whole land thoroughout, so there might be
likewise for personal tithes.

5. It is a rate so small, a pay so tolerable, for the people, (and yet where
the parish is any thing populous, reasonably competent for the minister also)
that a lesser or easier cannot with any reason or equity be desired. For it
is nothing so much as either the husbandman does usually pay, or as the
tradesman and artificer some years otherwise, of right ought to pay.

6. Seeing it cannot be denied, but that by means thereof, the ministers of
London live in very good and Scholer-like sort, in so much that (to the praise
thereof be it spoken) There is not a poor and needy minister among them: The
people also seeing thereby their ministry to be good, and the Gospel to
flourish among them, yield it with great contentation; what have the ministers
of the places, towns and Cities specially, offended, that they may not be as
well provided for as they of London? Are not their labors and studies as dear
unto them? Are they not Pastors in the same Church, and members of the same
kingdom? Or what have the people of other places, (towns and Cities
specially) committed, that they also should not be as duly provided for of a
good ministry, and of able teachers, as they of London? Are they not members
of the same Church and kingdom, 1. Sam. 2. 36
and their souls redeemed with the same price? Math. 9. 36.
but that the one as if they were the offspring of Eli, should be feign to
crouch for a piece of silver, Amos. 8. 11.
and a morsel of bread? and the other like the people of our Saviors time (but
none taking compassion upon them) should be left dispersed and scattered
abroad to seek here and there for the word of God, as sheep having no
shepherd?

7. If that course planted in London so long time since, even in time of
Popery, while yet the Law for personal tithes stood in his greatest strength,
and the offerings and other devotions of the people to the Church were 7, I
might say infinite times more then now they are, was found even then to be
most necessary and fit for both sides, to be a means of great agreement and
content betwixt the people and Pastor, and more beneficial for the Church it
self, being at a certain composition, then the uncertainty of those tithes:
No man is able to show any reason why now, the statute for personal tithes
being very weak and insufficient, the devotion and offerings of the people
being come as it were to nothing, such a compsition and certainty should not
be fittest and most necessary the whole land over.

8. Last of all, Imagine the Londoners did deal at this present with their
ministers as the tradesmen and artificers of many places do, that is, did
yield unto the minister, but two pence a (...) at Easter, and if any thing
over, yet but what themselves lift, no certainty, less for his whole years
labors, and for all duties commonly, then the country minister, besides his
gleebe, Aquilanon c^pit muscas.
and besides his great and smaller tithes, receives for his E^ster book
only; is it probable, or is it possible, there would notwithstanding be in
London, as many learned and worthy preachers as now there are of the Gospel of
Christ, and the preaching of the word flourish and abound therein as now it
does? no man I think will be so senseless as so to conceive and affirm; for
v^i cadauer, ^bi aquilae. Why then? is it not easy for men to conceive, If
they will not be blin^, how expedient it were for other places to be provided
for, as it is? and how dangerous and hurtful for them that they be not?

The only thing that I see can here against be objected, Objection.
is; The state and condition of other places, is not like unto the City of
London. And why? Because in London there is no means in the world, in diverse
of their parishes (personal tithes being not paid by Computation) how to raise
any maintenance, but by the house: but in other places there are some prediall
tithes, or other kind of personal tithes, which are and easily may be paid in
their kind.

1 This help and augmentation is but in some places only. Answer.
For diverse places there are, where the state of the City of London and of
them in this respect, is all one.

2 Though in some places, there are more prediall tithes then in London, yet
the parishes being not so populous, nor the rent of houses so great by a great
deal, the personal tithes (though rated according unto London) must needs be
less: and so the maintenance, one thing considered with another, not much
different.

3 Be it (as in some country market towns) that in some places, there are
some prediall, or other personal tithes to be paid in kind; yet does it
therefore follow, that tradesmen, artificers, etc. of such places must go
free, and be exempted from maintenance of their ministers? Surely that cannot
be but an open injury, an apparent sin. For what is this but to live by the
sweat of other men's brows? an injury to to their coparishners. And how has
the minister a part of all a man's goods? And what does he in this case but take
wages of one, to do^ another service? or rather being duly and well pay (...)
of his parishioners (the husbandmen) serve the other, the tradesmen for naught?
or of some part of goods, be de^rauded of other sorts? And so whereas his
living might be sufficient and good, if all did their duty, now the greatest
number withdrawing, it is very sparing and little. A double injury to the
minister.

Some also may happily object, 2. Object.
That in diverse places, they be already rated by the house, though not in
proportion as London.

But those rates, Answ.
(the times considered, the auailes of the Church then and now compared) are
commonly so small and unreasonable, that they can with no equity, reason and
conscience be accounted indifferent and fit to stand. See for this more, pag^
129. 130. and 131. in the title of Customs.

CHAP. IX.
Shows, how dangerous and unprofitable unto men even in respect of their
outward and temporal estates it is, to be illiberall and ouersparing to their
ministers. And on the other side how grateful to God, how profitable and
gainefull to themselves, to be liberal and bountiful toward them.

Verse. 7. For whatsoever a man sows, that also shall he reap.
THis later clause of this 7. Verse. (as I noted in the beginning) is a
confirmation of the former clause and doctrine, by an Argument or reason taken
ab euentu, from the good or evil event, and success, which shall and will
(whether men will or no) follow of men's actions, good or evil, equal or
unequal, in this behalf.

The words may diversely be taken. For they may be referred, either to the
quality of things, as they are commonly read, whatsoever a man sows, that
also shall he reap: or to the quantity, as of some they are expounded, as a
man sows, so shall he reap. The former sense intends, that for so much as
it is a thing both natu^^ll and ordinary, That a man reap such corn as he
does sow; therefore if any do employe his goods to this so good and
necessary an use, viz. the Maintenance of the Minister, he shall reap good
fruit thereof accordingly, that is spiritual things. But that whosoever
refuses to do, and employeth his goods only about profane and worldly
matters, he shall reap thereafter: if any, only worldly commodities. So our
Apostle seems to explicate his meaning in the next verse, where he says: for
he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that
sow^th to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. For, to sow
unto the flesh is to provide for the necessaries or pleasures of this present
life, no respect had of the life to come. That whosoever does, shall reap that
which he does sow, that is, that which will soon be lost, perish and
consume; happily besides and withal, shame and confusion. On the other side,
the spirit being here taken for the spiritual life, to sow unto the spirit
is to respect heaven more then earth, the kingdom of God more then the riches
of this world, and thereupon so to order our life, that we may aspire to the
kingdom of heaven, and so to employ our goods, that they may further us
therein, by procuring unto us, by and with them those things that perteine to
piety and religion: not sparing these transitory goods, so as by them, we
may get unto us spiritual, heavenly, and never fading treasures.

Hence thence we learn first, if we lay out our goods upon worldly things,
to buy us houses, lands and possessions here on earth, to procure us wealth and
treasures of this life, or which is worse, to maintain and increase our
pleasures and delights: such as we seek we shall find, as we sow we shall
reap, that is, at the best hand, such treasures and riches as rust and moath
will consume, as thieues may break in and steal from us: such as time it
self will take from us, or us from them. For, all these things how dearly
soever they are bought, how far soever they are sought, how carefully soever
they are kept, yet do, must, and will turn to corruption. And then what
avails all the labor and toil that we have taken, all the costs and
charges we have spent, all the time and travel we have bestowed, in getting
to us such things as will consume and come to nothing, as will be gone even as
soon as they be gotten, and such as we can by no means carry hence withv^?
Mat. 16. 26.
Specially what profits it a man, if he win the whole world and lose his
own soul? what helps it if our barnes be full, our storehouses full, our
cellars full, our coffers full, and so full that we can scarce tell wher^^^
bestow more, if that voice once sound in our ears, Thou fool this Night shall
they fetch thy soul away from thee, and then whose shall all these things
be which thou have gathered? I deny not, but that there is a moderate care,
and a lawful seeking after these things to be permitted and used: but beware
we, that this be not either our only, or our chiefest care. For the end will
surely then be corruption, and not corruption only, but (as some translate
the word in this place) interitum, destruction, perdition too. Where these
things are so sought, that true treasures are wholly neglected, and on these
our wealth and substance is so employed, that little or nothing is bestowed on
heavenly things, the return, the harvest, must needs be thereafter, that is,
want of what we most need, and loss of that we should chiefly have found.

2. Then secondly on the other side, if we lay out our goods on spiritual
uses, for furtherance of religion, Maintenance of the Ministry, to have the
Gospel preached, etc. then, as he that sows wheat, shall reap wheat: and he
that pla^teth good trees, shall have good fruit: so he that employeth his goods
to so good, holy and heavenly uses, shall reap, and receive, accordingly,
increase of knowledge, furtherance in religion, and finally by the good use and
plentiful benefit of those things, which by his worldly goods he has so
procured, eternal life. Marvel not at this. For these things follow by a
necessary consequent one upon another. We cannot be saved but by faith, we
cannot have faith without preaching, we can not have preaching without
maintenance for preachers: If therefore our goods do yield us the one, we may
say, That by our goods we attain the other. Wisdom is not to be bought for
money, nor (properly to speak) to be obtained for much gold. Job. 28. 15. Gold
shall not be given for it, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.
It shall not be v^lued with the wedg of gold of Ophir, nor with the precious
Onix, etc. Yet seeing God does al things by means. 2. Sam. 14 14. Experience
does show, That money and goods do usually procure learning, learning breeds
knowledge, knowledge causes understanding and so oftentimes thorough knowledge
and learning procured by money as by means, wisdom it se^fe is attained. So,
salvation. eternal life is the gift of God thorough Jesus Christ our Lord:
Romans 6. 23. and is not to be atteined of our selves, nor to be obtained with
money, nor any this worlds goods: yet seeing God do^th give his gifts by
means, seeing maintenance may procure preaching, preaching knowledge,
knowledge faith, and the end of our faith is the salvation of our souls, 1.
Pet. 1. 9. true it is also, that by the good employment of our transitory
goods, we may (as our Apostle here uses the Phrase) reap at length life
everlasting. It is not that goods properly which causes this, but the
preaching of the word, the publishing of the Gospel, which (seeing they by
whom it must be preached and published unto, be men and not Angels; and must
live, not like Chame^eo^^, by the air, but as men with ordinary maintenance)
hardly can be had without the laying out of our goods. And therefore as
Cornelius, Act. 10.
being told that S. Peter should come and speak to him, words whereby he
and all his house should be saved: knew full well, that he could not have
Peter to speak those words unto him, unless he would send for Peter, receive
him, and entertain him; (which he did joyfully and liberally) so in vain it
is for us to look to have the Gospel published, the word of God preached, the
way of salvation opened among us, unless we will with our goods entertain
those by whom it may and should be done, not standing upon the charge, so we
may have the thing.

Look now which is the best employment. We see the fruit of the one and of
the other. What we lay out upon worldly uses, yields us at the most, but
worldly profit: which of it self in time, will turn to corruption; happily
(which is worse) to destruction, to shame and confusion. What we lay out upon
religious uses, will yield us at the least, the use of religion, of the
Gospel, of heavenly things among us; happily (which is chiefest of all)
everlasting comfort, and eternal life. For the word taught, as seed sown, is
seldom without good fruit, but takes firm root in some.

Why then, Seeing we will not spare to lay out much, to get thereby only a
little worldly benefit, should we be sparing and loath to lay out but a little,
to get us great store of spiritual and heavenly goods? As God has allowed us
six days for our own labors, for worldly works and business, and requires
but the seventh, for his service, and our spiritual uses: so is he content that
of our goods, we employ nine parts for earthly purposes, for worldly uses, and
looks only that the tenth part, his own portion, as the crop and chief of
our substance, be employed to his honor and our own good. If this we refuse,
and (as if we were all body and no soul, had hope only of this life, and none
of that to come, or cared altogether for this earth, and d^sp^sed heaven) will
employ all our goods wholly and solely upon the world, for earthly profit,
shall we not show our selves too unmindful of heaven, ungrateful to God, and
(...) to our souls? And shall not the fault be only ours, if we be left
without teaching, without instruction, and consequently without salvation?
(For where Prophecy fails, the people perish. Proverb. 29. 18.) seeing We
refuse to entertain such as should teach us, and count the cost and charge
thereof (as we term it) better saved? It will go hard with us at the last
day, the day of reckoning, when every man must give account of the employment
of all his goods, if we shall answer, that we have employed all upon profane
and worldly uses. And if, being to give a reason, why we wanted the Gospel and
lived without preaching, destitute of knowledge and understanding, we be
enforced whether we will or no (for then truth must be uttered, dissembling
will take no place, pretenses and vain excuses will not serve, for God will
not be mocked and deluded) we be enforced I say, to testify with our own
mouths, It was, Because we refused to employ our goods to any such uses. Let
us not therefore be deceived, for what a man sows, that, only that, shall he
also reap. And hitherto of the former sense.

2 Let us likewise consider of the other sense of the words: which respects
the quantity, and intends, that as a man sows, either sparingly or
liberally, so shall he reap. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly;
but he that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully; signifying that
benefits are not in vain bestowed upon the ministers of the Gospel, for they
shall return with greater fruit, even of worldly increase. For even as the
husbandman that sows his seed in the field, does at harvest receive the same
with great increase: So they that be liberal of their goods unto the preachers
of the Gospel, and ministers of the word, shall at length receive fruit
thereof, viz. Gods blessing and increase upon them even in temporal things:
Whereas contrariwise, they which, thinking all to be lost, and as it were so
much cast away, that the minister has from them, and themselves to be
impouerished and hindered by imparti^g to them of their goods, are therefore
sparing and cruel unto them, shall in steed of plenty find scarsitie, and
reap according to their deserts and doings, penury and want. And to this sense
seem our Apostles words, verse. 9. best to agree, where joining this
particular doctrine of the ministers maintenance with other more general, he
concludes them all in this sort; Let us not be weary of well doing: for in due
time we shall reap, if we faint not. As it were intimating, That whereas men are
loath many times to lay out their goods on necessary and spiritual uses, for
fear least so themselves should want, that indeed such laying out is the very
direct way, to make the same increase, because it is as the casting of seed
into the ground; which, as nature and experience daily teaches, does and will
return with great profit, and increase.

This sense if we follow (as some expositors do, and indeed it agrees very
well with the Scriptures otherwhere) the words do yield a twofould reason or
cause why to be liberal and not sparing this way: and that is in regard o^ the
event that will follow upon it, even concerning our temporal estate, namely
penury and want, if we be sparing and niggardly: 2. plenty and abundance if we
be liberal. I will speak somewhat of each event se^erally.

The metaphor or similitude, it self, of sowing and reaping, which the Apostle
in this place uses, imports thus much, that as naturally he that sows but
little can reap but little, so he that to this use, viz. the service of God,
the maintenance of the minister, bestows but little, shall thrive thereafter.
Hereunto agrees that which we read. Mal. 1. 13. You have offered that which
was torn and the lame and the sick: should I accept this at your hands ^aith
the Lord? But cursed be he which has in his stock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great king, says the
Lord of hosts, and my name is terrible among the heathen. In which words all
they are condemned, that offer to God, they care not what: any thing is good
enough. And the prophet tells them that they procure themselves by so doing the
curse of God; as also is more plainly declared; Cap. 3. 8. where again thus
the Lord expostu^ateth with his people: Will a man spoil his Gods? Yet have ye
spoiled me. But ye say Where in have we spoiled thee? and he answers in
tithes and offerings. And it follows, Therefore are ye cursed with a curse, for
ye have spoiled me, even the whole nation. Verse. 5. of the same Chap. there
is an heavy commination against such as keep back the wages of the hireling.
I will (says God) come near to you to judgment, and I will be a shift witness
against those which wrongfully keep back the hirelings wages. It is grounded
upon the law of God. Leu. 19. 13. Deu. 24. 14. 15. The words indeed are spoken
in a more large and general sense then this in question: but seeing that Luke
10 7. 1. Tim. 5. 18 and Number. 18. 21. the pay and maintenance of the minister is
called his hire and wages, that general including all particulars, may well,
without any wrong to the text, be applied to this purpose.

Now as God threatening a curse may seem to allude to his own law, where
pronouncing cures, they are such as concern men's outward estates, according to
the express words thereof Deuteronomy. 28. 16. totu^, Leuit. 26. and other where in
sundry places: So what special curse and kind of punishment in this place, he
does mean (in hope such may credit others, as happily will suspect my
judgment) let S. Hierome Hierom.
show it who writing upon that place of Mal. before alleged. C. 3. 8. does in
the person of God paraphrastically explane it thus? For that ye have not paid
me mine offerings, therefore in f^mine and penury ye are accursed, and me have
ye deceived and defrauded. Behold the year is complete and ended, and nothing
is brought into my treasuries, but all into your own storehouses: and
therefore for the tenths and first fruits, which had been but a small matter
for you to have given me, You have lost all the plenty of your ^oss^ssions,
and the abundance of your fruits. But that you may know, that this is done by
me in mine anger, because ye have defrauded me of my part, I exhort and
admonish you, that henceforth ye pay me that which is mine, and then will I
restore unto you that which is yours: that is, the other 9 parts* which, as S.
Aug. observes, Aug^st.
God does often take away from them that refuse to pay to God his tenth: his
words be plain, Sermon. de temp. 219. Quid auid^ supputas? Nouem tibi parts
retractae sunt, quia decima^ dare ^oluisti. August.
Whereupon do thou greedily reckon? The nine parts are taken from thee,
because thou woudest not pay the t^nth. For, (as he says a little after) This
is the Lords most just custom, that if thou will not give him his tenth part,
thou shall be revoked or brought to a tenth. What he means by that speech
shows A^acensis. tract. (...) dec. where citing the said sentence of S.
Augustine, Aiacens.
he expounds it thus: ad d^c. r^uocaberis, id est, nouem parts amittes. Thou
shall be revoked to the tenth, that is, Thou shall loose thy nine parts. An
easy thing with God, if a man withhold from him his tenth, to make him, in
steed of gaining a tenth part (which he seeks to gain by keeping it from the
minister) to leese ten times as much another way. Also in the Gloss upon the
decrees, Cap. Maiores, 16. q. 17. S. August. is cited, as saying, that Therefore
now a days there are so often tempests and sterilities of Sea and Land,
dearth of victuals, mortalities and f^mines, because people do not pay to God
their Tenthes. And in the sermon before alleged he says directly; What
would thou do, if taking to himself the nine parts, God had left thee but
the tenth? which surely is even now done, when as the blessing of the rain
being withheld, thy hungry harvest fails, and either the hail has smitten,
or the frost has scorched thy vintage. And let us not think but that this
reaches farther then to the husbandman; unless we suppose with the heathen
Syrians, That our God is if the God of the mountains, 1. Reg. 20. 23
and not of the valleys, of the land, and not of the sea.

Unto these two Fathers, I will adioyne the words and determination of two
ancient Councels, and so the judgment of many Fathers at once. The one is
Council. Council.
Tribur. Tribur.
which Cap. 1^. brings in God, speaking thus: Da mihi de^imam, etc. Give me
my tenth. If thou will not give me my tenth, I will take away thy nine. If
thou will give me my tenth, I will multiply thy nine. The other is Synod.
Synod.
Arelat. Arelat.
4. Cap. 9. which affirms that No man can can give acceptable (...) of the
rest, unless first he separate the tenth unto the Lord. Which (says that
Council) he has appointed or reserved for himself from the beginning; and
that many grudging to pay that tenth, are therefore often brought to a tenth
part. According whereunto it has been long since held for a case of
conscience among the Canonistes very clear; Joan. Andrad. and Hostien. in C.
propter st^ril. de Locat. C.
That a man not prospering upon a living which he rents, if it be found that
he has not used to pay his tithes well, his landLord is not bound in
conscience to abate him his rent; because it is to be presumed, That because he
paieth his tithes no better, God does punish him, and will not suffer him to
prosper. And the like sense and notice seems at this day to rest, Reuertim.
16. q. 1. Perus. lib. 6. de Decim. cap. 1. etc.
as received by tradition from former times, in the hearts and minds of many of
our own country people, husbandmen, who are found to make such conscience of
paying their Tithes, which they very aptly and truly call Gods part, that
they think they should not prosper (as men that have robbed God himself) in
the rest of their goods. Which part of godly fear being wiped out of the
minds of others, makes them many times to defile their hands with this sin
without remorse: and to undo and overthrow themselves without any notice of
the true cause thereof.

Now having spoken thus much of the disprofit and hurt that arises in
defrauding the minister of his due, in communicating to him our of goods
sparingly, it is easy to gather on the other side, that by conseq. If for
illiberalitie and ill dealing, men be punished, that for Liberality and
upright dealing in this kind, men are blessed of God. For first generally,
That God does and will bless them that keep his commandments and ordinances,
is a thing so out of all question, that it were monstrous impiety to doubt of
it. And this being a principal commandment, appertayning to the first
table, Gods own immediate worship, it must needs be likewise, that the
greater blessings do attend upon it. For God has said, Them that honor me,
I will honor: and they that despise me. shall be despised. 1. Sam. 2. 30. Then
for the particular, we have God himself the giver of all blessings, speaking
thus, Mal. 3. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be
meat in my house. And prove me now therewith says the Lord of hoastes, if I
will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and pour you out a blessing
without measure. And I will rebuke the deuoure^ for your sakes, and he shall
not destroy the fruit of your ground: neither shall the vine be barren in
the field, says the Lord of (...). To this accords Solomon, Proverb. 3. 9.
where he says: Honor the Lord with thy riches, and with the first fruits of
all thine increase. So shall thy Barnes be filled with abundance, and thy
presses bu^st with new wine. Neither are the words of the imitatour of Solomon,
I mean Jesus the son of Syrach, in this case unworthy to be recited, who
Ecclesiasticus. 35. 6. has thus: The offering of the righteous makes the
altar fat, and the smell thereof is sweet before the Lord. Give the Lord his
honor with a good and liberal eye, and diminish not the first fruits of thine
hands. In all thy gifts show aisifull countenance; and dedicate thy tithes with
gladness. Give unto the most high according as he has enriched thee; and
look what thine hand is able, give with a cherefull eye: for the Lord
recompenseth it, and will give 7. times as much. To these, for so much as the
Temple and ministry of the Temple be Connexa, we may add that of the
Prophet Haggai, cap. 2. 19. Consider I pray you in your minds, from this day
and before* from the 24. day of the 9. month, even from this day that the
foundation of the Lords temple was laid. Consider it I say in your minds: Is
the seed yet in the Barn, as yet the vine and the fig tree, and the Pomgranate
and the olive tree has not brought forth. From this day I will bless you,
viz. with all kind of plenty, and abundaunce of wealth and riches.

But what are these to us? These things were spoken to the Jews, Object.
and of their times. Answ.

Yes, Answ.
they perteine to us also; for God is no chaungeling. As they show us how he
would bless his own people, if they did maintain his priests and Leuits as
he appointed: so, seeing God respects his ministers now no less then in
those times, they do also show, That he will bless us too, if we do
maintain them, as he has appointed. The one is a service and sacrifice no
less acceptable unto him then the other, as our Apostle also shows most
excellently in the last Chap. to the Philip. V. 10. Now I rejoice in the Lord
greatly, that now at the last, ye are revived again to care for me. Ye
have done well that ye did communicate unto mine affliction. Not that I desire
a gift, but I desire the fruit which may further your reckning. Now I have
received all and have plenty. I was even filled, after that I had received of
Epaphroditus that which came from you, an odor that smells sweet, a
Sacrifice acceptable and pleasant unto God. And my God shall fulfill all your
necessities thorough his riches in Christ Jesus, etc. See what words of
affection are here. what commendation of this duty our Apostle gives. It is a
sacrifice acceptable and pleasant to God: he reioiceth at it: he desires it
not so much for his own need, though he were in necessity, as for their
riches: that by it their accounte might be augmented: and for it, God (as he
assures them) would fulfill all their necessities. Syrach says, God will
recompense it 7. fold. Solomon assures that so thy barnes shall be filled: and
the presses even burst with abundance. And God himself says: if they would
but prove him upon this point, they should see how he would open the windows
of heaven, and pour down blessings: that he would rebuke the Deuourer, and
make their land to be a pleasant land, etc. What words might God have used
rather then these, to persuade us in this point, to stop their mouths and
answer all them, that account the mainteance of the minister to be a matter
of charge, and themselves to be empouerished thereby? He will have us to
know, that he does recompense it cum foenore with advantage; and that it is a
surer way to make a man rich, then the employment of it in any other course.
Genesis 39.
Potiphars house and all that he had was blessed for Joseph's sake: 2. Sam. 6.
12.
The house of Obed Edom because of the Arc: and the wydowes store by reason of
Elias. Even so men are blessed, bettered, and enriched: not beggered, 1. Reg.
17.
hindered or impouerished by the minister of God, when he is maintained as he
should be. God deals with men in this case* as husbandmen with their grounds.
The ground which of it self is fertile, and yields them most store, they toil
and keep best, they plant and sow most, that it may the better yield them
increase: And God, those that show themselves most thankful unto him, by
paying duly his part, most loving unto, and careful for their ministers, by
mainteining them aright, he does most bless: makes their stoare most
increase, and their labor best to prosper, that so they may be more and more
able to do their duty, and further religion.

1. The godly Jews believed thus: in consideration whereof they used of old,
to call their Tithes Diuitiarum Sepem, the hedge of their riches; See the sense
and use of this Phrase, Job. 1. 9.
as which did fense and preserve in safety their, together with Gods part.
Rab. Aq. in Pirt-Aboth.

They taught it (as we have already seen) for doctrine current and worthy
belief, That The Lord does recompense this kind of Li^eralitie, and (will
give for it 7. times as much, Ecclesiasticus, 35. 7. That thereby their barnes
should be filled with abundance, and their presses run over with new wine.
Phil. Iud. lib. de praem. Sacerd. and hon. Al^ae (gentes) g^meates and coactae
vix ta^dem conferunt, pero^ae quaestores c^u pestem publicam, nunc has nu^c
illas causas fin, endo, ^ead praes^itutu^, tempus tributa repraesentent. At
haec gens Sacerdotib. debi^am pecuniam libe^s gaudensque depromit, quasi no^
daret sed acciper^t, adde^s faustas ominationes and gratiar. actiones
populariter, idque quotannis, nec viris cessantib. nec mulierib. sed alacrit^te
spontanea, quanta nullis verbis exprimi potest, conferentibus.
Proverb. 3. 9.

And upon assurance and persuasion thereof used to pay their tithes, and other
accustomed duties, not as our people often do, with murmuring and grudging,
sparingly and fraudulently, as if they counted all lost that went that way:
but cheerfully and gladly, liberally and most justly, as if they accounted
themselves to receive not to yield a benefit: and to be beholding to the
Leuits and priests that they did vouchsafe to accept at their hands such
oblations, etc.

2. The deuouter sort of the heathen thought thus, as withnesseth Diod. Sic.
lib. 5. cap. 2. Biblith. who says, that many of the R^manes vowed and paid
their Tithes to Hercules: posteaque fortunatiores facti, and afterward became
the wealthier: and that the Custom of paying Tithes began of this, That some
of the heathen Gods had told and promised, that whosoever would offer unto them the
tithes of all their goods, should have a happy life, and great increase of
wealth: which the heathen people believing to be true, did observe such
payment.

3. That this was also the faith and persuasion of the godly Christians in
ancient times, is very manifest by their Testimonies, and their practice. For
S. August. says expressly: Our forefathers therefore abounded in all kind of
wealth and plenty, because they duly paid to God his tithes, and to Caesar
his tribute. And a little after in the same place, in the person of God, he
speaks thus: what? would thou put out thy goods to increase? wilt thou lay
out little, and receive for it more? Behold, Give to me then says the Lord: I
do receive little, and give for it more. And otherwhere. O homines stulti,
etc. O men unwise, what hurt does God command, (in demanding the tenth)
that he should not deserve to be heard? Thou give not this gratis, August.
Hom. 48. Sermon. de temp. 219. de Decim. Prou. 3. 9. Exodus 30. 12 Conc. Trib. cap
13
which thou shall receive again with great interest. And a few lines
following: Lo, Thou have in the holy scriptures warrant from the Lord
himself, by which he has promised thee, that If thou will give him thy
Tithes, thou shall receive not only abundance of fruits, but also health of
body. Thy barnes (says the scripture) shallbee filled with corn, and thy
presses flow over with wine. And, There shall not be among them any plague nor
infirmity. The Council of Tribur. (as you heard before) supposes God to say
thus unto us; Da mihi decima^, etc. Give me the tenth: If thou give me the
tenth, I will multiply to thee the nine parts: and again Si ergo quaerat
aliquis, Cur deci^^^ dantur? Sciat* and. If any therefore do make a question,
why tithes are to be paid? Let him know that therefore they are to be given,
that by such devotion God being pacified, may more largely afford us those
things that be necessary. etc.

It may appear also by their practice, in that they did so generally every
where, all Christendom over, give up and establish to the Church their tithes
both Predial and personal, 2. continue their oblations, and 3. bestow upon
the Church sundry endowments of lands and possessions, etc. which how might it
be they could possibly in so general, uniform, large and liberal manner and
measure ever have been induced unto, had it not been, that they hell and
believed this as a truth most certain and undoubted, That being liberal to
God and his ministers, they should procure God to be liberal unto them: by
dealing favorably and uprightly with the one, they should obtain favor
blessing and prosperity of the other?

Now as the very heathen, the godly Jews, and the ancient and most religious
Christians believed this to be true, viz. That by paying to God their tithes,
and honoring him liberally with their goods, and by consequence, by maintaining
the minister of God in good and liberal sort, they were not the poorer, but
the richer, they did not hinder themselves, but made themselves to prosper: So
must we believe also, unless we do or will imagine, that they all were
foolishly deceived, and did they knew not what, or (which God forbid) think
that God in making such promises and offers of blessings, and happiness, does
but feed and deceive us with vain words, but draw us on with frivolous
allureme^ts to hinder and undo our selves. But Be not we deceived. God neither
will be mocked with in this matter at our hands, nor does he mock and delude
us: what he promises he will make good. He has well wherwithall to do it. If
we sow plentifully, we shall reap plentifully. God (says S. Aug.) is always
ready to do us good* but he is often stayed from doing it, S. August.
through the malice and wickedness of men, who will have the Lord God to give
them all things, and yet they will not (of that they have) offer or give to him
any thing again. Hereof let men conside^ well. Seria res agitur. It is a
matter of importance that is in hand: and such as concerns every man very
much. Hereby shall al be tried. I know that men do now adays respect profit
and gains not a little: and will not deny, but, that (as the world now goes)
men had need to use any good course they may, to save and spare, to get and
increase their goods. But let men be advised, that in this matter they run not
a wrong course, and whereby they think to save a little, they leese much: and
fearing to lay out any thing, they gain nothing. In no case more then in this,
is that fulfilled which Solomon has, Proverb. 11. 24. There is that
scatters, and is the more increased: but he that spares more then is right,
sur^ly comes to poverty. And ponder aright, whether of the two they ought to
believe; Humane and carnal imaginations that suppose men are hindered, or God
that says they are enriched thereby: men's vain fantasy, that say it is a
burden, a charge, a very beggering of the place, to maintain the minister
liberally, or Gods word that teaches, it is a benefit, the way to riches, the
direct means to get abundance, wealth, and prosperity: worldly and covetous
motions which insinuate, that to have less teaching, and preaching, less
exercise of religion is most for their profit, and best for the place, or
Christ himself which testifies and assures us, that if we seek the kingdom
of God, which is there principally found, where the preaching of the word is
most plentiful, all these things, these outward, transitory and worldly
things which serve for this present life only, shall be added* and as it were
were exabundanti, thrown in unto us, and come unlooked for.

CHAP. X.
Comprehends, The sum and conclusion of the whole discourse. And declares
some motives that have put the Author in hope, that his labor shall not be
without some good effect: which God for his Gospels sake vouchsafe. Amen.

NOw have I through Gods Asista^ce, brought to an end the explication of this
parcel of scripture that teaches al men the will and rule of God, touching the
ordinary maintenance of the ministers of his Church. In handling whereof I
have somewhat at large (and yet not so largely as upon many occasions I might)
declared the particulars thereof in such sort and manner as at the first I
purposed them, and the scope whereunto I have had respect, did require: And
have plainly proved by apparent reasons, The sum of the whole treatise.
evidence of the word of God, the judgment of the Fathers, and pactise of al
times, That the minister of God to the end he may be enabled and not
discouraged in his Ministry, ought to have such maintenance, allotted and
assured him as is liberal and sufficient, and the same certain not voluntary:
that so he may as well know, what to receive for his maintenance as to do and
perform for his office. To this, every one that is a hearer of the word, must
for his part, without respect what others do, according as God has enabled
him yield and contribute, out of such goods in general, and out of all such
goods in special, as God has blessed him with with. Wherein no vain pretenses,
no idle excuses can take place, for God will not be mocked. This being Gods
rule and measure, that what a man sows, that also shall he reap.

Touching the practice of this doctrine, He that reads advisedly what I have
written, shall plainly perceive, That the ancient and usual practice of our
Church was agreeable hereunto. For so long as our Ministry enjoyed wholly her
endowments, her offerings and her tithes: in a word so long as there were in
the land none other then Rectories so long as each sort of Tithes Personal as
well as Predial were duly paid unto the Church: so long our ministers could
not but be condignely maintained. From which look how far the estate of our
ministry at this present is declined, so far do we come short of the due
and right practice of this doctirne.

The principal cause that has moved me to handle this argument, has been
the love I bear unto the Church of God, and fervent desire I have to see the
Ministry thereof in our land at length to flourish, or at least to be
competentlie provided for, and redeemed from that servile condition, needines
and contempt, wherein a great part thereof does dwell. The sight and notion
whereof cannot but move the hearts of all such as sincerely love learning and
religion, to lament it, and to desire, and, what in them is, endeavor the
redress thereof.

To bring this thoroughly to pass, the right and best way is, That the true,
and ancient practice of our Church in this behalf, which yet continues (God be
praised) in the greatest part of our land, and in most parishes, might be
restored into all, and firmly settled again throughout the same.

But of that seeing there is little hope, the next way is, That the state of
our Ministry for maintenance might be reduced as near unto that best and
absolute course, as possibly and conveniently might be.

How this might be effected, may be perceived by that I have written.

Which I have published to the world, in hope thereby to occasion such of the
lay sort as are godly minded, of their own accord, so far as lies in the^,
to put the same in practice* those that be of the ministry, better to
consider of its estate and misery, and with me to open their mouths in so
good and necessary a cause: Neither am I altogether without hope that the same
may be some motive and inducement unto such as be in place of authority, to
provide for it by wholesome and effectual Laws.

The causes and motives that have bred and confirmed in me this hope and
expectation are these;

1. For the matter handled the whole treatise throughout, I have delivered
nothing but the truth, nothing but what is consonant to the word of God* to
reason and equity, and to all ancient and good practice. For though I dare
not assume unto my self (let no man so understand me) that every sentence,
every reason and argument, every answer is such: yet for the maine points and
more general positions themselves, I hold them to be so agreeable to truth,
and consonant to reason, that I doubt not to affirm, That therein I have
spoken nothing but the truth, nothing but what is agreeable to reason and
equity: and therefore ought where we fail to be put in practice, as well as
where already we are in the right be continued.

2. In regard of the persons who^ it concerns, namely the ministers, and
those not a few, of our Church, the ministers I say of the Gospel, and
Preachers of the word of God. Their cause it is that I do handle, their
greeuances that I do make known. And it seems unto me, That seeing there is
regard had of men of all other professions, and upon due suggestion, convenient
relief and remedies granted and affoorded from time to time for their wants
and distresses, there is great reason and cause why we should hope, that they
also may obtein the like favor and benefit, the like or greater cause once
appearing. For, for my part, I can not, nor will not conceive so evil of those
thorough whose hands these things must pass, and by whose means principally
this kind of redress must come, that they will be upright and indifferent to
all sorts of persons else, and partial and hard unto the ministers of the
Gospel only. Though it be true, that, The Laytie is always offended with the
Clergy, and ready to hurt them what they can: yet my persuasion is, that this
shall be found true, but only in the vulgar sort of the^: and that the better
and worthier sort, specially they, who are chosen and singled out from all the
rest, as men of an upright heart and fearing God, will show themselves every
way indifferent to one as well as to another: and howsoever any passion or
affection may sway them this or that way at home in their private affairs,
yet being in place where only the Commune Bonum of Chapter or country is to be
respected, they will with the heathen man employed for his common wealth,
Simultates deponere, lay aside all grudges and passions, and look only to that
which their place and calling, equity and piety requires at their hands.

3. The present time: In which, religion being now thoroughly settled, Heresies
extirped, Schisms suppressed, and all contentions about doctrine or discipline
well quieted, also knowledge and learning abou^ding, and the use and necessity
of a learned ministry more then heretofore appearing, that opportunity is
offered to provide for the external state and good of the Church and
ministry thereof, which in former times was not to be had.

4. The present estate of our ministry, which differing far from that some
30. or 40. years ago it was, necessarily requires a better regard to be had
thereof. For then the ministry was filled up with Tag, rag, such as the time
would yield: Taylers, Weauers, Cobblers, etc. and whosoever else but would, was
made a priest. Whose desert commonly was such, That if they had but x. pounds a
year, less (if their maint. should be proportioned to their merit) was enough
for them. But now (God be thanked) our ministry either is, or (if due
provision for them were allotted) presently might be stoared with able and
learned men. And were it not lamentable (what if I said intolerable?) That
such men, graduates, Preachers, etc. should be feign to serve, (as often they
do) like those hedge priests, for x. pounds a year? And that men, having
spent their friends wealth, their own patrimony, their golden time and best
days, in great and sundry studies, should be enforced to accept of a peeld
Benefice not worth above 20. pounds, or 30. pounds a year? Is this condign
reward for such studies and expenses? and fit maintenance for such men? Surely
in mine eye, it is an indignity so great, That with less sin a great deal
might we continue and keep still those unworthy men in the ministry, then,
not providing due and competent maint. for them, procure in these: considering
that to contemn and abase them that are worthy contempt is in it self no
great fault; but to make them contemptible that deserve honor, and debase them
that for their learning and excellent gifts are worthy double honor and great
preferment, can be no small offense.

5. Whereas the reverend fathers of our Church have by their late Canons
provided, and will no doubt to their uttermost, carefully respect the
observation thereof, viz. that henceforth none be admitted into the
ministry, but such, as in some tolerable measure be fit therefore; I see not
how they can to the full perform this, until all their Churches be duly
provided for, of some tolerable and competent maintenance which in many 100.
Churches is yet wanting: but must, will they nill they, now and then lay their
hands on some unfit and unlearned persons; least else, such poor, ransacked
and impaired Churches be left wholly destitute. Wherefore, it behooues that
better provision be made then yet in many places is: til which be done, the
fault and cause in mine opinion is rather to be imputed unto those that, rather
then they will duly provide for Churches, will have such: then unto those,
that such necessity compelling, ordeine such to be in the ministry.

6. This also does not a little encourage me, for that I do not, as affecting
innovation and singularity broach any strange, new, difficult and untried
course, but (against all such as affect newfangled, confused and deformed
platformes) do, urge only A Reducing (and that but in some measure) where we
have by corruption of times digressed, Unto that course, which already planted
in the land, since Popery under Popery, and before Popery, has continued, in
most places is still practiced, and for the particulars is such, and of such
sort, as I am assured no reasonable and religious man, but will easily grant,
that it were to be wished might in all places be settled.

7. The things in particular that I intimate to need redress, are so few, so
reasonable, so necessary, and so easy to be effected and had, that is to say;

1. An endowment of all Churches; all those Beggarly stipends that many where
yet do stand, being wholly removed and done away.

2. A larger endowment of some Churches, which hitherto are very sparely,
badly, and vnreasonablie endowed.

3. A mitigation of some unreasonable, and ouerhard Customs, prescriptions and
Compositions.

4. A due provision for recovery of personal tithes, either in kind by
Computation, or (more likely to be obtained) not in kind, by some reasonable
and real composition. These things are I say so few, so reasonable, so
necessary, and so easy to be effected, that verily I do hope, few or none
will oppose thereagainst.

8. Ad to these the effects and use of these things, namely the increase and
condign reward of learning, the furtherance of the Gospel, the bettering of
our ministry, the planting of able and worthy teachers (where now they are
most seldom found) in the greatest congregations, and by consequence, the
peoples own salvation and eternal good, etc. All which, with other like
laudable effects cannot but ensue of the practice hereof, if it were in all
places in some good measure settled. There is great desire pretended at this
day of a learned ministry, and not a few do see, that the greatest and in
manner the only let thereto at this present is want of maintenance. If the
desire thereof be as great and sincere, as the means to procuremaint* is
ordinary and easy to be had, the thing desired will with great facility and
readiness be accomplished.

9. It does also appear, that there is great care had, and much desire
expressed, to weed popery out of the land, and reduce the fautors thereof into a
better course. To which purpose former laws have lately been much and worthily
explained enlarged and corroborated. This can by no one means better ^e
effected, then by increasing (by means of good maintenance) the number of good
and able teachers. Where do such commonly desire to nestle themselves, but in
some obscure and blind places where is little or no preaching? And what
Ministers of our Church do they more favor, then such as be ignorant and
simple? which argues, The more preachers, the fewer papists; The better
Ministry, the less popery. Light and darkness, preaching and papistrie will
never dwell together. So that this is one principal way indeed Sine vi et
Sanguine to root out and expel from among us this pestilent religion.

10. Moreover, I do see that the performance hereof will tend much to the
credit of the Gospel, and praise of us that profess it: as contrariwise* the
neglect and omission hereof is to the reproach of the one and shame of the
other. For how can it be other then a reproach and dishonor to our land, that
God having blessed it above other lands with variety and plenty of all things,
yet no small number of the ministers of God therein should live, as if it were
some hungry and barre^ soil, in need and penury of al things? that
professing religion and pretending a zeal unto the Gospel, we should yet hold
in contempt and vile account the Ministers of the Gospel? and should suffer
them (as hitherto in many places) to live by the courtesy of the people, no due
maintenence provided for them? And how can it be but a reproach and discredit
to our towns and Cities, to our trades-me and artificers (if they could see
their own shame) that whereas the Ministers that live in the country parishes
and among husbandmen, do commonly live in very good sort, equal with the
wealthier of the place; such as live in towns and cities, among tradesmen,
etc. live commonly in very poor and needy estate, like unto the poorer sort:
and that among the former, though the parish be not above 30. or 40.
housholdes, the Minister lives better then among the later, though the parish
be an 100. yea 200. housholdes? On the other side, would it not be a great
praise unto us, and singular testimony of our sincere zeal unto the Gospel,
if the Ministers thereof were so well respected, and so duly provided for,
that in every parish there were such tolerable maintenance at the least, for
the Minister of the place, provided and settled, that generally the whole land
through, as well as in London, it might truly be said, That (unless it be
through their own default) There is not one needy and very poor Minister
therein.

These with some other, Phil. Iud. of the leuiticall priests.
which here for very breuities sake I omit, be the Considerations, which, I often
reuoluing in my mind and pondering upon, have wrought in me that hope and
expectation before mentioned. The issue and event whereof I refer to God
alone, in whose hands are the hearts of all men, Nemo Sacerdos tam pauper, quin
dives videatur.
and whose is the cause I have in hand.

The God of all grace, author and giver of every good gift, so work in all
those that profess the name of Christ, and desire the prosperity of his
Gospel, by the inward operation of his holy spirit, That they may always do
those things that be well pleasing in his sight: and yield such Christian and
unfeigned obedience to his holy word and ordinance, as may be to the edifying of
his Church, furtherance of his Gospel, the good example of others, the
everlasting comfort of their own souls, and above all to the eternal praise
and glory of God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father
and the holy spirit be all honor and glory both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

