A BOOK OF very Godly Psalms and prayers, dedicated to the Lady Letice
Vicountesse of Hereforde.

GEVE GOD THE GLORY NOW AND EVER MORE



IMPRINTED AT London, in Fletestreate at the sign of the Faucon, by Wylliam
Griffith. 1570.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and verteous Lady: My Lady Letice Vicountesse of
Hereforde. etc.
MAdame: among many my gracious Lord your husbands, bounden and faithful
vassales: whom his L. bounty and Noble virtues do daily purchase abroad
(unknown to your Honor) I am one: who in my late sickely solitariness, for
the recreation of my weak soul, compacted and devised these few Psalms and
prayers, which by the commendation of the godly and learned, I have published:
not to supplye the scarcity, but to increase the plenty of heavenly
comfortes, whereof England flows: God grant us to use them to his glory,
that we may continually possess the light of his louinge countenance Amen.
Dedications of works both great and small, are common, for diverse respects.
Then let my poor little labor, have liberty to bestow it self, where it
would gladliest show the token of a thanckefull heart. Right Honorable my
good Lady, be it therefore your will, to take this well meante simple travail,
to your use and tuition, that by your estimation of the same, it may grow
common and acceptable amongst the verteous sort of Ladies and gentlewomen:
praying it may be so faithfully occupied, as it was of the Author zelously
purposed, who, your thrall: am of ready endeavor, to honor and to serve my
good Lord and you: by all the ways I can: humbly beseeching my heavenly
Father to preserve and to bless you both with long life in happy days,
repleate with grace and all manner of heavenly blessings, to your permanent
assurance, of true felicity. Amen.

Your good La. assuredly bounden. Roger Edwardes.

The first form of prayer. 1.
UP O sinful soul, and look upon the Lord of light, and life: see thine
own state: how thou art clothed with ignorance, sin and shame: how thou art
deformed, an abominable filthy, and ouglye Monstar: a caytife and a bond slave
to Satan: a fleshly beast and a fool: unworthy to lift thy head toward the
seat and majesty of our God: or to stand in the assembly of the wise.
Therefore shake off thy earthly stuggishnes: and get thee before the Lord of
grace and mercy, in lowlines and repentance, he is full of fatherly pity and
compassion and will not refuse thee: submit thy self with tears: and he
will accept thee: he will forgive thee thy sins, and enritche thee with
wisdom beauty and glory. Therefore tarry not, and thou shall be blessed.

O spare me a little, and suffer me to recover my strength O Lord, before I go
from hence and be no more seen.
TO thee O Lord, belongs mercy and forgeuenes: Bow down thy fatherly eye,
O God, and pitifullye behold the dampnable state of me thy wretched and
sinful servant, which am unworthy, but through thy incomprehencible mercy,
once to think, much less to lift my head and voice toward thy heavenly seat
and majesty. Therefore in the bowelles of thy fatherly love and pity, I
beseech thee O dear Father for Christ Jesus sake thy sweet Son our Savior,
to mollify my heart with thy grace, that humbly confessing my manifold sins
and wickedness, and from the botome of my heart thoroughly repentinge the same. I
may by thaide of thy holy spirit, frame and govern the rest of my life in
the ways of thy commandments, that justified in thy grace, I may with the
rest of thy chosen saints, give continual praise and thanks unto thy
eternal majesty, through Christ our dear Lord and Savior: Who with thee
and the holy Ghost, reigns in unity of glory and power sanctified for ever
and ever. Amen.

Psalms.
BLessed are they that walk in thy laws O Lord, for they are, undefiled in
the way.

Blessed are they that keep thy testimonies: sekinge thee in the truth of
their heart.

I make my humble petition unto thee, with my whole heart: O be merciful unto
me according to thy word.

Instruct my heart in thy wisdom, teach me O Lord, and lead me forth in thy
paths: open my lips to publish thy praise, exalting the glory of thy
majesty with thanks giving. For thou art the Lord our God, thou haste fashoned
and made us, and not we our selves.

We are thy people, whom thou have prepared in the secrets and power of thy
wisdom.

We are thy sheep whom thou preseruest, and fillest with the bounty of thy
blessing.

The heavens and earth with all the things in them contained, are the works of
thy hands O God, framed, wrought, governed and preserved, by thy omnipotent
will and power.

All things depend of thee O Lord, and without thee is no being.

Lord thou have been our refuge from one generation to another, before the
mounteynes wear brought forth: or ever the world was made: thou art our God
from everlasting, and world without end.

Be merciful unto me therefore O my god: let me come before thy presence with
songs of thankesgeuinge, rejoicing in thee O Lord the strength of my salvation.

My soul cleaves fast unto the dust, O quicken thou me according to thy
truth, facioninge my heart, after thy Testimonies, for therein is life.

O turn away mine eyes from vanity, and my heart from coueteousnes, and
quicken me in the ways of thy statutes O God.

Thou art gracious O Lord, make me obedient unto thy word, for thy mercy
endures for ever.

Gracious and righteous art thou Lord, thou teach sinners in the way: her
est them when the call upon thee and sauest them in thy mercy.

Great is thy mercy O Lord, full of compassion long suffering and ready to
forgive, plenteous in goodness and truth.

Thy merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us: thy truth O Lord is
everlasting.

Mine eyes are lookinge toward thee O God, patiently waitinge for thy mercy
wherein I trust.

Hide not thy face from me O Lord, for I am in trouble: O have thee to succor
me.

Deal with me according to thy name, O God, sweet is thy mercy, O deliver me,
for I am weak and helpelesse, my heart is wounded within me: my comfort is in
thy word O Lord.

Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul: in thee is my trust, let me not be
confounded, neither, let the enemy triumph over me.

Leave me not in dessolation and misery O Lord, least the enemy has cause to
say, that thou have forsaken me, and left me to the will of his tirrannye.

Here me, O Lord, in the multitude of thy mercyes, and in the truth of thy
salvation deliver me.

I go hence like the shadow of a clowd, and am driven away as the grass
hopper.

My beauty wythereth as the hay, and my glory fades as the flower of the
feelde.

As the wheel ronneth her course, so pass I through this vale, caryinge
nothing with me, neither have I time to behold the things I have.

My life is but a spanne long, I am ever lookinge into my grave: for the place
wherein I now flourish, is ready to refuse me, neither will it receive me any more.

O Lord teach me to consider the shortness of my days, and sapplie my heart to
wisdom.

Thou art of my inheritance the only portion: I have chosen thee for my
part, forsake me not O God.

Thou art always by me, thou O Lord have holden me up by my right hand.

Whom have I in heaven but thee, neither is there any in earth that I desire,
but only thee O Lord.

My flesh and my heart are weak, and ever failing, but thou God art the
strength of my soul, and my portion for ever.

Be thou my strong hold O Lord, whereunto I may always resort: thou have
promised to help me, thou art my house of defense and my Castle.

Rydde me O Lord and deliver me in thy righteousness: Incline thine ear to me
and save me.

Through thee have I been holden up, ever since I was borne: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb: my praise shall be always of thee.

Call to remembrance thy tender mercies which have been ever of old.

Remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me O Lord for thy goodness.

Cast me not out of thy presence, forsake me not in my weakness, but comfort me
in thy mercy O God.

Sh^we me thy ways, teach me thy truth, and lead me forth in the paths thereof
O Lord.

Teach me thy statutes, O God and quicken me with thy grace for thou Lord art
my Savior, in thee only is my hope and trust foreuermore.

Go not far from me O God: God have thee to deliver me.

Take me out of the mire that I sink not, O save me from them that hate me:
Yea out of the hands of the unrighteous and cruel man, Lord deliver me.

Let not the water flooddes of sin and sorrow drown me, let not the deep
swallowe me up, let not the pit shut her mouth on me, O my Savior.

Draw nighe unto my soul and save it, O deliver me because of thy
righteousness.

Hold up my goinges O Lord, and guide my footesteppes in thy paths that I
slip not.

I call upon thee O Lord, for thou will here me: incline thine care unto me,
and harken unto my words.

Show thy maruailouse loving kindness, thou that art of them that trust in
thee, the gracious Lord and Savior.

When my heart is in heaviness, I will from the ends of the earth, call upon
thee O God, and thou shall set me upon thy rock, for thou art my hope and
strong Tower against the enemy.

I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever, and my trust shall be under the
covering of thy wings O God.

Thou have given a tooken to such as fear thee, that they may triumph because
of thy truth.

Thou O Lord herest the desires of thy servants, and geuest an heritage to
theyme that fear and love thy name.

Therefore are thy beloved delivered, here me O Lord and help me.

O stablish me according to thy word that I may live, and let me not be
disapoynted of my hope.

Hold thou me up and I shall be safe, yea my delight shall be ever in thy statutes.

Thou O Lord art my defense and my shield, my trust is in thy word.

Therefore will I go forth in the strength of thy grace, making mention of thy
righteousness.

Then will I ioyefully singe to thee, O my God: for thou art my refuge my
merciful Lord and Savior.

THou O God sendest raygne upon thine inheritance, and refreshest it when it
is weary.

Thy congregations shall dwell therein, for thou. O Lord, have prepared for the
poor.

Thou have given thy word, O God, great is thy beauty and power of thy
messengers, let righteousness possess the land O lord.

Yea Lord let thy gracious light of thy merciful countenance, shine upon thy
people.

Give knowledge of the ways to the simple: let all nations see the salvation
of thy Saints.

Let all tongues and kinreddes praise thy name O God, and rejoice, for thou will judge thy folk in the righteousness of thy truth.

Thy kingdom is over al, make thy name known, from one end of the earth to
the other.

Thou art our God O Lord, and thou only art to be praised: which helpest us in
our distress, and fillest us with thy benifittes.

Thou art our God, even the God from whom comes salvation: thou art our Lord
and God by whom we escape death and destruction.

O think upon thy congregation whom thou have redeemed and purchased of old.

Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance, and mount Sion wherein thou
haste dwelte.

Suffer not thaduersary to triumph, that blasphemeth thy name, pluck thy hand
out of thy bosom and consume theyme.

Lift up thy feet, thou that may distroy every enemy, which means to do
evil in thy sanctuary.

Let thine enemies be scattered, O Lord arise and vanquishe theyme for evermore.

Make them to vanishe like the smoke that they be no more seen: yea let the
glory and power of the ungodly perish at thy presence O God, so, that it may
have no more place upon earth.

Let their table be made a snare to take them selves withal: and let the
things that should have been to there wealth be an occasion of there
destruction.

Let their eyes be blind and see not, and ever bow down their backs.

Power out thine indignation upon them, and let all thy wrathful displeasure
take hold of them.

Let them fall, from one wickedness to another, and not come unto thy
righteousness.

Let them be wyped out of the Book of life: and not be written among the
righteous.

Let all them be ashamed and consumed that seek after the souls of the
Innocents: yea let them perish without redemption, that, for hatred to thy
name, immagine myscheefe to thy Saints.

Thou art our God and King of old, the help that is done upon earth, it is
thou thy self that do O Lord.

O deliver not the soul of thy turtle Dove unto the multitude of her enemies,
forget not the congregation of the poor for ever.

Give victory unto thy people, deliver them, and make them to dippe their feel
in the blood of thine enymies.

Look upon thy covenant O God, let not the simple go away ashamed, but let
the poor rejoice and be merry in yt there Savior:

Let the righteous give thanks, in thabundaunce of peace, and praise thy name,
O Lord for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XVII. of John.
THese things spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father the
hour is come: glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify the^, As
thou haste given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life,
to all them that thou have given him. And this is life eternal, that they know
thee to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent. Jesus Christ. I have
glorified the on ye earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do, And now glorifi me, thou Father, with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was. I have declarede thy Name unto the
men which thou gave me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave
them me, and they have kept thy word. Now they know that all things
whatsoever thou have given me, are of the. For I have given unto them the
words which thou gave me, and they have received them, and have known surely
that I came out from thee, and have believed that thou have sent me. I pray for
them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me: for they
are thine. And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in
them. And now am I no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I
come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy Name, even them whom thou have
given me, that they may be one, as we are. While I was with them in the world,
I kept them in thy name: those that thou gave me, have I kept, and none of
them is lost, but the child of perdition, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled. And now come I to thee, and these things speak I in the world,
that they might have my joy fulfilled in them selves. I have given them thy
word, and the world has hated them, because they are not of the world, as I
am not of the world. I pray not that thou should take them out of the
world, but that thou keep them from evil. They are not of the world, as I am
not of the world. Sanctify them with thy truth: thy word is truth. As thou
did send me into the world, so have I sent them into the world. And for
their sakes santifie I my self, that they also may be sanctified through the
truth. I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in
me, through their word. That they all may be one, as thou, O Father, art in
me, and I in thee: even that they may be also one in us, that the world may
believe that thou have sent me. And the glory that thou gave me, I have given
them, that they may be one, as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that they
may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent
me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me. Father, I will that they which
thou have given me, be with me even where I am, that they may behold my glory,
which thou have given me: for thou louedst me before the foundation of the
world. O righteous Father, the world also has not known thee, but I have
known thee, and these have known, that thou have sent me. And I have declared
unto them thy Name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved
me, may be in them, and I in them.

WE acknowledge and praise thee O glorious God almighty, maker of heaven and
earth. Creator of all things visible and invisible.

To thee O Lord, all powers do bow, heaven and earth with all that is in
them, are governed by thy will, as obedient to thy commandment.

Each thing does testify thy glory and power, O God.

The Angels and Saints continually cry unto thee, Holy art thou, holy art
thou, holy art thou, which was, is, and ever shall be.

The Patriarchs and Prophets with thy chosen Saints and witnesses, have
testified and taught thy holy truth will and majesty.

They have witnessed the promised Messiah, his incarnation, and nativity

His Baptism and annoynting, his works, and doctrine, his apprehension and
examination. His death and passion, his resurrection, and ascension.

The proceedinge of the holy Ghost the promised comforter.

Who purchasing our hearts, by the operation of thy grace, fashioneth the same,
to believe the premises.

And that thy dear Son Christ Jesus through his blood and righteousness: has
delivered us from the curse of the law, reconcilinge us to thy favor.

So that being called through free grace and adoption, we are made coheires
with him whereby we call Father.

He sits on thy right hand, gloryfied with majesty and power our all.

He makes continual intercession for sinners: till the number of thy chosen
be filled.

Then shall the end come, Heaven and Earth shall be disolued, the living shall be
changed, the dead shall arise: and he shall come with glory to judge them both.

Him with thee O Father, we praise and glorifye: by whose merittes and
righteousness thou have opened the kingdom of Heaven, to thine elect,
wherefore, O Lord help thy servants. Whom thou have redeemed with the
precious blood of thy Son.

Make us to be numbered, with thy chosen to enjoy, the glory and bliss
everlasting.

Save thy people O Lord, and bless thine

inheritage.

Govern us, and guide us, and defend us, against the world and Satan.

Communicate thy grace unto us, that we being filled with thy gifts O Lord,
may evermore praise thy name with continual thankesgeuinge.

Circumsise our hearts with thy grace, that being decided from this witching
world: we may wholly cleave unto thee, O Lord.

Lift us up out of the mire O God, that we sink not in corruption. Deliver us
O Christ our Savior, from sin and death, that we may possess the kingdom
which thou have prepared for thy Saints.

O Lord have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us Lord, and let the light of thy
countenance shine upon us.

Make us to put our trust in thee O Lord, so shall we never be confounded.

Arm our hearts with humility and patience O God, that cleauinge fast unto
thee, we may despise and vanquishe, the malice, wrath, assaults, and
persecutions of Satan and this wicked world. For in thee is our help
comfort and salvation.

Prayers.
O Merciful Lord and louinge father, that for performance of thy mercy
promised, in the secret purpose of thine inserchable will and power: did
send thy dear Son to take upon him our fleshly shape and substance: in whom
thou art pleased, and by whose merits and righteousness thou art pacified,
toward such of Adames loss children, as thou have chosen and called to
salvation, through faith and holy conversation in Christ Jesus. As it has
pleased thy divine majesty of thy free grace and goodness, to reveal thy self
unto us wretches by the working of thy holy Spirit in believing the Gospel of
thy Son: So be it thy will O loving Father, pardoninge our frailties, to have
mercy upon us: ayding our infirmities with the power of thy grace, against the
concupisence of the filthy flesh, against the illusions of the foolish world,
and against the craftle suggestions of Satan: that we be not ouercomed nor
hurted thereby, but fastened in thy Son, to grow in all manner of godliness, to
that heavenly perfection that is requisite in thy saints, for the glorifyinge
of thy name: whereby we may possess the glory, bliss, and eternal life which
thou have promised and performest to all them that thou art willing to save, in
the blood and righteousness of thy sweet Son, Christ the Savior: to whom
with thee and the holy Ghost, reigninge in unity of majesty power and glory
be all praise honor and thanks for ever more. Amen.

O Dear Father for thy sweet Sons sake Jesus Christ our merciful Lord and
Savior, have mercy upon us. And in the bowelles of thy fatherly goodness and
pity, here us sinners: here us good Lord, and for the glory of thy name
grant our humble petitions. Which we offer unto thy divine majesty, through
Christ our redeemer and advocate.

O Merciful Lord and loving Father that of thine inserchable providence,
goodness and power, dydest prepare the glorious globe of heavenly light, to
walk and appear in the bonds of thy commandment, to the universal
comfort, preservation and bliss of man in this transitory being, and the
rest of thy creatures, comprehended within the compass of the transitory and
visible heavens Give us thy frail and drerie servants the light of thy
heavenly grace, so to shine in our hearts, that leading our lives in pure
holiness and virtue: we may ioyefully feel the presence of thy divine majesty
in our souls to the invincible, gladness, strength, peace, and salvation of the
same: through thy dear Son Christ Jesus our Savior, reyguing with thee and
the holy Ghost, in unity of majesty, eternal honor and glory, praised and
hallowed for evermore. Amen.

O Merciful Lord and loving Father, look favorably upon me thy frail and
wretched creature: humble my heart to the repentant confession of my sins,
give me the help of thy holy spirit to amend my life: and O Lord, guide and
bless all my thoughts, works, and words, with thy heavenly grace, that in
all things obaying thy will. I may worthily, through Christ give honor, glory
and praise to thee o father, in this and in ye world to com ame^

O Father of grace, mercy, and comfort, thou know my wantes and
imperfections, reform me, and bless me, preserve me. In thy tuition, make me
obedient, faithful and diligent in my vocation, ever reioycinge in thee O
Lord, through my Savior Christ: in whose blood and righteousness thou have
purchased thy chosen saints to believe in thy promises to their salvation,
whereby justified in thy mercy, we are bold notwithstanding thodiouse bourden
of our sins, through thy dear son Jesus, to call upon thy most glorious
majesty as he has taught us saying with humble and ioyefull hearts.

Our father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: give us this day our daily bread:
forgive us our trespasses: as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thou only art
King, thou only art mighty, thou only art glorious, praised in thy works
for ever more. Amen.

O Lord save thy Church, and bless thy congregations.

Lord make thy name known and feared throughout all the world, and let all
nations profess Christ the Savior in the truth of thy Gospel.

Lord destroy th'enimies of thy word, And defend the lovers of the same.

Give us plenty of true Preachers and Ministers of thy word.

And make us habundant in good works. Lord comfort the poor.

And make the ritche plentiful in charity.

Lord bless thy people with grace.

That in all things they may seek the glory of thy name.

Bless me O God, and preserve me in thy fatherly tuition: power forth
th'abundante bounty of thy good gifts upon my poor familye and children.

That in the riches of peace, joy, and love, we may praise and magnify thy
name, to the which be all honor and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

The second form of prayer.
O Lord make humble my heart to confess my sins wherein I have miserably
offended, and wretchedly declined, from thy most holy will and majesty: so
that I am not worthy to present my self before thee O God: but it lyketh thee
of thy endless pity to receive sinners whenever the turn unto thee, it
lies in thy will to convert us. Turn us therefore O Lord, and turn thou unto
us and have mercy upon us: set us at liberty in thy grace, lose our hearts
from worldly affections and purge us from thillusions of the same, strength en
us against Satan: comfort and instruct our weak blindness, with thy holy
spirit, that we may open our mouths through Christ our Savior, to praise
thy name O God with thankesgeuing, to the which be honor and glory perpetual.
Amen.

Learn to know and serve the Lord, O my soul: for it is lovely to praise
and extol the name of our God.
Psalms.
THou broughtest a vine out of Egipte, thou threwest out the Hethen, O Lord,
and did plant it in their habitations where taking root it prospered, and
filled all the Land.

The hills were covered with the shadow thereof, and the bowghes of it wear as
the Cedar trees.

She streatched out her branches into the Sea, and her sprayes into the River.

Plenteous was her fruit, thy people drank of her grapes, and wear refreshed.

Thou thy self tookest charge thereof O Lord: with thine own hands dydest
thou fence it round about, and semest to take high pleasure there in.

How is it then come to pass, that her hedges are all broken, her frythes are
trodden down, her grapes be common to the spoylers?

Yea the wild Boore does root it up, and the wild beasts of the feelde
deuowre it.

Turn thee again, O Lord God of hosts, look down and see thy vyneyarde,
which thou thy self with thy right hand had planted, making the branches
of it beautiful and strong for thine own pleasure, and for the plentiful
commodity of thy servants.

It is cut down and brent, the distroyers have spoiled it, and laid it wast
in despite of thee, O Lord. Behold O God where once thou tokest pleasure, and
where thy people wear refreshed, it is now mored up, by the swine of the
adversaries, and is become the harbroughe of Wolfes and Foxes.

Hear O thou Shepeheard of Israel, thou that leadest Iosephe like a sheep,
thou that sit on the Cherubins: sture up thy strength O Lord, and help thy
servants: distroys these men of malice.

O Lord how long will thou be angrye? shall thy ieolosie burn like fire for
ever?

Turn again, O God, and show us the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

O remember not our sins, but have mercy upon us: and that sone, least we
fale into misery.

Help us O Lord, for the glory of thy name: O our Savior deliver us, be
merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

O let the sorrowful sighinges of thy prisoners come before thee: according to
the greatness of thy power and mercy, preserve thou those, O God, that are
appointed to dye.

O Lord how long will thou be angrye with thy servants: how long will thou feed thiem with the bread of sorrow, and give them plenteousnes of tears
to drink?

Thou have made them a very strife unto there neighbors: and there enemies
laughe them to scorn.

Tunre thee again O Lord God of hosts, show us the light of thy countenance
and and we shall be whole.

Pour out thine indignation upon the Heathen, and upon them that fear not thy
name, for they have devoured thy servant, and laid wast thy dwelling place.

And for the blasphemy wherewith they have refiled thy majesty, reward thou
them O Lord seuenfolde in there bosoms.

O my God distroye thine enemies, make them like unto a wheel, like dust
before the wind, and like dry straw in the flame.

Let thy wrath be kindled against them, O Lord, like the fire that bourneth up
the woodde, and as the flame that cousumeth the mountains.

Persicute them with thy tempest, tear them asonder with thy thunder boltes,
distroye them with thy storms, make the^ to mealt in desperation, for fear of
thy majesty, O God most high.

Let them be confounded and vexed ever, more and more, let them, be ashamed,
and known, that thou whose name is Iehoua, are the only most high God of power
and majesty over all.

Then we that be thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, shall rejoice and be
glad, praising thy name, O Lord, withmelodie and thanksgiving, from
generation to generaton world without end. Amen.

BLessed are the people that rejoice in thee O Lord, they shall walk in the
light of thy countenance and be ioyefull.

There delight shall be daily in thy word, and in thy righteousness shall they
make their host.

For thou art the glory of there strength, and in thy loving kindness, shall
thou O Lord make sure their habitation and honor.

Thou art there Lord and defender, there King and only Souiour.

Whosoever dwells under thy defense O most high shall abide under the
shadow of the almighty.

For thou will send from Heaven, to save us from the reprofe of them that would
eat us up.

We will say unto thee O Lord, thou art our strong hold, and our hope, our
God in whom we trust and rejoice.

Thou shall be merciful unto us, O God: for our defense is under the shadow
of thy wings: yea Lord thou shall deliver us from the snare of the hunter and
cruel man, from the plague, and from the noisome pestilence.

Thou will send forth thy mercy O God, our hope and comfort is in thy truth, we
dwell among the Wolves and Foxes, our souls are among the Lions.

Thou Lord wilt make us glad through thy works: and the remembrance of thy
benifittes shall make us ioyefull in geuinge thanks.

When the ungodly are green as grass, florishinge in their wickedness, as the
Baye tree, then shall they perish in there thoughts, and in there works shall
they be distroyed for evermore.

The righteous shall florishe like a Palm tree, and shall spread like a Cedar
in Libanus.

Such as be planted in thy house, O Lord, shall continually prosper in the
courts of thy habitation: they shall be beautified with all manner of blessings:
and standing in the glory of thy presence shall extol and praise thy greatness
for evermore. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. to the Romans.
NOw then their is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For the Law of the Spirit
of life which is in Christ Jesus, has freied me from the Law of sin and of
death: For (that that was imposible to the Law, in as much as it was weak
because of the flesh) God sendinge his own Son, in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, That the righteousness of
the Law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit. For they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the
flesh: but they that are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. For the
wisdom of the flesh is death: but the wisdom of the spirit is life and
peace, Because the wisdom of the flesh is enimitie against God: for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indede can be. So then they that are in the
flesh, cannot please God. Now ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit,
because the Spirit of God dwells in you: but if any man has not the Spirit
of Christ, the same is not his. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead,
because of sin: but the spirit is life for righteousness sake. But if the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicke^ your mortal bodies, because that his
Spirit dwells in you. Therefore brethren, we are detters not to the flesh,
to live after the flesh: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye: but if
ye moreffye the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live. For as many
as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not
received the spirit of bondage to fear again: but ye have received the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. The same spirit bears
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. If we be children,
we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, if
so be that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him. For I
count the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory, which
shall be showed unto us. For the fervent desire of the creature waits when the
sons of god shall be reveled. Because the creature is subject to vanity, not
of it own will, but by reason of him, which has subdued it under hope,
Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we know that every creature
groneth with us also, and trauaileth in pain together unto this present. And
not only the creature, but we also which have the first fruits of the Spirit,
even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the adoption, even the redemption of
our body. For we are saved by hope: but hope that is seen, is not hope: for
how can a man hope for that which he sees: But if we hope for that we see
not, we do with patience abide for it. Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities: for we know not what to pray as we ought: but the spirit it
self makes request for us with sighs, which can not be expressed. But he
that searches the hearts, knows what is the meaning of the Spirit: for he
makes request for the Saints, according to the will of God. Also we know
that all things work together for the best unto them that love God, even to
them that are called of his purpose. For those which he knew before, he also
predestinate to be made like to the Image of his Son, that he might be the
first borne among many brethren. Moreover whom he predestinate, them also he
called, and whom he called, them also he justified, and whom he justified,
them also glorified. What shall we then say to these things? If God be of our
side, who can be against us? who spared not his own Son, but gave him for us
all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things also? Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? it is Christ, which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who
is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation or anguish, or
persecucion, or famine, or nakedness, or perrill, or sword? As it is written,
For thy sake are killed all day long: we are counted as sheep from the
slaughter, Nevertheless, in all these things we are more then conquerers
through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither death, no, life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Prayers.
O Merciful Lord and loving father, that of thy free grace and mercy: by the
blood and righteousness of thy dear Son Christ Jesus, have delivered us out
of the bands of death and darkness, and through the working of thy holy
spirit to believe thy Gospel, have called and chosen us to th'assuraunce of
the heaunly inheritance everlasting: Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us
Lord: and for thy sweet Sons sake our Savior, comfort, guide and
strengthen us with thy holy spirit, holding continually thy holy hand over us:
so to pass through this blind and fraudfull world, that no flattery,
illusions, nor enchantments thereof deceive us: and that no troubles, malice,
stripes, persecutions, fear, tyrrany, torments nor death, may separate us from
thee O God: but advaunced in triumphant victory, despising the world, the
flesh, and the Deuell: we may in gladsome hope wait and desire the coming of
our redeemer, for the diliuery of thy blessed Saints to appear in thy
gracious presence, in our renewed bodies, glorified and immortal, there to dwell,
with Angels and archangels praising thy majesty with ioyefull,
thankesgeuing: for evermore. Amen.

Bless our hearts with thy grace, O Lord, And make us ioyefull in thy peace.
Save thy Church O God.

And preserve thy Saints, in the bliss of thy countenance.

Comfort the nedye and distressed, O Lord. And gladden the souls of them that
trust in thee.

In the multitude of thy mercies here our prayers.

And for the love of the dear Son our Savior, perform our requests to the
glory of thy name.

O Merciful Lord and louinge Father, in whose power and blessinge all the
creatures of Heaven and earth do rest and are preserved: as it is proper to
thy goodness, to feed and to cherish al them with the immeasurable bounty of
thy blessings: So let it please thee, O God, to enritche us thy frail and
sinful servants. Not only with the knowledge of thy heavenly will and
majesty, but also with faithful obedience to thy word, in which being
taught and guided by the power and grace of thy holy Spirit: we may walk in
righteousness before thee all the days of our life: through Christ thy dear
Son our Savior: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all praise honor,
glory, and thanks, for evermore, Amen.

Lord comfort us in the way, And bless the works of our hands. Save us, O
God.

And make us evermore ioyefull in thee.

Praised be thy name, O God.
The thurd form of Prayer.
MErcifully, behold, O Heavenly Lord and Father, th'infirmities of us thy
frail, and Rebellious servants, (whom in thy holy will, thou have called to
the knowledge of the Gospel of thy Son) and reliue us with thy grace, that
being strengthened with thy holy Spirit, we may overcome and vanquishe, all
the suggestions, temptations and conspiracies of Satan: withstand the malice,
persecutions, and troubles of this wretched world, and so triumphinge in
heavenly victory, wholly to rejoice in thee, O God* praysinge and halowinge thy
name, through Jesus Christ thy sweet Son our Savior, Amen.

LET all knees, bow: all hearts humble themselves: and all tongues publishe
the praise of our louinge God, for he is glorious merciful and kind, and
embraces repentaunte sinners, with Fatherly pity, and satisfies there
desires whenever they faithfully call upon him, through Christ the Lord of
grace and redemption. Therefore let us be merry in him and give thanks.

PSALMS.
THy hands have fashoned and made me, O God: according to thy merciful
kyndnes thou have given me understanding of thy word.

The same is my comfort in trouble: it quickens me at the heart: they that
love thy name are glad when they see me: because I put my trust in thy word.

O think upon me according to thy truth: and let mercy embrace me on every
side.

O look upon me and be merciful unto me, as thou art wont to those that love
thy name.

O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort, according to thy word. Yea let
thy merciful kyndnesse come upon me, that I may live after thy
commandments, for therein is my delight.

Take not the love of thy Law from me, O Let my heart faithfully trust in thy
word, least I perish in my trouble.

I am thine, O save me, let me not shrink from thy word, keep my feet from
fallinge and my thoughts from evil ways, O Lord.

Show me the light of thy countenance, O God: and stablishe me in thy
statutes: that if trouble and heaviness take hold of me: my feet slip not
from thy testimonies.

O deliver me from the wrongful dea, linges of men, that in the safety of
peace, I may apply my self wholly to thy Law, for the great comfort of thy
people, O God.

When the multitude of them that hate me for thy cause, do gether themselves
together to confound me, thou shall deliver me with thy right hand, O Lord.

The righteousness of thy word is everlasting: thou art the defendour and
Savior of thy people: there enemies shall be dispersed: and in there own
inventions perish for evermore.

Thou shall avenge thee of them, O God, thy gracious mercy and truth to thy
servants is everlasting, for thou will not fail them in there troubles.

Blessed are thy whom thou chastenest and teach in thy Law, thou geuest
them patience in time of adversity: until the

pit be didgged for the ungodly.

Thou preseruest the souls of the sanctes: O Lord make us fervent in love,
toward thee: and to hate the thing that is evil: then will thou with thy
right hand deliver us from the hands of the ungodly and deceiptfull men.

Correct us Lord in thy mercy, and give us not over unto death: remember us
according to thy favor, that you wast wont to bear unto thy people, visit us
with thy salvation, O God.

Though we be sometimes afraid, yet is our trust in thee, O God, neither have
we care what flesh is able to work against us.

In thy word Lord, will we rejoice: and comfort our selves in thy promise, our
trust is in thee alone, O God, we fear not the power of men.

The offeringe of a free heart will we give thee, O God, praising thee with
comfortable songs of thankesgeuinge.

It is thou, Lord, that deliuerest thy folk out of troubles, and geuest them
there desire upon there enemies.

Open unto us the gate of righteousness, O God, that we may see the felicity of
thy Saints, and rejoice in the gladness of thy chosen, and give thanks with
thine inheritance.

We will thank thee, O God, thou have heard us, and art become our salvation:
thou only art to be praised, O Lord, thou art gracious, and thy mercy
endures for ever.

Praise the Lord, O my soul: and all the secrettes of my heart praise ye his
holy name.

Praise the Lord, O my soul, and forget not his benifittes.

He forgeueth thee thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities.

He saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving
kindness.

He satisfies thee with the plenty of his blessings, and cherishes thee in
th'aboundance of his fatherly bounty and goodness.

He executes righteousness and judgment, he delivers thoppressed, and saves
the poor from the tirrany of the mighty.

He shows his ways unto his servants, and guides his people in the ways of
his commandments.

He is full of mercy and compassion, long sufferinge and of infinite goodness
and truth.

He will not always be chidinge, neither keeps he his anger for ever.

He deals not with us after our sins, neither does he reward us according
to our iniquities.

For look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him.

Look how wide also the east is from the weast, so far has he set our
sins, asonder.

Yea like as a Father pitieth his dear child: even so is he a merciful Lord
to them that fear him.

For he knows whereof we be made, he remembers, that we are but dust.

The days of man are but as grass and florisheth as the flower of the feelde:
for so sone as the wind goes over it, it is gone, and the place thereof knows
it no more.

But the merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon them,
that fear him, and his righteousness upon their childers children.

Even upon such as keep his covenant, and think upon his commandments to do
them.

The Lords seat is in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all.

O praise the Lord ye Angels of his, ye that excel in strength: ye that
fulfill his commandments, harken unto the voice of his words.

O praise the Lord all ye hosts, ye servants that do his pleasure:

O speak good of the Lord all ye works of his: in all places of his
dominion: praise the Lord O my soul.

CHAP. II. to the Ephesians.
ANd you has he quickened, that wear dead in tresspasses and sins, wherein,
in time past ye walked, according to the course of this world, and after the
prince that rules in the air, even the spirit, that now works in the
children of disobedience, Among whom we also had our conversation in time past,
in the lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the will of the flesh, and of the
mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others. But God
which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved us. Even when
we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose grace ye
are saved, And has raised us up together, and made us sit together in the
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, That he might show in the ages to come the
exceeding riches of his grace, through his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God, Not of works, least any man should boast himself. For we are
his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained, that we should walk in them. Wherefore remember that ye being in
time past Gentiles in the flesh, and called uncircumcision of them, which are
called circumcision in the flesh, made with hands, That ye were, I say, at
that time without Christ, and were aliantes from the common wealth of Israel,
and were strangers from the couenantes of promise, and had no hope, and wear
without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus, ye which once were far
of, are made nere by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, which has made
of both one, and has broken the stop of the particion wall. In abrogatinge
through his flesh the hatred, that is, the Law of commandments which
stands in ordinances, for to make of twain one new man in himself, so
making peace. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by his
cross, and slaye hatred thereby, And came, and preached peace to you which were
a far of, and to them that were nere. For through him we both have an
entrance unto the Father by one spirit. Now therefore ye are no more
staungers and foreners: but citizens with the Saints, and of the householde
of God, And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ieuss
Christ himself being the chief corner stone, In whom all the building
coupled together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. In whom ye also are
built together to be the habitation of God by the spirit.

Prayers.
O Merciful Lord and loving Father, that of the incomprehensible riches of thy
mercy, toward the disobedient and loss children of Adam, (who serving Satan
after the blind and unbridled lusts of the vile flesh were carried away
through sin and ignorance to dampnation.) Have reconciled us to thy favor
through grace and adoption in Christ Jesus the righteous, by faith and holy
conversation in whom: we are delivered from eternal death and destruction:
Have mercy upon us, yea Lord have mercy upon us: and for love of thy sweet
son our Redeemer, defend us against the power of the distroyer, and with thy
mighty hand lift us up out of the fylthie puddle, and deathfull corruption of
this abominable world, purifying our hearts with thy grace, that, we, being
wholly inclined to heavenly desires: may grow perfect in all holiness, and
aboundinge in the good works, which thou have prepared for thy Saints to
walk in, for the glorifiinge of thy name: we may grow an acceptable Temple,
for thy continual dwelling in us. O Lord: to th'inspeakeable peace and
comfort, and to the everlasting bliss and salvation of our souls: Through
Christ our Savior. Amen.

Lord let not the darkness of ignorance, comprehend us.

Lead us by the continual light of thy grace to work righteousness.

Let us not sleep in sin, O God. Quicken our weak souls against earthly
sluggishnes.

Give us the heavenly reast of thy inspeakable peace, O Lord.

And nurrishe us with thy grace to salvation.

Pitiefully here our complaints O dear Father.

And grant our requests for thy sweet Sons sake our Savior.

O Merciful Lord and loving Father, remember th'infirmities of thy frail
servants, assistinge our weak souls with thy grace, that in all things we
may, love, honor, and obey thy heavenly will and majesty, waking and
walkinge in the paths of righteousness, to the scope of perfect holiness,
contemning this witchinge world withal her foolish illusions, for the true
glorifyinge of thy name, through Christ Jesus our Savior. Amen.

Lord comfort, the nedye, the sick, the prisoned, the tormented, the
distressed and helpelesse with the presence of thy grace, and have mercy upon
them.

Make us all ioyefull in thee, O God, with thankesgeuing through Christ Jesus.
Amen.

Lord into thy hands I commit my body and soul, receive me to thy
tuition, O God.
The fourth form of prayer.
AWake out of thy swinish slomber, O sily soul: shake off the deathfull sloth
of this earthye trunk: and watch for the Lord which is at hand: prepared to
judgment: Cease not to pray, for the forgeuenes of thy sins, labor
fervently in thy duty, then shall thou be clothed with mercy and righteousness,
to enter in, as a beautiful geast, with that ioyefull Bridegroom to the feast
of eternal mirth and dilicacye: there to dwell in joys for ever more.

O Merciful Lord and louinge Father, without whose aid and mosion, I am not
able to stir one member toward heavenly service, the bourden of this slow,
and sinful flesh does so over charge my weak soul: according to thy
Fatherly pity look upon me, O God, and quicken my dull spirit with thy grace,
to rise out of this myrie puddle, and to come before thy presence, in humble
repentance, crauinge thy mercy for my miserable sins and wickedness: and
being released in the blood and righteousness of Iesns Christ, I may ioyefully
serve honor, and praise thy eternal majesty: through the dear Son my
merciful Lord and Redemer: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all glory
and thanks for ever. Amen.

Praise the Lord O my soul.
I Will always give thanks unto the Lord, his praise shall ever be in my
mouth: My soul shall make her boast of him, the humble shall here thereof and
be glad.

O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together.

I sought the Lord and he heard me, yea he delivered me out of all my fear.

They that have an eye to him are lightened, and there faces shall not be
ashamed

The poor cry unto the Lord, and he hears them: yea and saves them out of
all there troubles.

The Angel of the Lord, tarieth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them.

O taste how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that puts his trust
in him.

O fear the Lord, ye that be his Saints: for they that fear him lack
nothing.

The Liones do lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the Lord, shall
want no manner of thing that is good.

Thou man that desire to live and see good days: keep thy tongue from evil
and thy lips that they speak no guile, eschew evil and do good, seek peace
and follow it.

The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open to there
prayers.

His countenance is against them that do evil: to root out the remembrance
of them from the earth.

The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

The Lord is nighe to them that are of contrite heart: and will save such as be
of humble spirit.

Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
all.

Misfortune shall slaye the ungodly: and they that hate the righteous shall be
destitute,

The Lord deliver the souls of his servants, and all they that put there
trust in thee shall be blessed for evermore.

Rejoice in the Lord ye that be righteous: for it becomes well the Just to
be thankful.

Praise the Lord with harp: sing Psalms unto him with Lute and Instruments of
ten stringes.

Singe unto the Lord a new song, sing praises lustely unto him with a lovely
courage.

For the word of the Lord is true and all his works are faithful.

He loves righteousness and judgments, the earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord.

By the word of the Lord wear the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by
the breath of his mouth.

He gathers the water, of the Sea together, as it wear on a heap, and
lays up the deep as it wear in a treasure house.

Let all the earth stand in fear of the Lord, stand in awe of him all ye
that dwell in the world.

For he spoke and it was made, he commanded and it stood fast.

The Lord brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught, and makes the
devises of the people to be of none effect, and casts out the determinations
of princes.

The counsayles of the Lord shall endure for ever, and his determinations are
everlasting.

Therefore blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord Iehoua: yea blessed
are they that have chosen him to be their inheritance.

The Lord looks down from heaven, and beholds all the children of men,
from the habitation of his dwelling he considers all them that dwell upon the
earth.

There is nothing that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is
any mighttie man delivered by much strength.

An horse is a vain thing to save a man: for he shall not deliver him by his
great force, neither help him with the swiftnes of his foot.

Behold how fatherly the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and how
lovingly he embraseth all those that put their trust in his goodness.

He delivers their souls from death, and feeds them in the time of dearth.

Let every soul patiently wait for the Lord our Savior, who comes to
deliver his people, then shall the righteous rejoice and be glad.

Quicken my soul, O God, let thy mercy embrace me, let thy holy spirit
comfort me, So shall I be saved in thy grace, to magnify and praise thy name
for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. IIII. to the Ephesians.
I Therefore, being prisoner in the Lord, pray you that ye walk worthy of
the vocation whereunto ye are called, with all humblenes of mind, and mekenes,
with long suffringe, supportinge one another through love, Endeuoringe to keep
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one
spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your vocation. Their is one
Lord, one faith, one Baptism. One God and Father of all, which is about all,
and through all, and in you all. But unto every one of us is given grace,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he says, when he
ascended up on hye, he lead captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. Now,
in that he ascended what is it but yt he had also descended first into the
lowest part of the earth? He that descended, is even the same that ascended,
far above all heavens, that he might fill all things) He therefore gave some
to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors,
and Teahcers, For the gatheringe together of the Saints that for the work of
the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, Till we all mete
together (in the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of God) unto a
perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ. That we
hence forth be no more children waueringe and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the deceyte of men, and with craftines, whereby they lay in wait
to deceive. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up
into him which is the head, that is Christ. By whom all the body being coupled
and knitte together by every joint, for the furniture thereof (according to the
effectual power, which is in the measure of every part) receaueth increase of
the body, unto the edifying of it self in love. This I say therefore and
testify in the Lord that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in
vanity of their mind, Having their cogitation darkened, and being strangers
from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
hardness of there heart: Which being past feling, have given them selves unto
wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with gredines. But ye have not so
learned Christ. If so be ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the
truth is in Jesus, That is, that ye cast of, concerning the conversation in
tinie past, the old man, which is corrupt through the deceiuable lusts. And
be renewed in the spirit of your mind, And put on the new man, which after
God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. Wherefore cast of lyinge, and
speak every man truth unto his neighbor for we are members one of another. Be
angry, but sin not: let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, Neither give
place to the Devil. Let him that stole, steal no more: but let him rather
labor and work with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have to
give unto him that needs. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your
mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister
graco unto the hearers. And griue not the holy Spirit of God by whom ye are
sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath
cryinge and evil speaking be put away from you, with all maliciousnes. Be ye
courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiuiuing one another, even as
God for Christ's sake forgave you.

Prayers.
O Merciful Lord and louinge Father: that by impartinge of thy free grace and
mercy, unto us: being erst, through sin, dampened in the flesh: have
delivered us from the bands af ignorance and death, to become the children of
light and life, through faith and obedience to thy word, revealed and
ministered unto us by thy dear Son Christ Jesus: our promised Savior: in
whom thou have begotten thy beloved Saints enritching them with plenty of
all manner of heavenly gifres, to become holy and acceptable in thy sight to
their salvation. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, yea Lord have mercy upon us: and
forthy names sake look favorably upon thy Saints dispersed throughout the
whole world: stand fast by them, O God, aydinge their fraylties with the
comfort of thy holy spirit, to be constant in faith, humble and obedient to
thy holy will and correction, patiently waytinge in ioyefull hope, thy good
pleasure and determination in all things: habounding in mekenes and love,
reioycinge in true holiness and virtue, gladdinge their hearts with, thassured
truth of thy promises: for the more fruition whereof extend yet thy further
favor and mercy, O Father: augmenting the number of faithful ministers and
preachers of thy word, prospering their labors with the effusion and working
of thy grace, for th'enlarginge of the kingdom of thy son amongst all
nations: that we and they united in faith, grace, truth, spirit, and Baptism,
may be framed and knitte, one entire and firm body, wrought in adoption, and
fashoned in love and obedience, to our bead and Savior Christ Jesus, thy
sweet Son our Lord, for whose love, O Father, we beseech thee to here our
humble petitions perfourminge the same to the glory of thy name. Amen.

Lord help our weakness.
And strengthen us against the power of the enymie.
Lord feed us with thy heavenly gifts.
And make us acceptable to thy self.
Increase thy blessinge in us, O God.
That we may be plentifuull in all goodness.
Augment the kingdom of thy Son, O Father.
Let all knees bow, and give praise to thy name.
Make our hearts humble and penitent.
And evermore redye to serve thee with thankesgeuinge.
Make us to lift up our voices to thee, O God.
And for the love of thy dear Son, Christ Jesus our Savior here our
requests, and grant our just desires, O Lord.

Pray.
O Father that of thy immeasurable love and mercy do continually knock at
our hearts, with the motion of thy holy spirit, to watch, to pray, and to
give thanks: Fulfill now, O Lord, all the peticions of thy servant, tending
to the praise of thy name: always comforting our weak souls with the
presence of thy grace, to dedicate our selves through faith and holy
conversation in Christ: to thy glorious majesty: O God, which with thy sweet
Son our Savior, and the holy Ghost, reignest, in unity of dominion power
and glory praised and hallowed for ever and ever. Amen.

Give victory to thy Saints.
And make them evermore ioyefull in thee. O God.
Receive thy servants to thy tuition, O Lord.
And deliver thy people from all evil.
Amen.
CHAP. IIII. of Jeremy.
O Israel, if thou return, return unto me, says the Lord: and if thou put
away thine abominations out of my sight then shall thou not remove. And thou
shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness, and
the nations shall be blessed in him, and shall glory in him. For thus says the
Lord to the men of Judah, and to Jerusalem, Break up your fallowe ground,
and sow not among the thorns: be circumcised to the Lord, and take away
the foreskinnes of your hearts, ye men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem,
least my wrath come forth like fire, and burn, that none can quench it,
because of the wickedness of your inuensions. Declare in Judah, and show forth
in Jerusalem, and say, Blow the trumpet in the land: cry, and gather
together, and say, Assemble your selves, and let us go into strong cities. Set
up the standert in Zion: prepare to flee, and stay not: for I will bring a
plague from the North, and a great destruction. The Lion is come up from his
den, and the distrdyer of the Gentiles is departed, and gone forth of his
place to lay thy land waste, and thy cities shall be destroyed without an
inhabitant. Wherefore gird you with sackecloth: lament, and howl, for the
fierce wrath of the Lord is not turned back from us. And in that day, says
the Lord, the heart of the King shall perish, and the heart of the Princes and
the Priests shall be astonished, and the Prophets shall wonder. Then said I, Ah
Lord God, surely thou have deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, ye
shall have peace, and the sword perceth unto the heart. At that time shall it be
said to this people and to Jerusalem, A dry wind in the hie places of the
wilderness comes toward the daughter of my people, but neither to fan nor to
cleanse. A mighty wind shall come unto me from those places, and now will I
also give sentence upon them. Behold, he shall come up as the clouds, and his
charetes shall be as a tempest: his horses are lighter then Egles. Woe unto us
for we are destroyed. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
may be saved: how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? For a
voice declares from Dan, and publishes affliction from mount Ephraim. Make ye
mension of the heathen, and publishe in Jerusalem, Behold, the scoutes come
from a far country, and cry out against the citees of Judah, They have
compassed her about as the watchmen of the field, because it has provoked me
to wrath, says the Lord. Thy ways and thine inventions have procured thee
these things, such is thy wickedness: therefore it shall be bitter, therefore it
shall perce unto thine heart. My belly, my belly, I am peined, even at the very
heart: mine heart is troubled within me: I can not be still: for my soul has
hard the sound of the trumpet, and the alarm of the battle. Destruction upon
destruction is cried, for the whole land is wasted: soddenly are my tents
destroyed, and my curteines in a moment. How long shall I se the standart,
here the sound of the trumpet? For my people is foolish, they have not known
me: they are foolish children, and have none understanding: they are wise to
do evil, but to do well they have no knowledge. I have looked upon the earth,
and lo, it was without form and void: and to the heavens, and they had no
light. I beheld the mountains and lo, they trembled and all the hills shoke.
I beheld, and lo, there was no man. and all the birds of the heaven were
departed. I beheld, and lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all the
cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his fierce
wrath. For thus has the Lord said, The whole land shall be desolate: yet will I
not make a full end. Therefore shall the earth mourns, and the heavens above
shall be darkened, because I have pronounced it: I have thought it, and will not
repent, neither will I turn back from it, The whole city shall flee, for the
noise of the horsemen and bow men: they shall go into thickets, and clyme up
upon the rocks: every city shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein. And
when thou shall be destroyed, what will thou do? Though thou clothest thy self
with skarlet, though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold, though thou
paintest thy face with coullours, yet shall thou trim thy self in vain: for
thy lovers will abhore thee and seek thy life. For I have heard a noise of a
woman trauailinge, or as one laboringe of her first child, even the voice of
the daughter Zion that sigheth and stretches out her hands: woe is me now for
my soul faints because of the murderers.

THe Lord has plesured his people, and helps the meek hearted.

He heals the contrite in heart, and byndeth up their wounds.

He rayseth them up that are fallen, he is louinge to every man: and his mercy
is over all his works.

He fulfilleth the desire of them that fear him, he hears their cry, and
helps them.

Suffrages.
O Merciful Lord and louinge Father, that in the blood of thy dear son
have reconciled, the chosen sort of Adames loss children: that through faith
and obedience to thy word: wrought in our hearts by thy holy Spirit (which in
the haboundance of thy mercy thou powrest upon the faithful.) We might in
Christ Jesus our Savior: cry for grace and forgeuenes of our sins.

For his sake O Lord have mercy upon us, most frail and wretched offenders:
Remember not our sins, nor the sins of our forefathers, neither take thou
vengeance of us, Spare us good Lord, spare us O Father, whom with the precious
blood of thy Son, thou have delivered out of the power of death and hell:
that converted and sainctified in thy grace, we may in newnes of life: worthily
praise and magnify thy name, in this and in the world to come.

Spare us O Father.
Ye spare us, O Father, and so bless us with thy grace: that our hearts being
facioned, by the working of thy holy spirit, to believe and to repent our
manifold sins and wickedness: (in gladsome hope of thy mercy) we may fasten
our selves upon Christ Jesus: to honor thee, to love thee, and to serve thee,
with all our hearts, and withal our souls: walking before thee in holiness and
righteousness all days of our life: extollinge thy name with continual
thankesgeuinge.

Here us O Father.
Here us O Lord and deliver us from all evil bodily and ghostly: save us from
Satan and from all his games and false suggestions: let us not taste of thy
wrath. In wealth, in woe, in health, insicknesse: in life and death, be thou
our merciful Lord and comfortes: from hell and dampnation, save us O God.

Save us O God.
Yea save us Lord and deliver us. From all blindness of heart, from pride vain
glory and hypocrisy. From ambition envy and disobedience, from swearinge and
blasphemy: from fornication, gluttony, and dronkenesse, from all the
deceiptes of the world the flesh and the Devil. From lightning and tempest
from plague pestilence and famine, from battle, from murder, and from sudden
Death: from sedition, from conspiracy, and treason: from all false doctrine
and heresy: from hardness of heart, from contempt of thy holy word and
commandments.

O Father deliver us.
By thy power and mercy, by thy word and promise, by thy wisdom and
providence by thy fatherly love, and pity, by thy truth and compassion, in the
favor of thy sweet Son our Savior.

O Fathe. deliver us.
By the incaruation, nativity and circumcision, by the life and doctrine, by
the precious death, and burial: by the glorious resurrection and assention, by
the righteousness and intercession, by the merits, glory and power of thy dear
Son our Savior.

O Fother deliver us.
Deliver us O Father, and for love of thy sweet Son here us sinners, and for
his sake grant our humble requests which we demand for the glory of thy name.

O Lord and Father we beseech thee to hear us.
Yea Lord be merciful unto us, and here us, praying that it may please thy
heavenly will and magestie, to save and to defend thy Church rulinge, and
prospering the same, by the power of thy grace, in peace, truth and holiness:
and strengthening thy servants, with the continual aid of thy holy spirit,
to walk before thee, in righteousness and virtue, Thy glory may shine amongst
all nations upon the earth.

O Lord and Father we beseech thee to here us.
O Father here us, and let it please thee to teach beautify and to enritche,
the preachers and Ministers of thy word, with true knowledge and love of the
same, that in all their ways words and works, they may sincerely and
diligently seek thy honor and glory, to the comfort of the faithful, and
enlarginge of the kingdom of thy Son.

O Lord and Father, we beseech thee to here us.
Garnishe and adorn our Prince, our magestrates, nobility and rulers, the
people and ministers, with plenty of thy heavenly gifts, that shininge in the
beauty of celestial virtues, and godly conversation, they may worthily and
ioyefully praise and extol thy name in this and in the world to come.

O Lord we beseech thee to here us.
Give peace and prosperity to thy Church, O Lord: erecte, preserve and defend
all faithful Princes and magestrates, to love and to cherishe, thy word truth
and glory: Rule their hearts in faith fear and obedience to thy Gospel:
Instruct them in thy wisdom, give them grace and aid to execute Justice:
and to mayntaine truth: aduauncing the good: and punnishinge the wicked.

O Lord we beseech thee to here us.
O Lord multiply the number of thy Preachers and ministers of thy word,
prosper there labor in thee: increase faith upon the earth: let all nations,
know that thou art the Lord, of power and glory, the Lord of truth and
salvation, and only Savior of the world.

O Lord we beseech thee to here us.
Let thy peace, love and mercy go over all: comfort the innocents,
weakelinges, and distressed: make them humble ioyefull and patient puttinge
there whole trust in thy goodness that never fails: and according to thy
truth, deliver thou them O God.

O Lord we beseech thee to here us.
Preserve the faithful Trauailers of the Earth, bless their works, and
prosper, their just indeuoures: that their labors may turn to the benifitte
of thy creatures: wholly dependinge of thy fatherly bounty and goodness: which
thou haboundantly powrest upon all things to the glory of thy eternal and
almighty majesty.

O Lord we beseech thee to here us.
Preserve thy people O Lord dispersed through out the world: increase their
faith and godliness, hold always the holy hand over them, fill them with
thy peace and grace, arm them with sure hope and cherefull patience:
maintain, bless and preserve, the friendly favorers, helpers, and
herboughrers of them: destroy Satan and his ministers: pour forth thy
wrathful indignation upon thine enemies: dashe their counsels, break their
strength, tear their dominions in pieces, consume them with the furious and
inquenchable blast of thine anger, spoil and distroye them for ever more.

O Lord we beseech thee to hear us.
O Lord direct our ways and lead us forth in the paths of thy truth and
righteousness: that framinge our lives and conuersations after thy will (through
the continual aid of thy grace and holy spirit) we may appear, obedient
and louinge thildren, to the laud and glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ
our Savior.

Lord we beseech thee to hear us.
Make our hearts humble, paciente, and ioyefull in thee, abiding thy good will
pleasure and determinations in all things: louinge one to another: forgeuing
our adversaries: habounding in peace: that our joy may be full and
irremoueable in thee, O God, through Christ our Redeemer and advocate, for
whose love, O Lord, be merciful unto us and hear us.

Be merciful unto us, O Father, and for thy sweet sons sake our dear Lord
and Savior: hear us, and grant our peticions to the glory of thy name, O
God: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, reigning in unity of majesty,
power and glory be all praise honor and thanks, for ever and ever, Amen.

O Merciful Lord and loving Father, that despisist not the prayers of humble
and penitent sinners, have mercy upon us: yea Lord have mercy upon us and
hear us, and for thy dear Sons sake our Savior, pardon our frail
weakness, and help us with thy grace, for thou know whereof we are made:
Turn from us all those euilles that we most justly have deserved: And in all
our troubles health, wealth, need, sorrows, joys, life sickness and death,
make us to put our whole, stay, hope, and help, in thy Fatherly mercy and
goodness: which never faylist them that repose their full trust and confidence
in thee: direct and govern us by the power of thy holy Spirit, evermore to
serve thee, in holiness and pureness of living to thy honor and glory: through
our only mediator and advocate Jesus Christ our Lord: to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost be all laud praise and thanks for evermore. Amen.

Both now and ever, vouchsafe to hear us, O Lord: graciously hear us, O God,
and in Christ our dear Savior thy Son, fulfill our requests, to the honor
and glory of thy blessed name. Amen.

Praised by thy name O God.
For the preservation of the Saints.
O Merciful Lord and loving father, which in the bowelles of thine infinite
mercy, have through thy dear Son begotten thine ellect children: Look
favorably upon thy servant dispersed throughout the whole world, defend
them with thy heavenly grace, hold thy holy hand over them, let thy holy
spirit be ever more with them, and so preserve them and lead them in the
continual profession knowledge and obedience of thy word, that their
conversation in this life being holy, they may in the end obtain everlasting
life, through Christ Jesus thy sweet Son our Savior. Amen.

O Merciful Lord and loving Father, Lord of mercy, truth, grace and comfort,
which take compassion, and sparest sinners: forgive unto me my sins, O
Lord: forgive me my sins. O Just and loving God, that being covered in the
multitude of thy mercies, they be not imputed unto me. Yea Lord assist my
frayletie with thy heavenly grace, that thoroughly repentinge my sinful life
past, I may hereafter by the power of thy holy spirit, resist sin,
ioyefully praising thy blessed majesty with pure and gladsome thankesgiuinge,
through Jesus Christ thy dear Son my Savior, to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost, be all honor glory and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

A general prayer.
Almighty God, our merciful Lord and Savior, fountain of all grace
wisdom and comfort, which know our necessities before we ask, and our
blind folly in askinge. I beseech thee, O louige father, to have compassion upon
mine infirmities, and those things, which thy heavenly wisdom knows
necessary, for the true felicity of my body and soul, (whereof I am both
ignorant and unworthy to make request unto thy divine majesty) vouchsafe to
give me for the worthenes of thy dear Son Jesus Christ my sweet Lord and
Savior. Amen.

O Lord we beseech thee mercifully here our prayers, and spare all those which
confess their sins, unto thee, that they, whose consciences by sin are
accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved through Christ Jesus our
dear Lord and Savior. Amen.

O Merciful Lord and louinge Father, which haste compassion of all men, and
hate nothing that thou haste made, which would not the death of a finner,
but that he should rather turn from sin and be saved: mercifully forgive us
our trespasses, receive and comfort us, which be grieved and weryed with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is to have mercy, to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins, spare us therefore good Lord, spare thy people
whom thou have redeemed. Enter not into Judgment with thy servants, which
be vile earth and miserable sinners, and so turn thine Ire from us, which
knowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults. So make have O
Father, to succor and help us with thy grace, that we may pass the rest of
our life in holy conversation to the honor and glory of thy name: through
Christ our sweet Lord and Savior. Amen.

TVrne thou us O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favorable O Lord,
be favorable to thy people, which turn unto thee in weeping fasting and
prayinge, for thou art a merciful God, full of compassion, long sufferinge,
and of great pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath
think upon mercy. Spare thy people good Lord, spare them, and let not thine
heritage be brought to confusion, hear us O Lord, for thy mercy is great, and
after the multitude of thy mercies look upon us.

For grace and strength of Spirit.
O Merciful Lord and louinge Father, which haste voutchsaued in
th'aboundaunce of thy mercies, to beget us of the new in the blood and
righteousness of thy dear Son our Savior, by whom we are made acceptable
unto thee, regenerated by water and the holy Ghost, to the free forgeunes of
our sins, for the fruition of eternal salvation. Strengthen us we beseech
thee O Lord with the holy spirit the comforter: and for the glory of thy name
sake, pour upon us thy manifold gifts of thy grace, the spirit of wisdom
and truth, the spirit of meekenes and love, the spirit, of peace and
patience: the spirit of Counsel and ghostly strength, that wemaye walk and
continue in all godliness, praysinge and magnifiinge thy glorious majesty with
gladsome and acceptable thankesgeuinge: through Jesus Christ our dear Lord
and Savior. Amen.

reversed:

:reversed

A Prayer for grace to repent, and amend our life.
OH Lord God, and heauenle father, which art a just Judge to punnish all them,
that do continewe to offend thee: as thou art a Father most pitiefull to
receive to mercy all those, which give over themselves to thee: show me thy
grace and favor so, that I may be toutched with inward hatered of my sins,
and that in the place of flatteringe my self to sleep in sin, I may be so
cast down in heart, that the rather I may truly with mouth confess most
humbly to give thee, the honor, glory, and praise due unto thy holy name: and
that, as thou do instruct us thereunto by thy holy word, so (for thy names
sake) make that the same may so lighten and clear our conscience, that in due
examination of all our whole life, we may learn to be angrye and displeased
with all our former and corrupt living. Oh that it may please thee to draw
near unto us, in addressinge and guiding our foot steps, in the true and
perfitte way of obedience to thy holy laws and commandments. Send thy holy
Angel to pitch his tent round about us, that Satan and his infernal army,
never prevail against us: but always with strong faith we may through
Jesus Christ withstand all his crafty subtilties, malice, and snares: knowing
undoubtedly that thou never forsakest them that put there trust in thee. Oh
let us not be lead by th'infirmitie of our untoward flesh, but strengthen us by
the virtue of thy holy spirit. Suffer us not to lie under thy heavy wrath and
vengeance through hypocrisy, but rather toutche us so inwardly, that we may
without ceassinge, sighe and groan unto thee, by true and unfeigned repentance.
And although we be not always so well disposed, to ask and pray, as we ought
to do, yet (good Lord) for thy names sake, stretche out thy mighty hand,
that by the gracious workinge of thy holy Spirit, our minds and hearts may be
drawn, from al earthly and corrutible things, so that our prayers may proceed
of an earnest and inward affection, never presuminge to come before thee with a
double heart, knowinge that whosoever asks or prays for any thing of thee,
not askinge in faith, shall not opteyne. Increase our faith therefore (Oh
merciful Father) that we presently may lively feel the benifites of
remission and pardon of all our sins, through the merits and death of
Christ Jesus our Savior: and so work in us for ever hereafter to live in the
fear of thee, and to stand in awe of thy displeasure: that thou may
continue our merciful Father world without end. Amen.

A prayer for th'aide of God to a holy life.
O Most merciful Lord God almighty, that of thine inserachable power and
wisdom, dydest create all things of nothing, in obedience to thy rule and
commandment: among the which it pleased thy gracious will, not only to
make me a reasonable creature in the celestial form of man kind: but also,
(where, by my natural property state and inclination I was conceived and
borne to ignorance and sin, and thereby to death and dampnation.) So to
limite the time and place of my birth into this world, that in unity of
Baptism, comunion, and healthful doctrine with thy Saints, I am governed and
taught, to know, to profess, to honor and to serve thine omnipotent
majesty, true and eternal God reigninge in trinity of persons inseperablie
knitte in unity of dietie, power, eternity and glory: and also instructed in
the truth of the Gospel of thy sweet Son Jesus Christ my Savior: through
faith in whom I feel that blissful operation of thy heavenly grace, by the
effusion of thy holy spirit, as the free benifite of thy mercy whereby I am
called with the rest of thy chosen children, to th'undoubted hope of eternal
life and salvation: so that erst being far from thee through blindness and
sin: I am now by grace and adoption in Christ the redeemer, brought nere and
reconciled to thy favor, as a Son. Therefore as one yet environed, with many
sorrows, pereiles, wretchedness and calamities, a midst the swarms of
innumerable ennymies visible and invisible, that are prepared to spoil me,
even to eternal destruction: I call for thy help, O God: which only art,
the sure and invincible fortress wherein I may be saved. Streatch forth thy
mighty hand, O Father, and give me a ioyefull victory against the power of
the malicious enemy that works to spill, whatsoever thou would est have
saved. From the bothome of the deep I cry unto thee O Lord to succor me:
and for love of thy dear Son my Savior to deliver me, from the power of
darkness and ignorance: and by thy holy spirit to guide and lead me in the
light and paths of heavenly grace and knowledge: that findinge this transitory
and short life to be but a troublesome passage (besette with many storms,
perels, and deceiptes to perdition) and cleaving fast unto thee and despising
all earthly pomp, and vanities: I may pass through it to the port of
perpetual peace and saftie: there to possess the triumphant, and eternal
joys which are prepared for thine elect: sanctified through faith in Christ
Jesus our sweet Savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all praise
honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer for well vsinge of our vocation.
O Merciful Lord and God, by whose power and benifite I am formed and endued
with humayne shape and reason, and called to thassuraunce of eternal life,
through free grace and adoption in Christ Jesus my Savior: who by his merits,
blood and righteousness, has purchased thy fatherly favor, mercy, and
blessinge for me and for all them that are regenerated in faith and obedience
to thy word: have mercy upon me O God: yea for love of thy dear Son my
Savior, have mercy upon me, and of thy gracious goodness so direct and
stablishe th'inclination, steps and hauiour of my life in this world: that
faithfully, obediently, humbly and frutefully walkinge in my vocation, I may,
through love, subdue my heart and will, to thy ordinances, determination, and
pleasure: meekely and patiently sustayning and seruinge the same, with humble
and hearty thankesgeuing: And thou Lord of thy plenteous goodness and fatherly
blessinge, so amplify, the requisite aid of this my worldly life, that of my
sufficient portion, I may rather be helpefull to the poor and nedye: then for
want, to be a bourden and chargeable to the ritche and haboundant. But in all
my ways, thoughts, pourposes and procedinges, remember me to behold, and
dulye to consider: wherence I came, and whether I must: whereof I consist, and
why I am borne to this world: the shortness and frayltie of my life: the
foolish vanities of this deceivable world, which with all her gawdes does
pass away, as a shadow: and so to esteem the same: that my heart and mind
being altogether inclined to the love of heavenly things: I may by the help
of thy holy Spirit, dedicate my self wholly a quick and spiritual sacrifice
to thy divine majesty, mortified in the flesh, through faithful and holy
conversation in Christ my Savior: to whom with thee and the holy ghost be all
praise honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

A prayer for the christened state.
O Heavenly Lord, which alone art God omnipotent gracious and wise, that of
one clodde of cleye have thus innumerablye multiplied, the kindredes, families,
cities, states, tongnes, and nations of people, deuidinge them into
felowshippes, private and public, mayntayned and preserved by unity and
obedience, to such rule, ordinance, government and power: as thy Fatherly
wisdom has erected, ordained, established and auctorized, for our behofe,
life and being upon earth. In thy gracious favor look upon us: and in thine
irrepugnable power, O Lord, so order direct and govern our purposes and
procedinges in this frail, tormoylinge, unstable and transitory state, that
all things being done in godly love, truth, mekenes, virtuous industrye,
honest care, brotherly unity, and obedience: we may prove, Just, faithful,
fruitful and godly each one in his vocation: in all our dealings and behavior
seminge worthy of thy name, to the glory and praise of the same. Of like
fatherly love and care toward us, be it thy gracious will, O Lord, so to
direct, govern and sanctify the hearts thoughts and inclinations of our
sovereign Prince and rulers, of this Realm of England, and of each other
state professinge the Gospel of thy Son: that in all their purposes
counsels, determinations and procedinges: they may with constant zeal, to
the glory of thy name: work establishe and maintain, thy truth and honor,
aduauncing all virtue right and Justice, embracinge and louinge pure godliness,
preferring also the lovers and folowers of the same: and dulye punnishinge each
vice and disobedience: seking peace and folowinge it, that thy holy Church,
nurished, mayntayned, and defended by Kings and Princes, may rejoice and
florishe in th'haboundant of blissful quietness, integrity, and sound
doctrine: to th'education and bringinge forth of plenty of godly faithful and
industrious, ministers and preachers of thy word, to labor for the
establishment and enlarginge the kingdom of thy Son among men: who by the
heavenly light of true doctrine and holy conversation, shall also appear
lanternes of celestial comfort and brightness for the guidinge of thy strayed
and converted servants, by milions repleat with grace and benidiction,
through Christ thy dear Son our Savior: To whoms with thee and the holy
Ghost, be all praise honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer for the godly proof of a child.
O Most merciful Lord God almighty only which art gracious and good: as by
thy divine will and power this child was formed and made a living creature
tonsisting of body and soul in the womb of his mother, from whom he is
departed into this world, by natural birth, weak and impotent, of frail and
sinful substance: by his own property inclinde, to ignorance, and sin: and
now enuired with thousands of malicious, mighty and subtle, ennimies both
bodily and ghostly, which wait for the seducinge and leadinge of him to
perell, death and destruction, whereunto all man kind is prone and (wear it
not for thy merciful grace and tuition) sone overcome. So be it thy will O
most gracious Lord, in th'aboundaunce of thy mercies and love, for Christ thy
dear Sons sake, with thy fatherly eye to look upon him: and to bless him,
pouringe plenty of thy heavenly gifts upon him, that being preserved, brought
up and nurished in divine knowledge, faith fear and obedience, of thee,
through true profession of thy sweet Son Jesus in the sincerity of thy
Gospel: He may grow ritche and beautiful in all godliness and virtue: in all
his ways and proceedinges, sekinge the kingdom of eternal glory, through
firm and haboundaunt faith and holy conversation in Christ the Savior:
working all righteousness, filled with meekenes, brotherly love, obedience,
cherefull hope, desire of heavenly things, contempt, of the world: and mightily
armed with thy grace, and strengthened by thine asistaunce, to vanquishe the
power of the sinful flesh and Satan: that having victory in the end he
may ioyefully triumph in thy presence O God, with the rest of thy beloved
Saints, to give honor and continual praise to thy most holy name, in bliss
everlasting: through thy dear Son our merciful Lord and Savior. Amen.

A prayer for the wanderinge poor.
O Most gracious Lord God, almighty and eternal in whose hand it consists,
to purpose and to determine of thy creatures, as seems good to thine own
insearchable pleasure: have mercy upon the poor afflicted in spirit, nedye
and naked: cold comfortless and distressed: which for want of habitation
necessary liuelyhode, and succor, are, through distress and penury driven to
wander in much misery, and uncertain of relyfe and comfort: cut off from the
conversation and fellowship of the civil, virtuous, wise and godly people,
and secluded from holy instruction education and doctrine, do raunge in
loathsome liberty, where, by brutishe ignorance, and unbridled disorder, their
wretched souls (without thy great grace and mercy) may be choked even to
eternal death: Turn unto them O Lord, and of thy fatherly goodness, for
Christ's, sake, have mercy upon theyme, lighten their hearts with thy grace, O
God, and comfort them, that feeling their cross to be of thy sufferaunce and
layinge on, they may patiently bear the same, with meek hearts and humble
thankesgeuing: and their eyes being opened with heavenly understanding, in
the grace and power of thy holy spirit, to behold, and truly to Judge of the
frail vanity, and foolish value of this whirlinge world, whose riches,
pleasures, gaudes, glory and estimation, do vanish as the smoke: and fly from
us as the shadow of a cloud, and this life to be of no moment nor abiding
without true joys or felicity: But (wear it not for cherefull hope of
eternal life) O most vrkesome and wretched tragidie, to all men. And in this
true and celestial consideration to turn wholly unto thee: accepting their
wanderinge poverty, distress and misery: a blessefull purpose and
determination of thy merciful will, for their good avail, through hope and
patience in Christ Jesus: and feelinge the operation of thy heavenly grace, to
rejoice in their cross and afflictions, embracinge thy will with cherefull
humility, and due obedience to the same, dedicatinge theymselues unto thy most
gracious favor and tuition: to be comforted, succored, reliued, defended,
cherished and helped, by thy fatherly bounty and goodness against all,
miseries, wretchedness, desperation, and calamities, of body and soul: to the
heavenly reioycinge of their troubled spirits, enritched through mercy and
geace to the eternal bliss and salvation of the same: in Christ our dear
Lord and Savior: for whose love O Father be merciful, and here my faithful
request, grauntinge the same: to the glory of thy most holy name: to the which
be all praise honor and glory for evermore.

A prayer for the Sick.
O Most grocious Lord God almighty, which have power over all: thou geuest,
and at thine own pleasure take away: Thou O God have made us, and not we
our selves: thou have limited our scope, beyond which we cannot pass: man is
a vain thing and trauayleth in miserye: and of all his labors, glory, state
and riches, (which vanishe as smoke) he has no part in the end: all his
pomp forsakes him: his soul will no longer dwell in him: but forsakes him
and leaves him to death, to be clothed with dust and ashes, for therence he
came, and thither returns with speed. But the soul of the faithful lives
in peace, and rejoices in thassurance of eternal life and felicity: for the
fruition whereof he shall be again clothed with his former tabernacle, renewed
and raised to glory and immortality, to reign with Christ the redeemer of
thine elect, in the perpetual presence of thy most glorious majesty,
triumphing in peace and bliss everlasting. O Father that, (through faith and
holy conversation, in Christ Jesus) have ioend and knitte thy beloved Saints
in a loving brotherhode, to honor, to praise, and to serve thee, in unity of
faith, truth, hope, obedience, and love: whereby we are moved, and taught to
minister and pray one for the other, that our charity may be full: have mercy
upon thy sick, feeble and payned servants, whom death does assail, with
bitter panges, by tormentinge gryfes for the privation of this mortal life:
yea Lord for thy sweet Sons sake, have mercy upon them, and upon every of
theyme: Turn unto them, and be merciful unto them, show them thy loving
countenance, O God, and comfort them, stand by them, hold thy holy hand over
them, and defend them against the power of the enemy, aswage their pains: and
strengthen their weakness with the presence of thy divine grace: that feelinge
the comfortable workinge of thy holy Spirit, they may thoroughly vanquishe the
distroyer, and triumphinge in victory, in gladsome assurance of thy mercy, to
give over cherefull souls into thy fatherly hands, for the perpetual bliss
and safety of the same: through Christ our dear Lord and Savior: to whom
with thee and the holy Ghost reigning in equality of magestie glory and power:
be all praise honor and thanks for evermore. Amen.

A prayer for our worldly trauayles.
O Merciful Lord God blissful and almighty, that for the behofe of man
dyddest create the whole world: geuinge him dominion and skill to use them,
to the nurrishment preservation, and mayntenaunce, of his transitory life upon
earth: Look favorably upon our faithful industrye and trauayles, and so bless
and (for thy dear Sons sake) so prosper our faithful labors, and
indeuoures, that through the plenteous bounty of thy fatherly goodness, we may
reap and gather the hoped fruits, and blesseful increase of che same: that
being fed and blessed with sufficience, we may be haboundaunt in alms, and
charitable geuinge, to our infirm comfortless, nedye, and distressed
brethren: to the glory and honor of thy name: which for love of our sweet
Savior Christ, hear and fulfillest, the godly requests of thy faithful
servants. So be it.

A prayer for the Queen and Realm.
O Most gracious Lord God, and King almighty just and everlasting, upon
whose will depends, the rule, stay and direction of all things both in
Heaven and in earth: geuinge men power and dominion over the people and nations
of the world: to whom, being obedient to thy most holy will and
commandments: thou geuest wise, careful, industrious, virtuous, happy, and
prosperous, Kings, Princes, Rulers, and magestrates: to rule and to govern,
to the peace, blessinge, comfort, and wealth, of the same: But the unrighteous
people, lasciuius, contempteous, Idolatrous, superstitious, blasphemous, and
Rebellious against thy word and majesty, shall be delivered over to the hands
and tuition of foolish, Idle, dissolute, negligent and unfortunate Princes,
Rulers and governors: by whose brutishe, disorder, losenes and folly, the
state, beauty, strength, and bonds of peace, Justice, love and government,
shall be neglected, broken, disturbed, spoiled, and by intestine hatereds and
discordes: or else, by foren vanquishmentes and discomfitures, distroyed:
whereby both land and people, are left a pray, to the invasion, spoil and
rauine, of the greedye and victorious distroyer: who in his merciless rage
executes the plagues of thy just wrath, O Lord, so that neither man woman,
child, beast, foul nor feelde, scapeth the stripes thereof. Their countries,
Towns, Cities and dwellings, burnt spoiled, rent torn and made waste:
Justice, Law, discipline, nurture, civil feloship, honest arts and
exercises, Religion, knoweledge and fear of thee, scorned, banished, and
persecuted: And the land being filled, with abomination, beastly tyrrany,
slaughter, blood, robbery, thiuery rapyne, and murder, the people killed,
strangled, starued, spoiled and mocked: bound and carried away to be sold (as
beasts) in the markette: to servitude and slavery, there to consume their
days in miserable thrall and sorrows: the kingdom and inheritance
transported to the possession of the distroyer: who raised in thy wrath, and
armed with the power of thy displeasure: ministers due punnishment, for the
sin and disobedience, of each reuoltinge nation that falls away from thee,
and will not be reconciled to grace: witness of all the states, Empires,
kingdoms, tongues nations peoples and kyndreds of the earth, from the
beginning of the world to this day. But in these later days: specially of the
Jews Egiptians: Armenianes, Grecians, Italiens, Hungariens, Poloniens, and
others: whose servile thrall and calamities, ought never to be out of our
remembrance: which should move us continually to behold, the blessinge of thy
love, and the heavy sorrows, of thy displeasure. Wherefore in the haboundaunce
of thy mercies and louinge kindness, and for love of thy dear Son: whom
through the gift of thy grace, we profess in the truth of his Gospel, we
beseech thee O merciful Father, favorably to look upon this Realm and
people, of England: Turn not away thy face, O Lord, take not thy grace and
holy spirit from us: let us still enjoy the bliss and coumforte of thy
loving countenance: keep us in the way, and cover us under the shadow of thy
wings: suffer us not to be taken from thee: make us to follow and to put our
whole trust and confidence in thee, then shall we be safe: Thy mighty hand O
God, gives the victory: and in the power of thy favor shall the ennimie be
vanquished, and his strength brought to nothing. Saf is the City where thou
Lord art the watchman: but who so stands out of thy tuition, he is a redye
pray to the distroier: Therefore go not far from us, O God. For thine electes
sake wear the heavens and the earth, withal their implements, fourmed and
made of nothing: for their preservation and mayntenaunce, was rule and
government devised and stablished, and for their sakes, are Empires,
kingdoms, countries, and nations, preserved, saved and blessed: and for injury
and ignominy done to them and to thy truth and holy name, are they changed,
plagued, subverted and distroyed. Great is thy mercy and compassion O Lord,
long sufferinge and redye to forgive: behold us, O Father and have mercy upon
us: remember not our inquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers: take not
just vengeance of our sins: neither reward thou us after our deserts: spare
us good Lord, and for thy sweet Sons sake Christ Jesus our Savior have mercy
upon us: yea Lord have mercy upon us and upon our posterity, holding
continually thy holy hand over us, and bless us: Increase our faith, and make
our children and childers children obedient to thy word, and through holy
conversation in thy Son our Redeemer, make us and them acceptable unto thy
self, O God: that being sanctified in faith and love toward thy heavenly will
and majesty, we and they may be delivered from thy wrathful displeasure, for
evermore. Pour forth haboundaunce of thy grace and blessinge upon our Queen,
that in the fulness of thy gracious favor, she may have long life in health
and happpye days: aided with faithful, verteous and prudent Counsailours, and
ministers, to do all things to the nurishing and maynteynaunce of true Religion
and virtue: Increase the light of thy Gospel and the number of faithful and
godly preachers and ministers of thy word, whose industrye and labor, by the
peace and tranquillity of thy Church, may largelye augment the number of thy
Saints: to the glory of thy name, and to the joy and blessinge of the land
and people. For the preservation and continuance whereof, in the bowelles of
the fatherly care and favor remember us, O louinge God: leave neither us nor
our posterity headless, neither put us over to the yoke of a strange, nor
Irreligious Prince: But after the blissful days of this thy gracious
handmayde our Queen (whom O Father let it please thee to preserve in happy
and ioyefull state to the end) give peace and concord to thy people, with a
verteous wise, godly, and fortunate Prince, whose constant, zeal, care,
industrye, and endeavor, toward the cherishinge and advancement of thy truth
and glory, may purchase thy fatherly love and furtheraunce, to fill the land
and people, with all manner of blessings, as thy heavenly wisdom knows
necessary, where beautified with virtue and godliness, it shall prosper and
triumph, in continual peace and victory, geuinge honor and gladsome thanks
to thy glorious majesty, that with thy dear Son our Lord and Savior, and
with the holy Ghost, reignest in unity of power, glory, and dominion: praised
for ever and ever. Amen.

A prayer for constancy in Christ.
O Lord God maker of all things, only thou that art to be feared: only
thou that art glorious, righteous, and merciful: Thou which only art
gracious, only liberal, only just almighty and everlasting: thou that of
thine accustomed and ritche mercies deliueredst thine elect from all troubles,
voutchsafe for thy Sons sake to deliver and preserve us, from all evil, and
also from doing those things which thou in thy holy word have forbidden. Oh
be gracious unto us, and think upon thy covenant made with our forefathers of
old, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they true and faithful servant: and give
us all, such hearts, that we may unfeignedly love and serve thee, by true
obedience to thy holy Laws and commandments. Send us inward peace in
conscience that we may be at one with thee, so that thou never forsake us in
the time of trouble, be unto us in all our need and necessity as a sure rock,
defense buckeler and Shield, that under the wings of thy divine majesty, we
may be safely kept, and covered, that Satan and his wicked Impes, by any
cruel tyrrany or oppression, never prevail against us. But grant (good
Lord) for thine own glories sake, yea for thy Son Christ Jesus sake, that
we in the time of trial may show our selves as valiant warriers, firmly and
constantly to fight under thy banner, and not like cowardes at every blaste of
wynd, be ready to run away, startinge back, and slyding from the feloship
of thy Saints: thinkinge here in this wicked world for a long time to enjoy
the riches and pleasures thereof: the which time, if we duly consider, is but
as one drop of rain compared to th'hole Sea: yea if for this short and
momentarye time we might get the whole world, and lose our own souls, what
should it profitte? or what is their (oh Lord) to redeem our souls with
all? In every soldier that in this world, takes in hand under his Captain
to fight, it is required, that he be stout, valiant, and manly, that when
they pinche of the battayls comes: he then prove mighty and courageous in
fight, in assured hope of triumphant victory. Even so (oh good Lord) it is
required in every of us which profess thy holy Gospel, that we show our
selves manfull in fight for the defense of the same: that when, by thy
providence the brunte of persecution is kyndled and ministered unto us, we may
then show our selves as true and faithful Christians, to fight that good fight
for an eternal triumph and victory: In giving and offeringe up our own
bodies, for a sacrifice unto the Lord our God, who is ever ready to
strengthen them that put their full trust in him. Oh good Lord grant for
thy names sake unto us such plenty of thy grace, that when time requires, as
we do believe in heart to justification, even so by mouth we may make true
confession to salvation, that the fruit of the same may be to us in the latter
day, joy comfort and eternal consolation, through Jesus Christ by whose
death and merits, we are made inheritours of his everlasting kingdom. To
whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be praise glory and dominion, world
without end. Amen.

A prayer against the workeinge of Satan.
OH Lord destroy all the works of Satan, comfort them that are in
adversity: help those that be in trouble for thy names sake, have mercy upon
us, and make us thy true faithful obedient and thankful servants: Lord
incline our hearts to thy testimonies, and suffer us not to serve th'unlawfull
lusts of our sinful flesh. O turn away our eyes that they behold not
vanity, but quicken thou us in thy law: bestow upon us thy word (oh Lord)
so that we never abuse it, neither turn it unto wantones: But that entering
into the grace of true repentance, we may therein increase, and therein
continewe till our lives end. Amen.

A form of prayer to God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost.
O Almighty and euerliuinge God, the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which of thy unmeasurable goodness, have opened thy self unto us, and with a
loud voice, haste said of the Son Jesus Christ our Lord, hear him: O maker
and preserver of all things with thy coeternall Son our Lord Jesus Christ,
which reigns with thee, and was manifested in Jerusalem: and with thy holy
Spirit, which was powered upon the Apostles: O wise God, merciful Judge, and
mighty Lord, which have said: as truly as I live, I will not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should convert and amend: which also have said:
call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliver thee: have mercy
upon us, for Jesus Christ's sake, whom thou would, of thy marvelous and
incomprehensible counsel, should be made for us a slain sacrifice,
mediator, reconciler, and peacemaker, to the end that thou might show thy
exceeding great wrath against sin, and thy estimable mercy toward
mankind. Sanctify and illuminate our hearts and souls with thy holy spirit,
that we may truly believe in thee, call upon thee, be thankful unto thee,
and obedient to thy holy will. Defend, govern and cherishe thy Church, as thou
have promised, saying: this is my covenant that I have made with them: my
spirit which is in thee, and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart from the mouth of thy seed for ever. Preserve those kingdoms and
commonweals, which give harbor to thy people, and maintain the minesterye
of thy holy word and Gospel, that the kingdom of thy Son Jesus Christ may
increase and shine throughout all the world.

A prayer to God the Son
O Jesus Christ, Son of the everliving God, crucified for us, and raised also
from the dead, and now reigning at the right hand of thy father, that thou
may give gifts unto men, which haste said, come unto me all ye that labor
and be heavy laden, and I will refresh you: have mercy upon us, and pray for
us unto the eternal father: sanctify and govern us with thy holy spirit:
help and succor us in all our necessities, as thou have promised, saying: I
will not leave you comfortles.

A prayer to the holy Ghost.
O Holy spirit, poured upon the Apostles, which waste promised unto us by the
son of God our redemer, to kendle in us a true kuowledge and invocation to
God, as it is written: I will pour upon you ye spirit of grace and of
compassion: make to arise in our hearts, a true fear of God, and a true faith
and knowledge of the mercy which the eternal father of our lord Jesus Christ,
has promised unto us for his Sons sake. Be our comforter in all counsayles
and dangers: illuminate our understanding, and fill our hearts with new
affectes an spiritual motions, and renew us both in soul and body, that we
may die to sin, and live to righteousness, and so in true obedience may praise
the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his son our redemer, and thee also
our comforter euerlastinglye.

Another prayer to the holy Ghost.
O Holy and blessed spirit, together with the father and the Son, our true
and everliving God, full of majesty, and power which with thy heavenly
inspiration quickenest the minds of those that before were dead in sin,
make joyful the hearts of the faithful, penitent, bring into that way of
truth all such as have erred, and gone astraye, comfortest the souls of such
as hunger and thirste after righteousness, and plenteously enrichest those with
diverse gifts, which ask them in Jesus Christ's name: purify our hearts (we
beseech thee) and inflame them with the fire of thy love: replenishe them with
thy heavenly benefits and spiritual blessings, that they may be made mete
temples for thee: lead us into all truth, which art the only fountain of truth,
and mortify in us whatsoever proceeds not of thee. Arm us against the
crafty assaults of subtle satan, against the vain pleasures of the wicked
world, and against the sinful lusts of filthy flesh, that we being endued
with grace from above, by thy holy inspiration, may walk forwards in newnes
of life, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life.

A godly prayer to be said at all times,
Honor and praise be given to thee (O Lord God almighty) most dear father of
heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kyndnes showed unto us, in that it has
pleased thy gracious goodness, freely, and of thine own accord, to elect, and
chose us to salvation before the beginning of the world, and even like
continual thanks be given to thee, for creating us after thine own Image,
for redeminge us with the precious blood of thy dear Son, when we were
utterly lost, for sanctifyinge us with the holy spirit in the revelation and
knowledge of thy holy word, for helpinge and succouringe us in all our needs
and necessities, for sauinge us from all dangers of body and soul, for
comfortinge us so fatherly in all our tribulations and persecutions, for
sparinge us so long, and geuinge us so large a time of repentance. These
benefits (O most merciful Father) like as we knowledge to have received them
of thy only goodness, even so we beseech thee, for thy dear Son Jesus
Christ's sake, to grant us always thy holy spirit whereby we may continually
grow in thankefulnes toward thee, to be lead in all truth, and comforted in
all our adversity. O Lord strengthen our faith, kindle it more in feruentnes
and love toward thee, and our neighbors for thy sake. Suffer us not most
dear Father to receive thy word any more in vain: but grant us always the
assistaunce of thy grace and holy spirit, that in heart, word, and deed we
may sanctify and do worship to thy name. Help to amplefie and increase thy
kingdom, and whatsoever thou sendest we may be heartily well content with thy
good pleasure and will. Let us not lack the thing (O Father) without the
which we cannot serve thee: but bless thou so all the works of our hands,
that we may have sufficient, and not to be chargeable, but rather helpefull
unto others: be merciful (O Lord) to our offenses, and seeing our debte is
great, which thou have forgeuen us in Jesus Christ, make us to love thee, and
our neighbors so much the more. Be thou our Father, our Captain and defender
in all temptations, hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we may be
delivered from all inconveniences, and end our lives in the sanctifyinge, and
honor of thy holy name through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. So be
it.

Let thy mighiie hand and out stretched arms (O Lord be still our defense,
thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son our salvation:
thy true and holy word our instruction: thy grace and holy spirit our
comfort and consolation, unto the end and in the end. So be it.

O Lord increase our faith.
CHAP. XXI. of John.
AND I saw a new heaven, and a new earth: for the first heaven, and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea. And I John saw the
holy city new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a
bride trimmed for her housband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven
saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them: and they shall be his people, and God him self shall be their God with them.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain:
for the first things are passed. And he that sat upon the throne, said,
Behold, I make all things new: and he said unto me, Write: for these words
are faithful and true. And he said unto me, It is done, I am and the beginning
and ye end. I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of
life freely. He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I will be his
God, and he shall be my son. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liars shall have the part in the lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. And there came unto me one of the seven
Angels, which had the seven viales full of the seven last plagues, and talked
with me, saying, Come: I will show thee the bride, the Lambs wife. And he
carried me away in the spirit to a great and an hie mountain, and he showed
me the great city, holy Jerusalem, descendinge out of heaven from God, Having
the glory of God: and her shining was like unto a stone most precious, as a
Jasper stone clear as cristall. And had a great wall an hie, and had twelve
Gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and the names written, which are ye
twelve tribes of the children of Israel. On the East part there were three
gates, on the Northside three gates, on the Southside three gates, and on the
Westside three gates. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles. And he that talked with me, had a
golden read to measure the city with all, and the gates thereof, and the wall
thereof. And the city lay four square, and the length is as large as the
breadth of it, and he measured the city with the read, twelve thousand
furlonges: and the length and the breadth, and the height of it are equal. And
he measured the wall thereof, an hundredth, forty and four cubits, by the
measure of man, that is, of the Angel. And the building of the wall of it was
of Jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass. And ye
foundacio^s of the wall of ye city were garnished with all manner of precious
stones: the first foundation was Jasper: the second of Sapphire: the third of a
Chalcedonie: the fourth of an Emeraude. The fifte of Sardonix: the sixth of a
Sardius: the seventh of a Chrisolite: the eight of a Beryl: the ninth of a
Topaze: the tenth of a Chrysoprasus: the eleventh of a Iacinth: the twelueth an
Amethist. And the twelve pearls and enery gate is of one pearl, and the
street of the city is pure gold, as shining glass. And I saw no Temple
therein for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it. And the
city has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: for the
glory of God did light it: and the Lamb is the light of it. And the people
which are saved, shall walk in the light of it: and the Kings of the earth
shall bring their glory and honor unto it. And the gates of it shall not be
shut by day: for there shall be no night there. And the glory and honor of the
Gentiles shall be brought unto it And there shall enter in it none unclean
thing neither whatsoever works abomination or lies: but they which are
written in the Lambs Book of life.

A prayer.
O Merciful Lord and loving father, God almighty, Just and everlasting,
that in the inserchable purpose of thy will and wisdom, dyddest create Heaven
and earth, withal the things in them contained to depend, to serve, and to
continue in obedience to thy irrepugnable order and direction: till the number
of thy beloved, which, in thy dear Son our Savior, thou have chosen to
eternal life: shall be filled: at whose delivery from corruption: (whereunto
disobedient man brought all things subject through his offense) the
transitory, vanished and burnt creatures, shall generally be renewed, and
stablished in permanent state of beauty and glory ever enduringe, filled with
the gladsome brightness of the continual presence of thy majesty, dwellinge
amongst thy Saints to their inspeakeable joys and bliss everlasting: Look
upon us O Father and have mercy upon us: and as it has pleased thy gracious,
goodness, O God, by the inspiration of the holy spirit, to frame our hearts to
beliue the Gospel of thy Son, by whom we receive sweet taste of thy fatherly
love and mercy: So let it be thy will O God, to comfort our faynte souls
with the continual presence of thy heavenly grace: that we perfectly feelinge,
the being and workinge of the same in our hearts: may utterly despise this
miserable world with all her foolish trifiles and fond vanities: ever
thurstinge after thee with insatiable desire of heanenly things, willing to be
disolued from this corrupt and sinful tabernacle, to rest with thee in the
Tabernacle of peace and joys everlasting: through Christ our Lord, Judge,
and redeemer: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost reigninge in equality and
unity of majesty, glory, and dominion: be all praise honor and thanks for
ever and ever. Amen.

A Psalm to be said in the time of any common plague, sickness, or other
cross and visitation of God.
O Come, let us humble our selves and fall down before the Lord, with
reverence and fear.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hands.

Come therefore, let us turn again unto our Lord, for he has smitten us, and
he shall heal us.

Let us repent and turn from our wickedness, and our sins shall be forgeuen us.

Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from his heavy wrath, and will pardon
us, and we shall not perish.

For we knowledge our faults, and our sins be ever before us.

We have sore provoked thine anger (O Lord) thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy
heavy displeasure is sore kyndled against us.

Thou haste, in thine indignation stricken us with thy grievous sickness, and by
and by we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind.

In deed we aknowledge that our punishment are less then our deseruinges: but
yet of thy mercy Lord correct us to amendment, and plague us not to our
destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened that thou can not help: neither is thy goodness
abated that thou will not hear.

Thou have promised, O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear us: whilst we
yet speak thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee shall be confounded: neither any that call upon
thee shall be despised.

For thou art the only Lord, who woundest and do heal again, who kyllest
and reuiuest, bring even into hell, and bring back again.

Our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and wear helped: they put there trust in thee, and
wear not confounded.

O Lord, rebuke not us in thine indignation, neither chasten us in thy heavy
displeasure.

O remember not the sins and offenses of our youth: but according to thy
mercy think thou upon us, O Lord, for the goodness.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us, for our bones
are vexed.

And now in the vexation of our Spirits and the anguishe of our souls we
remember, thee, and we cry unto thee: hear Lord, and have mercy:

For thine own sake, and for thy holy names sake incline thine ear, and hear
O merciful Lord.

For we do not pour out our prayers before thy face, trustinge in our own
righteousness: but in thy great mercyes.

Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness: and cleanse us from our sins.

Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdedes.

Make us clean hearts, O God: and renew a right spirit within us.

Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us, and
be merciful unto our sins for thy names sake.

So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanckes
for ever, and will always be shewinge forth thy praise from generation, to
generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost,

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

The comfort and Prayers of the Sick.
MAN that is borne of a woman has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery, he comes up and is cut down like a flower: flees as it wear a
shadow and never continues in one state, In the midst of life we are
dyinge, of whom shall we seek succor and comfort but of thee O Lord God our
maker.

THou have made me of naught O Lord: and when it shall please thee to nothing
shall I return: of earth I came and to earth I shall without tarying. I
brought nothing with me, neither shall I carry ought away, when I depart.
Thou art my portion O Lord Christ: by thee came grace and life to the chosen,
receive me to thy mercy: thou wast killed for our sakes, and art risen as the
first fruits of them that sleep, thou art crowned with power and glory, thou
have diststroyed death, and given everlasting life to all beleuers. Thou shall
reyse us up at the last day and give us possession of the inheritance, which
thou have purchased in thy blood and righteousness, according to the merciful
will of our heavenly father, whom thou have pacified and pleased, for our
redemption and salvation for the performaunce of the oath, which in his
eternal and inserchable, purpose, he promised our forefathers. Whereof in thy
merciful favor thou have called me to be partaker: whereby I am taught and
comforted by thy holy spirit, to despise the world and this corrupt
Tabernacle of sinful flesh, which has of it self deserved nothing but
death and dampnation: and wholly to cleave unto thee O my Savior. Therefore
stand by me O Lord, and defend me against the assaults of Satan. That after
triumphant victory through the grace and power of thy holy spirit, I may
ioyefully give over this fleshly being, and come to thy presence, O Lord, to
rest in blissful peace, till the delivery of thy Saints: with whom I am in
assured hope (by the witness, of thy spirit) to have my portion of the
inheritance everlasting. Amen.

The Sick says.
I Heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, write, from henceforth, blessed
are the dead which dye in the Lord.

PSALM.
IN thee, O Lord, have I trusted, let me never be confounded: but rid me
and deliver me in thy righteousness, incline thine ear to me and save me.

Be thou my strong hold whereunto I may resort, for succor: thou art Just
O Lord, thou have promised to help me: therefore I flee unto thee, as the
only castle and forte of my defense and sauegarde.

Receive me to thy tuition, O God, and save me, deliver me from the hand, of
the enemy, and my soul from the power of the dogs.

Cast me not away in my last hour O Lord, neither forsake thou me in my
weakness, go not far from me, but have thee to help me, for thou art my
hope and salvation, O God.

Let my heart be filled with gladness, and my mouth with praise, that I may
singe of thy glory: and with the real of thy Saints, give honor to thy
majesty, in the eternal fruition of thy presence, through Christ.

Praised be thy name O louinge God, that art merciful unto sinners, and sauest
them from destruction.

Remember not O Lord mine iniquities, nor the iniquities of my forefathers,
take not vengeance of my sins. Spare me good Lord: spare me whom thou have
redeemed with thy precious blood, and be not angrye with me (a wretch) to
death.

O Lord deliver me from the power of the enemy:

O Lord save me thy poor servant, that put my trust in thee.

Send me help from thy holy place. And evermore mightily defend me.

Be unto me a strong Tower O Lord. And evermore cover me under thy wings.

O Lord hear my prayer. And let my cry come unto thee.

I know that my redemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the
last day, and shall be covered again with my skin, and shall see God in my
flesh, yea and my self shall behold him, not with other but with the same
eyes.

OH my soul be ioyefull in the Lord, and despise not his correction, neither
faynte thou at his rebukes.

For whom the Lord loves, him he corrects, yea he scourges every Son
whom he receaueth.

Thy sins wear innumerable, neither could thou claim ought of duty, but
death and dampnation.

Thy merciful Lord, has accepted thy tears and repentant groninges: and
turnde away his face from thine offenses: he freely has forgeuen thee thy
sins.

And because thou have repented, and trusted his mercy, he has put them all
out of his remembrance, neither will he think on them any more.

He will receive thee into his house and crown thee with glory and kyndnes.

Thou shalt stand before his presence in the sanctuary everlasting.

With Angels and Archangelles, with the Patriarchs and Prophettes, with the
faithful witnesses, and with all the reast of thy chosen children of grace, to
honor him to serve him: to magnify and praise him, with continual thanks,
in blissful joy and felicity for ever and ever.

Now O my soul look upon Christ Jesus the righteous, thy advocate and
redemer, he is ready to receive thee': therefore be glad in him, and give
thanks. Reioycinge in the visitation of the Lord, whereby he so mercifully and
lovingly warns thee' to prepare thee' to the way, that shall bring thee' out
of this vale of misery, care, thrall, labor, and sorrows, to the castle of
eternal, joys and felicity. Pluck up thy heart with cherefulnes, despise
the world with all her painted vanities and illusions, look steadfastly upon
thy Savior who will not fail thee' in thy distress but stand by thee',
comfort thee' and deliver thee'. Commit thy self unto him, and giving
praises unto his name for that is lovely. And he by death shall receive thee'
to life ever enduringe.

Prayers.
O Look down from heaven, visit and reliue me thy poor and weak servant:
Behold me with the eyes of thy mercy O God: give me comfort, and sure
confidence, in thee. Defend me from the power of th'ennimie, and keep me in thy
perpetual peace and saftie, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

O My merciful Lord and loving Father, which according to the multitude of
thy mercies, do so put away the sins of those which truly repent: that
thou remembrest them no more. Open upon me the eyes of thy fatherly pity O
Lord, desiringe forgeuenes of my manyfolde offenses, earnestly repentinge the
same. Renew O louinge father, whatsoever has been or is decade in me, by the
fraud and malice of the Devil: or by mine own carnal will and fraylenes:
preserve and continewe me in the unity of thy Church: Consider my contrition,
accept my tears, assuage my pain, give me an obedient heart to thy good will
and pleasure, yelding my self unto the same with humble and cherefull
thanksgiving. And puttinge my whole trust and confidence in thy mercy, impute
not unto me my sins, but take me in to thy favor and blessinge, O Lord:
through the merits of thy most derely beloved son, Christ Jesus my Savior.
Amen.

O Most gracious Lord God almighty merciful and true: which art a most strong
Tower, to all theyme that put their trust in thee: to whom all things in
heaven, in earth and under earth do bow and obaye, be now and evermore my
defense, and make me know and feel to the end, that there is none other name
under heaven given unto man, in whom and through whom, I may receive health
and salvation but only the name of Jesus Christ, my Lord and Savior: for
whose sake oh Father have mercy upon me: have mercy upon me Lord, and stand
by me to the end. Oh Savior of the world save me which by thy cross and
precious blood have redeemed me: help me, O God, and save me, for ever, for
thine own righteousness sake oh Lord.

O my soul commit thy self unto the Lord, for he is ready to receive
thee.

Lord, Lord, my Redemer have mercy upon me, and receive my Spirit.

THANKESgeuinge.
Praise the name of the Lord.
Praised and magnified be thy name O Lord god everlasting: thy power is
infinite, thy counsayles unsearchable: thy will almighty: thy promises are
true: and thy judgments righteous.

Praised be thy name O Lord, and magnified amongst all thy creatures: that by
thy word made the heavens, the earth, the aer and Sea, and all things in
them contained.

Praised be thy name O Lord: unto whose order and derection all power do bow
and obey.

Praised be thy name O Lord: that of thy fatherly goodness and bounty, powrest
thy blessings upon all creatures: without which, is no life, no preservation,
no comfort, no succor, no food, nor sustentation.

Praised be thy name O lord God almighttie, that of one clodde of claye: have
multiplied, all the kynreds nations: and generations of the world.

Praised be thy name O Lord: that gave Adam free will, and reason: and a
charge to obey thy commandment: from the which he fell through his own
infirmity: to the utter ruin and just dampnation of himself, and all his
posterity.

Praised be thy name O Lord God of mercy: that made a covenant with our
forefathers, and have performed the same to the salvation of thy chosen.

Praised be thy name O gracious Lord God everlasting: that, according to
thine eternal truth and mercy, have satisfied the longinge hope of thy
faithful servant the Patriarchs and Prophettes.

Praised be thy name O heavenly lord and Father: that dydest send down thy
Son to become man: to teach us thy will, and to offer himself unto thee,
for the redemption of all them that believe.

Praised be thy name oh merciful Lord and Father: that, of thine own free
grace and mercy: have begotten us of the new, through faith and obeydience in
Christ our Savior: to possess eternal life which erst we had lost, through
misbelife and Rebellion.

Praised be thy name oh merciful Lord and father: that geuest unto thy
beloved children: thy holy spirit to sanctify their hearts with faith and
obedience to thy word: which as a sure witness of thy grace and favor,
works love, and ioyefull peace in their souls: through irremoueable hope of
eternal life.

Praised be thy name O merciful Lord and father, that knittest all thy
faithful children by unity of grace and adoption, in one inseparable
brotherhode in Christ thy son our Savior, whereby we call thee father.

Praised be thy name O gracious Lord God almighty: that geuest wisdom to
the simple, that exaltest the meek hearted, that enritchest the poor, that
comfortest the distressed, that succourest the helpelesse, that sauest thy
people from destruction, and geuest them ioyefull victory against there enemies.

Praised be thy name O glorious God everlasting: that in the quarrel of thy
Saints, and defense of thy name: troublest, breakest, tearest asonder,
throwest out, disparsest, and utterly distroyest, the counsayles,
determinacions, dominions, strengthes, powers and glory: of the proud, of the
malicious, of the cruel, and of the mighty men of the world.

Praised be thy name O Lord God of power, that for revenge of sin and
disobedience: do remove and spoil: the proud nations and kingdoms of the
earth consuminge them in the fire of thy wrath: as straw in the flame. And as
dust before the wind are they driven from there seats and habitations.

Praised be thy name O Lord: that hate the backebiters, and the proud: and
to the humble and meke geuest, plenty of all manner of goodness.

Praised be thy name O God most gracious: that never departest from them that
unfeignedly seek after thee: that never faylest them that put their whole trust
in thee, that hear them that call upon thee, that deliuerest the fayythfull
out of all their troubles: and crownest them with mercy and loving kyndnes.

Praised be thy name O good and gracious God: that with the presence of thy
grace do assiste thy faithful servants, to live in holiness: and to dye in
faith, workinge in them, cherefull assurance of everlasting salvation: to
reign with Christ in the ioyefull presence of thy majesty: praysinge and
magnifyinge, thy most glorious name O God: with continual mirth and
thankesgeuinge.

Oh praise the name of our louinge God: for it is he only that is worthy to be
praised, his power is infinite, his glory eternal, and his mercy is
everlasting.

Praise the Lord O my soul.

Four forms of prayer divided for every sixth hour in the day and night.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT LONDON in Fletestreat at the sign of the Faucon by VVylliam
Gryffith, and are to be sold at his shop in S. Dunstones Church-yarde. 1570.

Cum Priuilegio.


